

Wbe Asiatif ^ocietg 

1, RARK STREET, CALCUTTA J G. 

FROM THE COLLECTION OF 

DR. CHARU CHANDRA DASGUPTA 


DONATED BY HIS FAMILY 





ELEMENTS OF HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 




ELEMENTS 


OF 

HINDU ICONOGRAPHY 


BY 

T. A. GOPINATHA RAO. M.A. 

S( TKRrNTKNDliNT OF AKCH/EOLOGY, TRAVANCORF .STATE. 


Published under the patronage of the Government of His Highness 
the Maharaja of Travancore. 


Vol. I— Part 11. 








THE LAW PRINTING HOUSE 
MOUNT ROAD :: :: MADRAS 


1914 


All Rights Reserved. 



T’RI^^TI£r> AT TUT!: PRINTINO IlOV'SK. 

>10U1MT ROA.r>, AfAI>RAf^. 



ADITYAS AND THE 
NAVA-GRAHAS. 




ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GEAHAS. 

T he Adityas arc a very ancient class of deities 

in India, as they are found praised in the 

Vedas. The earliest references to them say 

that they are seven or eight in number. In the 

Satapatha-brahmana^ for instance, 
Adityas. - ’ . - . 

they are said to bo eight in one 
place and twelve in another ; and in the latter case 
it is conceived that they correspond to the twelve 
months of the year. Different accounts are given 
regarding the origin of the Adityas. The most 
commonly accepted meaning of their name is that 
they are all so called because they are the sons of 
Aditi ; and in the Ptcranas they are all evidently 
solar deities. Owing to the existence in Northern 
India of the Maga-Brahmanas, who in all probabi- 
lity are related to the Mitra-worshipping Magi of 
Persia and are worshippers of the sun, it is not 
strange that we meet there temples dedicated 
exclusively to Surya the sun-god. But it is certainly 


299 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


curious to find a temple in the South Indian 
village of Suryan&rkdyil in the Tanjore district 
dedicated entirely to the worship of the sun-god 
and the planets, the former being the object of 
worship as the principal deity and the latter as 
attendant deities. This village must have evidently 
received its name from the temple of Surya therein 
built ; it is stated in one of the inscriptions found 
iu the temple that it was built in the reign of 
KulOttungachoIadeva (A. D. 1060 — 1118) and was 
called Kulottnugachola-MarttAndalaya. 

The nine planets Surya, Chandra, Bhauma, 
Budha, Sukra, Brihaspati, ^ani, Bahu and 
Ketu are also worshipped by the Hindus, and 
their images are generally found in all important 
Saiva temples in S. India. They are invariably 
placed in a separate having a pediment 

of about three feet in height ; and no two of them 
are made to face each other. It is stated by some 
that the images of the planets are set up in 
temples in the order in which they are in the 
zodiacal circle at the time of the construction of 
the temple. If there is any truth in this state- 
ment, these planet-figures may serve as a now 
means for calculating the probable dates of the 
construction of the temples wherein they are 
installed for worship. 


300 



ADITYA8 AND THE NAVA-GBAHAS. 


Regarding the worship of Surya in ancient 
times in India Mr. NAgendranath Vasu has collect- 
ed much valuable information in his Archaeological 
Survey of Matjurahhanja. He attempts to prove 
that the Magas or Scythic Br&hmanas were the 
first to introduce the worship of the Sun into 
India ; and from the references found in Pali works 
like the Bamhhajala Suita he shows that at the 
time of Buddha the Maga-Brahmapa astrologers 
were held in disrepute. It is stated in the 
Bhavishyat-purcina, as he says, that Samba one 
of the sons of Sri Krishpa was suffering from 
leprosy and that he was cured of it by worshipping 
Surya and that some Brahmanas of the Sakadvipa 
were worshippers of that deity. The same Parana 
relates “ that Zarathustra, who acknowledged the 
superiority of fire, was born of that element. He 
also used to interpret the Veda in a perverted way, 
which led to a quarrel between him and the 
Magas who worshipped Mitra, the Sun-god.” 
Mr. NSgendranath VSsu adds further — “In the 
Zend Avesta, the oldest record of the fire-wor- 
shippers, Mitra is known as only one of the minor 
gods. But on the other hand in Mibir Yast, we 
find a faint reference to the effect that at one time 
Mitra was worshipped as the highest god. Bo 
that as it may, on a dispute arising between the 


301 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


followers of the Mitra cult and the fire worshippers, 
those of the ^akadvipa Bi^hmapas who belonged 
to the former sect, migrated to India with their 
families." 

The description of Mitra or the Sun>god, as 
taken from the VUvakarma-ailpa, is given by 
Nagendranath V&su in the following words: — 
“ His groat chariot has one wheel and is drawn 
by seven horses, he has a lotus in each hand, wears 
an armour and has a shield over bis breast, has 
beautiful straight hair, is surrounded by a halo of 
light, has good hair and apparel, is decorated with 
gold ornaments and jewels, has on his right side the 
figure of Nikshubha and on the left that of Eajhi 
(queen), with all sorts of ornaments and whose hair 
and necklace are bright. His chariot mentioned 
above is called by the name of Makaradhvaja. Ho 
wears a crown. The figure is surrounded by a halo. 
Danda (Yama) is represented as one-faced and 
Skanda as having a bright conch-shell. These 
two figures with the form of man are placed in 
front. YSreha on a lotus is placed on a horse. 
His body is represented as lustrous, and he is the 
one giver of light to all the worlds. A Surya- 
mandala is to be made by placing nutmeg and 
Vermillion. He (Mitra) has four hands or only two 
with jewels adorning them. In both of his hands 



ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GBAHAS. 

there are lotuses. He is seated on a chariot drawn 
by horses of variegated colour. His two gate- 
keepers Dapda (Yama) and Pingala (Agni) have 
swords in their hands.”'' 


* wwi i 

fRrapr ii 

5nTr>r»?W!i®s?rj^ i 
II 

f5rg*n ?r%5t qr^f ^ qq^li%nr i 
ijql^TC’nd^TKi %vijK€g5»5q%ii ii 
qqR^ i 

*ifayiPr qw5q*iwid^ ^ ii 


^qqqsrrflfcf) (0 • 

f<qr i wq^ gqqiijfirq^ ii 

(jg ?) gNfq q^iw qr ^ q w^H . ' 
^nflwRRqgq q4^% q» q1qq q ; ii 

( 0 ?^*Rq 55 H I 

q[ ^qnqf^ritqrqqr ii 
^RR qedq^q ^nrarwn^: i 
q^«q ^ ii 



In the description 'given above, Mr. Nagendranath V&bu 
treats the word Bajni as meaning a queen. It however appears 
to be the name o! the goddess associated with Sdrya. Again, 
he takes Danda to mean Yama ; from the description found 
in the Bhavishyat-purdna it appears to be probable that 
Dapda is evidently a contraction of Dapdanayaka, the 


308 




HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


In the BliavUhyat-purdLna it is stated that Surya 
began to burn the asuras with his heat ; the latter 
thereupon attacked SQrya. The gods then felt 
bound to help Surya ; and with this object in view 
they placed Skanda on the left of Surya and Agni 
on the right. Since Skanda is the punisher of the 
wicked in the universe, he is called Dandanayaka ; 
and from his reddish yellow colour Agni, the god of 
fire, obtains the name Pihgala. The same autho- 
rity also gives the names of the attendants of 
Surya as R3>jna and Srfisha and identifies these 
with Skanda and f^iva respectively. The names 
are also derived and explained therein. ‘ Because 
Kartikeya shines always as the commander of the 
army of the celestials, he is known by the name of 
Bajna.” Such is the explanation of the name 
Rajna, which is here evidently conceived to be 
derived from the root raj meaning to shine. The 
explanation of the name Srosha is — ‘ The root sj'u 
is known to be employed to denote movement, 
and to this the suffix sa is added. Because he 


comraander-in-ohief of the celestial hosts, and should there- 
fore be understood to refer to Skanda. In the Sanskrit pass, 
age of the Bhaviahyat-ptir&na quoted by him, the reading of 
the latter half of the line beginning with hayarTidhastn appears 
to be padmastham-varka-namakam. 


304 



ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GBAHAS. 


goes he is known by the alternative appella- 
tion of Sransba’. It is worthy of note here that 
Mr. Nagendranath Vssu has pointed out that the 
name of the attendant of the Sun, as known in the 
Avesta is, Sraoshavareza or simply Srosh some- 
times. The same Bhavishyat-piirana adds further 
that the Asvinidevatas may also he made to be 
standing, one on each side of Surya, or, on the 
right of Surya, there might be Fiuga]a with an ink- 
bottle and a pen and on the left Dandi with a 
danda in his hand. The goddesses Bajhi and 
NikshubhS are also required to be made to stand 
on either side of Siirya. It is said that these two 
goddesses represent the air and the earth. 

In the temple of Surya or the Sun-god, ^oma 
and the other gralias should be, it is said, estab- 
lished in the following manner : — on the east there 
should be Soma ; on the south-east, Bhauma ; on 
the south, Brihaspati ; on the south-west, Bahu ; 
on the west, Sukra ; on the north-west, Ketu ; 
on the north, Budha; and on the north-east, 
Sani. If such should always be the various posi- 
tions assigned to these planetary deities, the belief, 
that the Nava-grahas are arranged in temples 
according to their position in the zodiacal circle at 
the time of the building of the temple, turns out 
to be unfounded. The names of the door-keepers 


39 


305 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


at the four gates of the temple of Surya are given 
thus in the Bhavishijat-purd,na : those at the first 
gate are called Dharma and Artha ; at the second, 
Garuda and Yama ; at the third, Kubera and 
Viuayaka ; and at the fourth, Raivata and Dindi. 
Raivata is said to be a son of Surya, while Dindi 
is said to be 6iva. 

According to the Amhnnadbhldagavia and the 
suprabheddgavia the figure of the sun-god should 
be sculptured with two hands, each holding a lotus. 
The hands should be so held up as to cause the 
fists holding the lotuses reach the level of the 
shoulders. His head is to be surrounded by a halo 
(Jidntiniandala) and his person should be adorned 
with many ornaments ; on his head there should 
be a haran^a-mahita and the garment worn by 
him should bo red in colour. He should wear a 
pair of ruby ear-rings {Imndalas) and over his chest 
there should lie a hdra (necklace). He should 
wear only one cloth and the body should be covered 
(with a coat) as ‘ in Northern India’. The fabric 
of this coat should be so delicate in texture as to 
make portions of the body visible through it. 
There should also be a yajTidpav'ita on his person. 
The figure of Surya should be made to stand on a 
padma-pUha by itself or should be placed in a 
hexagonal chariot drawn by seven horses fully 


30G 



ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GRAHAS. 

caparisoned. The chariot should have only one 
wheel and be shown to be driven by the lame Aruna. 
On the right side of Surya there should stand Usha; 
and on the left, Pratyusha. A second authority 
mentions four consorts to Surya ; namely, Eajni, 
Suvarna, Suvarchasa and Chhaya, while a third 
says that one half, taken vertically, of the body of 
Surya should have the shape of a dark comploxion- 
ed woman, probably indicating that the sun in spite 
of his being the god of light, is inseparably wedded 
to night and its darkness. 

The Silparatna states that on each side of 
Surya there should bo a dmrapalaJca, named 
Mandala and Pihgala respectively. According to 
this same authority the material of which the kirlta 
of Surya is made should bo pushparaga, or ruby. 

In sculpturing the imago of Aditya attention 
has to be paid to the instruction that the nose, the 
forehead, the chest, the knees, the thighs and the 
neck should all be raised and prominent; the 
diameter of the halo should bo twice the height of 
the kirlta. If the figure bo made so as to be one 
cubit in height it would be a saumyamurti, that 
is, a handsome, gentle figure ; if it be of two 
cubits, it would be productive of wealth ; if of three 
or four cubits, it would bestow happiness and 
prosperity. 


307 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


The following is another description of Surya 
based upon the Matsya-pur&na. According to this 
authority, the figure of Surya should have a fine 
moustache and should be dressed as men are in 
North India. Surya should have four arms, a 
lustrous body of rod colour covered with a coat. He 
should bo decked with all appropriate ornaments. 
In the right and left hands he should hold the 
sunbeams as the bridles and should wear round 
his waist a girdle named Panhjahga* Ho 
should be wearing a garland made up of all kinds 
of flowers, and should also wear anklets. On the 
left of Surya there should be the good-looking 


* The reading paniyaiiga is evidently incorrect, as might 
be gathered from the following account of Surya obtaining the 
avyanga or ahyanga from Vasuki found in the Bhavishyat- 
purdna. The origin of avyanga or ahyanga, the avyonhana 
of the Farsis, is given as follows : during each ritu (season) 
there came to the Surya-ma^^ala one each from among the 
rishis, dcvatds, ndgas, ganiharvas, apsarasas, yakshas and 
rdkshasas. In one of these turns Vasuki, the ndga, presented 
Surya with a oord called the avyanga or ahyanga which was 
produced from bis body. This oord was composed of gold and 
had the colour half white and half red. From this time 
forwards the followers of the Surya-oult were required to 
wear a similar oord round their loins. 


308 



ADITYAS AND THE NAVA GRAHAS. 

figure of Danda, and on the right the dark coloured 
figure of Pingala, both dressed in the North Indian 
fashion ; and two of the hands of Surya should bo 
placed upon the heads of these two figures. Pingala 
should bo shown as carrying in his hands a palm 
leaf and a stile. When two of the hands of Surya 
are not placed upon the heads of Danda and 
Pihgaja, they should carry a shield and a sida. 
The device on the banner of Surya is the lion ; 
and the banner should bo placed on the left of 
Surya. It is also stated that Rovanta, Yama 
and two Manus, all of whom arc understood 
to bo the sons of Surya, should bo standing 
two on each side of Surya. Or, as he is the 
lord of the planets, he might be surrounded by the 
planets. 

As wo have already seen the Adityas are 
twelve in number ; and each of them is said to 
preside over a month of the year. Their names are 
given variously in various works; and a good 
many of them agree in naming them in order as 
Dhatri, Mitra, Aryaman, Rudra, Varuna, Surya, 
Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pushan, Savitri, Tvashtri, and 
Vishnu. The image of each of these twelve 
Adityas is described in the VUva1iarma-sadra\ 
and the description in so far as it relates to their 
hands and the objects to be carried in them, may 


309 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


conveniently be summarised in the form of a table 
thus : — 


!Jo. 

Names of the 

Back Right 

Back Left 

Front Left 

Front 

Right 

Hand. 

Adilyas. 

Hand. 

Hand. 

Hand. 

1 

Dhatri 

Lotus gar* 
land 

Kaman- 
^ dalu 

Lotus 

Lotus 

2 

Mitra 

Soma 

Siiia 

Do. 

Do. 

3 

z^ryaman 

Chakra 

Kaumo- 

daki 

Do. 

Do. 

d 

; Budra 

Akshamala 

Chakra 

Do. 

Do. 

1 

5 

Varuria 

1 

Chakra 

Pasa 

Do. 

I Do. 

6 

! 

; Surya 

Kamandalui 

! Aksha- 
mala 1 

Do. 

Do. 

7 

Bhaga 

Sula 

Chakra | 

Do. 

Do. 

8 

Vivasvaa 

Sula 

1 

Garland ■ 

Do. 

Do. 

9 

Pushan 

, Lotus 

Lotus 

Do. 

1 Do. 

! 

10 

Savitri 

Gada 

Chakra 

Do. , 

Do. 

11 

Tvashtri 

, Sruk 

Homaja- 

kalika(?) 

Do. 

Do. 

12 

Vishnu 

Chakra 

Lotus 

Do. 

Do. 


Of these, Mitra, it is said, should have throe 
eyes ; Rudra is considered to be an important 
Aditya. Pushan is required to be sculptured 
beautifully ; he is declared to be the destroyer of all 
sins. Savitri is the Aditya who is capable of 
fulfilling the. wishes of his devotees and bestowing 


310 





ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GBAHAS. 


bool^ on them. Of all the Adityas the most 
lustrous one is Vishnu. It cannot fail to he inter- 
esting to note here that the names of some of the 
Adityas according to the Indian Aryas are the 
same as those according to Iranian Aryas : the 
Mitra, Aryaman and Bhaga of the Hindus are 
identical with the Mithra, Airyamau and Baga or 
Bagho of the Farsis. 

The photographs of some of the images of 
Surya or the Sun-god may he seen reproduced 
here on Pis. LXXXVI to XCIV. It may he 
seen that there are two varieties among these 
images, namely, the North Indian and the South 
Indian. Each of these possesses very marked 
peculiarities which are easy of I’ecognition. The 
South Indian figures of Surya have, as a rule, their 
hands lifted up as high as the shoulders, and are 
made to hold lotus flowers which are only half 
blossomed ; the images have invariably the udara- 
handha, and their legs and feet are always left bare. 
The North Indian images, on the other hand, have 
generally their hands at the natural level of the 
hips or the elbows, and ai’o made to carry full- 
blown lotuses which rise up to the level of the 
shoulders, and their forelegs have coverings resem- 
bling modern socks more or less in appearance and 
the feet are protected with a pair of footwear 


311 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


resembling boots. The udara-handlia is not fodnd 
in the northern variety of the images of the Sun- 
god, but there is a thin cloth or a sort of coat of 
mail shown as being worn on the body. The South 
Indian images are as often with the seven horses 
and their driver Aruua as not ; those which belong 
to the extreme south of South India, to such parts 
as the Tamil districts of the Madras Presidency, 
do not possess auy attendant deities like Danda, 
Piugala and the goddesses. The images of the 
Sun-god as found in the Earnatadesa and the 
Southern Mahratta country, corresponding roughly 
to the ancient Chalukya and Hoysala kingdoms, 
have invariably two goddesses sculptured one on 
each side of Surya. The common features of both 
Southern and Northern varieties of Surya are that 
the head is in all cases adorned with a Mrlta 
surrounded by a circular halo or jirahhaniandala, 
and that in several instances the characteristic 
seven horses and their driver Aruna are not 
missing. 

The image of Surya on PI. LXXXVI appears to 
be the oldest among those whose illustrations are 
published here. It belongs to the ParasurSmeS- 
vara temple at Gudimallam in the Madras 
Presidency. It has its hands lifted up to the level 
of the shoulders, and from the features of the face 


312 



PLATES LXXXYl 



Surya : Stone : Gurlimallam, 


[To face page 312.] 







[To face page 313.] 


(Fig. 1.) Surya : Bronze : ' Fit*. 2.) Surya : Stone ; Fllora. (Taken (Fig. 3.) Surya : Marble : Rupnagar 

Madras Museum. from Cave Temples of India by Kisbangarh District, 

Fergusson and Burgess). Raiaputana. 


ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GRAHAS. 


and tihe peculiarities of the modelling in general this 
image Vnay well be taken to belong to a period 
anterior to the seventh century A. D. The image 
whose drawing is reproduced on PI. IjXXXVII'Ii 
is found in the i^iva temple at Melcheri near Kavc- 
ripakkam and belongs to the later Pal lava period 
(A. D. 800). Here Suiya may be seen standing upon 
a flat seat under which are worked out the seven 
horses and the driver Aruna. Fig. 2, PI. LXXXVIII 
is a fine piece of sculpture found in Ellora. In 
this Surya is seen standing within a chariot drawn 
by the seven horses driven by Aruna. As in the 
case of all South Indian images of this god the 
hands of Silrya are, in this instance also, lifted up 
to the level of the shoulders and carry each a lotus 
flower. On the right and left of Sfirya are TJsha 
and Pratyusha driving away the darkness before 
them with their bows and arrows. The chariot 
of Silrya has here two wheels instead of only one 
as required by the Sanskrit authorities. This 
sculpture may be assigned to the eighth oentury. 
Of about the same time is the seated figure of Silrya 
whose photograph is reproduced on PI. LXXXIX. 
In this sculpture Surya is .seated cross-legged in 
his chariot drawn by seven horses driven by 
Aruna. Around him are to be seen the figures of 
the goddesses Eajui, Suvarna, Suvarchasa and 


40 


313 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


ChhSyS, as also the figures of Da^da and Pihga|a. 
The photographs reproduced on PI. XC are ihCerest- 
ing and represent the North Indian type of the 
image of the sun-god. The images of Surya illus- 
trated by them wear a curiously shaped Tiiriia- 
maJmta with a flat top, and have the characteristic 
round face associated with North Indian sculptures. 
Their hands arc placed at the level of the hip and 
a lotus with a long stalk is held in each of them, 
the flower itself being at the level of the shoulders. 
In figs. 1 and 2, the goddesses Bajfii and Nikshubha 
are seen on the extreme right and left of Surya, 
while nearer him on either side are Danda and 
Pihgala. In fig. 1, the ASvini-devat&s with horse- 
faces are shown seated in small niches specially 
provided for them, whereas in fig. the figures 
of UshE and Pratyusha are seen as if engaged 
in chasing darkness with their bows and arrows. 
Below these are seen the somewhat damaged 
figures of the goddesses B&jni and Nikshubha ; and 
immediately below the feet of Surya are worked 
out the seven horses of the Sun-god’s chariot. 
The images of Surya in figs. 1 and 2 on this 
plate have a broad belt round their waist which 
is perhaps the avyMiga or ahyaiiga mentioned 
in the Bliavishyat-pur^i^a. Fig. 3 contains the 
central image of Surya and surrounding it are 


S14 



PLATE LXXXIX. 



Seated Surya : Stone : Chitorgarh : Marwar. 


[To faoe page 3U.] 







PLATS XG, 




[To face page 314.] 


(Fig. 1 and 2.) Images of Surya : Stone : Ajmere, ®g. 3.) 

Bajputana Museum. 






pirate: xci. 



Surya : Stone : llavori, Dharwar District. 


[To face page 315..1 




ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GBAHAS. 


the images of Panda and Fihgala and the 
horse&faced A^inl-devatSs, as also Usha and 
Fratyushft : tho latter are as usual chasing away 
darkness with their bows and arrows, and are 
sculptured near the Itdbntiman^ala of Surya. The 
body of SQrya is shown as covered with a thin 
fabric through which the body of Surya is clearly 
visible. The ahyahga in this figure is not a broad 
band but a narrow belt encircling the waist. The 
three figures on this plate are seen wearing socks 
and boots. The photographs reproduced on FIs. XCI 
and XGII are of Surya of the South Indian 
variety belonging to tho Ghalukya-Hoysala country. 
Tho hands of Surya in these cases are lifted up to 
the level of the shoulders and are found to carry 
half-blown lotuses. There are tho udara-bandha and 
the ahijaiiga, but no sort of footwear. In FI. XCI 
the goddesses Bajni and Nikshubha arc work- 
ed out as standing one on each side of Surya with 
a chamara in their hands. In FI. XGII the 
goddesses Usha and Fratyusba are, as usual, driv- 
ing away darkness with bows and arrows. Besides 
these, a number of small figures are carved probably 
to represent Panda and Fihgala and others. On 
the top-most tier of the sculpture stand five figures 
resembling boys; these are perhaps the riahis 
Sanaka and others. In the tier below this first one 


315 



HINDU ICONOQEAPHY. 


are a scli of musicians playing upon different musi- 
cal instruments. In Pis. XCl and XCII are the 
seven horses, but in the latter alone is the figure 
of Aruna shown. Fig. 1, PI. XCIII and figs. 1 
and 2 on PI. XCIV also belong to the South Indian 
variety of Surya and to the Tamil country. In 
these the absence of the attendant deities may bo 
noticed ; these images, excepting fig. 1, PI. XCIV, 
wear udara-bandha and ahyanga ; the figures of 
the seven horses carved below the seat of Surya 
are not seen in the remaining images. Fig. 1, 
PI. LXXXVIII is the reproduction of the photo- 
graph of a bronze statuette of Surya preserved 
in the Madras Museum. In this, Surya is seen 
seated upon a chariot having a single wheel drawn 
by seven horses and driven by Aruna. This figure 
is encircled by a prabhavali. The goddesses Bajni 
waving a chamara and Nikshubha with what 
appears to be an umbrella are seen standing on 
either side of Surya. Fig. ^ on the same plate is 
a piece of sculpture belonging to the modern 
Bombay school. It is carved in marble ; Surya is 
here shown with four hands carrying a lotus each 
in the back bands and the aksham&lS. and the 
katnaii4cilu in the front ones, and seated upon a 
chariot drawn by seven horses driven by Aruna. 
Fig. 2, PI. XCIII belongs to the North Indian 


316 
















PLATE XCY. 








ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GEAHAS. 

vSfi flfey L th e figure of Surya has a face belonging 
to thf /^a/TType. Strangely enough it is seen 
holding the hands as high as its shoulders and the 
lotuses carried in them are at the higher level 
than the shoulders. Near the legs of the image of 
Surya are those of Da^da and Piugala and 
the goddesses Bajfii and Nikshubha and one other 
between the legs of Surya ; it is difficult to say 
whom this figure is meant to represent. Fig. 1, 
PI. XCIV belongs to the Hoysala country; the 
image of Surya has in this instance four hands, in 
the front two of which are the lotuses and the back 
ones are seen carrying the chakra and the iaiikha- 
The seven horses and Aruna are sculptured below 
the foot of Surya. PI. XCV represents the tdrai}a 
or gateway of a Surya temple. On the columns and 
the archway of this torana are sculptured the 
figures of eleven Adityas, which together with the 
one in the central shrine make up the usual number 
of twelve Adityas. Some of the Adityas have two, 
others four goddesses attending upon them ; each 
one is enshrined in a small fane and are seen 
carrying lotuses in their hands. All except the 
central figure on the archway are standing ; the 
central figure is seated in a chariot to which are 
yoked the seven horses characteristic of Surya. In 
the niches below the two Adityas on either side of 


317 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


the central one are some figures whose Big*!iific£Mlce 
is not known. 

The Eight other Obahas. 

In Hindu astronomy as well as astrology, 
the sun, the moon, the five planets — Mercury, 
Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, and also the 
ascending and the descending nodes of the moon, 
called Bahu and Ketu, constitute the well known 
naca-grahas or nine grahas. It has been stated 
that all these are worshipped in certain Hindu 
temples, where there arc special images installed 
in representation of them. The sun is the chief 
of the grahas, and the description of the sun>god 
and of his images has therefore been given first in 
some fulness. The other eight grahas are now 
taken up for consideration. 

Chandra or the moon is also known as Soma. 

His figure according to the Amiu- 
**** fnadbJied^gama may be represented 
either as standing or sitting. In 
the latter case, the seat, upon which he is to sit, 
should bo a simhasana. The colour of Chandra 
should be perfectly white and his bead should be 
surrounded by a halo or prabh&mai^ala. He 
should also be adorned with various ornaments 
and a garland composed of all sorts of flowers, and 


318 



C ms AND THE NAVA-GRAHAS. 

iQ^ed in white garments. He should 
■htkve two handsi each of which should hold a white 
water-lily {kumuda). On his chest there should 
be shown a golden i/ajfildpavlta and his countenance 
should be beautiful and possess a peaceful look. 
The ^ilparatna requires that the figure of Chandra 
should be shown as seated in a chariot drawn by 
ten horses, that this deity should hold a gads, 
in the right hand and that the left should be held 
in the varada pose. The Matsya-pui'Sna agrees 
with the kilparatna in stating that Chandra should 
be seated in a chariot to which ten horses are 
yoked, and adds that on the right and left of 
Chandra there should be the goddesses Ka,nti and 
l^obha, and that the lion banner of this god should 
also be placed on his left. The Purva-kara^gama 
gives the name of the only goddess, who is to be 
by the side of Chandra as Bdhini. 

Diflerent authorities give different descriptions 
„ of the figure of Bhauraa. Some 

Bhauma or Mars. . 

say that it should be seated upon 
a goat, some upon a simliRsana^ and some again in 
a golden chariot drawn by eight horses. The 
colour of the image of this planetary deity should 
be red like the fire ; it should have four arms ; one 
of the right hands should be in the ahhaya or the 
varada pose, while the other should carry the 


319 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


weapon SaHi. In the left hands, the -gfe^ar^nd 
the 6rda should be held. It should be ad6rned^ 
with garlands of red colour, and should be clothed 
in red garments. 

Budha is sometimes known as Grahapati and 
is said to be the son of Chandra, 
cury.***** His image should be seated upon 

a lion and should be adorned with 
garlands of yellow flowers and ornaments of gold. 
The colour of the body of Budha should be the 
yellow of the harnihara flower, and that of his 
garments should be also yellow. Budha should 
have four arms ; one of the right hands should be 
in the varada po.se, and the other three hands 
should carry the weapons known as JcJiadf/a, 
TihUaTia and Qadfi. The Vishnudharmdttara, 
however, states that the image of Budha should 
resemble that of Vishnu and be seated in a chariot 


re.sembling that of Bhauma. 

The two planetary deities Brihaspati and 
Sukra should each be represented 

Brihaspati or 

Jupiter and with four arms ; one of the hands 

Sukra or Venus. 

should be in the varada pose and 
the remaining three hands should carry the Icaman- 
dahi, the akshamUlA, and a da'^.a. The colour 
of Brihaspati is golden yellow. According to the 
Vislinndharmdttara, however, Bnhaspati should 


330 



ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-OBAHAB. 

I 

haVe two arms, and in his two hands he 
should carry a and the aJesham&ld. He 

should be adorned with all suitable ornaments and 
also clothed in yellow garments. The same 
authority says that ^ukra, the son of Bhngn, 
should be of white complexion, should have only 
two arms ; in his two hands he should carry a 
nidhi (treasure ?) and a puataka (book), and should 
be seated in a silver chariot drawn by eight horses. 
The colour of his clothings also should be white. 

The complexion of Sauai^chara and also the 
colour of his garments should be 

sanaischara or black. He should be small in 
Saturn. 

stature and somewhat lame in one 
leg. He should have two arms ; in the right hand 
he should hold a da^a, and the left should be in 
the varada pose. This is according to the Arhku- 
niadhliedtigama ; but the VishnudharmHtara 
requires that there should be the dat^a in the one 
hand and the akshamAlA in the other. The 
former authority prescribes the padma-pltha as the 
seat appropriate for danai4ohara, while the latter 
prescribes an iron chariot drawn by eight horses. 

The figure of Bshu should, according to the 
Silparatna, be seated upon a 
aimhdsana, while according to the 
Viahrpudimrni&ttara, a silver chariot drawn by 




831 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


eight horses has to be his seat. Accordu/gjkfthe 
first of these authorities, EAhu shohld possesulloih^ 
arms, one of his hands should be in the vtirada 
pose and the remaining three should carry the 
I'hadga, klie^aka and kiila. But according to the 
second authority, Bahu should have only two 
hands, in the right of which there should be a book 
and a woollen blanket while the left hand should 
carry nothing at all. 

Ketu is to be of dark colour and should have 
two arms, one of his hands is to be 

Ketu. 

in the ahkaya pose and the other 
should carry a gad^. He should be mounted upon 
a kite. The Vi6vakarma-8ilpa states that Ketu 
should resemble Bhauma in all respects, but that 
his chariot should be drawn by ten horses. 

The Bupaman^ana gives a summary of the 
description of the colours, weapons and emblems 
and vehicles and seats of the nine grahas, which 
may be tabularly presented thus : — 


Name of 

Colour. 

Weapons eto. 

Soat and 

CO 

M 

a. 

the deity. 

Right hand. 

Left hand. 

Vehicle. 

1 

Surya 

White 

Padma 

Padma 

Ohariot with 
seven horses 


S5roa 

Dq. 

i 

Kumoda 

1 

Kumuda 

1 

i 

Ohariot with | 
ten horses j 

i 1 



322 




PLATE XGVI, 



[To laco page 323.] 


Rahu. Sukra. Ketu. Soma. Surya. Budha. Sani. Bhauma. Bi-ihaspati. 


ADITYAS AND THE NAVA-GRAHAS. 


Weapons eto. I jg 

* ' — — ■ ! a 


Natna oi 

1 

Colour. 

‘ ‘ r - 1 Beat and | | 

Right hand. ! Left hand, j VaWole i | 

Ibe daity. 

Bhauma 

Bed. 

1 

Da^da Kama^dalu A goat ^ 

Hands in yoga-mndra Sarpasana rg 

Budha 

Yellow 

Guru 

Do. 

! fl • 

Aksbamala Kama^dalu Hamsa 

Sukra 

White 

Do. Do. A frog ^ g- 

1 S'? 

Sani 

Blaok 

Da 9 ?la ; Do. | g 

i ' ' “S 2 

Baku 

Smoke- 

oolour 

1 {A saorilioial a>^ 

i ' 1 pitfkuuda) Jg 

*51 

i •TJ o 

Ketu 

Do. 

1 Arms folded as in the The lower por- o it:' 
anjali attitude. tion of tho •§ 

bodyofBabu ^ 
should bo £ 
that of a ss 
snake. 

PI, 

XCVI contains the reproductions of the 


photographs of the bronze images of the Nava- 
graham to be found in the Surya temple at Surya- 
narkoyil in the Tanjore district. The central 
shrine of this temple, which faces the west, is 
dedicated to Surya, the sun-god ; near the image 
of the Sun-god are also placed those of ViSvesvara 
and his consort Visalakshi. The figure of Brihas- 
pati is set up in front of the central and those of 
the other grahas in small shrines constructed 
round the central shrine. 


333 




DEVI. 




DEVI. 

G od, according to Hindu philosophy and theo- 
logy, may be viewed as being either with or 
without attributes, that is, as saguna or nirguna In 
the former case God is spoken of as He or She, and 
in the latter case as It. In the saguna form of wor- 
ship, which is prescribed for all common people, the 
Yaishnavas worship him as Yisbpu and the ^aivas 
as Siva. Those Hindus who worship the Supreme 
deity exclusively as a female principle are called 
S&ktas. The classification of Hindu worshippers 
into Yaishnavas and Saivas on the one hand and 
Saktas on the other is not, however, exclusively 
rigid or inviolable, in as much as Yaishnavas and 
Saivas also worship the Devi in the form of 
Lakshml and Psrvatl, although the supreme place 
of honour is reserved for the male Deva, that is, 
for Yish^u or Siva as the case may be. Here the 
Devi comes only next to the Deva. But the 
Ssktas make the Devi supreme deity and assert 


327 



HINDU lOONOOBAPHY. 


that without the co-operatiou of this goddess the 
absolute Brahman of itself can achieve nothing. 
This f^akti may be conceived to be the personifica- 
tion of universal energy in the abstract. She 
resides in the macrocosm as well as in the micro- 
cosm. The discovery and development of 
or psychic energy in man is the aim of the 
Mantra-iHatras. The 6akti which resides in man, 
and the development of which is one of the aims 
of the Ydga-d§,stra, is called the Kui^lim 6akH. 
The place where it resides is called the MfdAdh^ra, 
and is understood to be at the lower extremity of 
the spinal cord- By a successful development 
and working of this Sakti at the MulTldJtdra, 
even the attainment of tn^kslia or the liberation of 
the soul is believed to become possible. In the 
ordinary condition the KutytlaUni l^akti is latent 
and sleeps quitely at the MulUdhara. The yOgic 
aspirant may first awaken the sleeping faculty in 
two ways, that is, either by means of the prd- 
r^y^ma or by means of mantras. Of these the 
former process consists in the regulation and the 
holding of the breath for certain definite periods 
of time. This is the course advocated in works on 
the YZigai&stra. The second process requires the 
aspirant to be initiated in certain mantras or in- 
cantations which be has to repeat a fixed number 


338 



DEVI. 


of times at certain hours of the day, keeping all the 
while before his mental vision the image of the 
deity associated with the mantra. When thus 
roused up, the Kiiij4aUni ascends from the Mula- 
dhUra to the next higher centre the 8vd>dhishihd,na : 
thence to the centres Manipura and Anahata in 
the latter of which this psychic iahti is transform- 
ed into sound ; then to the centre Viiuddhi where 
it becomes sattoio ; and then at 'last to the centre 
AjnH where the iaJcti becomes manifest in the form 
of a flash of light. By repeatedly practising the 
process of holding the breath and controlling it, as 
laid down in the Ydf/a k&stran, one may be enabled 
to enjoy this divine light perpetually, and thus be 
in union with Divinity itself. The practice of 
holding the breath and controlling it for the pur- 
pose of rousing the KundaUni &akti possibly brings 
into active play some latent power residing in the 
several parts of the spinal cord of the human 
being, which has not been as yet examined by 
Western Science. 

The effects produced in each of the six centres 
mentioned above are often depicted diagra- 
matically ; and the diagrams may conv^ey to the 
initiates some concrete idea of the internal psychic 
results attained by the practice of yogic breath 
control and mental concentration. These diagrams 


43 


329 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


are called by the names of OhaTtras and. Yantraa. 
A chakra is defined in the Tantras as a figure 
consisting of angles and petal-like parts ; that which 
consists of angles alone is called a yantra. The 
yantras generally consist of triangles cutting each 
other or straight lines crossing each other so as to 
produce a number of rectangular spaces and termi- 
nating in trident-like projections. Certain letters 
called bljaksharas or seed-letters are associated 
with these chakras and yantras^ and are written 
down invariably in specified parts thereof. The 
bljaksharas may be imagined to be something like 
code words, whose significauce is known only to 
the initiates. The worship of yantras is common 
throughout India ; perhaps the most important of 
these yantras is the ^rlchakra. It generally con- 
sists of forty-three triangles interestingly arranged 
in a plane and may also bo produced in three 
other different forms called Meru, Kailasa and 
Bhu. The Meru is the same as the plane 
^tlchakra in plan ; but the various triangles, 
surrounding the innermost one, are piled one 
over another in different planes so that the whole 
becomes shaped into the form of a pyramid. The 
topmost layer of the MSru contains a circle called 
the bindu. If associated with the eight mAtrikS. 
deities the Meru becomes the Kail&sa ; and with the 


880 




b'richakra. 





PLATE XCYIII. 



Srichakara : On nootal Pleti : Sriiigari Matha. 


[To face page 331. J 





DEVI. 


Vs,sinl deities it becomes the Bhu. The &ruti or 
Vedic revelation itself supports the worship of yan- 
tras {vide, Taitt. "Aran.). The drawing of the 
famous yantra known as the ^fkliahra is given 
herein : the lettering of the spaces is also shown in 
the photograph reproduced below ; with an ordi- 
nary reading lens, the letters of the Devan^gari 
alphabet may be seen engraved in various parts on 
this mystic figure.* This and other yantras are 
generally engraved on some metallic plate, prefer- 
ably one of gold ; silver and eopper also are of ten 
enough employed. The ^ricliakra engraved on 
metallie plates is an object of worship. In South 
Indian temples of the medieval and later periods, 

. '"The belief in the myatio potency of the iuterlaoing triangle 
and other geometrical figures, does not belong exclusively to 
the Hindus. The interlacing triangle, which is known to the 
Freemason under the name of Agla, once contained oabalistio 
oharaoters in each of its spaces and was considered to represent 
either the design of Solomon’s seal or the Shield of David. 
By some strange and occult process of reasoning it was 
believed to be a security against wounds, to serve as an 
extinguisher of fires and to possess other marvellous properties. 
The interlacing triangle, or the pentangle, with the letter G 
placed in the centre forms jewel of the Mark-Mason ; and the 
same, with an Egyptian Tau in the middle space and with a 
tail-devouring snake encircling the whole, constitutes the seal 
of Modern Theosophioal Societies. 


881 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


there are shrines called by the name of 
layas, in which there is a plijia or smaller altar 
very much resembling the common hali-pUha 
whereon the oblations of formal worship are usual- 
ly offered in temples. It is said that these pi^has 
associated with the &ahti-p%halayas contain inside 
them the plate on which the ^rtchakra is engrav- 
ed. Regular piijA is offered to the ^akti-pUha at 
least twice a day. In as much as this is thus an 
object of worship, it has been treated in this work 
as an icon. 

The other yantras are engraved upon thin 
gold, silver or copper plates, which are rolled into 
a cylinder and then put into a golden or other me- 
tallic case so that they may be vrorn on the body 
of person with a view to avoid diseases, possession 
by devils, and other such evils, which, it is suppos- 
ed, they have the power to ward off. Occasional 
worship is also offered to this case containing the 
magical yantra, and the wearer’s faith in its effi- 
cacy may well effect cures in many cases. 

^The goddess Devi is worshipped in many 
jforms. She is variously named sometimes accord- 
ing to her imagined age ; thus, when she is worship- 
ped asjan year old baby, she is known by the name 
of SandhyS ; if she is conceived to be two years 


333 



DEVI. 


V)ld, she is called Sarasvati ; if of seven years of 
age, Chandika; if of eight years of age, Sambhavi ; 
if of nine years of age, DurgS or Bali j of ten years 
of age, Glaurl ; of thirteen, MahSlakshmi ; and of 
sixteen, Lalita. Sometimes she is named in 
recognition of one or other of her heroic achieve- 
ments; for instance, she is called MahishSsura- 
marddani in consequence of her having destroyed 
the Mahishasura. There are special forms of 
images corresponding to these various ways of 
conceiving the goddess Devi. In the B^vlmahat- 
tmja found in the Markar^^ya-'pur&na, the 
Devi herself is made to say “ In the Vaivasvata- 
manvantara, at the end of the Dvapara-yuga and 
the beginning of the Kali-yuga, a new set of 
asuras called by the names Kumbha andNiSum- 
bba, would be born; and then I shall also be 
born as Nanda to the cow-herd Nanda-gopSla, 
and shall take up the Yindhya mountain as my 
abode. Thereafter, at the end of the DvSpara- 
yuga, I shall kill the asuras born in the family of 
Viprachitta and eat them up ; then my teeth, 
hair, body and weapons will all become red with 
their blood and for that reason they will call me in 
the world as Baktaj-ChSmu^a. Then there would 
occur a famine of a hundred years’ duration in the 
world, when there would not be available in it 


383 



HINDU lOONOQBAPHY. 


even a drop of water. In response to^ the prayeit 
of the Munis I shall at that time come out of the 
body of Parvati with a hundred eyes ; and then 
people would call me by the name of ^a tSks h^i. 
In the fortieth yuga of the Vaivasvata-manvan- 
tara I shall protect all the beings in the world with 
such vegetables as are necessary for the mainten- 
ance of life and relieve them from the famine. 
People would then call me ^Sk ambha rl. In this 
form of mine I shall kill an asura named Durgama, 
and shall thenceforth be known as DurgSdevl. I 
shall then proceed to the Himalayas and assume 
the terrific form of !]^ima. There will then appear 
an asura by name Arupa; and in the sixtieth 
yuga I shall, with the aid of a swarm of wasps 
(bhramaras), attack him and kill him. I shall, for 
this reason, be called BhrSiinarl’’. In this way the 
M9.rkai}4eyu-pur&na gives the clue to some of the 
wiiames of Devi, indicating that they often depend 
upon the achievements that are attributed to her. 

Regarding the supremacy of Devi as a deity 
and her position as the source of all divine as well 
as cosmic evolution, it is worth quoting from the 
same authority. It is said in the M^rkay^^o-- 
purana — “ The Gupta-rupi DSvl, that is, the Devi 
who is unmanifested, takes the three forms of 
Lakshml, MahSkSU and Sarasvatl, representing the 


884 



DEVI. 


^ BSjasa, the. SSttvika and the Tsmasa attributes or 
^unas of prakriti. She is also known in various 
other ways ; for instance, at the time of srishti 
or creation, she is Mahaksji exercising control 
over Brahm'St and bringing the world into exis- 
tence; at the time of the pralaya or universal 
destruction, she is MahamSrl ; as giver of wealth 
and prosperity she is Lakghmi and as destroyer of 
wealth and prosperity Alakshml or JyeshthadSvi.” 

“ During the time of creation, she 

assumes the form of a dark coloured woman under 
various names, such as Mahimaya, Mahakali, 
Mahaman, Kshudha, Trisha, Nidra, Trishna, 
Ekavlra, Kalaratri and Duratyaya. In obedience 
to the command of the supreme goddess Maha- 
lakshml, she divides herself into two portions, a 
male portion known by the names of Nllakantha, 
Baktabahu, ^vetahga, Chandrasekhara, Budra, 
Sankara, Sthanu, and TrilOchana, and a female 
portion of white colour known as Vidya, Bhasha, 
Svara, Akshara, and Eamadhenu. Similarly, the 
Sattva form, of moon-like splendour, possessed of 
akshamila, ahhuha, vlna and pustaka, is also 
generated by Mahalakshmi, the supreme goddess ; 
this aspect of the goddess is known by the names 
of Mahavidya, Mahavani, Bharatl, Yak, Sarasvati, 
Arya, Brahmi, Kimadhenu, Vedagarbha, Dhl and 


SS6 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


Idvan. She also gives rise to a male afld a female^ 
form by the command of the supreme Dgvl ; the 
male form produced out of this aspect of the god- 
dess is the black coloured deity known as Vishpu, 
Krishna, HrishikeSa, Vasudeva and Jan&rddana ; 
and the female is the fair coloured goddess known 
as Uma, Gaurl, Satl, Ghandi, Sundatl, SubhagS 
and diva. The Bkjasa form of the supreme 
Mahalaksbmi is simply called Lakshmi. She 
carries a mdiuluhga (pomegranate) fruit, the gadd>, 
the 'pdkira (vessel) and the hlietaka^ and has a 
chiJnia or mark consisting of the male and female 
sighs (Liuga). Hers is the colour of molten gold. 
She has also divided herself into male and female 
parts; the former is known as Hiranyagarbha, 
Brahman, Vidbi, Yirihcha and Dhata and the latter 
is called drl, Padma, Kamala, and Lakshmi. And 
the mother of the universe, Mahalaksbmi, ordered 
Brahman to take Saras vati as his consort. The 
great Brahmanda was born by their union. Budra, 
that is, diva married G-auri, and they both broke 
open the ‘ egg of gold ’. Lakshmi became herself 
the consort of Vishnu and they both afforded pro* 
tection to the universe. From Maya the whole 
lot of created beings came into existence.” Thus, 
according to the Devimd,h&tmya,siM the gods and 
goddesses mentioned above are but manifestations 


886 



DEVI. 


of the one single Supreme Being Mah&lakshm l 
and should not be understood to be separate 
individual deities.” 

The evolution of the various cosmic gods and 
goddesses from the supreme Goddess Mahalakshmi, 
as given in the DevUmiih&tmya of the MJirltain,d^a- 
purOna, is shown below in a tabular form : — 

Tha Bnprema Mahalakshmi. 

, __ j 

Sattvagunatmika Rajasa-gunatmika Tamasa-gnnatmika 

»■ Sarasvati . *■ Lakshmi. Mihakali • 

__i_ ! j — -I ^ 

Gauri. Vishnu md. Lakshmi, Hiranyagarbha md. Sarasvati. Budra. 
J md, 1 


It may be seen from the above table that all 
the manifestations of divine power are here conceiv- 
ed to flow from Mahalakshmi, who is looked upon 
in the MTirkanc^ja-purUtipa as the Supreme source 
of all power. This Devi is indeed at the basis of 
the worship of ^akti; and hence, as proceeding 
out of the supreme Devi, all the minor Devls are 
described in this chapter irrespective of whether 
they belong to the Saiva or the Yaishnava cult. 
They are, however, for the purposes of descrip- 
tion, grouped according to the cult to which they 
belong, as certain convenience is gained by so 
doing.^ 

S8T 

43 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


It was pointed out already that Dgvl is wor- j 
_ . shipped independently as the 

General feature* * 

of^ toutges of Supreme Deity under the name of 
dakti in Saktism, and that she is 
also worshipped in association with Siva in ^aivism 
and Vishnu in Yaishnavism. It has to be noted, 
however, that ^Aktism is often considered to be 
more akin to Saivism than to Yaishnavism. Hence 
the characteristics of the Devi as an independent 
goddess and her PurAnic associations may be 
noticed to have somewhat marked relations to the 
cult of ^iva- worship ; and the study of Devl-icons 
confirms this view. The ordinary or common 
form of the image of the Devi as the consort of 
Siva is given in the Uttara-kamik&gama, There it 
is described as having four arms and three eyes and 
a pacific countenance. It should wear on the head 
a karan^a-mahita and be clad in silk garments. In 
two of the hands the pdUa and the <mku6a should be 
carried, while the remaining two are to be held in 
the varada and the abhaya poses. 

If the image of the Devi is such as is made to 
stand by the side of the image of her consort, then 
it generally has only two hands ; one of these is 
made to hold a lotus or is kept in the kanaka pose, 
evidently to have a fresh natural flower put in 
every day, instead of having to carry metallic or 


S88 



DEVI. 


stone representation of the same ; the other hand 
is allowed to hang down freely by the side. This 
kind of goddess should have only two eyes and be 
of golden colour and handsome in appearance. 
Even when the Devi is not made to stand by the 
side of her consort, she may sometimes be given 
only two hands, one o^ which may be mad^ to 
carry a {Tarrot or a mirror and the other a blue<lily ; 
or, she may be made to hold a kUla and a paia, or 
any other weapons which please the fancy of the 
artist. 

The Devi may also be sculptured with six 
arms ; then she should be wielding in four of her 
hands the paia, ankuia, iankha and chakra and 
the remaining hands should be in the varada and 
abhaya poses. Sometimes she may be given even 
as many as ten hands : in this case she should 
be represented with five faces having terrific 
look and with side tusks. Her hands should carry 
the same weapons which Siva does when he is given 
ten hands. She should have the same iiaana as 
Siva. 

Again, the Devi is sometimes sculptured as 
embracing Siva or as sitting on the same or a 
different seat near Siva. In the former case she 
is seated on the lap of Siva. In the latter case, 
one of her legs, either the right or the left, should 


889 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


be folded and made to rest upon the seat, and the 
other should be left hanging down. Since it is said 
that either of the two legs might be folded and 
made to rest upon the seat, it is clear that the 
goddess may be seated on the right or the left of 
6iva. 

Whether the image of the Devi happens to be 
an independent figure or in association with the 
image of Siva — in either of these cases, the body 
of the goddess may have two bends and be of the 
dvibhanga variety or it may be perfectly erect and 
be of the samabhanga variety. When by the side 
of her lord i^iva, the Devi is known by the names 
of Manonmani or Gaurl. If ^iva is conceived as 
SadSsiva, the Devi associated with him is Man5n- 
mani ; and she happens to be Gaurl, when she is 
associated with Nataraja and other murtis of ^iva. 
There is, however, not the least difference in the 
sculpturing of these two differently named forms of 
the goddess. She might be shown as being black, 
white or red according to the taste of the artist. 

The Suprabhedngama says that the image of 
the Devi should have large and prominent breasts, 
and that it should be adorned with all ornaments. 
The standing figure of the DSvi with only one pair 
of arms is, according to the Purva-kHra'g^aina, 
known by the name of Bhav&ni also. 


840 




PLATE XGIX. 



(Fift. 1.) Darga : Wood : Durga : Stone : Mahabalipuram. 

Onakkur. 


[To face page ^41.1 


y 


DEVI. 


We m{iy now take into consideration some 
of the special forms of the DSvl, as associated 
directly or indirectly with the cult of Siva. The 
6aiva and the Sskta forms of the Devi are in fact 
the most numerous ; and it is the latter of these 
forms that are indirectly associated with ^aivism 
largely. 


The goddess Durga may have four, eight or 
more hands, should have three eyes and be of dark 
complexion. She should have a handsome look 
with a well developed bust, stout thighs and big 
hip, and be clad in yellow garments. The head 
should be adorned with a 1cara'n4a-niakuta, and 
the body decked with all ornaments. The front 
right hand should be in the abhaya pose, and the 
back one should carry the chakra. The front 
left hand should be in the kataka pose and the back 
one should carry the kahkha. The image of Durgft 
should be made to stand erect upon a padm^sana^ 
(See PI. C.), or on the head of a buffalo, or be 
seated on the back of a lion. Her breasts should 
be bound with a snake, and a red bodice should 
cover the upper portion of her body. The Supra- 
hhedUgama calls her ‘ the dear younger sister of 
Vishnu’, and informs us that she came out of 


841 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


the Adi4akti. According to this work she may 
have either eight or four hands ; and when she 
has eight hands, they have to carry the kankha, 
chakra, hula, dhanus, bdna, kha^a, khe^aka, and 
p&ia. (See Pis. XOIX and Cl). 

No less than nine different forms of DnrgS 
are mentioned in the ^gamas, namely, 


1. Nllaka^tlil. 

2. Kahemankari. 

3. Haraaiddhi. 

4. Badrfimaa-Durga. 

5. Vaoa-Darga. 


6. Agni-Dnrga. 

7. Jaya-Durga. 

8. Vindhyavaai-Dorga. 

9. Bipum&ri-Dnrga. 


To the above must also be added the group of nine 
figures of Durgii called the Nava-Durgas. 

Of the nine forms of Durga mentioned above 
Nilakanthi is described as the 

Nilakanthi. 

bestower of wealth and happiness 
on her devotees and is to be shown as carrying 
in three out of her four hands the triiula, the 
khe^aka and a drinking vessel, while the remain- 
ing hand is required to be kept in the varada 
pose. 

Kshemankari, the goddess capable of giving 
health, should keep one of her 

|f |ylidkW4Tilrj>.r i. 

hands in the varada pose and the 
remaining three should be shown as carrying the 
trUula, the padma and a drinking vessel. 


842 




Durga: Stono; Mahabalipurara. 


PLATE Cl. 



Durga panel in the rock-cub temple of Varaka3vamia in Mahabalipuram. 


[To face pape 343,] 



DEVI. 


Budramia 

Durga. 


Harasi^dhi is the goddess who confers attain- 
ment of the desired ends to her 
Harasiddhi. yotaries ; she should carry in her 

hands the ^amaru, the hamar^^alu, the kha^ga 
and a drinking vessel. 

^ BudramiSa-DurgJl is described as having two 
eyes and a dark coloured body 
and is draped in red garments. 
Her head should be covered with 
the kir^ia-makuta and she must be adorned with 
golden ornaments set with rubies. She should 
carry in her hands the iula, the kha^ga, the iahkha 
and the chakra. Her vehicle is said to be the lion ; 
on either side of this goddess should be the sun 
and the moon. 

Yana-Durg§i should have eight hands in seven 
of which should be held the 

Vftna-Burga. 

iahkha, chakra, kha^ga, kli^aka, 
bana, dhamis and kula, the remaining hand 
being held in the tarjani pose. The complexion 
of this aspect of Durgs is grass green. 

^ Agni-Durga has also eight hands, six of which 
hold the chakra, khadga, khie^aka, 

Ag^i-Durga. 

bS,^a, paia, and anktiia ; of the 


Vana-Durga. 


Agni-Durga. 


remaining two hands one is held in the varada 
pose and the other in the tarjani pose. She has 
three eyes and her complexion is as brilliant as the 


343 



HINDU laONOGBAPHY. 


lightning. On her crown is tied t||ie crescent 
moon ; she is riding a lion and has a terrific look. 
On the right and left of this goddess there should 
be standing in a reverential attitude two celes- 
tial damsels holding each a sword and a shield. 

Jaya-Durga should have three eyes and four 
arms in which she should be shown 
as carrying the ha7ikha^ the chaTcra^ 
the kha^ga and the trUula. The colour of this 
form of Durga is black. The crescent moon adorns 
the crown of this goddess also ; the vehicle of Jaya- 
Durga is a lion ; her lustre is said to spread 
throughout the three worlds. This form of Durga 
should be worshipped by those who desire to attain 
siddhi. 

Yindhyavasi-Durga of complexion bright as 
the lightning should be seated on 
^ golden lotus, should have three 
eyes and four arms. Two out of 
her four bands should carry the Sankka and the 
chakra, while the remaining two are to be held in 
the varada and the abhaya poses respectively. She 
should be adorned with the crescent moon, the 
h&ra, angadas, kun^alas and other ornaments. 
Surrounding her should be seen standing Indra 
and other gods praising her. The lion, her vehicle, 
should also be standing near her. 


344 




(I'ig. 1.) Katyayani or 

Mahisbasuramarddani ; Stone : 

Madras Museum. 


(Vig. 2.) Durgfi ; Stone : Conjeovarara. 


[To lace page 344.] 







Katyayani or Mahiahasuramarddani : Sbone : Gangaiko^idasolapuram. 
[To face page 345.] 




DEVI. 


Bipu];D&ri-Durg& is of red complexion and with 
Biptunari- * terrific look. In one hand she 
carries the triiula, while the other 
is held in the tarjani pose. If her mantra is repeat- 
ed ten thousand times, ail the while concentrating 
the mind on her as being placed in the SaryaMmba 
(the disc of the sun), she is believed to effect the 
destruction of enemies and their followers. 

The goddess DurgS, as Mahishasura-marddanl, 
should have ten hands, according 
to the kilparatna, which describes 
her further as having three eyes ; 
she should wear on her head a jatja-mahilfl, and 
in it there should be the chandra-kala or the digit 
of the moon. The colour of her body should be 
like that of the ata^ flower, and the eyes should 
resemble the nilQtpala or the blue lily ; she should 
have high breasts and a thin waist and there should 
be three bends in her body (of the trihhanga 
variety). In her right hands she should carry 
the triiulat kha^ga, iahty&yudha, chakra^ and a 
stringed bow ; and in the left hands the pdia, 
ankuia, kM^ka, paraiu, and a bell. At her feet 
should lie a buffalo with its head out off and with 
blood gushing from its neck. From within this 
neck should be visible the half emerged real asura 
bound down by the niga-pdia of the De^. The 

M 


846 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


asura should be tuade to carry a sword and a 
shield, although the Devi has already plunged 
her tri&ula into his neck and he is bleeding pro- 
fusely. He should have a terrific look with knitted 
eye-brows. The right leg of the Devi should be 
placed on the back of her lion and her left leg 
should touch the bufialo-body of Mahish&sura. 
(See Pis. CII and CHI.) 

The VislinudharniQttara as quoted in the 
Vachaspatya, describes Mahish&sura-marddanl 
under the name of Chandika thus : — This Devi has 
the complexion of gold and is a very handsome 
youthful woman in an angry mood, sitting on the 
back of a lion. She has twenty hands; the right 
ones carry respectively the iula, klia^ga, iahkha, 
chakra, hhi}a, kakti, vajra, ahUaya, ^amarii and an 
umbrella ; while the left ones are seen to hold the 
ri&ga-pdhia, klie^aka, paraiu, ahkuia, dhanus, ghania, 
dhvaya, gad&, a mirror and the mudgara- The 
buffalo-part of the asura is lying decapitated with 
the real asura proceeding from out of the neck. His 
eyes, hair and brows are red and he vomits blood 
from his mouth. The lion of the Devi mauls him, 
and the Devi herself thrusts the triiula into his 
neck. The asura, who is bound down by the 
nd.ga-pd^a, carries a sword and a shield. (See 
Pis. CIV and CV.) 


346 




Katyayani or MahishasaramarddaDi : Stone : 
ELlora. 


tTo face page 346.] 





PLATE CV. 



[To face page 347.] 


DEVI. 


Kfttyftyani is described as a goddess having 
ten arms and pairtaking of the 

Satyftyani. 

nature of the three gods Brahmfi, 
Vishnu and diva. She wears on her head the ja0,- 
bh&ra, in which is tacked up the crescent moon. 
Her face resembles in splendour the full moon and 
the colour of her body is that of the atasl flower. 
She has very pretty eyes and an appearance dis- 
closing the freshness of the youth which has just 
come upon her, and is decked with all ornaments. 
Her breasts are large and prominent and she 
stands with three bends in her body itrihhanga). 
She is represented as killing MahishSsura, bear- 
ing in her right hands the trUula, hha^ga, hd,T^, 
chakra, iaktyAyudha ; and in the left ones, khetaka, 
pAia, ahkuka, gliantjA and parahi.* Below is the 
headless trunk of the buflalo-bodied asura from 
whose neck his human form is made to emerge 
with a sword and a shield in his hands. His chest 
is pierced by the trihula of the Devi. The rest of 
the description of this aaura here agrees closely 
with that of MahishSsura as given under Mahishft- 
sura-marddanl. 

* In another desoription two more artioles, the pw^a- 
p&tra and eh&mara are mentioned as held in the hands in 
addition to those already mentioned ; but the nnmber of hands 
are. however, said to be only ten. 


347 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHT. 


The following account of the dest/uction of 
Mahishasura is given in the VarUha^purdii^: — 
Vaishnavl, the l^akti of Vishnu, was making tapaa 
on the Mandara mountain. On one occasion, her 
mind lost its concentration, and in consequence 
several handsome looking females were bom out of 
her. They began to attend upon the Devi ; and 
thus, looked after by these damsels, she began to 
continue her austerities. NSrada, who happened 
to go that way, saw her resplendent beauty, and 
told Mahishasura of the existence of a real paragon 
of beauty on the Mandara mountain. Seized by 
the madness of possessing her, the aaura prepared 
himself to capture her and marry her. As a 
preliminary step he sent a messenger to the Devi 
to relate to her his greatness and prowess and to 
ask her to accept him as her consort. This 
messenger narrated to her the origin and history 
of Mahishasura thus : — When the m/ii Sindbu- 
dvipa, son of SupSrSva, was practising penance in 
Mahishmati, a girl named Mahishmati, a daughter 
of Viprachitti, came with her friends to the 
Mandara-parvata on a pleasure excursion. There 
they came upon a beautiful abode of a riahiy which 
she wanted to take possession of. To drive 
away the then occupant of the diirama, they all 
took the shape of she-buSaloes and threatened to 


348 



DEVI. 


gore the rish% who was doing penance. The 
risM perceived by means of his mental vision the 
truth of the situation and cursed that these girls 
should all become real mahiahia or she-bufialoes. 
As soon as they heard the curse, they began to 
realise the formidable nature of the offence they 
had committed and began to repent. The mAi 
also became cooled down somewhat, and promised 
them that their buffalo nature would disappear 
from them as soon as a buffalo-son was born to 
Mahisbmati. After some years had passed by, 
Mahishmati was grazing on the banks of the 
Narmada. The riahi Sindhudvipa, who had also 
gone there, met a celestial nymph named Indumati 
and fell in love with her. As he was not able to 
approach her, his seed fell in the river Narmada, 
and it was swallowed with the water of the river 
by Mahishmati who took then her drink from the 
Narmada. This seed grew in the womb of Mahish- 
mati, and in time Mahishasura was bom. In ad- 
dition to giving this description of the origin of 
Mahishasura, his messenger praised also the intelli- 
gence and valour of his master. On hearing this, 
Jaya, one of the attendants of the DSvl, replied by 
saying that none of the women on the Mandara 
mountain was going to get married, and that 
therefore he might depart in peace. He left 


349 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


accordingly. After the departure of the messenger 
N&rada appeared before the Devi, and informed 
her that Mahishasura, having defeated all the gods, 
was going to her to carry her away by force. Very 
soon, the asiira, as stated by NSrada, came with a 
large army to attack the Devi ; she with her female 
attendants met him and his army in battle and 
completely destroyed all of them. 

A different version of the destruction of 
Mahishasura is given in the Vamana-puraijta. 
Pulastya addressing Narada says — “ The gods, 
having been defeated by Mahishasura, forsook their 
abodes and hastened, with Brahma at their head, 
to implore the protection of Vishnu. Sahkara 
was also present there ; and, when the gods finish- 
ed relating their grievances, Vishnu, and at his 
command, BrahmS, Sankara and all the gods so 
emitted flames of anger from their eyes and 
countenances that a mountain of effulgence was 
formed. From this mountain came forth EStySyanl, 
resplendent as a thousand suns, with three eyes, 
with hair black as night and with eighteen arms. 
To her Siva gave a trident, Visbpu a disc, Varu^a 
a conch, Agni a dart, Yama an iron rod, V&3ni a 
bow, Surya a quiver and arrows, Indra a thunder- 
bolt, Kubera a mace, Brahm& a rosary and a water- 
pot, K&la a sword and shield, ViiSvakarma a 


350 



DEVI. 


battle-axe smd other weapons, Huuavftn a lion, 
and other gods varioiis arms and ornaments. Being 
thus armed and adorned by all the gods, ESty&yanl 
proceeded to the Vindhya mountain. There two 
asurasy Chanda and Munda, saw her, and imme- 
diately hastened to their king, and informed him 
that a most lovely goddess had singly fixed her 
abode on the Vindhya mountain. On hearing 
the high encomiums which Chanda and Munda 
bestowed on the beauty of this goddess, Mahi- 
shilsura determined to obtain possession of her and 
ordered, his army to be collected and marched to 
the vicinity of the mountain. He himself entered 
into a lofty pavilion, and then sent the son of 
Maya to summon the goddess to his presence. 
Dundubhi, the son of Maya, accordingly pro- 
ceeded to her, an'd standing respectfully at a short 
distance addressed her — “ I am, O virgin lady, a 
messenger sent by the chief of the asuras". 
KlitySyanl replied — “ Approach ! Approach ! and 
dismiss thy fear, and truly deliver the message 
which thou bringest.” Encouraged by these words, 
Dundubhi answered, — “thus says Mahisha, the 
king of the amras , — ‘ The gods wander upon the 
earth, helpless and powerless, as the three worlds 
have been conquered by me. It is I who am Indra 
and Budra and Sdrya ; I am the sole lord of the 


861 



HINDU ICONOGEAPHY. 


Universe, and there is no other god th^ me. In 
battle am I unconquerable ; and by my victorious 
arms have I acquired possession of every desirable 
thing that the world contains. But on thy account, 

0 lovely virgin ! have I now come to this moun- 
tain hasten, therefore, to pay due obeisance to 
the lord of the universe, for thou art worthy of 
becoming his spouse ” Katyayani replied, — “ It is 
true that the mighty amra Mahisha has subdued 
the three worlds, and I also am ready to obey him ; 
but there is a custom, long established in my family, 
which requires that each daughter of our house 
should be conquered in battle by her wooer before she 
can be united to him in marriage. From this custom 

1 cannot deviate. Before, therefore, I can become 
the spouse of thy king, he must vanquish me in 
combat.” Dundubhi, on hearing these words, 
returned to Mahisha, and acquainted him with the 
determination of the goddess ; and he immediately 
ordered his army to advance, on observing which 
the gods exclaimed to DurgS, — “ Put on thy 
armour”. But she said, — “ I will not, for what 
necessity is there for an armour, when none but 
these vile asuras stand before me Vishnu, 
however, presented her with an armour, and 
entreated her to protect herself with it against the 
weapons of her enemies, especially as in conse- 


862 



DEVI. 


quence of % boon granted by Siva to him Mahisha 
had been rendered almost invulnerable. 

When Devi perceived the elephants, the horse, 
the foot soldiers and chariots composing the army 
of the asuras approach her, she at once strung her 
bow and rained on them a ceaseless shower of 
arrows. Many of the enemies of the gods she slew 
with her shafts ; others with her sword ; and with 
her various other weapons she caused havoc in 
their ranks, as her lion brandishing its mane 

bore her along Thus Kstyftyani 

destroyed countless hosts of the bold asuras ; and 
on beholding the battle-field covered with their 
corpses, she seized a vlndt, and a ^maru in joy and 
laughingly began to play. Wherever she moved, 
drawing out music from her instruments, ghosts 
and goblins shouted out in response and danced ; 
and her lion tossed about in sport the lifeless 
bodies of the slain. But Mahisha, on viewing the 
destruction of his army, hastened to engage, the 
goddess in personal combat ; and KstySyani, 
equally eager for the combat, urged on her lion. 
Then commenced a terrible duel in consequence of 
which the summits of the mountain were rent 
beneath their feet, the earth and the ocean trembled, 
and the very clouds up above became scattered. 
In vain did the goddess employ her various weapons 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHT, 


ftgftin and again ; the wily art of Mahisha rendered 
them all innocuous ; even when she succeeded in 
binding him with the noose given her by Yaruna, 
carrying the rope round his horns, his muzzle and 
hoofs, he escaped from the bond ; and when she 
hurled a thunder-bolt at him, he shrank into such 
a diminutive size that it went past him leaving 
him uninjured. At length Durga dismounted from 
her lion and sprang upon the back of Mahisha, and 
with her own tender feet so smote his head that 
he fell senseless on the ground ; and then she im- 
mediately cut off his head with her sword ; and all 
the hosts of asuras exclaimed, Ah ! Ah ! 

In other works also similar stories are given 
of the killing of Mahish§.sura by the Devi. The 
destruction of Mahishasura is considered to be 
allegorical; the Padma-purciTia says that in the 
Sv&yambhava-manvantara, Mahish&sura was killed 
by Yaishnavl on the Mandaragiri, that he was once 
again destroyed by Nandi in the Yaivasvata- 
manvantara on the Yindhya mountain, and that 
thus personified ignorance was killed by Jii&na- 
Sakti which is the same as personified wisdom. It 
may also be that this story indicates the substitu- 
tion of the buffalo-totem worship by a form of 
goddess-worship among certain early primitive 
tribes in the country. 


364 



DEVI. 


In the VUhipiidJiarmdttara it is stated that 
Nand§> was born ‘ from the pleasure 

Kaada. 

of Bharadvaja She has four 
arms; one of her hands is in the varada pose, 
another in the abhaya pose; the third and the 
fourth hands carry a lotus and an ankuia respec- 
tively. Or, she may in these hands hold the 
kha^ga and the kKetaka. Her complexion is white 
and she is seated on an elephant. 

The Var&ha-pttrd,i}a, however, has the follow- 
ing version of the origin of Nanda : — The king 
named Sindhudvipa, the son in a previous birth of 
Tvashti, knowing that in that birth he was killed 
by Indra, practised penance with a view to beget 
a son who would kill Indra. The river VStravati 
assuming the form of a young woman approached 
Sindhudvipa ; and through their union was born a 
child named Yetrasura. The child of theirs in 
due time became the king of Pr^gjyOtisha. He 
vanquished all rival kings, and then began to give 
trouble to Indra and the other gods. The gods 
with Indra at their head, and having ^iva also with 
them, went to Brahmft to complain to him of 
the annoyance caused by Vetr&sura to them. On 
hearing their complaint, Brahma suspected that 
the trouble was due to Mftyfi created by Vishnu ; 
and then at ohoe a damsel, clad in white robes, 


856 



HINDU ICONOGEAPHY. 


wearing a Mrlta on her head, and having eight 
hands carrying in them the iankha, chakra, gads,, 
paia, kha4ga, gkan0, dhanus and hS^a, appeared 
before him and undertook to kill the troublesome 
Vetr&sura. She then transformed herself into 
innumerable heroic damsels, and fought with the 
asura and put an end to his life. BrahmS and other 
gods, while complimenting her on her suooess, 
prophesied that she would be called upon on a future 
occasion to destroy another troublesome asura of 
the name of Mahishasura. The gods then retired 
to the Himalayas, where they set up the goddess 
Nanda as an object of worship and were feeling 
happy. Because they were so happy, they named 
this goddess Nanda. 

Durga is often worshipped in the form of nine 
figures, one of them being set up 
Navadurgas. middle and the remaining 

eight in positions corresponding to the eight points 
of the compass. They are all seated figures having 
a lotus as their seat. Instead of actual figures, 
we may introduce in their respective places their 
tatvaksharas, in the yantra. The image in the 
middle has eighteen hands, big breasts and thighs, 
and is adorned with various ornaments. This 
goddess, who is capable of granting all powers, has 
in eight of her left hands the tuft of hair of the 


856 




PLATE CVI. 



Standing; figure of Bhadrakali : Bronze 
Tiruppalatturai. 


[To faoe page 357.] 


DEVI. 


asura, the. kheiakay ghavi^, mirrov, dhanus, dhvaga, 
^amarUf pAia, the remaining left hand being held 
in the tarjani pose. The right hands carry the 
iaktiy ^anka, hula, vajra, iahkha, ankuia, cane, 
hAiju and chakra. Each of the eight other 
figures of DurgS has only sixteen hands. The 
names of these goddesses are Btidra-€han4^, 
chai}4^y Chan^ogrAy Chan^a-nAyikAy Cha7}4Ay 
Cha‘ij4Avatly Cha'^arupAy Atichaij^ikAy and Ugra- 
chat^ikA. The colour of the centrally situated 
DurgSi is that of fire. The other Durg&s are 
yellow of the gArochanay red, black, blue, white, 
grey, turmeric-yellow and pink. The central DurgS. 
is in the All4hAsana posture riding on a lion and 
holds in one of the hands the tuft of hair, as 
already stated, of the asura emerging from the 
cut-end of the neck of the buffalo-form of the 
asura. The other DurgSiS are seated upon rathas 
shaped like lotuses. Such is the description of 
Navadurg^s as given in the SkandayAmala. 

The conception of the goddess Devi as 

^ „ BhadrakSli has eighteen hands 

and a handsome appearance. She 
has three eyes. The following things are found 
held in her hands, namely, the akshamAlAy trUulay 
kha4gay chandray bAi^a, dhanus, iankhay padmUy 
truk, sruva, kamai!4alu, dan^^Ay iaktiy agniy 


m 



HINDU IOON06BAPHY. 


krinktfXiQina, water, one in each hand : of the 
remaining two hands one is in the klinii pose 
{ahhaya ?), and the other carries a jewelled vessel. 
She is seated in a chariot drawn by four lions, her 
posture being what is generally described as the 
nU^JtHsana. 

^ Mahak&li is jet black in colour and has tusks 


Mahakali. 


in her mouth. Her eyes are dis- 
tended and the waist is thin. She 


carries in her four hands the klia^ga, khe^aka, 
piiira and kapAla. She wears on her head a 


garland of skulls. Or, she is black in colour 


resembling the rain-cloud and has a stout body 
and eight arms. In her hands are held the 
cJtakra^ iahkha, gadA, a pitcher, a pestle, ahkuha, 


paaa and vagra. 

This goddess is said to be of the colour of the 
water-lily, carrying in three out 
of her four hands the p&ia, padma, 
and pAtra the fourth hand being in the abhaya 


pose. 

Ambik& is seated upon a lion and has three 
eyes ; she is adorned with various 

Ambika. , , . , . 

ornaments, and has in one of her 


left hands a mirror ; one of the right hands is held 
in the varada pose. In the other two hands she 
bolds the sword and the shield. 


m 






DBTI. 


Btrvamaiigiila. 


Mahgali is seated upon a nmMtaM, and 
wears on her head a ja^-mhi^. 

Muti pala. 

She carries in eight out of her ten 
tiatidH the ittla, ah}iami&% dhams, a mirror, the 
bum, khe^ha, khadga, and cliardra; and the 
remaining two hands are held in the varada and 
abhaya poses. She has a lovely appearance with 
pretty breasts and a playful smile on her counte- 
nance. She is adorned with various ornaments. 

This goddess is seated on a lion and has four 
arms; in her hands she carries 

BftnrftniAiigAlA. 

the akshasutra, padvia, iula and 

kaman^h. 

^ This goddess is a representation of the iakti 
as a destructive power. She has a 

KAlATAtri. 

single braid of hair and her ears 
are ornamented with red shoe-flowers in addition 
to the ht^ala*. She is naked and seated on an 
ass. She is sometimes specially associated with 
Bengal. Her body is smeared with oil and her left 
foot wears a kind of anklet made of iron spikes. 
K&Iar&tn is rightly of a terrific appearance. 

Lalit& has in her two left hands a mirror and 

, , a iahkha, and in her right hands 

a fruit and a small box containing 
collirium for the eyes. Hers is a standing figure, 
and it must be decorated with various ornaments. 


KAlATAtri. 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


Gauri is the goddess looked upon as an un- 
married girl, with either two hands 

Oauri. 

held in the varada and abhaya 
poses, or with four hands, three of which carry the 
ahham&lA, padma and kaman^alu, the fourth one 
being in the abhaya pose. This is understood to 
be the aspect in which the devas contemplate upon 
her ; and she is held to be capable of bestowing 
much benefit and great merit. 

Gauii is worshipped under different aspects, 
such as Uma, P&rvati etc. Of these 

Vma. 

Uma is the goddess who is wor- 
shipped even by the devas ; she has in her hands the 
alshaniAlAf a mirror, the kamanc^alu and a lotus. 

The figure of this goddess has four arms ; in 
her hands are seen the akshaniAlA, 

Parvati. , . 

an image of Siva, an image of the 
lord of the Devaganis (GaneSa) and the kaman- 
dalu; and her abode is between agfii-kun^as. 

Another aspect of Gauri is represented as a 
female figure standing upon the back of an alliga- 
tor ; she is required to be worshipped at home in 
the houses of her votaries who desire wealth and 
prosperity. She has four arms; in two of her 
hands are held the akshasutra and the padma, 
while the other two are kept in the varada and 
abhaya poses respectively. (See fig. 1, FI. CVIII.) 


360 



PLATE OYIII. 



tTo Um p»ge 860.1 



DEVI. 


Bambhft is an aspect of the D§vl said to be 
able to grant all the desires of her 

Itambha* 

votaries ; she is seated on an 
elephant. She is handsome and has four hands, 
which carry respectively the ahsha- 

m&ln, vajra and anhuia. 

Totals is another aspect of Gann who carries 
the iula, ahshamdla, dai^ and a 

Totalat 

white chauri. She is said to be 


able to destroy all sins. 

TripnrS another aspect of Gaun carries in two 


Tripura. 


out of four of her hands the ahJcuia 
and the pdia, while the remain- 


ing ones are held in the varada and abhaya 


poses. 

In a temple dedicated to Gaun the central 
figure should naturally be that of Gaun. On the 
left of the image of the central Gaun should be 
that of Siddhi, while on the right that of Sri. 
There should also be the images of Bhagavati and 
Sarasvatl in places which are called the prishtjia- 
kanj^ bMga, GapeSa in the north-east corner and 
EurnSra in the south-east comer of the temple. 
The door-keepers of the temple of Gaun are eight 
in number. They all keep one of their hands in 
the abhaya pose and carry in another a 
while the two other hands of Jay& and VijayS, 


46 


861 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


two of the gate-keepers, are seen carrying imhiia 
and p&ka ; of AjitSi and Aparftjita, the padma and 
paia ; of Vibhakti and Mahgala, the vajrat and 
ahkvSa ; and of MShinl and StambhinI, the Sahkha 
and the padma. 

The general appearance of this goddess is 
black, and she has long eyes. The 

Bhutamata. 

colour of her face is either white or 
red. She wears a linga on her person, and has 
only two hands in which she holds the kha^ga and 
khetaka respectively. She is seated on a simhd- 
Sana. Her head is decorated with ornaments 
made of pearls. Bhutam&tft is worshipped by 
bhutas, jjretas, pikt^chas, by Indra, Yakshas, Gan- 
dharvas, etc., and her abode is under an akvattha 
tree (ficus religiosa). 

.. The figure representing this goddess is requir- 
ed to be sculptured as lying down 
on a bed with the eyes closed. It 
must be shaped very beautifully. The goddess 
keeps a drinking vessel near her, and has only two 
hands. 

^ V&mft is represented as a female figure with 
one head and two arms, and is of 
terrific look possessing three eyes. 
She holds in one hand a kap&la and the other is in 
the dbhaya pose. She wears a ja0,-fnaku^ on her 


To^anidra. 


Varna. 


362 



DBVL 


bead. This goddess is supposed to confer all the 
desired good upon her votaries. 

The goddess Jyeshthft is terrific and powerful, 
/ is of red complexion and is said to 

confer fortune upon her votaries 
and also destroy their enemies. She is described 
as the eldest of the group of eight goddesses begin- 
ning with JyeshthS and ending with Mandnmanl. 
She has two hands in which she carries the kapdila 
and the bHi^a. 

^ Baudrl has a black face, is of a terrific look 
. ^ . and is draped in red clothes. She 

is older than the other six goddesses 
whose descriptions follow. 

Kali is a goddess of dark colour, her face alone 
being red. She carries in her two 
hands a lotus and the kap&la. She 
is the destroyer of fear. 

^ Kalavikarnika is of a bluish colour and carries 
„ . in her two hands the kap&la and 

the iakti. She is also understood 
to be capable of removing fear and giving rise to 
happiness. 

Balavikar^ika is of grey colour, has long eyes 

kap&la and the japam&lS,. She is 
the giver of peace to her worshippers. 


868 



HINDU lOONOOBAPHY. 


Balapramathani is of a reddish or white com- 
plexion and has two hands in 
B«iapr«inatiwiii. (5aj]fj[0g the kap&la and 

the p&ia. She is the destroyer of all enemies. 

Sarvabhutadamanl is of deep red olour resem- 
bling that of the shoe-flower, and 
^^j^abhutada- tugjjg Jq her mouth ; her belly 

is big and large. She carries the 
kap&la and the vajra in her two hands. 

Mandnmanl is to be either of blue or of black 

complexion, should have a large 
Mftno&maxii. ^ 

face and should carry the kap&la 
and the kha^a. She is also said to bestow wealth 
upon her votaries and to terrify their enemies. 

This is a twin goddess of whom VSrunl has 
pendulous breasts and a flabby 
mSda?*^’^** garments 

and carries in her hands the iula 
and hana.. Otherwise she must be sculptured as 
a handsome woman. Chamun^S has large and 
long nails and several hands. This Ghimun^S is 
said to be capable of attracting all to herself by 


means of ber power. 

Bakta-Ghamund&, also known as Ydge4vari, is 


B»kta-Ob«- 


believed to be permeating through 


munda. 


out the moveable and immoveable 


objects of the universes ber worshippers are. 


86i 



DEVI. 


supposed to attain this extraordinary power of per< 
meating the whole universe. This goddess carries 
in her hands the kha^ga, musala, halli and a 
p&tra, 

SivadQti has a faded look and a face suggest- 
^ , ing that of a jackal. Her body is 

Sivaduti. . , . T . 

emaciated, thin and wiry. It is 
ornamented with snakes ; and she wears a garland 
of skulls. Her look is terrific. In her four hands 
she carries the rakta-pS,tra (a vessel to hold blood), 
kha^ga, hula and m&msa (flesh). She is seated in 
the ill^h^aua attitude ; near her is seen a kha^- 
v&nga. According to another authority, the com- 
plexion of ^ivadiiti is said to be that of the midday 
sun ; she has three eyes and hands, in the left ones 
of which are held a patra (vessel) for holding blood, 
the gad&f kJiHaka, pUha and in the right ones the 
padma, ku^iara, klia^ga and ahkuha ; she is 
adorned with ornaments set with all the nine 
gems and is worshipped by the gods, rizhii and 
others. 


YdgeSvari should have ten hands, three eyes. 


Togesvari. 


and should carry the kakii, kha4ga 
and 4o>maru in three of her right 


hands and khS^ka, kha^v&nga, and trikula, 


in the four left ones. Nothing is mentioned about 


the remaining hands. 


865 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


Tripurabhai- 

ravi. 


Bhairavi holds in her hands ihe-pUka and the 
ahhuia, and is of red complexion. 

Bhairavi. 

If the worshipper so desires, he 
may endow her figure with twelve arms. 

This goddess is of the complexion of the 
rising sun and has three eyes. 

surrounded with a 
garland of skulls ; a ratna-niAhu^a 
in which is inserted a crescent moon adorns the 
crown of her head and her chest is daubed with 
blood. In two of her hands are held the aksha- 
tn&lA and vidya (is it jhana-mudra or a book ?), 
while the others are held in the varada and 
abhaya poses. 

Siva is seated upon a bull and has three 
eyes ; one of her hands is in the 
varada pose, another carries a 
4amaru bound with a snake, the third hand car- 
ries the triiula and the fourth is in the abhaya 
pose. 

Klrti is adorned with costly ornaments set 
with superior gems. She has a 
very pretty waist and is seated on 
a blue lily, and also holds the same flower in one 
of her hands. In' another hand she carries a 
kalaha (vessel). She smells of rice mixed with 
toddy. 


366 



DBVI. 


Siddhi. 


Biddhi, 


Siddhi is another goddess who is capable of 
bestowing all desired; objects on 
her worshippers ; she has her body 
covered with white sandal paste, is seated upon a 
white seat, and is decorated with white lotuses. 
She has a door-keeper attending upon her. 

Biddhi is a goddess represented like a hand- 
some woman seated in the rSir&aana 
posture. She is fondly looking 
into a mirror. Her forehead is marked with a 
very pretty tiVaika and the hair of her head is 
done up neatly and beautifully. * Ghnmaras and 
garlands are held on either side by attendant 
women. She is also fond of playing on the flute 
and the xUndi.. 

This goddess is seated upon a padmasana and 
is engaged in the practice of yoga. 
Hers is a pacific and beautiful 
countenance ; she wears a flat waist-zone and has 
also the yoga-pa^a going round the back and the 
two'orossed legs. One of her hands is in the varada 
pose and the other holds the triiula. 


Kahama. 


* It we take of the Sanskrit text as a single 

word the description of this goddess ought to be changed as 
follows ; — on her body is a black mole (something like the 
^rfvatsa mark on chest of Yishpu). 


367 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


Dipti. 


Rati. 


Dipti is a goddess full of radiating effulg- 
ence and is seated upon a chandrH- 

SCLTl/Qf 

Bati is a very handsome looking goddess 
wearing such jewels as are generally 
worn in spring seasons. She is 
attached to playing on the vlna. She is scented 
with kasturi and karpuray and is carrying in her 
hands a and an aksham&la. She is full of 
glee and is dancing in joy. 

^vetS is bright as the moon 
and is seated on an white lotus. 
Bhadra is a goddess with four hands in which 
are found an akahamUlA, nllQtpala, 
a fruit and the iula. She is seated 
on a bhadr&sana. 

These twin goddesses should each hold in three 
snd out of four hands the iulctf pcidinci 

Vijaya. aksJiavtalA ; and the fourth hand 

is in the varada pose. The goddesses are seated 
upon a lion. They are also goddesses who fulfill 
all the desires of their votaries. 

Ksli is a terrific goddess and has a peculiar 
smell about her calculated to create 
fear in the mind of all. 

Gha^^karni carries in her 
hands the ghaij^S. and the triiula. 


Sveta. 


Bhadra. 


Kali. 


Ohantakami. 


368 



DEVI. 


Jayanti. 


Siti. 


Jayanti must also be sculptured as a very 
beautiful woman ; her hands should 
be made to carry the hinta^ iula, 
hha^ga and hlm^aka. She is worshipped in thank* 
fulness by those who are enjoying happiness. 

Diti, who is praised by the aauraSf is also 
worthy to be worshipped. She is 
to be shown as seated on a dar^- 
sana, and decorated with all ornaments. In her 
hands are to be held a nlldtpala and a fruit and 
she carries a child on her lap. 

Arundhati is a goddess who is free from anger, 
is draped in white clothes and is 

Arundhati. 

always austere. And in evidence 
of this latter quality she has to be sculptured as 
carrying in her hands patras (leaves), flowers and 
water indicating that she is intent upon offering 
worship to the gods. Her body is covered with 
sandal paste. 

AparftjitSi should be so shown as riding a lion ; 

she is to be sculptured as a very 
strong woman carrying in her 
hands the pin&ka (Siva’s bow), bai^a, khadga, and 
khSfyika; she should have three eyes and the 
jainbharlt on the head, with the orescent of the 
moon in it. She has a snake V&mki as her 
wristlet. 


Aparajita. 


47 


369 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


Kriabna. 


This goddess has the face of a cow and the 
body of a handsome woman. She 

Surabhi. 

carries in her two hands a handful 
of grass and a kaman^lu respectively, and is 
worshipped for the attainment of wealth and plenty 
and prosperity. 

The abode of this goddess EnshnA is in the 
midst of agni-kuij4o^ or sacrificial 
fire-pits. She has four hands, two 
of which are in the anjali pose, and the two remain- 
ing ones carry the ahshamMTk and the haman^alu. 

Indr&kshi is a goddess with a bright counte- 
nance and a pair of hands in one 

Zndrakalii. ^ 

of which she holds the vajra, and 
keeps the other in the varada pose. She is drap- 
ed with a pair of yellow garments, decked with all 
ornaments and is surrounded by a number of 
youthful damsels. This is the aspect of the Devi 
which is worshipped by the apsaraa women. 

The youthful goddess Annapurna is of red 
complexion, having a face round 

Annapuma. 

as the full moon, three eyes and 
high breasts. In her left hand she carries a vessel 
set with rubies and containing in it honey : in the 


Zndrakalii. 


Annapurna. 


right hand she holds a spoon set with rubies and 
containing delicious rice. She is adorned with 
wristlets set with rubira, a h^kra which rests 


370 



DEVI. 


gracefully upon her chest and many other orna- 
ments. (See fig. 2, PI. CVni.) She may have 
sometimes as many as four hands, in which case, 
two hands are to carry the paia and crnkuka and 
two others held in the abhaya and varada poses 
respectively. There should also be the orescent 
moon adorning the crown on her head. 

Tulasidevl is of dark complexion, with eyes 
resembling the petals of the lotus 

XttlMldevi. 

flower, and having four arms ; of 
the four hands two are in the abhaya and varada 
poses and the other ones keep in them a lotus and 
a nltdtpala. She is to be adorned with Mr%^a, hara^ 
k^ura, hatp^las and other ornaments, clothed in 
white garments and seated on a padniasana (or 
on a lotus). 

This goddess should be seated upon a horse, 
with one hand canwing a golden 

Aavarudhadevi. j a 

cane and the other holding the 
reins of the horse. She has three eyes ; on her 
crown is the orescent moon. 

The complexion of BhuvaneSvan is the red 
colour of the rising sun and she 

Bhuvanesvari* 

has three eyes. Her crown is 
adorned with the crescent moon and she is seen 
wearing all ornaments including huij^alaiy Kara, a 
broad belt round the waist and TcankaijMS set with 


371 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


rubies. She is seated upon a padm&sana. In two 
of her hands arc the pasa and the ahkii^a and the 
remaining hands are held in the abhaya and the 
varada poses. 

Bala is also a goddess of red complexion 
seated upon a padmUsana. She 
holds in two of her hands the 
akshumalti and the pustaka and the remaining 
ones are kept in the abhaya and the varada 
poses. 

This goddess of black complexion should be 
seated upon a seat set with rubies, 
with one of her legs resting upon 
a lotus and her hands playing upon the wtna. 
There should be near her a parrot whose talk 
the goddess should be listening to. EajamSitahgi 
is adorned with the orescent moon on her 
crown which is tied round with a garland of blue 
lilies, a tilaka on her forehead and all appropriate 
ornaments. 


Rajamatangi* 


Lakshmi. 


So far we have dealt with the images of Devi 
either as directly or indirectly 
associated with the cult of ^iva. 
There is goddess-worship associated with the cult 
of Vishn u and BrahmS as well. The goddess is 
here invariably look^ upon as the consort of the 


372 






Sridevi: Sfcono: Mahiibalipiirani. 


[To face page 372.] 




PLATE CX. 





PLATE CXI. 



Tjakshmi ; Stone : Mideyur. SridevI : Ivory ; Trivandram. 


[To face page 373.] 



DEVI. 


god ; and chief among Vishnu’s consorfc is Lakahml. 
When the ocean of milk was churned for obtaining 
the ambrosials for the gods, many other valuable 
things came out from that ocean. The goddess 
of wealth Lakshmi, who became afterwards the 
consort of Vishnu, came out from that ocean then. 
Lakshmi is conceived to be treasured by her lord 
on the right side of his broad chest. She is known 
by several names, such as, ^rl, Padma and Kamala. 
She is seated upon a padma and holds in each of her 
two hands a lotus. She is also adorned with a lotus 
garland. On either side is an elephant emptying 
water on her head from pots presented by attendant 
celestial maidens, (See Pis. CIX, CX and fig. 2, 
PI. CXI). This goddess is of dark complexion 
according to the Vishnudhanridttara. The Amiu- 
niadbJiedd,gama describes her differently. According 
to it the colour of Lakshmi is to be golden 
yellow. She should wear golden ornaments set 
with rubies and other precious gems ; in her ears 
there should be jewelled ndkra-lcwn^adm- The 
figure of Lakshmi has to be like that of a maiden 
who has just attained age and should be of very 
handsome appearance, with pretty eye-brows, eyes 
lil^ the petals of a lotus, a full neck and a well 
developed waist. She should wear a bodice and be 
adorned with various ornaments on the head. In 


378 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


her right hand she should carry a lotus flower and 
in the left hand a biloa fruit ; she should bo draped 
in beautiful clothing and her back should be broad 
and attractive. The waist zone should be a broad 
belt of artistic workmanship and should heighten 
the effect of her natural beauty. 

The Silparatna alone mentions that the colour 
of Lakshml is white and further says that in her 
left hand she holds the lotus and in the right hand 
the bilva fruit. It adds that she wears a necklace 
of pearls and is attended by two maidens who are 
waving the chumura near her. She must be 
bathed with water taken out of two exactly 
similar vessels. The figure of Lakshml should have 
only two hands when she is by the side of Vishnu. 
But when she is worshipped in a separate temple 
she should have four hands, (See fig. 1, PI. CXI), 
and be seated upon a lotus of eight petals placed 
upon a simhiisana. In one of the two right hands 
she should hold a lotus with a long stalk, and in 
the other a bilva fruit ; the left hands should carry 
an amritaghata (a pot containing ambrosia) and 
a sahkha respectively. Two elephants standing a 
little behind her should pour from pots pure water 
on her head for bathing her. On her head also 
there should be a lotus. She should be adorned 
with MyUra and kankaij.a. 


37i 




PLATE CXll 



ivollapura IVlahalakshml 


Sbone : Kolhapur. 


[To f.T,cc page 375.] 



DEVI. 


In Karavlra (tho modern Eolhapura) there is 
a temple dedicated exclusively to Mahalakshml : 
it is therefore a very famous place of pilgrimage. 
The VUvakarma-§astra describes separately the 
figure of MahSilakshml as found in this temple. 
She is represented as a small girl wearing various 
ornaments and looking very handsome. In her 
lower right hand is a patra (vessel), and in the 
upper right hand the gadd, named kaumMaki; in 
the lower left hand she holds a bilva^ fruit, and in 
the upper left hand the* klietaka. On her head is a 
Linga, (See PI. CXII). She has to be worshipped 
by those who are desirous of acquiring wealth. 


Bhumi or Bliu< 
devi. 


It is conceived that Bhumi or Bhudevi, mean- 
ing the Goddess Earth, is also a 
consort of Vishnu. Possibly this 
association of the Goddess Earth 
with Vishnu is due to his boar-incarnation. Bhumi 
or Bhudevi is said to be of a light green colour 
resembling that of the tender sprouts of the paddy 
plant. Her head has to be adorned with a karav4^- 
makuia ; and she should be made to wear ornaments 
of all kinds and be dressed in yellow clothes. 
Bhumidgvl should be sculptured as a woman with 
two hands in which she should carry either lotuses 
or nllutpalas. She may be either sitting or standing 


376 



HINDU lOONOQBAPHY. 


upon a padmnpl^ha. This is the desoription of 
the goddess as she is found by the side of her lord 
Vishnu. The Furva-kHrai^gama^ however, gives 
a slightly different desoription of Bhiidevi. She is 
said there to be of dark colour and to wear red 
clothes as well as a golden ycynopavUa on her body. 
In the VisJiy>U(lhar)n>dttara we have it stated that 
her complexion is white, that she has four arms 
and carries in her four hands a ratna-pMra (a 
vessel filled with gems), sasya-p&tra (a vessel 
containing vegetables), dshadhi-p^itra (a vessel 
containing medicinal herbs) and a lotus respectively. 
She should be seated upon the back of four dig- 
gajas or elephants of the quarters. This description 
is evidently that of the Goddess Earth when she 
is set up independently as a svayam-pradhd,na 
object of worship and represents fully poetically all 
the characteristics of the earth, as the producer of 
plants, gems etc. 

In addition to Lakshmi and Bhudevi, there 
are other goddesses associated with Vishnu in 
relation to some of his other incarnations. For 
instance Sit§> was worshipped as the consort of 
Bgima, and Bukmini, SatyabhAma and B&dhS. as 
the consorts of Krishpa. Even Subhadrs, the sister 
of Krishna, is associated with Vishnu worship at 
Jagannath. 


376 




Saraavati: Ssono 


[To faco page 377.] 




Sarasvati : Stone : GangaikoQ(la8o]apuraQi. 


[To face page 377.] 






[To (ace page 377.] 


Saraavati: Stone: Bagali. 




Sarasvati with a viim: Stone: llalobick. 


Sarasvati dancinj*: Stone : Jlalebidu. 


[To fiico page 1)77. J 



DEVI. 


Sarasvatl, the goddess of learning, is associated 

generally with BrahmS, who hap- 
SarMvati. ® , , ,7 

pens to be the creating god m 
the Hindu trinity. She is seated upon a white 
lotus, is of white complexion, and is draped in 
white clothes. She has four hands (See Pis. 
GXIII and CXV). In one of the right hands 
she holds an akshamd,la and the other right hand 
is in the pose called vyS,khya,na-mudr& ; and in 
the left hands she carries respectively a book and 
a white lotus. Surrounding her there are standing 
a number of tmmis or sages engaged in worshipping 
her. She wears a yajnopavlta on her person and 
has the ja^-mahita on the head ; otherwise also 
she is decked with various ornaments. This is 
according to the Am^umadbhedligama. But the 
VishipitdharmoUara tells us that Sarasvatl should 
be standing upon a white lotus and further substi- 
tutes the kaman^alu in the place of the lotus in 
one of the left hands and makes the right hand 
with the vyakhyana-mudrd, carry instead a Vlnd, 
with a bamboo stem (See fig. 2, PI. CXVI). In 
her standing posture she should be sculptured 
as a,8amabkanga image. The AmiumadbJiedagavia 
says that the kun^^alas of Sarasvatl should be made 
of rubies but the Purva-k&rai^&gama prescribes 
for her, ear-rings of pearl (See PI. CXIV, also fig. 1, 


48 


877 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


PI. GXVII). Sarasvati is described in the Suta- 
8amhit& of the 8Jcanda-purS,na as a female figure 
having a ja^-makuia on her head, in which there is 
a crescent moon inserted. Her neck is of blue 
colour and she has three eyes. The I)dvlniS,hmmya 
of the MArkaty^a-pii^rAna describes her as holding 
in her hands an ankuia, a vinA, an akshamAlA, and 
a puataka. It is in this fashion that the Devi is 
represented in the Hoysala sculptures (See fig. 1, 
PI. CXVI). It is obviously intended here that 
Sarasvati is to be looked upon as a Sakti of diva. 
She is also sometimes conceived as a dakti of 
Vishnu. Indeed Lakshmi, SarasvaM and PSrvati 
are all identified ^ith t he o ne Devi. 

Tn’reTation to the sculptures and castings of j] 
goddesses in South India, it may be observed that, 
in groups consisting of a god and two goddesses on 
either side, the goddess on the right is seen wear- 
ing the hncha-han^ha (bodice) just as is worn at the 
present time by the NambQdiri ladies under the 
name of mulaikkachehn or breast-band, and that 
the goddess on the left does not wear such a bodice. 
This is a noteworthy peculiarity. It may be parti- 
cularly noticed in relation to the group of images 
consisting of Vishnu and his consorts Sn and Bhu 
(see Pis. XXII and fig. 2, PI. LXII). The meaning 
of this difference in the sculpturing is not evident. 









DEVI. 


By Diti were born to Kasyapa two sons known 

as HirapySksha and Hirapya- 

SaDta- miktrikas ■ 

kasipu. They were respectively 
killed by Vishnu in his Vargha-avatSra and 
Nrisimha-avatSra. PrahlSda, the son of Hiran- 
y&^ha, became a devotee of Vishnu and renounced 
all concerns of worldly life. After him Andhak&sura 
began to rule over the asuras. By piously practis- 
ing a long series of austerities, he obtained several 
boons from Brahmil and became very powerful. 
He then began to cause annoyance to the devaa ; 
and they ran to KailSsa to complain to Siva about 
the troubles caused by the asura chief. Even as 
Siva was listening to their complaint, Andhak&sura 
appeared at Kailasa with a view to carry away 
Parvati. Siva thereupon got ready to fight the 
asura ; he made the three well known snakes 
Viisuki, Takshaka and Dhananjaya serve as his 
belt and bracelets. An aaura named Nila, who had 
secretly planned to kill Siva came out in the 
meanwhile in the form of an elephant. Nandi 
came to know of this and informed Vlrabhadra ; 
and he took the shape of the lion (the natural 
enemy of the elephant) and attacked and killed 
Nila. The skin of this elephant was presented by 
Vlrabhadra to Siva. It was wonl by Siva as his 
upper garment. Glad with this curious garment 


379 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


and ornamented with the serpents, and wielding 
his powerful triiula, Siva started out on his expedi> 
tion against AndhakSsura taking with him his 
army consisting of the gaiias. Vishnu and the 
other gods also went with him to ofier help. But 
in the struggle that ensued Vishnu and other devas 
had to run away. At last Siva aimed his arrow 
and shot at the asiira and wounded him ; blood 
began to flow in profusion from the wound, and 
each drop of it as it touched the earth assumed the 
shape of another AndhakSsura. Thus, there arose 
thousands of Andbakasuras to light against Siva. 
Immediately Siva thrust his triiula through the 
body of the original and real AndhakSsura and 
began to dance. Vishnu destroyed with his chakrd,- 
ijudha the secondary amras produced from the 
blood-drops. To stop the blood from falling on the 
earth, Siva created out of the flame that was 
issuing from bis mouth a sakti called Y5ge4vari. 
Indra and other devas also sent their iaktis to 
serve the same purpose. They arc Brahm&ni, 
Mahesvari, Kaumarl, Vaishnavi, VarAhi, IndrS.ni 
and Chamunda. These are the female counter- 
parts of the gods, Brahms, Mahe^vara, Eum&ra, 
Vishnu, Varsha, Indra and Yama, and are armed 
with the same weapons, wear the same ornaments 
and ride the same t'a/{a7{a« and carry the same 


380 



DEVI. 


banners as the corresponding male gods do. Such 
is the account of the origin of the Sapta-m&t^fts 
or the seven Mother-Goddesses. 

The Varaha-purarpa^ however, states that 
these Mother-Goddesses are eight in number and 
includes among them the goddess Yogesvan men- 
tioned above, although all other pitranas and 
agamas mention them to be seven. The Var^iha- 
pur^na further says that these Matrik&s represent 
eight mental qualities which are morally bad; 
accordingly Yoge^vari represents kama or desire ; 
Mahesvarl, krodha or anger ; Vaishpavl, l^hha or 
covetousness ; Brahmani, vi^da or pride ; Kaumari, 
m^ha or illusion ; Indrani, matsarya or fault- 
finding; Yftmi or Chamupda, paUimya, that is, 
tale-bearing ; and Yarahi, aauya or envy. 

The seven Matrikas caught all drops of blood 
as they fell in the battle between Siva and Andha- 
kasura, and thus stopped the further multiplication 
of secondary Andhakasuras. In the struggle 
Andhakasura finally lost his power known as 
asura-^nHydk and was defeated by Siva. Neverthe- 
less through Siva’s grace he gained a good end. 

The Kurma-purdhipa continues further the 
story of the Mftt^k&s. After the chastisement of 
the asura Andhaka, Siva commanded Bhairava 
and the M&tnkss to retire to the pd,ti^4ska, the 


381 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


abode of the t&niasic and destructive Vishnu Nri- 
simha. They accordingly did so ; but very soon 
Bhairava, being only an amia or part of Siva, be- 
came merged in Siva, and the Matrikas were left 
alone without any means of subsistence. They 
began to destroy everything in the universe for the 
purpose of feeding themselves. Bhairava then 
prayed to Nrisiiuha to abstract from the Matrikas 
their destructive nature, and it was thereupon 
withdrawn from them. 

According to the Varciha-piiraiia the account 
given above of Andhakasura and the Mstrikas is 
an allegory ; it represents Atma-vidya or spirit- 
ual wisdom as warring against amlhakara, the 
darkness of ignorance: Uat-U mrcam-aJchyatain- 
atma-vidyamritam. The spirit of vidya, represented 
by Siva, fights with Andhakasura, the darkness of 
avidya. The more this is attempted to be attack- 
ed by vidy&, the more does it tend to increase for 
a time ; this fact is represented by the multiplica- 
tion of the figures of Andhakasura. Unless the 
eight evil qualities, kiina, krodha, etc., are com- 
pletely brought under the control of vidya and 
kept under restraint, it can never succeed in 
putting down andJtakara.. 

In the BuprabJied&gama it is said that these 
seven Matnl^ were created by Brahma for the 


382 



DEVI. 


pnrpose of killing Nirrita. The general descrip- 
tion of these goddesses is briefly given in the 
Jkgama thus firabm&ni should be sculptured like 
BrahmSi ; Mahe4van like Mahe4vara ; Vaishnavl like 
Vishnu ; V&rahi as a short woman with an angry 
face and bearing a plough as her weapon ; Indr&ni 
like Indra ; and Chamunda as a terrific woman. 
This last goddess should have her hair in a dishe- 
velled condition, should possess a dark complexion 
and have four hands ; she should wield the tiHula 
in one of her hands and carry a kap&la in another. 
‘^All the MatnkSs are to be seated images and 
should have two of their hands held in the varada 
and abhaya poses, while the other two hands 
' should carry weapons appropriate to the male 
counterparts of the female powers. They are 
shown seated upon padm&sanM in the sculptures. 

This goddess has four faces and a body bright 

as gold. In the back right hand 

Brahmani. 

she carries the kTtla and in the 
back left hand an akshamala ; the front right hand 
is in the abhaya pose and the front left hand in the 
varada pose. She is seated upon a red lotus and 
has the hamaa as her vJthana as also the emblem of 
her banner. She wears a yellow garment {pit&m- 
bara) and her head is adorned with a karanda- 
makuia. Her situation is under a palAka tree. 


389 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


Such is the description of her in the Amsuniad- 
bhed&gama ; the Vishnndharmbttara, as quoted in 
the Vachaspatya, gives her six hands, the left ones 
of which are characterised by abhaya, pustaJca 
(book) and kaman^aluy while the right ones are 
characterised by varada, sutra and sruva. It also 
adds that her dress is deer-skin. On the other 
band, the Purva-haran&gama agrees with the first 
work quoted above in ascribing only four bands to 
Brahmi.nl, although it states that she carries the 
kamatidalu and akshamala in two of her hands and 
holds the other two in the abhaya and varada 
poses. 

Vaishnavi carries in one of her right hands 

the chakra and in the correspond- 

Vaishnavi. , * 

ing left hand the kahklia ; her two 
other hands are held in the abhaya and the varada 
poses respectively. She has a lovely face and 
beautiful breasts, and is of dark complexion. Her 
eyes are pretty, and she wears a yellow garment* 
On her head is a kirita-makuia. She is adorned 
with all the ornaments generally worn by Vishnu, 
and the emblem of her banner as well as her 
v&hana is the Garuda. Her place is under a rSja- 
vriksha. The VishTpiidharmbttara states that like 
Brahm&nl she has also six hands ; the right hands 
are characterised by the gadn, padma and abhaya^ 


384 




pngre 3S4.. 





DBVI. 


and the left ones by the iankJia, chakra and 
varada. In the L^vH-purtifia she is represented as 
possessing four hands in which she carries iahkha, 
chakra, gadH and padma. She wears the vanam&l&, 
the characteristic garland of Vishnu. In respect of 
this last description, the DevUrpurHiia agrees with 
the Purva-kdran&gama. 

The figure of Indranl has three eyes and four 
arms ; in two of her hands she 

Xndroni. . 

carries the vajra and the iakti, the 

two other hands being respectively held in the 

varada and abhaya poses. The colour of this 

goddess is red, and she has on her head a kirlfa ; 

on her body she wears various ornaments. Her 

vHhana as well as the emblem of her banner is the 

elephant, and her abode is under the kalpaka tree. 

According to the ViahnvdharmUttara, she should 

have a thousand eyes, and should be of golden 

colour ; she should have six arms, four of the hands 

carrying the sutra, vagra, kalaka (a pot), and plitra 

(a vessel) and the remaining hands being held in 

the varada and abhaya poses. The Deifi-pur&riA 

states that she carries the ahkuia and the vajra 

only, and the Purva-k&raniigama mentions that 

she has only two eyes. According to the last 

authority the goddess Indrftni holds a lotus in one 

of her hands. 


49 


386 



HINDU lOONOOBAPHY. 


The goddess ChSimand& has four arms and 

three eyes and is red in colour. 

OAftmundA. 

Her hair is abundant and thick 
and bristles upwards. She has in one hand the 
Ttapdla (skull) and in another the hTda, while the 
other two hands are respectively in the varada 
and the abhaya poses. She wears a garland of 
skulls in the manner of the yajnbpatHta and is seated 
upon a padmfisana. Her garment is the tiger- 
skin, and her abode is under a fig tree. Her seat, 
it is said in the Vishnudharmbttara, is the dead 
body of a human being, and she has a terrific face 
with powerful tusks. She has a very emaciated body 
and sunken eyes and ten hands. The belly of this 
goddess is thin and apparently empty. She carries 
in her hands the following things ; irmsala, kavacha, 
billet ahhiia, kka^ga, kke^akli, paia, dhanus, dai^^a 
and paraiii. To this description the Purva- 
k&ran&gama adds that she should have her mouth 
open and should wear on her head the digit of the 
moon even as l^iva does ; that her vHhana is an owl 
and the emblem of her banner an eagle. In one of 
the left hands she carries as we have already said a 
kapUla which is filled with lumps of flesh ; and in 
another left hand there is fire. In one right hand 
she holds a snake. She wears in her ears kui}4a- 
lae made of conch-shell {iahkha-patra or kuT^la). 


386 



Fithas of Sapta-Matrikas. 



EuevatioK- 





DEVI. 


MfthS4varl has four arms ; two of which are 

in the varada and the abhaya poses 
XabMvari. . 

respeotively, while the remaining 
two hands carry the iula and akshamdda. Her 
vHhana is the bull. This goddess is said in the 
Viahijiudharmidtiara to have five faces, each possess- 
ing three eyes, and she wears on her crown the 
orescent moon. Her colour is white and she has 
six arms ; in four of the hands she carries the 
sutra, ^maru, kula and ghan0, the two remaining 
hands being respectively in the varada and abhaya 
poses ; her head is adorned with the ja^S,-mafmia. 
Her banner also has the bull for its emblem. 

The figure of Kaumiri is a feminine copy 
of that of Subrahmanya who is 

Xaumaii* 

known as KumSra. Kaumarl has 
four hands, in two of which she carries the iakii 


and the kukku^a, the remaining two bands being 
respectively in the abhaya and the varada poses. 
Her vdiJiana is the peacock and this same bird forms 


the emblem on her banner. She has a makuita 
said to be bound with vHrsikd or vachika. What 


this means cannot be found out. Her abode 


is under an tidumbara or fig tree. She has, 
according to the Vishnudharmbitaray six faces and 
twelve arms; two of her hands are held res- 


pectively in the varada and the abhaya poses.; 


867 



HINDU lOONOOBAPHY. 


and she carries the iaTtU, dhvaja, da'tj4o>^ dhanus, 
hd>im, ghati^, padma, pUdra and paraki in her 
other hands. The Dev^pura^a adds that her 
garland is made of red flowers, and the Purva- 
kJirait^gama substitues the ankuia for kukkufyi, 
and adds that the goddess should be so sculptured 
as to suggest the ideas of valour and courage. 

Vftrfthi has the face of a boar and the colour 
of the storm-cloud. She wears on 

Varahi. 

her head a kara'n4o>-inaku^ and is 
adorned with ornaments made of corals. She wields 
the hala and the ^akii, and is seated under a 
kalpaka tree. Her vlihana as well as the emblem 
on her banner is the elephant. To this description 
the Viihnudharmdttara adds that she has a big 
belly ; according to|this authority, she has six hands, 
in four of which she carries the dan^a, kha^a, 
khe^ka and pAia, the two remaining bands being 
held respectively in the abhaya and varada poses. 
The Purva-karayAgama says that she carries the 
iAmga-dhanm, the hala and the musala as her 
weapons. She wears on her legs raupum-anklets. 

We have already mentioned that on one side 


of the group ^ the Mother-Goddesses there is the 
figure o^Ganesa, and on the other side that of 
Virabhadra. This latter god is described as having 


four arms and three eyes, and being of a pacific look. 



DEVI. 


On his head is a ja^-maku^a, and he is decked 
with various ornaments. His colour is white. 
One of the right hands is in the ahhaya pose and 
the other holds the kula ; one of the left hands is 
held in the varada pose and the other carries the 
gads,. He is seated on a padmasana under a va^a- 
vrikaha (banyan tree). His banner has the bull 
as its emblem. GaneSa might be figured here 
either as standing or as seated on a padma-pltha. 

The sculpturing of the Sapta-m&trikft group 
of gods and goddesses found in the cave temples 
of Ellora conform largely to the descriptions given 
above. They, however, differ in a few points ; for 
instance, the goddesses in some cases are all made 
alike with a single face each ; and these are distin- 
guished from each other by their weapons and the 
ISnehhanas or emblems worked out below them 
in small niches or countersunk panels. Thus, 
BrahmSnl is recognised by the small figure of a 
swan sculptured in the seat below. In some cases 
the goddesses are each provided with a child, 
which is placed either on the lap or is made to 
stand by the side. The group is invariably made 
up of the seven seated mothers flanked on either 
side by Virabhadra who is seen playing upon a 
and Vin&yaka, there being some blood-thirsty 
ghosts surrounding Ch&mu^^^. 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


The worship of JyeshthftdSvi appears to be 

very old. The B^dhS>yana-Orihya- 

Jytshthadevi. «# • 

Sutras contain a chapter dealing 
with the worship of this goddess. One of the Sri* 
vaish^ava Alv&rs (saints), called Toi^dar-adippodi. 
meaning the dust of the feet of God’s devotees, 
refers in derision to the worship offered to this god- 
dess by people in the vain hope of acquiring the 
fulfilment of their desires, while there is the great 
god Vishnu, the conferor of all boons, whom they 
forget altogether. We know of several temples in 
which the image of this devl is still seen to be 
occupying a corner, though not receiving any wor- 
ship; in many other temples the image of this 
goddess is pulled out of the seat and thrown away ; 
and even educated people do not understand what 
this rejected piece of sculpture is intended to 
represent. Strange stories are concocted in modern 
times in connection with the image of Jyesh^hA- 
devl ; and they are introduced into Sthalapur&ipas. 
In a place called Nangapuram in the Trichinopoly 
District there is a diva temple belonging to the 
Chola period. It is known to have been built in 
honour of a Chola princess. The first part of the 
name of the village means a maiden, referring 
evidently to Arifijigai, the Chbla princess. The 
people of this village point out an image of Jsrgsh- 


890 






DEVI. 


th&dSvl and assert that it represents a ChO^a 
princess who was born with the face of a jackal. The 
story is that the king, feeling sorry for the deforma- 
tion of his child prayed to god that her jackal-face 
might be removed from her. Then his god appeared 
to him in a dream and told him that if he built a 
temple for Siva in the village of Nahgapuram, and 
made his daughter visit and worship the god set 
up in it, she would immediately lose the face of 
the jackal and obtain instead the normal face of 
a woman. This, they say, happened accordingly ; 
and in proof of the correctness of the story, they 
direct our attention to the figure with the bull’s 
face sitting on the right of Jyeshthsdevi and say 
that it is the princess before she visited the temple 
and lost her jackal-face and that the figure to the 
left of this is the lady as she became after she 
offered worship to ^iva in the newly constructed 
temple (Of. PI. OXXI). They, however, give no 
explanation at all regarding the central figure. 

Another equally remarkable instance of forget- 
fulness in relation to the image of this goddess 
is noticeable in the famous temple of ^iva at 
Tirupparafigunram near Madura. About the end 
of the eighth century A.D., a pious queen of the 
then reigning Jft^ilavarman Parftntaka 

P&94y^ ^ shrine of Durg& excavated in the rock 


391 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


near the shrine of Siva and got sculptured near it 
the image also of JyeshthSdevl in half relief. 
These facts are even now found recorded in an 
epigraph very near to the group of the Jyeshth&devi 
images there. Tirupparahgunram is in fact one of 
the few famous sacred places dedicated to the 
worship of Subrahmanya now. But, unfortunately, 
there is neither a shrine for that god nor a sculp- 
tured representation of him in that place. Pilgrims 
go there, nevertheless, by thousands on days sacred 
to Subrahmanya, believing that the group of 
JyeshthAdevl images — which are the principal 
objects of worship there — in some manner or other 
represents that god. Possibly at some period in 
the history of that temple, the central figure of 
the Jyeshthadevi group came to be draped in mas- 
culine god’s clothes and to be called Subrahmapya, 
the figure to the right being understood to be 
Nandike4vara, the steward of Siva’s household, and 
the figure of the female to the left being taken to 
be the first wife of Subrahmanya. The pujs,ri 
accounted for the absence of the second wife by 
stating that the god is sculptured there as he was, 
before he took his second wife. This so-called 
image of Subrahmanya has by its side a silver kahti 
(weapon) dedicated perhaps by a pious worshipper. 
The crow-banner found by the side of JySshthftdSvl 


392 



DBVI. 


in the sculpture is explained to be the cook-banner 
of ^nbrahmanya. To the pu^&ri the absence of six 
heads, of two wives and of the peacock vtkhana 
as well as many other details characteristic of 
Subrahmanya, did not matter very much. Even 
the noticeably female form of the central image 
did not make him hesitate in asserting his opinion 
that the central figure in the group is indeed that 
of Subrahmanya. 

According to the description of Jyeshth&devl, 
as given in Sanskrit works, she is a goddess with 
two arms and two eyes, with big cheeks and large 
pendulous breasts descending as far as the navel, 
with a flabby belly, thick thighs, raised nose, 
hanging lower lip, and is in colour as dark as ink. 
Her legs have to be hsiuging down in front of the 
Bhadrdksana on which she is seated. Her hair is 
done up in a knot, and on the forehead a Ulaka is 
marked. She wears a maku^a on her bead ; in her 
right hand she holds a nUotpala flower, and the 
other hand rests upon the seat. One authority, 
however, states that she should carry a nlldtpala 
in one hand and keep the other in the ahhaya 
pose. In actual sculptures, she is often seen with 
the right hand in the ahhaya pose and the left 
hand made to rest upon her thigh (See PI. GXXI) ; 
sometimes in the sculptures the right hand holds 


eo 


393 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


the nltdtpala flower and the left hand rests upon 
the seat. (See PI. GXXII and GXXni.) 

On the right of JySshth&devi is the image of 
a bull-faced human being with two arms. In the 
right hand of this image there is a datf4(i (stick), 
and a rope is held in the left hand. In the Purva- 
hUranJlgama this being is declared to be the half- 
bovine son of the Dgvi. The right leg of this 
figure is hanging down, while the left one is made 
to rest upon the seat. The colour of the body is 
white, the Suprabhedugama saying that it is blood 
red. This image is decked with all ornaments ; on its 
head is a kirl^a, and it is clothed in silk garments. 

On the left of the Devi is a female figure, 
whom the 2.^umadbJiedd.gama calls Agnimatha.(?) 
She is a maiden with a pretty bosom and of youth- 
ful appearauce. Glad in red clothes, adorned with 
all ornaments and with a karai^-mahufyi on her 
head, she is seated with her left leg hanging down 
and the right folded and made to rest on the seat. 
Her colour is jet black. In her right hand she 
holds a nllbtpala flower. The Purva-kOrai^gama 
calls her the daughter of the Devi. 

The emblem on the banner of Jyesh^h&dSvl is 
the crow and her v&hana is an ass. 

When the ocean of milk was churned Jyfish- 
tha was bom before Laksbmi, and no one wished 


S94 



PLUTE GXXII, 






PLATE CXXIII 



Jyashtbilcievi : Stone: Kumbhakonam. 


DEVI. 


to marry her. The rishi Kapila took her for his 
wife and therefore she is known as Eapilapatni. 

The side-images in the JySshthadSvl group 
must oome up as high as her shoulders. 

In the old Tamil nighaip\m the names of 
Jyeshthft are given as follows: Mugadi, Tauvai, 
Ealadi, Mddevi, the crow-bannered, the ass-rider, 
Eet^ai, the bad woman and Ekavepi. Her weapon 
is said to be the sweeping broom. 

There are two kinds of images of Jyeshthft, 
Bays the Viih^udharmiSttaray namely, the Bakta- 
JySsh^hS and Nila- JyeshthS ; both of them are 
seated figures having their feet touching the 
ground. They have each only one pair of hands. 
These forms of the goddess are to be praised and 
propitiated by heroes. 

The Lihga-purdkifa has an interesting account 
of Jyeshthadevi which is somewhat different from 
what has been given above. When the ocean of 
milk was churned to obtain 4he immortalising 
ambrosia for the gods, 1a.\ahu^a-vishay the all-des- 
troying cosmic poison, came out first from that 
ocean; then came Jyeshth&devl. A Br&hmapa 
risM named Dussaha married her and was taking 
her home with him. He perceived in her on the 
way a peculiar trait which he was not able to 
comprehend. He noticed her closing her ears 


886 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY, 


wherever there was the singing of the praise of 
Vishnu or the uttering of the prayers offered to 
Siva, or any other good thing was being mentioned 
or done.*^ Once upon a time he went with his wife 
to the forest for tapas, but the lady could not 
endure to see him so engaged, and consequently 
left him alone there and quietly returned home. 
The poor rishi bad at last to promise to her that he 
would no longer engage himself in any virtuous 
acts, which were displeasing to her, before he could 
reside with her in his house. Just about that time 
MarkandSya came there ; and poor Dussaha then 
opened out to him his heart and explained to him 
the peculiar nature of his wife and asked him for 
advice as to what places he might visit without 
causing annoyance to bis wife. He was advised 


y,^ M&rkandeya that he might go with her to all 
places where inauspicious acts were being done or 


inauspicious words were being uttered ; and gave a 
long list of acts of which the following are a few : — 
wherever there was quarrel between husband and 


wife in a household, Jyeshthadevl might be taken 
there ; she might also be taken to places of Bauddha 
and non-Vaidik forms of worship ; again, she might 
be asked to take her place in houses where the elders 
enjoy pleasures, such as eating anything good, with- 
out first offering the good things to the children 


896 



DEVI. 


to eat. After giving this advice, Mftrka^deya 
departed. The rishi Dussaha then called his wife 
and told her that he was going to the Basfitala- 
lOka to find out there a good place for them both 
to live in without anything to disturb them, and 
asked his wife to stay, till his return, in a plttce 
midway between his &irama and the pond near by, 
and was getting ready to start on his journey. 
Jyeshthadevl asked the rishi how she was to sustain 
herself till he returned, and who would help her 
with the things she wanted ; the rishi replied that 
women would offer her bali, which would be more 
than enough for her to feed herself satisfactorily, 
and added that she should not visit the houses of 
any of those women who offered her oblations. 
Promising to return as early as possible, the rishi 
went to the tank near his abode and plunged into it 
with a view to reach the lower world Basitala, and 
never again returned. Ever since that time, this 
poor abandoned wife is said to have been wandering 
here and there and making the hills and the plains 
outside inhabited villages her abode from time to 
time. She once happened to meet Vishnu, whom 
she entreated to prescribe for her some avocation 
to while away the tedium of being all alone. He 
thereupon permitted her to go and live with those 
who offered worship to him exclusively, with a 


397 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


distinct disregard in their hearts for diva and 
the other gods. On leaving her after bestowing 
this boon he went on muttering the Budramanira 
to safe-guard himself from the evil influence of 
dyeshthS otherwise called Alakshml. Vishnu- 
bhaktas and women must therefore offer oblations 
to JyeshthSdSvi. 

An explanation of the worship of JyeshthSdgvl 
is found in the Saivd,gamas. The SiddhUnta- 
a&rUvali of TrilSchana divAoharya and the commen- 
tary on it give what follows : — ParaSakti, in the 
form of VSmS, is the author of the pancha-kntyas, 
or the five acts called srish^hi, sthiti, aaM&ra, 
tirodhS,ti& and anugraha. She, therefore, assumes 
the eight forms representing the eight iaftvas. 
They are, VamS as prUhvlmayl, JyeshthS as jala- 
rupitih Baudri as agniyAk&r&y Kali as vayvilkllrH, 
Ealavikaranl as aknSarupiyl, Balavikarapl as 
chandrarupinil ; Balapramathani as suryarupiH ; her 
two other forms are — Sarvabhutadamanl as titma- 
rupa, and Mandnmayi as ParJikakti. Now, VSmS 
means a beautiful damsel. Although each of the 
five bhutaa or elements has its own peculiar charao- 
teristic quality when pure and unalloyed, still, it 
is conceived that, ordinarily, all the elements except 
S.k&ia are not unalloyed and therefore possess mixed 
characteristics. Among such alloyed elements 


898 



DEVI. 


prithvi, or the earth-element, is the most alloyed, 
and possesses the oharaoteristio qualities of all the 
five elements ; and hence VSmS, the beautiful, is 
said to be presiding over prithvi. The manifes- 
tation of Siva, or Murti4vara, corresponding to his 
creative function (arish^ht), is called Vftmadeva, as 
he is the lord of Yams. 

Jyeshtha, vrho is jalamayly is the representa- 
tive of athithi. The Murtllvara of jala is Jyesh- 
tha, and he is the lord of Jyeshth&devi. Baudri 
represents the kakti of the agni-tattva. The Murtld- 
vara of agni is Faiupati, who is no other than 
Budra, the lord of Baudri. PrdLna is the property 
of time (Mfa) ; hence ESli is the iakti presiding 
over the element vS,gu. The Murti4vara of vHyu- 
tattva is Ksla, and he is the husband of ESll. 

The part kala in the name Ealavikarani, means 
a limb, and vikarani indicates absence. Hence 
Ealavikarani means ‘ free of limbs,’ that is, undi- 
vided. Indivisibility is the characteristic feature of 
HklUa ; therefore this goddess is made to represent 
akuia-tattva. Her lord and corresponding Mnrtld- 
vara is Bhlma. He is Ealavikarapa, and his 
consort is Ealavikarani. 

That which augments strength is Balavi- 
karapl. Chandra (moon) is conceived to infiuenoe 
the production of HahadMa (medical herbs) which 


S89 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


give health and strength ; therefore Balavikaranl 
represents the moon looked upon as a tattva. 
Her husband is Mah&deva. 

Balapramathanl means the destroyer of hala 
or strength. Surya (sun) is hot and enervating ; 
hence this kahti represents the sun as a taitva. 
The Murti4vara corresponding to this goddess is 
Ugra. He is the destroyer of all paias or bonds. 

The kaltti that holds under control all the 
activities of all the souls is Sarva-bhutadamani. She 
is Utma-murti and her MurtiSvara is TajamSna. 

Mon5nmani is the iakti that unites aspiring 
souls with the Universal Lord, Siva, after remov- 
ing from them their mala or dirt of sin. Her lord 
is Paraliva. 

Such is the explanation of the functions of 
these goddesses. The very large variety of the 
goddesses herein noticed cannot but be striking. 
Their number is indeed even more. Hindu theo- 
logy and philosophy account for their variety and 
numerousness by endeavouring to evolve them as 
representative powers out of fundamental philo- 
sophical principles. But a student with the his- 
torical turn of mind cannot fail to see in the very 
numerousness and variety of these goddesses a 
Striking proof of the gradual affiliation of non- 
Aryan deities of all sorts to the institutions of 
expanding Hinduism. 



PARIVARADEVATAS 




APPENDIX A. 

A DESOBIPTION OF THE PliAN AND OF THE 
DISPOSITION OF PABIVABADBVATA8 IN A 
VISHNU TEMPLE OF SEVEN AVABANA8. 

According to the VaikhAnasngamay that temple 
of Vishnu which has only one avarana or circuit 
and contains the images of the central Vishnu, 
Vishvaksena, Sribhuta, Garuda, Chakra, Dhvaja, 
^ankha, and Mahabhuta is considered to be the 
most inferior (adhamBdhama) one. If, in addition 
to the above mentioned deities, there be also the 
VimAnap&las and LdkapAlas, it is said to belong to 
the Adhamamadhyama class of temples. A tern* 
pie with a second Avargi^a together with the 
images that are to be found in it, as also those of 
Havirakshaka, Pushparakshaka and Balirakshaka 
is classed as the adharr^ttama temple. If there be 
a third nvarana with the necessaiy images in it, 
the temple is of the MadhyamO-dhama class. If, 
in addition to the above, there happens to be a 
fourth Uvarana with all the images in it, the temple 
is considered to be of the Madhyamam-adhyama 



HINDU IOON66BAPHY. 

.^1 

class. The addition Ia Ihe images of KuhQ, 
Anumiti, Jaya etc., ana the Sapta-mAtnkas, makes 
it one of the madhyaimMama variety. If the fifth 
Itvaram together with the ^images that are to be 
in it is added to the a^ve, the temple becomes 
one of the uttamadham/.i class. The addition of 
a sixth Uvarana wiiif all the images in it makes 
the temple one of the utiamamadhyaina class. 
A temple with seven &varams is an ideal temple 
and is said to be of the uttamottama class. The 
above classification is with respect to the number 
of Avaranas or prdJcAras, found in a temple. 
There is another classification based upon the 
number of images found in the temple. A temple 
with Vishvaksena, Garuda, Sribhuta, Nyaksha 
and Bhutapitha, a group which goes by the name 
of pancha-parivdTa, is said to belong to the 
adhamadhama variety. The addition of Indra, 
and the other Ldkapalas, Surya, Chakra and 
Saukha converts the temple into one of the 
adhamamadhyama class. If, further, the images 
of Vivasvan, Mitra, Kshatta, Dhvaja and Yutha- 
dhipa are found in it, the temple is said to belong 
to the adhamottuma class. The addition of the 
images of Siddhi, Sri, HavihpSla, Skanda, Vighneda 
the Sapta-matrikas, Purusha, Jyeshthfi, BhSrgava, 
and Brahma renders the temple into one of 



PABIVAR ^DBVATAS. 

the madhyam&dhama variety. The temple is of 
the madhyamarnadhyama aass if) with the images 
of the above mentioned • deities, there are also 
those of Bhaskara, AAgaraka, DurgS, the seven 
BShinis, Manda, Budha, Brihaspati and Purusha 
in the third Avararm. If in addition to those 
above mentioned, there are the images of JyeshthS, 
dukra, Ganga, the Saptarishis, Brahma, Chandra, 
Bndra, the Alvins, Kapila, the five Bhutas, 
and Sarasvatl in the fourth Avarana^ the temple 
is of the madhyamottama variety. It is of the 
uttamiAdhama class if there are in addition to the 
images already mentioned those of PrithvI, Mitra, 
Nara, Dharma, Dhatrl, Svarapriya, PushpeSa, 
Vyahriti, Basra, Bhava, Manu and Mahavlra. It 
will be considered a temple of the uttamamadh- 
yama class if there are the EkadaSa Budras and 
the Bvadaia Adityas also ; and it would become a 
temple of the uttamAttama class if there are further 
the images of Balirakshaka, the eight Yasus, Jaya 
etc. The VaikhAnasAgama also gives the number 
of archakas or the officiating priests and the pari- 
chArakaa or the servants that are to be employed 
in each one of the above mentioned varieties of 
temples. For the uttamdttama class of temple it 
is said that there should be twenty archakas and 
one hundred paridhArakas. Excepting the famous 


8 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

temple of Ba&gan&th^ in dnra&gam there does 
not appear to be an^ other ancient temple in 
India with seven dvaranas. Before the time of 
Bim&nuja this temple followed the VaikMna- 
sUgama and therefore we find even to this day a 
number of small shrines^ in all the livaranas, but 
after BSmSnuja introduced the Panchar&trUgama 
in drirafigam, the images of the Srivaishnava 
saints and ach&ryas were set up along with the 
images of the deities already found in them. The 
plan of a Vishnu temple haviug seven Hvara‘t}as 
with the names of the deities that are required to 
be consecrated in them is appended. 

Besides the deities enumerated above a few 
others are also mentioned as being found in a utta- 
miottama temple in a place called the karmarcJiH- 
sthUna in the second or the third d,varai}a of the 
main temple where the utsava and other beras 
or images are enshrined. This place itself appears 
to be surrounded by three ^vuranas. In the first 
or the second d,varana of the main temple, the 
water required for bathing the images should be 
kept in a room situated between the east and 
north-east facing the central shrine and guarded 
by Purusha. Near this place where the water is 
stored, the washed clothes required for draping the 
images should be dried, and the flowers required 


4 



PABIVABADEVATAS. 


for making garlands should be stored, the latter 
being under the guardianship of Pushparakshaka 
and the former under Tvashta. The bed-room 
0ayyd,dUa or PalUyarai) for the ntsava-bera 
should be situated between the east and south-east 
of the first or the second avarana and should be 
guarded by KaumSdaki. The kitchen should 
occupy the south-east corner of the second or the 
third Uvarana ; it should consist of four quarters 
(Sul&s); in the southern quarter known as the 
hdmasthana should bo the nityd,gni-kun4<i required 
for the daily fire sacrifices {agni-kQ,rya) which 
should be guarded by Balirakshaka. In the 
western quarter of the kitchen and on the north 
of its entrance should be stored rice and other 
articles required for cooking, under the guardian- 
ship of Chamunda. The ovens should occupy the 
whole length of the eastern quarter — from the north 
end to the south end. The guardian of this 
quarter named Havlrakshaka should be set up here. 
Like the room where water is stored, the kitchen 
should also face the central shrine. 

Hound the neck of the dome of the vimAna of 
the central shrine should be placed the four 
guardians of the vimAna, namely, Nyaksha, 
YivasvAn, Mitra and KshattS facing outwards. 
The gates should be guarded by three pairs of 


6 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHT. 


dvArad^as of whom DhSta and VidhSta facing 
the north and the sonth respectively should be 
situated on either door-posts of the central shrine. 
On the door-sill of the same gateway the deity 
named Bhuvahga should be conceived as lying 
with bis head towards the south and the feet 
towards the north and facing upwards. The 
officiating priests (archaJcas) should not cross 
Bhuvahga except when they enter the shrine on 
duty. On the lintel of the same gateway and 
directly above the door-sill occupied by Bhuvahga, 
the deity named Patahga should be conceived as 
facing downwards with his head towards the north 
and feet towards the south. Fatira and Varuna 
are conceived as occupying the right and the left 
doors respectively of the same gateway. 

In the accompanying plan of an ideal Vishnu 
temple, the letters N, E, S, and W stand for north, 
east, south and west respectively, the directions 
which the images are required to face. In the 
case of those images where nothing is mentioned 
about the directions which they should face, they 
are shown tentatively by the same letters, but 
enclosed in square brackets. 


6 



AN ALPHABETICAL LIST OF THE 
PAEIVAEADEVATAS. 


Avarana. 


Aohyuta ... ... 1 

Aditya ... ... 7 

Adityas (the twelve) ... 5 

Agoi ... 2.4,7 

Akshahanta ... ... 7 

Akshata ... ... 4 

Angaraka ... ... 2 

Aniruddha ... ... 1 

Anumiti ... ... 5 

Abapavatsas ... ... 7 

Apsarasas ... ... 5 

Aryama ... ... 7 

Asura ... ... 6 

Asvins ... ... 5 

Atbarva ... ... 4 

Balida ... ... 6 

Brahma ... ... 7 

Bfihaspati ... ... 2 

Budha ... ... 2 

Chakra ... ... 3 

Obakraobu^i ••• ••• 7 


Avarana. 

Chapda Out- side the 7(ib 

avarana 

Ghandrabha ... 

... 6 

Dapdadhara ... 

... 7 

Dhanada 

... 7 

Dhatri or Mabakalf 

... 3 

Dhvaja 

... 6 

Durga 

... 3 

Ekadasa Budras 

... 5 

Gandharvas ... 

... 6 

Ganga 

... 3 

Garuda 

... 2 

Gavishtha 

... 4 

Guha 

... 4 

Halesa 

... 6 

Haripl 

... 4 

Indra 

2.7 

Indraja 

... 7 

Isa 

... 7 

Isaoa 

... 2 

Isitatma 

... 2 


7 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


Av*rau. 


Jambava 

... 6 

Javana 

... 7 

Jaya and ofehers 

... 5 

Jyeshtha 

... 3 

Eaminf 

... 6 

Kapila 

... 1 

Eeta 

... 2 

Einnaras (a pair oO 

... 6 

Eubera 

... 2 

Euhu 

... 6 

Euthini and six other 

Bohi- 

nfa 

6 

Madaoa 

... 6 

Mapika Central Shrine 

Maruts 

... 6 

Maya 

... 3 

Mitra 

... 4 

Mudgala 

... 6 

Munis 

... 6 

Nanda 

... 6 

Narada 

... 6 

Narasimha ... 

... 2 

Narayapa 

... 3 

Narmada 

... 1 

Nir^uti 

2.7 

Panohajanya ... 

... 4 

Pasabh^it 

... 7 

Pavana 

... 4 

Pavitra 

... 4 


Av*nuu. 

Praohaa^a Ontside the 7th 


Amraifa 


Prablada 

• • • 

6 

Prajapati 

• • • 

6 

Prapa 

• • • 

6 

Pupya 

• • • 

1 

Purusha 

• at 

1 

Babu 


2 

Baka 


3 

Bik 


4 

9itu8 (six) ... 


6 

Budra 


7 

Budraja 


7 

Sama 


4 

Samhladinf ... 


3 

^anaisobara ... 


2 

Sandbya Central Shrine 

^ankhachddi 

... 

7 

Sapta-matrikas 


5 

Saritpati 


7 

Sarasvatf or Siddhi 


3 

^arnga 


2 

Saryavidyesvaras 


6 

Saryddvaha ... 


2 

^atarudras . . . 


6 

Satya 


1 

Savitri 


7 

Savitra 

• • • 

7 

Sindhu 

• • • 

8 


8 



FABIVABADBVATAS. 


Sinfvalf 


Avarana. 

... 3 

Torha^a 

Atuuw. 

... 5 

iliva 

... 

... 4 

Vamana 

... 2 

Soma 

. • . 

2.7 

Varaha 

... 2 

Subhadra 

, , , 

... 9 

Varu^a 

... 2 

Sukra 

... 

... 2 

Vasus (eight) 

... 6 

Sunanda or Sundara 

... 6 

Vatsaras 

... 8 

Sundarl 


... 3 

Vayu 

2.4 

Sura 


... 8 

Vidyadharas ... 

... 5 

Surya 


... 2 

VikbaDaaa ... 

... 1 

l^rl 

• • • 

... 8 

Vipa 

... 6 

l^ribhuta 

... 

... 1 

Vishpu 

... 4 

Svadha 


... 3 

Vishvaksena ... 

... 1 

Svaha 


... 3 

Vyajanf 

... 6 

Takshaka 


... 4 

YajSa 

... 1 

Tapasa 


... 1 

Yajua 

... 4 

Tlrtha 


... 2 

Yaksha 

... 6 

Toya 


... 4 

Yama 

2,7 

Trivfkrama 

... 

... 2 

Yamuna 

... 3 

Tumburu 

... 

... 6 

Yutbadhipa ... 

... 9 


9 

h 






«nT ^ i 

I •»**wr 

%?[§^r qtfj: I Scigit ^WPSt iwt 

mmi ^ ^ \ foiN wm 

3?*n^i ?iwi«0«ri*i^: 

«flqi9if«idj'4^it^iii«qCrs^q«RaiTqc5i^<itMl *TOnqqr- 

«rr 5 ^ «ttfRafhr: 9m^. «fhjpr- 

^ t Bmr \ 


»i«i*ii«K«f^*n: I 


mMi w> Jn^t ^RTw: ^ftmRrwajqr- 



: ifitrM^ 39T: 


qi»igw«rtinri^ i 


11 





enwJi^: «p^«5|5iR|[ 5^ «rnt 

itf^RTr *gi5r/^h^0T^^ »TPi3fr+?n^- 
«(W3tf: ^fj^: gPRt gt I 


^«iig<a)sgHi4 r ^?f»n*siwtsj3'^wt^w- 


<l^ qi «fHq)<w ( gi^«iiSr^ «itr «rf ?r^^R4 304 
sigftft I 


wmi«rw^; qf^sfrfljWM 3!Krs^s*g5nTq(ft(4%^ 

A r\ fN ^ • 

siWraWw I 



«fi<l<^ltW<ll*t^P I3 j 4 ff ; «K< i g|^Wl wTf StKT *IRROr 

wmm 5pft*Rpr% 1 




13 





3 ^ 

iRkr^5#N}3T^3f^^sf^ ?r§%^w*r- 

I 


HtKj gwi: jwT goqpiR^ giR?^ goq^r- 

^5Tf^ I 


in^ JTrapg^^*?PT«3i|5R5r|- 
*r^ «Rri ^ I 


arilFrt !n^ |»n»3rr^^«rg#sR^if^- 



; qi qgw^fi wTt 3 S5^ 




?%5r 5%qrl^i3^ *n^: ^?!aw«ig#ir- 

^^rtwttr s*{<<«han«i<iifiddtwRd ^ q : sft^Prerd^ sire- 
W *rRl^ HfiaWJpifil I 


IS 





?*ii*Ti**iww3§3r: 
/^^<£wr*f<orAei: qw/^^fwif g?ir (ifRnw 
«R? ^ ^tecJTR^ I 


q(^ iWRrtt qjra'K^ fk- 

i »qi W* i^ *n*w q^ qiRqqqfef^fitq^ i 


qpi^ qftqri^g^ sftew: 'fl^iwqrd 3?pftq^ofl»qt 
T ^iqfqit ?Hif i 

gqR -^^cf^q t feif^q i q : yrr ^ w ^a ^ g r; qnrqiRq^: 

33TCFSl|5iqf^- 

qi? gpqi^ qiWgfildqiq^wi^ - 

Rthqf^^q w 1^^ ^rafwit i 

^^Tpqt IIR^ ^rFWWTFqW: q » qq >[ y T wi*q( 
goq gt iRf^ i 

^ %rq% i 


3*nqmui^qu i 
«l^qiq^ut jpqt 

fdf^qr^ftTOcr: q t a q q g p^dqRtw ; ft^teWT- 


14 



'ift«rR^TOr; i 

%g«r^r »ri)«tif*i«i^MRi 4 <hK 4 Mr 



«niRt ^^TRi: f% 5 » fi 3 « qqg^wfiKm fir> 

y f ^ «T 4 rs gwF gw(i^iwwnf/^- 
qra^ f!inR- 
I 

«in^ ?*iRnfr ^rfprewtr *i^ gTtg«i 4 l »T f| «wi ^ 4 ( 
«<«»»K4l'*i^3j«nnfl^?) tI0dHK<4l *T^ «TIT 
wRT ♦ 1 *^ 4 SWW I 


5 l 4 { 3 rt sfteP^t 

l><haw« » 4t q ^R4lM( : qtfMtt fsHifir- 

qrewit irjprepsnc: qRft f S g«q4 t 
151511 ^ 1 ^ 1 ^^ 414 ) q^ qqor 


• ‘41flrqTq4t*RqF?iT’^j%«n3^^ w r Mtt^nHww 
«ir 4 1 fli^qqtqwjf tK H t ffir torrh i «jrRaqnq5qt 

I t/ 5 SRfrillfq 5 ^f|f^’ ^%qT 3 RRI^I 


16 






*03^* 5^g- 

*n3g?R^i 

3^ Rl^nioJ: ^ g«qq!wr: «qi^- 

^ q«j<i'iri5l^ I 

^^TFit qi2si»TfeRii«i(t gq >i^5 wr g^ srsi^^ijjr- 
sns^sr: q?l?fr^ TOqrar^- 
tRnsr ^ ?wPrf^ 1 

^^K4lS8 i q«Wl3<sl l; I R l t^8>H quR 

^ mT W Iwi l^dWI«H iqRiRI«<JVn iTFRi 


^ I 

^ ^fipt wm 8?Ri*aRw qiT^ fi^srr 



8ftqRi(^4) [ ^^ Rqn ?3iflg T i sfT: ^ 

ijraf inft^rfNtftf^ I 




I 


16 


*i<(ll5ii% I 

%R% I 


^»fr=^wi^ <ft§rqft sri^iiRg^t 3^ i 


«n?Rt sn^pR^^oM: 
wWJ ^pr'kit I 


3tK- 


^%on3«tr 5 ^*rr: ^?tw: «toRn 5*n5R 







qft?r qRRrft5p^ *FRn4t ^ft g ww - 

mKTfT^swtr ^r?ftf^5rqrwTt ?rf|^ 


qR^ qftwn^g’q: 
*n g gqn»q t gfwqq^q g 



i «^^q|J|(^ \ 


0 


17 





gwi: I 


S^ %|5r^WTfti% I 

gWtHR3^ W'oiiit^W fWFm I 

fl?fmi«i^«l irwifJT: ftsr;, 

JTSWr^JTJ 

%^«nRg?SiV 

lt»i?:, ^tFFsr^ ^M^cTT qm i ^ ^ aft^ii^ - 
?iFftei^ uPTntsr^feR^ I 


^< Ti^ret ? TRR; ggmw*<(3>*<KW>l^ - 

<n(T*] «R?fi«f , ^ wmwm: ^^anri m^- 

ftoit g«<v»ii^^y^w i ^^ a T ^ ri l pn/ ^g ^totj 

I 


ftsr 9Tft ^wr- 

{q^ i%q g^ 5#^, gjHFw 

gunflOT ?RRR gsftqit q«RFq# ^FTR, 

WRm 3^ *F5if , eq^qi^ «fii9<l^ (^F^FFWtw, 

wpi <s»*F?nt i 


18 




iSW ^i5r 5ftoff ^ I 

fJn%qr^ ^f*TRt q> * i og<s« T <^ sfi- 

f*i«iitf«iiR^Mfcl<j'hK4^^ TOFT JHrnrf^ f^?rnni 
I g^oM q^j^: 

qr^4 304 

gwW^rfir 1 


qi^j ^Rn4t miih^mThw: q^gg^nq^- 

iq«Rqi54t ^q5«RWi(^^4«hK4Nr an^ gqiq^- 



I 3TRtqi4;ig»IH<- 


w H'««<i^w: qjq<qrg«q^ 



*iRr?i8iJ<«it'4; 


^qRtfg; qw^ ^ngjfw 1 


5T?^: I 

q»q4w!^ %gqoif?T: ^<4g<al 

«rRir I qi% *psr4^ gq»q^ < T <s i q i g>rw ’ jm4 gp^ 
^fe pT i pf t I 5it ^^ q i^ gp<4g^ r sft^- 

qwfr Twqr^sfireg; wfRu w: 1 sfqqwwHTWiqiRq- 


19 





ST I I SfR^- 

?ipnfST^S<q%g^^oflvi| awipr: q?lf; I ftK4l9lu|- 

sT^ ^ofrr^ *r3rfi54t ?TssRt ^%?r: qf^: i sn^r gsioiWt 
«Roft^ w»r: I «)rsTis!i<(Ksf^3rr7T^[^ 
^TT'iiSsn^f^cFinar (0 1 ^TRrrt ?i^ st^, (Iw rir 


«h'iHRr»3<o« sq^, ^ gqra^ 

qf^ ari%^ ^1^, ^ ?jl%sT^ 
q^ e n sw a sraifer I 


f^siHmgu I 

q%:qT^ ui'SKfl'^ in^g# 
tsTpq^; nireft^ ^«sqifi)R5^srEq3T5ti5jfr (Htofr^ snsrr- 
sqsT «fl5R*nWrl^ i 


q^«q<Egq«qW<iTw[^»] 
sft^ PlcmiPqqw^ sT^?f sTT!h%sF?r^i 


qjiW ni^qiq<a^ i <q>io g g r( ^ ; ji«qiHW: qs^rtr- 
fsiijgt^ig^ qpS T Rf^ l^|S3^ *1^ STWr- 

ft?fr fsRi^ WOfqi^ I 


20 





3^ tmw: 3«7ww) g*m^ 

^ojqiMoftqf^l^l^: ej^TT ?5^ 31^ 


SfWRJT: I 


H«W5R?f^ »Firai^ 





sri^r 3FT qc^ qjjRiRr R mi » 3 w r g «q ^wi ^l^nTr 
3q»Rsft5n ?p«n iww^ ^- 

I 

g<aqo3q5R5l%^ ^4»I^*hi% |*fi»?[tJ fsr«r^ 

^iqi^i^ftviit ^D^qri5r«g^ ^- 

3^ (?) ?f^tgTK I 


3^qnFTJ *t»;^W'ilWKI«|(i!<«fl3lw/Mt^ 
I 



<54qrc3«u- 


'«r'sr«r'^iftiflq/<)4Hi«na<«ft5r; xfisqisti^ 

fiif^: l%I^F^ 313^ 35%5r I 


ai 




^ ^RTnrr ft#CT- 

q|^^g<iu<i3fcreO«rT«w^41'*i annf^ 

^fNraf^: jwi^ 

*fc«4i5,4 *T3rffiid m^i 

1^^: qrat^: ansjq^: *wigi)¥t 

<n > g o *><t>4 g ^ I 

5rf^ ^i(t^ f ^ re ^ r ^niRftsft 

fPSi?ir3i8R^ra<a^4l5?i irowror 
^i?4r 5i*rP^wHft: 'K^«wp®rfe!4h&" 

•fi*Rr4t *iHKH I 

^rfnrr 4l^r«itr 

q<(m'»i<n44 l 5i!fr«if ?iif ^Treorerf^roifriMtw: 

rvfK M^fS fN -rV _ M u ji AfS % 1 

WFRWWfRiW ^iraWRrwRt I 

^ ^rKPiit w*R^ f??nwit qv ?t«rR: 

qqw^Rifsf; Miyqi^idf^^^q: qw<l!»^4t3r: q?!^: 
qirt^ ^rRf# i j tR Rqi W ^ I 

M<i i <fi>ir<aftR t TORRui anfrrftrftfir ’BTFiiwiqwigqsqc • 


92 





%!mk ft«g»nK 

I 

«n% y r wp ^ 

mnRi^5w i ^hw^m^ ggsOi^ g Rqi f^a ft ^^ 




^ir«r^r 


%f*RWn^ a»%W: ^ K8 fl ^ 51*^ 
51*^ m %?RRnil%^ I 


5R<^ ^ y Kan<^ ^ 50# ^T^- 

iF?nt TO3«rft^ I 


^5iptr sft35i5ni^i% 5^w»r- 

3^ 5F^ ^5TC?: 5i^5l^<4) 

f0jRo?f ^im 

ftfir I 


t ‘5ft^i5jft*r’Prftr «Ttsi »q<H . i 





«ri5r 

H^RRg^TOJT I 

IR^i%ot ^*?Rt IrKsrerW^BllSir 3^- 
5l%0T^ tH^^<iq!|iaReP^c(4IH(td 
^BT«rt 3 tk: 5R ?nft5f*r 

qwi^ ^ 5 r ^o g < gq¥g»f ww 


spiRW: 

JIW: ^ I 




^<^4Mi«hK q i^ ^ ^^qrPRt^ ^f^pmg- 

<s i (^gfq^ ^wRfi^sWr: 

chai<i<!»|!^d^^: «fN?# ireRj^ ijq^§ti^s«wr 

fejir: ;i»qm(O i ^qtR>»<og»g^r ^nnqf^: 3«R«iWf : 

3*1^ 

I 


24 



f^wini^ (Wt #TFWflJ i|T 

^fNt^rRi: s>**ro< g t<^ ^wwoj 

Wr I 


fi2*Rn(??g^5p»»9PW^ 

39i: 






^s W2<?Fq«rai^ftl8Rr^5Rfwit 3WJ0*^W»iqwfl?^ 

»T^ qf%^ l 


?i?^ ^TKi»iRjW% 

fJNivisi#t5Tpifir I 

«?# qm^ 5*^ rwwd 


d 


26 



I 


fe T t^«iwn rf ^»<i^ ^sTORjfr^r >»i<iR^<»N ( ^fi l [«i>»i r qiwc 
«jra% ?feor m «n*nnfswni^R«rf^ w^s- 
artr «FilW I 


?RsJ^ 4ft TTWfw^r 

srftg^ ^eafr w^ 

HI D ^ glftft I 


W5jf 4ft qi^i^ w(mt «w^: 

^ 35 !W!R: «^U 4 ^W)i| 5 Jl*fl^ra- 

(?) ftsgpijiftft i 


^^SSRlftsr 1^ 5TRTO^ ^Wlf^- 







wJ i[ ^gii*n^ 

fi^j fq«^^g«Ri5*p|i5iqfir: ^wsR- 

*ft^rsfN^wwwf?if^fC% H0f3yr^nfh^: «jw3t *n% 
5??nr «»iK« ^ii<^ ww< ^ flwo« m^^Rfia i 

^*fNnpr ?d^ qftiHrt^pr: ^RrnSt ^aipid Saw 

\t f5^1w^ 

^ €i4 flfUfP^^ I 



ap«^R^ iflg i R^ 

sfwnwsfNr^fi^^pw m < ^^ i gdP^R t i 


5R«r qj^i^ ^?rl^<sf: ?«nJi^ <?in«rer 

3^ ||? ww ^ e ^ i^g r fiR t i 
qWt i^ifl^rw ui^: 

^i<iww:wi % «t?« ! rn(i!^tf^ IKPifitt 3^ IN fiN%- 
(^1 





isRPiqf 

*hrqn*i'^qMi'»h 


«TWt 5f%ong^«rsinSt ffciir: 
5i5Nta»siwtr f 5^f9^f5s^ir^rf*wr»<^ mm- 

^WfrtNt ^ I 


?RsiFrt ^wnfr 3r<TFf^ ^gsfr strt- 

^[j^qnFRRT: qnms^t *roy^ff?niTi%??rf«nr5rf5Jr «nlsq^ 
>»i<iMl^^< i w<> a R41^ 505^15 i 

jn«rt fjsRt^; %<n*3rwr 

**Ic?w ^ ®wf JMnRTnRra I wW 


«SfNnR0l|*rT: I 

^Rimr ^w if fte iq fa r i^arj^fljiKr 
wjwT nifr niffsrM 





wjwTt ’/N^rt 
««iir5li?R^ ffcprr 3«?^ <W3K*rr qew« n f^« Ki 
sTRi^WRafNrr *^r«T5!rt RirM «tM 'TW'ft- 
I 


mvprr ^tKwr ^erawr l^srr g®?- 

*iRR<r f 4«T^^rc«Tr sRift^ft^sirar srmiw- 

3^ ^(^urig^ar g«q«reRU 

^ 3 rr ^r^Nrt *i<fi<MMi*ii^^i f^- 
[«!♦] firs^fepf 5 r^<f ^ 3 Rsm^ i 

irsrN^ «rr ^- 

5(PTO 3«il<w*W33!r ^PP'RiTRsft g^<g|y^i ^PJsm 

ftfir i 


«nW iwRofr k^pm ^ai^rr 





99 





I 

^riT[ 357Ffcr «yrJT^JT[ g®7r^iTR?w:r 

tftcr*T^nTcr ^rKJfr^qit^ (?) jtst^- 

^irgtfir* 3%^3rF?rr ?a^T!i{«T^r5?rr erf^^stf 

35 n ?rF*Tr^ 5 Fr^^F ^^sf, 3 %?i^ : ^^gF^r^flf ^v. 

s^F^Tiff (?) I 

^TF^iTr ?tTWF ?«IF*TF*^CHr^^qiTF »TfFd^ ^F«FF- 
^F^ 4 l^^CF^T|fF JFIhF^^?!^ T^g^F ^iTjflt^ffF 
^[JW7F^5^F ^Tflf f^?F’?>fiTF45r?F^F/|rfrq'^HiTF???JTF ^g^- 
^%cTF ?FFJTF1I«^^F f^^F=^«5F3r^F55TF?k«r5rirF5TF ’^F^ 

5ip?r?# HF^ q/^JFFf^Fg^^F ?:TF;^ofr ^qF*5n:i=r^:r gsq- 
5??FF 3«Tg^F fi^aif f^cFg^^JFF #iTI%g^^F ?^F?g:S-^F 
^wt?T«^5FF^F g^i^^c^?5TF g?:F get gg<^ g»TJTF- 
I 

cF^f^nJf tn^HFf^Fg^ ^jf-^ff^tf f^cTF»^?w g®7c«rF 
fFsqf itrTgjI^I ^OTltgC^F ?^R5IF^F f^Fe^^r^Ff^FF 

*if «Trei??ng i 


30 



5n»nq«[i^5f|5rr 'wrsif 

^^\-m ?:TT;q^w i!^- 

f^?Tpg^?rr 

^jft ?s?f! I 

?Tcqfeir =#mTr/iigisfr feci^rmr g’sq^ 

m^rsrr i 

Tf^ in^^sTT ^?pRi>n f^rrp^^w 3®T5^ Hg^ 
3^'^rf^ P55[5[^if^T »i^g?:T5rT ?njn- 

m^ir mj »n^ift ^^ifflf i 

wifRRw 

«fTf^ ?n*nift i 

^onw q’w^ 

'O 

insoi|ife5i^[^ ^?T«q^«n5?iT ^iqrraafR^- 

^inf^53iM| 5?|qi ^rKlft STO^WTi^ I 


31 



HR» I K ^ < n: I 


*ml^ i^ I 


T-irsns^ «wi*n#: ^rtr^T ftrowi?- 

<11%: ^Rr*iFRTrJ^t 5ri^ w<tn41^t$jt*i5|^i t fl|n4lOT- 

q > g|q>q o 1wti*< i »^ ^ »rsr- 
€n^; 3<q^ ^q#srwf[q^g?aifl^ stri^hj^: 
g«TOW; 3"^?^ I 


q»®5rw*iisRil^<5divi<l li^w?^ ^fRwwRifriiw- 
MqfitrWpKsrRr: m^t w- 

^ '^Rirf^qfiH^ I 


83 



5r<TSR«n% ’Tf^mr^rpr 'wwr ftjprr 


iT^ *T^ 30*11 I 



:^Rn«rdl^^r 


aTfsrf«wj5i^r?is?rgoT«!?f»«t ^»T5rw ‘sngojr I 


?*TnT^: cftcTFsr^ 

<«ifr55T(^5i?«r^ 5TRr?ia5R5ft^?5f^: 

s ?3jr^ I 


^5«ft*Roi^r: I 

sTr»5Rl^ ^orqrf^r: 

^ir«r^* ^^rcsTWRT^r^r’#: «wir^ 5rr*n«wRii?*3?T 
JTI^ *TI%^ *Tf^ %ffT ?J?riT?^?rl%^ I 

im ?[^«R5Cftoft3H, I 

qWr URg^ qi^rw- 

*R«raif^qwt*T; 

' 7 [wff?r ?n*r *Tf^WRi 1 




33 



11^ ^iTW«- 

^ I 

!Tr^^S5r«TR: ^w«r^ 5T3^ fw?f^ 
rRS^Wsr 3iw«r ^3rw|fg«R^^: TO^^S^aft^r: qfJUr: 

^I^^TTfir: %5fnT: qi^hwR^ 

qr5R«f^?ff’J 3WT ^TPR g«q?[f^mP# i 

?i7S^ ^®rr5^: ?qR5rt^ 5*Tr«rwf: 

%i%iT vRra#% I 

<T^4fiir<url[irT; i 

q%*n/^prr mwr gwww 
ftfin fwnf(%?n5t3Tr g«R?^^r ^«Tinn?JTr 
JTnn^8iR3ft^ ff 5581 5Frf^ I 

^ot qf^rf^r warwr gwi^wr 

ftg^ri <3irRT3Rrf!Tr ?Rrrawift^f^l^®ri«ijjn- 

' <TT3!»fTO^ I 


36 





^j^remr^crr, iwtrw?! ?i^- 

q#:, ^Tf^ofr ^feRn^Rf ?r^rf&r:, I^t- 

^ 'fl?fr»3rwr qw^ 5WRini?^»Tr 

i[ff!q^r wqrf&r:, ^qrmvrr ^ [ « r^r qwr#:, 

qii5f^ ?qTm>Tr ;[TRr*q^r f ^j^qrwnf^ %5Tr qqwi- 
^mratqr qRRraj^^srr: teq^r^r^qr arrafisqr 
iM«q^l^WHqRR: I 

qqrniff ^'q^qrqqt 

iT^'qff, <sr%5ft Riq^r qofsflf, ^»spt4 

ffwqi qRrCf q^qrg^ qi^^, s^^q?tPr- 

f^roff qqRRff, qjr^f qi^tqj^ ^q^i I 

qi%q m^qrrf^r ^qiqsrf^RFSRi ^rjqjprr 
gqriqf^wFq^ l^nqr, f^r?f|[ f^, qiqq>PTr 

^^qw sfeqiT, ^riqfliWTOqjiqn ?Tqqq^>TP5R«n[r spqqiT, 
fgqPTT ^wy<iH / ^*<i»qit f*95?ft, ^q^l^ sftei^R- 
qd?q^r, qTqT tq >3«qf^r gqjqq^RRr %?Tr: 

qv^^^rr: ft§«n: «ftwii^giqR5qi«qqmipTr 

fTRWMt^n qf^JRT wm: 1 


37 





joqi 

^JT5p?f, ^ ^ iw?rR%*n, gfl^rt gmrl 
;p^r HgsTJT^ gprf gjnrt, fRScff g^ gwiri 
g»Tf^5ff ?r?^r?*Rit, ^#Rf '^^- 


»T^^i?T!wr: gwir«Rw: g^r- 


ffesff ^Ptsff Rsmi 

JT«rrf|off, ff^oft crrf^ ^rf^r, snftofr 

iT^r^f, f^f»Wr3[rNt 


?fhT?r€f 





arr^Rrr msr^r: g«Tr»3W <pyg<d i m^ i Mv»i - 
^f??Twr^RRRi#irRrr f^RrfM^^RggoTRnfrw stc^t^f 



%*ft9n flg^n sri^: g^nj- 

f?rRRWRg?Rr jtfwt:, 

snwRqr^ s^TRg^R ^i r wP rf ^ i 





fj(g^ arfew: sc^jpn^Jfr- 
55T|«Rr ^q f> ^<K 


^RIWT s qra^ fw iTI: f^|f?j5|?ff- 


rs, 9 . ■ . 

srf^^ # I 



^otsf?RT% q/^RrfJrg^ jr- 


^if^r:, 


*] ft5T [^*] f^- 


gjw q^’ HTBrt ^ # i 


^ gw?) 

qorT: sqra^^fm 5(Mr«rr%^WFqc?T^ ^s^sn^. i qqq^- 
3t^rrk (?) M%5t ^qsqnq^ ^ 
qjq#^ wg^ i 


^W^RToP^r fijprr: 

JTR^qr »R5nf5rr iTqinc(ra??^)?ft5rr 
5RRTr [»F«5r«ft:*] iFq<fisiwii^wi^3nf*lfii i 


FqsTORq^srw mMg t hmwi t i 
f yii«ig^ifHl «F7RWTt<ir?qg^ I : «rMg^RiiiT^ii>«rt 


39 





*R5wnTr 

fWWTTi^snTO 5r®^mw^3f^<?resqiin?^" 


qj^ Mi^^i ^TO: 3«qFiWJ qvfwr fifg^rr: 
«r«oTf^rri»j>l^5rRgq^q^r{ f^T«q^re:5rr 
3wsrr «r^^s??T5rr ^ I 


sn^’^ Jtrasfknrrq^ftqgsqq^ 3®?^ 
flg^ qfR»q«er«q^ 3%Ra5^r^ 

ijnq M i ^R s ft srRrf^qiqMy qq^ g»4f tq?^fg?fri^ i 


^ ^f^rq^r: qqiPTr-. g«qq^i>^^r; qiT?:?5Tr ft- 
g^snwfsq^r^qf^jg^fqr: fJ^qqmqf^ qq> K aft < iir wf^ qi 

q^w;, qt ff«r ^WR^q^Jq^ Sqjjq iWRii^<% I 

^feong^qrqRT iteTprr 
qe[iw qqqqjw q(|q«qqqr^r *tq^qT f^«nq^r- 
q^ri^4tqf 


qsrqr’q^: | 

T!m^: qjrqd ft- 

^ qfq^qw^fiq^i^lgqnpr: 



gW H^oi- 

ftfif I 

?ni^ 'Tftmi^sr: ^TRpaRsifr 

[*n3#] wr: «^^«ratsft^- 
®n^ sTR^ *rRt gl^ jtfww iWRPw- 

^ I 

^ttKig<^i arsaniTr: ^?!«rerr: g«?5Wi 
g«q<«m*Tr ^<(*«oiiwd4l »Rir- 

qftiJt sn^t ^mt <7si ^ 

R^l ’^ y q g fl l 5Rn#j jRiq^ 

I 

3^ ^RTRr 

g ST W T ^ «»<W«g»Toh?t *fWWW«ft3(: «R®r% ^ 

arnW^rapi^ 4 > gR 0 qiwr^; 

g^%g^ frTw ro^4l ^ »TRPTl^lJMt ^ m- 


41 



sn^ (?) *R>R5ft^ qgf fqf H^g ri^ *w{fr m 
gi^ I 

^^TRnf? ^i^rsr^r arns^H^^wi- 
«ir«iqfil4^wi^qr55!: C^- 

^ 5 ^jftaT I 

^^TFart ^armnl? ^- 

ga^ 5ft^n#; ij^ frrniqnn^aft^ 

^ wiqj ^Ka?#Tft% I 

a»R T^r % JT^qf ql^qiPtg# q%TT^ 3^^i»54ahR 
qr44t; qa{rT«rt g?K aftoTRn^^^?? *imrasfi<**iW qig^i^n 
^ n^sr ??I^ q|% a » ; q P)Ri i 

?ri% 5? qiW^ig# ^R i ^aRd 
fstapr: sn^s»««^^Rrr5^ R oi qw<tK4)v»i ; 

IT^; srgR JT5I5R aT3[Wf^f^ I 


^i^Rrf^rgaawTwt 


qg^mr 


araRRaft- 


^ *T?% *M qniT g^ f ^gqyf^ pri^i^ i 


42 





?i5ir fIjpTr gw T fft^< i fa T 55^F^qtt 3«q^ra*iN«i 
gq!«wi ^qrorr ^ M 

qf^ ni^g^srr |»prr ^Ri*si^r g«q^ 
%g^qr gqnsRqr^srr f^^TFnssrsrRrr 
*nqi«i(a<4t^f s^TRift g^nrt i 


?i5^ ^?5Tmr s^r^nftq!^^, 

qir^ qfrft^ff g^ruft I 


^fijoni^tprr ^5rRi «wirw g«q5^ litg^ 
^sriT«q3n?i^ ^sRRrar 

? T wra ^{Rsfrirr =®Fi?P(Tt ?Fqjfr ?5SRn^ i 


^rUF^d fl^^T; q^Tf^cI- 
wqf*T<onjf^eit ir^rqf^JT; <§ffr‘q^?9*T^iq/^*TJqRWS[^^ : 
qRT^qRRf^ip^ ^ g»TR^ i 


^remnrcot iriw, 5Ri%ors^Fot 

g^, <oi'?<gqn[i/5i3<si, qfti% qiqr^w sn^^, ^ 


48 



w 3!fiiwrt ?nj^, %%9rt ¥jr- 

«TFi5*Tt ^ ^srsn^jt ^^TFqnr? «iiw i 

«F5ro% sn«ng^wi^ ^ q^‘ 

^ *W|t^ I 

5Rj%qqr^ *80^ ’WhrW 5*il 'Jta‘J5g<sff 

^ I 

a^»Tritsfi>5wrts flw jkot ^ 

li«nT I 

gcqpfepwlit «W ^ Jirot 

I 

qpfei?r ^ ^ 

I 

^sw5T ?rr»T 3 ^ *iI5F2 

* "f*8Fcnr’W?r m*|gq<H . • t l?rfir qrsis^Rn 1 


44 





jnqn^tt wffe iftn^thlqr^^Rqi ^nr^- 
I qqt ’q ^>^q i ^«i i <<i^qYTK i 5i^ fnqr^l 
qjRRoft; %fIFW: fepTT: 


4si^: sft/^ "q r dWIcq^qq^i^^^ ; jtrtR: 
qRqRq r i «^qi*fiRinim*n% iwnq^o^ 

^ a(i«hKif^d^qw^^ i ^iftqroonwit f^- 

q^ dT i ^^w^<^iq^ pt F Trq^ ^qwqT'»qi‘«f<>(^(^^ i 


# 4<Oft T MY# q?^: II 


46 




THE UTTAJWADASATALA MEASURE 




APPENDIX B. 


MEASUREMENT OF PROPORTION IN IMAGES. 


THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASURE. 

In the Indian measure of length there are two 
different kinds of units, namely the absolute and 
the relative. Of these the first is based upon the 
length of certain natural objects, while the second 
is obtained from the length of a particular part or 
limb of the person whose measurement is under 
consideration. The following table gives the rela- 
tion between the various quantities used in the 
absolute system: — 


8 Paramdnus make 1 Batharenu, 


8 Batharenu 
8 Bomagras 
8 Likshas 
8 Yukas 
8 Yavaa 
7 Yavaa 
6 Yavaa 


1 Bbmagra, 

1 Likaha. 

1 Yuka. 

1 Yava. 

1 Uttama-manangula. 

1 Madhyama-manangula, 
1 Adhama-manangula, 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

Besides these there are also other larger units 
of length ; they are : — 

24 Angulas or Manangulas make 1 Kishku, 

25 Manangulas „ 1 Pr&j&patya. 

26 „ „ 1 Dhanurgraha. 

27 „ „ 1 Dhanurtnush^i. 

4 Dhanurmushtis „ 1 Danda. 

The measure called dan^a is employed in as- 
certaining large lengths like that, for instance, of 
a street in a village. 

In the relative system an angula is taken to be 
the length of the middle digit of the middle finger 
of either the sculptor or the architect, or of the rich 
devotee who causes a temple to be built or an image 
to he set up. The angula thus obtained is called a 
mitrangula. Another kind of angula is obtained 
by dividing the whole length of the body of an image 
into 124, 120 or 116 equal parts ; each of these divi- 
sions is called a deha-labdha-ahgula or shortly 
dehniigula. The relative measure is meant to be 
used in the construction of temples or in the making 
of images ; it is however, employed for the latter 
purpose more often than for the former. Different 
names are given to certain lengths representable by 
two or more deh&ngulas up to twenty-seven; a 
knowledge of these is also very necessary for the 
proper understanding of the descriptions given in 


2 



THE UITAMA-DASA-TALA MEASURE. 


the Sanskrit texts printed in this Appendix. An 
explanatory list of those names is accordingly given 
below : — 

A distance of one angula is called Murti, Indu^ 
Viivambhard, Moksha and Ukia, 

A distance of two ahgulas is called Kald, Od\aka, 
Ahinl, Yugma^ Brahmana^ Vihaga, Akshi 
and Paksha, 

A distance of three aitgulas is called J^ina, Agni, 
Budrdksha, Guna, Kdla^ Bdma^ Varga 
and Madhya. 

A distance of four ahgulas is called Veda^ Praiish^hdt 
Jaiit Varna, Karna (or kara^a), Abjajdnana, 
Yuga, Turya, and Turiya. 

A distance of five ahgulas is called Vishaya, Indriya, 
Bhuta, Ishu, Supratishtha and Prithvi. 

A distance of six ahgulas is called Karma, Ahga, 
Basa, Samaya, Gdyatrl, Krittikd, Kumdrd- 
nana, Kaustka and Bitu. 

A distance of seven ahgulas, Pdtdla, the Munis, 
Dhdtus, Lbkas, Ushnik, Bohiril, Dvlpa, Ahga 
and ambhbnidhis. 

A distance of eight ahgulas is called Ldkapdkta, 
Nag as, Uraga, Vasus, Anushtup, and Ganas. 

A distance of nine ahgulas is called Brihatl, Grihas, 
Bandhras, Nandas and Sutras. 

A distance of ten ahgulas, is called Dik, Prdturbhavd^ 
Nadi, Pahkti and ... 

A distance of eleven ahgulas, is called Budras and 
Tfishtup. 


8 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


A distaooe of twelve aivgulas is called Vitaeth Mukha 
Tala, Yama, Arka, Bail and Jagati. 

A distance of thirteen ahgulas is called Atijagati, 

A distance of fourteen ahgulas is called Manu and 
l^akvari. 

A distance of fifteen ahgulas is called Ati-iakvari 
and Tithi, 

A distance of sixteen aiigulas is called Kriyd, Ash^i 
and Indu-KaW,. 

A distance of seventeen ahgulas is called Atyash{i. 

A distance of eighteen ahgulas is called Smriti and 
Dhriti. 

A distance of nineteen ahgulas is called Atidhriti, 

A distance of twenty ahgulas is called Kriti, 

A distance of tiventy-one ahgulas is called Prakriti, 
A distance of twenty-two ahgulas is called Akriti. 

A distenoQ ot twenty •three ahgulas is oaMed Vikriiu 
A distance of twenty-four ahgulas is called Samskriti. 
A distance of twenty -five ahgulas is called Atikriti, 

A distance of twenty-six ahgulas is called Utkriti, 

A distance of twenty-seven ahgulas is called Nakshatra. 

The measurements described in Sanskrit autho- 
rities are altogether of six kinds; and they are 
respectively called Mana, FramVvt^a, Unmina, 
Parim&na, TJpani&na and Lamhaniana. Of these 
Mana is the measurement of the length of a body ; 
pram&na is that of its breadth, that is a linear 
measurement taken at right angles to and in the 
same plane as the md,na ; measurements taken at 


4 



THE CTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASURE. 


right angles to the plane, in which the mana and 
pramiina measures have been noted, are called 
unmana, which obviously means the measure of 
thickness ; parimana is the name of the measure- 
ment of girths or of the periptcry of images ; 
tvpainAna refers to the measurements of inter-spaces, 
such, for instance, as that between the two feet of 
an image ; and lastly lambamana is the name given 
to measurements taken along plumb-lines. These 
six names of the requisite linear measurements 
have a number of synonyms which it is also very 
necessary to know for understanding aright the 
texts given in this Appendix. They are therefore 
given here below : — 

Mana — Ayama, Ayata, Dirgha. 

Pramana — Vistara, Tara, Striti, Visriti, Visritam 
Vydsa, Visarita, Vipula, Tata, Viskkambha 
and Viidla. 

Unmana — BahaJfl, Ghana, Miti, Utchchhraya, Tuhga, 
Unnata, Udaya, Utsedha, Uchcha, Nishkrama, 
Nishkriti, Nirgama, Nirgati and Udgama, 

Parimana — Marga, Praveia, Parinaha, Naha, Vfiti, 
Avrita and Nata. 

Upamana — Nivra, Vivara and Antara. 

Lambamana — Satra, Lambana, and Unmita. 

Besides the smaller unit known as the 
dShtlhgula there are otber larger relative units of 
length, which are called Pr&deia, T&la, Vitaati and 


6 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Gokarna. The distance between the tips of the 
thumb and the forefinger, when they are stretched 
out to the utmost, is called a pradeSa ; that 
between the tips of the thumb and the middle 
finger, when they are also so stretched out, is called 
the tala ; that between the tips of the stretched 
out thumb and ring-finger is known as the vitasti ; 
and that between the stretched out thumb and 
little-finger is called the gokarna. 

The ^gamas prescribe various proportions to 
the images of the various gods, goddesses and other 
beings belonging to what may be called the Hindu 
pantheon : the unit of measurement chosen for 
stating these proportions is the t&la. The different 
tnla measurement prescribed for the various images 
are given below : — 

The Uttama-dasa-tala (of 124 dehangulas) is pres- 
oribed for the images of the prinoipal deities- 
Brabma, Vishpu and ^iva. 

The Madhyama-dasa-tala (of 120 dehangulas) tor 
those of ^rldevi, Bhumidevi, Uma, Saras- 
vatl, Durga, Sapta-matrikas, Usha and Jyesh- 
tha. 

The Adhama-daia-tala (of 116 dehangulas) tor Indra 
and the other Lokapalas, for Chandra and 
Surya, for the twelve Adityas, the eleven 
Budras, the eight Vasus, the two Alvini-ddva- 
tag. for Bbrign and Mfirkauddya, for Garuda, 


6 



THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASURE. 


Sesha, Durga, Guha or SubramaQya, for the 
seven Bishis, for Guru, Arya, Cha];ide8a and 
Eshetrapalakas. 

The Navdrddha-tala for Euhera, for the nine Grahas 
(planets) and certain other celestial objects. 

The Uttama^nava-tala for Daityesa,* Yakshesa, TTra- 
gesa, Siddhas, Gandharvas and Charapas, 
Vidyesa and for the Ash^amurtis of l^iva. 

Sa-tryahgula-nava-tdla for such persons as are equal 
to the gods in power, wisdom, sanctity, etc. 

Nava-tala for Bakshasas, Asuras,YakBha8, Apsarases, 
Astramurtis, and Marudgapas. 

Ashta-tdla for men. 

Sapta-tdla for Ydtalas and Pretas.t 

Shat-tdla for Pretas. 

Pancha-tdla for Kubjas or deformed persons and for 
Vighnesvara. 

Chatustdla for Vamanas or Dwarfs and for children. 

Tritdla for Bhutas and Kinnaras. 

Dvitdla for Kuahmapdas. 

Eka^tdla for Eabandhas. 

The measurements relating to an image of the 
Uttama-daia-tdla proportion are given in tabular 
form below ; and a figure is also drawn to show 
clearly how this proportion works out. 

* These are, according to the Earapagama, to be made 
according to the Uttama^nava-tdla measure. 

t These are, according to the Earapagama, to be made 
according to the Sha^-tdla measure. 


7 



HINDU lOONOGBAPHY. 


In this connection, it would be interesting to 
note that, according to the canons of European 
art, a well-proportioned male figure is equal to 
eight times the length of the head : in other words 
is ashta-t(ila in height ; that of a female figure is 
seven and a half times that of a head, or sUrdha- 
sap^-tala. According to European artists the 
ear is said to extend from a line drawn across the 
side of the head on a level with the eye brow, and 
another which is drawn on a level with the wing of 
the nose : or, in the language of Indian artists 
between the bhru-sutra and the nasa-puta-siitra. 
Similarily the other rules arrived at by the Indian 
artist do not appear to be divergent from those 
evolved by the European artist, and if in Indian 
sculpture the results arc not good in some instances 
it is the fault of the artist and not attributable to 
the guide-books. The similarity of the limbs of the 
body as compared with various natural objects 
such as for instance, the nose with the sesamum 
flower and the trunk composed of the chest 
and abdomen with the face of a cow are very 
well pointed out with reference to a number 
of illustrations by Mr. Abanindranath Tagore 
in his excellent cuticle entitled ‘Indian Icono- 
graphy ’ contributed to the Modern Beview for 
March 1914. 


8 



Measurements according to the 


THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASUBE. 



9 




THE UTTAMA-DASA-TALA MEA8UEE. 


o 

: 


i 

o 

o 

I ; 


: o : 

o 



Oi 

. 


H< 

:2 


: ^ : 

s 

tH 

• 


• 


09 

. cq 

■ 

. tH • 



: 

•' 

• 

: 

• • 

• 

: : : 





. 

. 

. 

. . 

• 

■ • • 


■ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 


• 

i 

: 


CO 


o 

cq : 


: ^ : 


. 

, 

00 

05 


H< 

05 : 

00 

: w : 

• 

• 

• 


oi 


tH 

• tH # 

• 




o 

o 



o 

o : : 

H« 

cq 

CO 

Oi 

o 

c* 

OJ 


05 

CO : : 

O 

rl 



iH 

C9 

cq 


tH 

tH . • 

cq 














o 

o 


H4 O 

O 

: cq 

HH 









HI 













CO 

Oi 

o 


cq 

05 rH 

05 

CO : tH 

o 

t-4 

tH 

rH 

o 

09 

cq 

tH 

• 

cq 





HI 








< 1 


Measurements according to the 


HINDU lOONOGBAPHY, 


'i 

.s 

08 

a 

o6 

% 

«o o 

: 

: o ^ 

o 

:oo ; ifHe- 

1 

> 

1 

QO 

a 

< ■ 

CO 

tH 

: oi 

; 'ttt 

lO eo 

^ u3 : ^ cq : : oo 


i 

1 

Yava. 

! 


*-< : ; 

o : 

'.cqooocqcqevB^ 

S' 

& 

108 

W 

tub > 

fl 

< : 

CO : 

vH . 

03 00 

00 : : 

w : 

lOCO-^Bt^THi-l-^W 

CO 

'Si 

il 

If 

oB 

% ■ 
p-i i 

: 


:coco 

CO ^ 

^cQOcqiH 't^coco 

com 

tab 

< 1 

: 

. IH 

: oi 

; to 

o ^ 

^co^^cqr-ico^eo 

eS 

1 ' 

g ' 

ea 

: ^ 

: ^ 

cq CO CO 

CO 

^cqocqrH ^eoco 

1 1 
'$ 1 

1 

tib 

1 

: CO 

. iH 

: 00 

»o CO ^ 


'«8(COK«'^C<1iHO^CO 


a 

g 

g 

< 

I 

& 

n 

M 

n 


0 

1 

s 


c8 48 e8 
M 

QO 


O 




12 


THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASUBE. 


0 iHHwO 

00 

O-^CTtHCqTH :iHOC^CO 

00 CO fH fH iH 0 

: 05 

CO to ICO ;tHthoo 

^OiHOOO 

; -<c< CO 0 

O^dCQiHiH^rHOC^CO 

»H d tH iH tH iH 

: 00 fc»»o 

fi^COiCDlCa^^iHrHrHOO 

th : : : : 

: : CO « 00 0 

O^CMfHCMOqCQiHOOCO 

CO c?i : : : : 

: : 00 1 - *0 CO 

C^COlCOOTH^rHiHiHiHO 

: 

: rcoc^coco 

o^oiiHOJicqcqfHOOco 

CO CM : : ; : 

: : t- »o CO 

t^COtCOtO’^^fHiHiHrHO 


PC o 

:::::: o J 

Hi 
I -giS 
« «si 

: S : : : 2 

-g . oc . ^ ® 2 - 

5 J M rS ■“ § 

^ 'W ^ S^J 3 

■g|-^£ gl-s ft 

M rj»d 

o'o-S'S-S'sl^l 
,§ J ’i 'i '5 'S ^ "I •& 


O******* 

: .3 , : :^ : : : 

§ I 

w fl 8 g> 

'S ® i 

§5 . g 

'^<g:S,:::'a;;:'§::'g 

•§ fe sl 2 

'^:S •“ 2 Sa.'Sa 5 

^ ^ «§Sfe!S i 

if ^IshJ ^l'S|l|1 

■®S SS'sJiS 1•cli:S5 

oooo2 SSSSSo 

§5 55:S5« 5555^5 

•2 a o^oS®. 00000 ^ 

S‘,2 9^^^J3:S 

j§5li2i2iH|a»itg’l’f 

a>SSooooo«a®2®2®® 


13 


The width of the middle finger at its root 
The width of the forefinger at its root 
The width of the ring-finger at its root 
The width of the smallest finger at its root 






plats 2 App. B. 



[To taco page 15 oE App. B.] 


(Fig. 1.) Foot, drawn in accordance (Fig. 2.) Palm of the hand, drawn in (Fig. 3.) Ear. drawn in accordance 

with the measurements given in the accordance with the measurements with the measurements given in the 

Amsumadbhedagama. given in the Amsumadbhedagama. SuprabhSdagama. 




THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TSLA MEASUBE. 


thumb which 
is near the 
palma 

1 4 

of the index fin- 
ger = 

1 6 

of the middle 

<§ 

.“1 

i"ii 

o 

<s 

*1 ’ 
« 

M O W »H 

t ^ » 

Sc *^60 

o 

The width of the 
middle digit of 
the index fin- 
ger = 

1 5. 

of the middle fin- 
ger* 

2 0; 

of the ring fin- 
ger* 

1 5^. 

of the small fin- 
ger* 

1 3. 

: ^ 

: : ^ 


: : 



: : ; 

tH ; o 

i 

*• • 



: : : 

to : i> 


: o 



»c : : 

o 





^ * ! 

to CO CO 


o 



»o : : 

o 

<M 

« <M 




to CO CO 



a 


o 

ja 




aJ 
•sg^^ 

P o ® 

l|l|JI 

I 'I 'I' 


na 

p -g 
® ffi .S 

k. 

©2 ^ 
oc'd 
P *a ® 
cp p ^ 


08 cB fl 
cj © © 

Isi 

Pi n n 
© © © 
.a pp ja 

4a ^ aa 

«M k-l «4H 

o o o 

-p pp Jp 
4a ^ 

itj fd 'P 
o 0 © 

egg 


u 


Measurements according to the 


HINDU ICONOGRAPHY 




16 


At the roots of the fingers there should be 
strips of flesh 4 yavas in thickness 
The thickness of the palm should decrease from 
the wrist to the finger by 5, 4 and 3 yavas... 


THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASUBE. 



Psil’afll 

ItiUlpj 


s 




oo 

o 

^ : : : : : 


cq eo 

^ rl 

Cl 

rH 1 J J ; J 


: : 

: 

. o o o 

: : : ; co co o 

: : . . t* ^ lo 


111! 

l-siS’s^s^jsS 

O l> 

O 

o : 

: o 

o 



00 r-l 
CO r-J 

<N 

cq 

<M : 

! I ^ 

O) 



O f 

o 

o : 

: : o 

o 



® IH 
00 pH 

cq 

CM 

CM ; 

: : ^ 

CO 


*§J 


80 h ^ 
g n3 CP 


M “ 

.2 ®.t; 



0 


17 



THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASUBE. 



19 








HINDU IOON06BAPHY. 




PLATE 3 App. B. 



The length of the upper lip, which ia also the 
length of the mouth 


THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TiLA MEA8UBE. 


hInHw 

CO 

! ! ! 


Hw o : ; 

^ o 

: i : 


»H CO : ; 

CO CO 

: 


:oo 

^ o 

« iH : 

o 

: : CQ CO 

W Hn 

«HHn 

HN 


CO 

r-l 

CO 

• • • • 

^ o 

<M fH O 

o 

: : ; : 

CdHM 

iHHN 

Hm 

HlM^ • • 

CO 


CO 

iH : : 

o 

Cq»-IO 

o 

o CO : : 



31 



Measubemec^ts accobding to the 


HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 



32 



MBASUBBMENTS of the BAB. 


THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASURE. 


o 

o 

o o o o 




; : : ^ 

o 

CO 

01 

eo CO CO 01 

fH 

: 

: 

; 

: : ; o 

: 

o 

o :oo 

: 

: 

: 

o : : eo 

: 

rH 

01 

eo : 00 01 

fH 

: 

: 

: 

^ : o 

o 

: 

: o : 01 

01 

»H 

iH 

O 

o 

fH 

: 

: !>• : d 

01 


d 

rH iH O 

o 

: 

: o : 01 

d 

- 

iH 

o ^ ^ 

10 


; ; 01 

d 

iH 

d 

^ 1H fH o 



23 


the ear, called the ndZa in Sanskrit 
The width of this strip of flesh in front 
The width of the same at the back 
The thickness of the same 



Measurements according to the 


HINDU lOONOGBAPHT, 



24 



THE UTTAMA-DAI^A-TALA MEASUBE. 



The width of the waist at the back 
The width of eaoh glutial 
These should be spherical in shape. 

The width of the space between the ^utials . 



Measubements accobding to the 


HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 




The outline of the side of the body from the 
armpit to the abdomen should be slanting 
and the total slant is 

In the case of Siva the neck above the hikka- 
sutra should be blue in colour. 


THE ETTAMA-DA^A-TALA MEASUBE. 



27 










Measubements according to the 


HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


1 


. 

* s ^ 

c8 

1 

d 2 

'cS S 



:S & 

Dfl 


oB 

Q 


> 

< 


eB 

flB 


a 


: 

<s 

'1 





e8 


: 

M 

< 


'S 1 

i 


l| 



11 

Ang. 

Cl 

j 

eS 

i 


d 

eS 


•49 

flS 



flS 

j a 

1 '3 

Ang. 

C<l 



28 




[To faoe page 29, App. B.] 


Lamba-Pmalaka. 


THE OTTAMA-DA^A-TALA-MEASURK 

For measuring lengths along plumb-lines an 
instrument called the Lamha-phalahdt is employed. 
It is a plank two angtUas in thickness and measur- 
ing 68 ahgulas in length and 24 in breadth. All 
round the plank a margin of 3 ahgiilm is left. A 
small hole, just a trifle larger than a yava in diame- 
ter, is bored in the centre of the margin along the 
length of the plank ; this hole is meant for the 
madhya-sutra. Other holes are bored for the 
puta-paryanta-8utra ind,8d.-put,a-8utra), netra-pary- 
anta-8idra, kartpa-paryanta-siiira, kak8ha~paryania- 
suira, and hdJm-paryanta-8utm, in places marked on 
the accompanying diagram of the Lamba-pkalaka. 
Through theb^' are suspended by strings, which are 
one yava in thickness, small plummets of iron or 
clay. In the case of reclining figures the 8utra8 
are strings stretched horizontally in front of the 
figure which is in the process of modelling. In the 
case of the 8tha7iaka-murti, the madhya-sutra 
which is suspended from the hikh&mani (crest-jewel) 
set in front of the kirUa (crown) of the image, 
should pas» through the middle of the forehead, 
between the brows, the middle of the nose, the 
neck, the chest, the abdomen, the private part 
and between the legs ; it should touch the body 
at the tip of the nose and the middle of the 
abdomen. The distance of the top of the crown 


29 



HINDU IGONOGSAPHY. 


behind the madhya-suira is 6 aiigulas ; that of the 
middle point of the chin 4^ aiigulas ; that of the 
hikM-sutra, 4 aiigulas ; that of the middle of the 
chest, 2^ aiigulas ; that of the navel, 1| aiigulas ; 
that of the root of the penis, 2 aiigulas ; that of the 
middle of the thighs, 3 aiigulas ; that of the knee* 
joint, 8 aiigulas ; that of the shin bone, 16 aiigulas ; 
of the total length of the great toe a portion 
measuring half an aiigula is to be in front of 
the rnadkya-sutra, while the remaining portion 
of it measuring 2^ aiigulas is found to be behind 
the madhya-sutra. The b^hu-paryanta-sutra, 
which is also known as the aiiga-parha-madhya- 
sutra, should pass through the middle of the side 
jewel of the crown, the head, the sides of the ear, the 
upper arm, the elbow, and the middle of the knee, 
the foreleg and the foot. The other madhya-sutra 
which is hung behind the middle of the back, should 
pass through the middle of the back of the crown, 
the head, the nape of the neck, the back-bone, 
between the two glutials, and the heels. The 
vaktra-bddiya-sutra should pass by the side of the 
head, through the extremity of the mouth, side of 
the cheek, end of the chin, side of the hroni^ and 
the middle of the thigh and the foreleg. 

All the six sutras mentioned above should be 
suspended as far below as the pitha or pedestal on 


80 



THE UTTAMA-DA^A-TALA-MBASDRE. 


which the image is made to stand, whereas other 
sutras, which are required for taking the measure- 
ments of particular limbs of the body may be 
suspended as far as the lower extremity of those 
limbs. 

The nasa-puia-aiitra is also called the drigan- 
tail-sutra, that is, the line that passes through the 
inner margin of the eye near the nose. This sutra 
also passes through the extremity of the mouth 
and is the same, therefore, as the vaktra-bahya- 
sutra. The antarbhiijavadhi-sutra is the same as 
the kaksha-paryanta-sutra and is also sometimes 
called the aiiga-parha-madhya sutra, a term which 
means the line which is to pass through the 
middle of the side of the body- The sutra which 
passes through the back of the head and is known 
as the kirah-prishthavasana-sutra, is also the outer 
limit of the back hands of a figure with four arms. 

Different names are found given to the same 
sutra, according as the sutra is viewed from the 
front or the side of the Lamba-phalaka ; for 
example, the kaksha-paryanta-sutra, when viewed 
from the front of the Lamba-phalakd,, is seen 
passing just in front of the arm-pit and is therefore 
called the line that forms the limit of the arm-pit ; 
the same sutra when viewed from the side is seen 
passing just in front of the bhuja or the upper 


31 



HINDU lOONOGEAPHY. 

arm ; hence it is called the line which forms the 
inner boundary of the upper-arm or antarhhujUk- 
vadJdsutra, 

If the image is a seated one, the six autraa 
should be suspended as far as the pl^ha on which 
it is seated. The distance between the two knees 
in a figure seated with crossed legs, as in the 
ydg&sana posture, is equal to half the total height 
of the corresponding standing figure, that is, 62 
aiigulas. 


32 





srg i 

jjjij^LLirmLb Q&^ireoei>uui^/r 

3 m II 

^ ^ (?) 

tSuiQuirfiiu^mfi 124 O^iu ^ ^Jii^ii (S^a 

LDir^^!TirtB(^si>QLXi€irjp) Ou(uir/ni, 

5F*TRi i '^Nir 3 «r4 jJItf 

tSadso % Q^iu^trio ujmeu ^Arjp) 

OuiUffITLb, 

*^%«rr5^f^ II Ni'«jft'^i?qi5'T4^flt*iM iR^q^ 1 

^L^'ssif^ub jpL^fkS uiTfiuirajihfiLLirs ^ika 

Lbtreftt^ jtjetrimuuL^fr iBeirpjp. 





^^asFlsirjpiU) (oa^rti^uiirs adir^ [^1, lumm*'^ 8< 


gjiNr 


L/ L^irii fB ^si^drjpi fup^sui jgu^ir asijih 

^(3ir/r€irjpi<s(^ eQjJi) 4 ; lussieu 8 * 


(usnmi 4 - 

BSir(S^)^BPLh t ^0 (U^su (^'Snpiu, 


[«hUAwf^^#<g 3 #] II 


£BsAru,ji^i(^i (^jpii^emL^iretfT jpri^ 

fSiff QiLearjoi QuujiTfrii, 


’adSfT 




*;OouId it be 

t «<Hr( 7 <_A'##iI) ? 


84 







?w ywii^RPi. II 
51?^ fit^sraw. ! i 

<sajzi) ^ireo 18 (uesitu 8. 

KtrtS<SiiSLJbrrK^u^trm^ih eQireo 18 (u^su 8. i^rtStS 
^(T^ii^ 

QiLLLir^eOiijpi^s (^jpim(j^smL^iretfr ^ji^/rui 

t Qtumjpi Qu(uinrih» 

*T^[5r*] (wt) wm^ I 

Serrui eQireo 27 * 

^^^sirjpiLh Sir id 4, S8® 

* 



uiT^fiQeoiTjsQeiv^th Sued 4 . ^uuis^ 

^id fSeirjpiUi uir^fUTiuii^uura e^^Qm^ih Sirid 124* 


t tn^fitu as^fiir^ 

* ^mtsddfLo ^coL.aSejr ifm-Quo* 


86 





?iFRqrrf^ It 

Qu0^ireo j^ioifFlu3l‘^&i :Ssirjp.Lh (^^lu^euirs&feirfsfr 
f^sfTLb eSoeo 17 * 



UTeun-o^irastii eBir^ 27 . 

(SsiriruuQo/r^^Fih ^Meo 2 

?n^5rq|?5T[f54 (ciwr^) »i«nnf i 

Qfisir&siaQiu^SsouSsir (yhif^iOaSdrjpiih Uijituiris/(Qmfl 
u9^ ^A8ia iMstrekJtr^ ^tieo 13 }. 

5Td I pr^rt ?Tnl*TRf^ II 

(Tih tQaeo 12i’ 

pTRi^ g ^n^qql^qnpft. i 

(ip6Ba’{i^ji^^99}i^fu 

ifiqw jftqpj? ii 

Q^euirsQirui usuLfSir^ 9 ^* QlftuirQfieoui uauLf 

^aei 10 - 


’*' fiUdsir 


36 


cm li 

dSdRi^lB6S(^i^ mQuUlTLJL/ dfi/T^ 22^, 






^^(jj^^iuLnsfreufra eQ^^fririi 


Jitreo 19- 


Lji^ueQtuir^ih 16. 


»(S[r(r&Rjfl^tririh eflir^ 19. 

^if.u9 fpiML^uj ^iSirih ^^ireoih eQireo 18. 

5R«r: ^rnl^Nr/^: I 

aufjssim uirirsreuinifiLLfra « 


eBireo 20i- 


q i ^qg ' ^ TPT 3 II 

sm^Qfiso ^^(Tsoii eSir^ 18f. 

nK0U)^^<u ^^‘ireoii tBaeo 14^. 


37 


Sg/r^ Siutr^Lb €9iDid 9 i. 





SiiBiairQpeo eB^ireoti ^trei> 8^* 


I 


’n^RRwnt g 



Siiiiar Lbfi^iu aS^iraiLC eBireo 6f- 


II 


^q| 4 « m ? y %n: 1 i 

(ifi^Q^irdresr ^j<sArQ /»0 eQ^/reoii Jiireo 9 . 


qRl?nw«TPt g ii 

fB&tr^fT JSi^tredLb sSjA 4 }« 

^qqrfWwRT g5qn^5qrwg«i^l i 

(QsouiT&io^ ^&^frei)ih isQirdv 5 lusmsu 8 * 

g ^ ll 

Seirjpjii ^geomsfreu/rm tLiunib tBir^ 4|‘« 

Wll ^ fc nt ^ 5lf5q qi«oqf?5# ^ ^ I 

u/r/f^sssB^/riru) ^treo 4^. e.^^u 

«0r«> 4}- 

qsfw q^FRnng^wcii 

fifOLD^^IULD <Oir<M 6 lumtu 2> 


88 





fieoraSir^M^irJiM cO/rw 7- 


qKIfSWd II 

uirflirtB(^ei^L^frtu^th eQireo 4) lu^eu 2. 


q^l ^ gqK i g dFT I 

uir^iria^e^L^ ^^^irtrtli ^ireo 2 ^ njeneij 1 . 

dRi^ q[ ^qra t * i q^s*c, n 

j)ffW(^e^L^ eQ^^^friTji^^ u.r^ issssS^^^irFLair suffi 
jif^eo Qpiatriii ^ojinoLLtrekijp. 


^ir^iitUfrtu/ru>Llb isQtr^ 4) uj^su 8* 



j^KfriB^triufru^Lo^Sirso 8 ^ ajo9)su 1 . 


^nlwf^nrR g i 

aSld^uf^^fr ^iTi^Lb tfSirA 2j. 

JR^IRTK ;iW:5n^?IH^ li 

51 # I 

iSiT'-o^QS Qp^eoiresf ifir^i^iT^iii^^ih ^TOtit j^eni^ 

<3«/ 9j 8J (^7i ?), 7, 6) <ua»«f u^ir^^iruairaiai- 

fiHSp^sa uufi mdiLDirmijp. 


89 



gwnffRrreiti^r: I 


f^>T3i|sr: 11 

^trid €Q^jg/nr^iin^ 4 Qsiu^ 

8 sk^jH^s^ tssiriSQirir^^ih Qstrm^euir^. &mpjgi 

uT(QLLfi^(U ^B^nrsoaLh eQo’eo 89 lusiaeu 3. 

Q^irlfuuir ^uj/r^ih 


q^tTOmPT 5 qii?i8q«ii^q[. ii 

(sQ^eivpfnrih cS/ro) 6|* 

qi^*T^ g^ ^ n *Tf & | gFi r /s?^ i gq >^i : 1 

LoeffsFluiip e9>3Ffr€C^LJD (sQireo 3f* 



A^eirsfnBSf)^ l^srrui eQirio 7. m^S^treo dSardo 6| 

q q i ^^^wpt WRsrrwTiqrqg^T^ I 

ji/ismBair ^srrih <sB!rso SJ. 

qqrf^ 3 qsri^ ^^^iqiqg^ r ^ li 

ptr^iS Serrih ^Qireo 5) 1. 

?Tqi^5»?nT 3 <0^?pqift84r: 1 

sSfi^u,As^mu.iu ^iriaiii ^irA 4|. 


40 





QuQ^^aii jBfif.uuiruLi eQiTffO 1^. 

^?mir 5 praf«rr 3 vm 1 

^/r&fS j^uj^CjuTuL^ (umeu 8 . ld^iugdil (tfieoJiw 
^(Tirib ttj€9ieu 9* 

«RiftBrr TOwr BproRri^BwiBr: ii 

j^ffiriBsir QfieotS^/B/rinh lues^eu 8 * 

^€0 ojsneu 6< 

(ipfieoa^ar SriosisSiid ^so d0sn>^/r/ru) 

Q^frAsouuLLL^ffi. 

^B^ireoias&Beo 16 Q^iu^ 

^Jih^Lb (Qmp^jfj ji/iSir eQ^ireoih Qs/reiraQ^eu/rdr, 

3 qwl^ I 

^lipAfi €Birios9Seo ^eoFluSeo uirusnu 6 Q^iu^ 
jf^io 5 196S eQ^pirJTQpih Qs/r^d^oi/rcir. 

qr 43 li 4 ra# ^ mwrarefir: 11 

LbpOlQffQ^ 4ft^(3so utr^^ikmm LbinJbmefTiB(^uu£fi 
mapfieo €utf€^ ^tup ^^ppubirtSlQ^uu^. 


41 





Ka«Qm)fSira fi^sn sriituirSfiiupfS mm^irisu^ Qsirei 
(^€u/reir. 

siwimw ii 

a^iriurm^^io ^sSiruiTeu^^p(j^ ^iimh 

Qsir^f^eutrm. 

^g8<i^q4< q ^ 

Op^u^eu^/rAdsih iuaf>€u 17 * 

8?nf^ II 

(yjecuir&jQfiUi ^f6irLBs(tpei>uir€iQfiUi 

eBar^ 2 * 

Lup^iULLir (yjecuireu^ir^^ih ujsif>su 18 - 

q>f^8»i gq l w ?Rt^ qq i Wid i: || 

aSeLfLtf.^fr Qf^s^uieu^iT^^ui iu^€u 18 - 



(tp&i>u/reup^p(^Lh ^3S!ruir6Uji^p(s^ nCSSeirp 
SetrQui Ltip^iuulieup^p(^LL Hefrubireu^. 

ST1[8 3 M Wl<^li^q4^3^ l: II 

jtlia(^ei^L^ih ^jrsArQ uireuLmruSiQj^LJU^* Smp^eu 
Qajeoeoinii uireuLDtru9(^LJU^, 


43 





«• 

fB^fraSirtOAf^iriTLii eQireo 

^ 3 II 

fl€OLL^^tu eQ&v^irirth eBirio 6 . 


fBei>(ifi&> S^treou^ 6 ^« 


?rrNpi^ ^Itk I 

jifiB^e!fkL.QpeiiLb ^i^AS fiirsi^(tfisoi£>eireuTa tOffA 
8 ^- a-Qsir^sruiQuirQeo ^0uu^, 





II 


jTt^ g[W?f ?ra[ 5 T 

Qu(V^iS(r^jj)U^ ^L^!wS LLesSu^^unGireuiriu S(Sfrui 
eQireo 4 . dissrih oOir^ 2 ^. 


en^eQeifliiLf S€arLb 3 . ^dQju^tr^ar^ 

2 ^ireoQuirQei) (?) 


3?|[3f|*TnTWPg jpn^f^r *tI^ ?ra I 

eOffeos^A> Sifi 2i cO/r^ LDirib&vefrLmrtu utk^ 0 uu^, 

uiTfUD^/Sih u/ruL/flfiiT^ (?) »(oafr^jLh (Suir(Seo 
o9(^uu^. 


48 




^ ^ «Tr 

ft.s7a7rim«in<ss0^6i/ ajmm 5) C^*)3 

Qffffij^LLQiresiaiu/rQso ^isimir^idy ^iShrmirfiio^ (Q€OtLa‘ 
/B€0 ^Quuirm, 

q^nii «Tr f^FW iTO?^ I 

ufBLLiruLLir/Bso (^^^ruLLtr^io %L.^eir/Bsnm Qo^nmmaji 
sptSuuir^^ 

gf t nqi^%aij^ 8?n^ qsBl ^ i fi i ^ II 
<5^ 5 »#Trer f ^flfS|^u|| ( S^;f4^ I 
^ srni ^ ii 

^Q^ppirmirirLDirmr ^Quamf^ArnuuiLi^ 

jufip S(QpfBirmirirp^m Smpfnrpenp 5 ^jpi 

Q^iujfi gljipff(Seo ^0 snJSpp^ €l.(i^AS QppuiLi^ 

eu^st SLp^nptLfih (tfiUiiLL^iB(^aerr(riS ^Ap QpuiLLu.iBStr 
mfriQinjairmofiti e‘PfiS€sr SLjpt ^ekjpt ^diiok^jpi 16 . §}Apu 
u^^jp OupQff'^eo QaireAru-pi KirpjDu^frmunrih, 
u^armpptrQed mirpmunrPffa^iBffi Qs/rtir(^€uir€ir.\ 

f While the Sanskrit passage is quite clear, the Tamil 
commentary is unintelligible. According to the Sanskrit text, 
the girth of a round body, (in this instance that of a limb), is 
Si of the width or diameter of that body. 


44 





Q^JiA(^ijbso SffSjggnsnL^tu KirfUDU^ tQjrso 28 (88?) 

^sqf^ fit^srecTR «i*ft!Taw5nf^u 

QftBa(^iLQeo QirS gpisni—iu ^/nru> ^0 afi/r^ 
(luancii (1)) (^snpiu eSireii 12« 

3 H^Nl^ *1^ 1 

O^«0tf0^6Br Sjr»<i(^ miTfUDU^ Sirio 22. 

?8*ni5 3 II 

ai'essriiia&fltir i9mnpLb isiromth d9/r^ 12* 

^ql 4 « iFT * n>t 3 I 

(ifitkQa^irtirar ^irserQ mirptop^pi^^ nQCSeu §)3r 
emQ mUrisiB m^^vjtroi^. Sa-Q^etaLmOJ itirpiou) 

tBirio 88> 

* r w pn ^ •«T3^^ II 

SQirirunp^iup^eo LbeArL^ei)ih eBii) 4 . 

gf^i f I 

JPjKp SQffirLiisirL^eop^eitflmjpuhfSaiFfripLLtr^^QirAd* 

» TqT g r w ^ ^»^ ^ ii 

^lip utemLme6p^«fi^jpi «/r<dBr (Ss^/rmpiars 
Srii 9< 





j^KfB S^O'iruisirL^eo^fi^eirjpi iBi^SuBio 
Ltirst tSsrij 2^. 

g sraiw^piitn^ H 

Qnp/£IA(^jpis^ tQirdo 9- 

(Sa^trkpLLireftr p^i(^LL 

0Lb %® Lj(T^sup^jgiisnu.(U M^^iuireujp. 

3 ^rFTRnf^ ^nir 555 ii 

LjQ^sup^^unL^uj jifmSirui eQirso 9. 

(oUfT^SO <9^mLCUU^, 

5 i I 

^irsar(S nQ^^p^<k(^ih /v@ 4^ lujineu, 

^mA q^qcTR qqsq^ ii 

LjQ^euih Seirih Strio 5 * i ^ 0 cbi mSsQtio pro’ll) tumeu 2 * 

?IFT *I«nTn^ I 

Li(7^euiB(S€B^6irjpiLh ^^tusrreuira ^eiriiiSinp 

3u/r(Seo 3iru^ji^3si> Qfs[ni^]fB3u9(7j^uu^. 

«mR 1 ^^: II 

[(^s8)/D0si/3Byr ?] ^mptnrih tumeu 1. 


t '?rr^<TO^’fin%'Tr5RRi^i 


46 






<#1^ qiSR I 

, ajpidIffilSm/BirirQfih m^flQ&VflQpih luoneu 6 . 

f>ww o T^ l 44t ; I 

6sji^tBifi6S(^€8)L^aj u/rir4=€uiBa9S(Sso Qm/ek^eir 
tSariLtrmui tumeu 6 . 

^r g f^ ^ «rT i 

^imrt II 

£AQuft€oeuirfiid ^eo^i(ouireosuir/f €0 jUfirji^^i^arT 
S(jj^^iutrfiic Qis fl^ffirSQ^^sfiiiui spiSuuTm, 

%aW5Rrtf3r ! I 

tuir(Sflir 0 ^Vf.en QeueirSsfr 

Q^frsira^eufr^, 

5|^sW KWVWS 5 11 

(SiSji^jr,TA^^^(S^ Qeumhstr €Bffiu9(Ssi> u/r^ajmeu 
u^trfi^iTLb &€uii^(r^uu^. i^(S(Seu Q^ffSiir 

LbsArL^eo iBiruntessrih lueneu 1. 

d^BlfNwpt g 11 

^)0iL/<na/(i9M &C-tf.Qeoiimjpi mOGa/ 
u.tou>(rmijgi. 


47 



QmeSeniL [^Qfiii^] iSffLofrsarth tumeu 1}. 

«T«r: qapT ^ 51554 *pni. || 

^sfOLniLfU) tumeu IJ. ^qdlo Setrih tusnoj 18* 

^i l 4t r 5 T t %I 1 5TqT5J?If^ 44?^ I 

eBirio 2^. 

^rrl’iwrw 44?^ || 

QiLSsnubSio Qpif^exj (Ufioe/ 6. 

8nT;q?{*T^ i 


ipgsTRf i 

SffiQisiraQstn' ^^fiiuirSio airji^Q^fSirs^Ln/rih. (Sibio 
QKK'iQesr ^ffiuJirQdo ^u^jffsArt^trui, uirn-meu^^^if^ 
iuirSlio jifi/s 8ir/riLeua‘Ss^i(^ uijfi Kir^opmu^trii. 

^mstuirCSto eu(^ii^iLfU) QsQffr^^^irs d9ffitnaj^ 
Qfiufua’^, 


i8 




?Rr: i 

(Sis^^ireoai^imih ^uui^J^QrirweB aireuSlmireiJK^esani 
Gl^g’^souut—(riS^p^. 

H Fl ^^ 'ig ga i nti 3 ? rr <* T Bi^ ^ II 

i^/rSaiTLiL^/i^dr Ljpu^LSsir eS^piraih iusa>€u 18* 

^ HtqRwR 

KQeQ&opfririli lusnsu 9. (BirSatrQfieo ^S&opirtrLD 

aj€neu 4J, 

^fl'3fl3?i5 STRTP^ 3 a?r^ *iH 11 

Qui^ipLLuf^Af QLLS^pir^s^i(^ (S^irs^QujArjpi 
Quiutririb, (SsBT^uSssl^eirjpuh (tpik3jgpisa>L^uj ^iSlir 

ffiiamLb Saea % 

-nfiNTR^ ?n< i 

fffrS^iri^L^iBS(^m(^^u>eo ^eBf)d50 eO&opTirih lustnsu 9. 

?rqi^*R*TR 3 «TWig2^ ii 

KirBrnirLfL^p^m ^esrih tumeu 1^. 

8J<(^^< T?f «TRT ?rri^?l?PW I 

ntrS^frji^^ira p^ssr (^jpi^^uurun lu&ndu 7j- 

’?wq«r 3 5id^ gi ii 

mttmirpjfi€uif^itir^9ih (ucs>q/5. LjL^LLirmjp ^€u&nfri 
QssireAi^nLjSufrQeo 

48 

a 


'dwwenaiti^ i 


^<S 0 §}0uujfi, 

5ra[5r 5 «ii^ II 

§)ir€ArQ fl$/reitvT^^€u/rar^jpi(^ ndhS^^iLjiuirih 
«0ir& 1 • isesrth lUGneu 1. 

3<i^^w^filR l ic| 3«^ ^ I 

Kir&oirjSiPsu!Tff(am$fidr /9(Si9^^s0 LjeL^airQuiarjpi 
Quiuairui, 

qw^wa? srRTUT saqjRj: 11 

LfL^€n)’^^^if^^'2so iSmjpiih /sirm/raSdu) luenmi 1. 

»!NW riFTpli^^TO I 

(Sa/r^/Shiaui lumeu 1. 

euiTtu 0 ^'A 0 ^€frLD ^ireo 4 ^, 

Qui^ifiiLisf^m a(BuuiruLf iueif>€u 8^. 

uiTuLf euTuS^/nsmL^tu ^eiriLetreuira ^mL^Ji^€0 
O(^auiini90uu^ . 


60 





^LD£^ifBU^t^^(Su^eo u/refi sstfrii lumsu 1. 


qi^ ?i^t5?R5rPRnc. II 

QiL^ifiiLu^SSea euBsrrii^ J^ti^ &.^lL®,S0 
^etr (Ssnr ?) eutrSQ^uu^. 

arer^qq ^rr «rq^rsFT cd^q^i. I 

3(^lgiLi^m SiutrUi {um€u 18* 

qqrf^Rn^ rft fesRm 1 ii 

@Q^fitL.u^^ ^^jSiTJu^ eQir^ 1 lusntu 1. 



Sof^iLi^eir uireQmm lumeu 1^. S^QmirsQ 

u9q^uujp. 


5 ?rnt«rsqqg«q% ii 

Co/L£>A6i/riij«O«.rLl-g5)L-«0 (oLnio 9 l/s^lL(S e^tuffiii 
lu&neu 1 ^. 

( %/^aT^R l < i i<hKqiw 5yq i 4q)i0i<;^ | 

euirmiuiLfa^J^u.ira SS^^iQairmi^uu/Bir 

a^Q«<uaiT«Br. 


^^ir^^vS\drjpiui (Suiiia/iriusQairu.JiBu. nir [i9 ?j 

^rdo 2}. 


61 





SLjS^^eSeirjDiLh euii^ih iu98>€u 8 ^* 



^iTHLb ^irei> 8}« ^(3^ 

/BUi/ru90tju^» 

9pJ|5P6r5*Rit 5 I 

^/i^uBQeosffi^kjpith 40 nQ 

^nii) 10. 


fmR«T tn^Wlgor vm, ii 
t?n?T ?rt: I 


^ ^ «0 jgp/ da) L. (U . 

If. @^ii0'''2(X)5V 


,Oaj^jpfU) 

PdQtuerrtoijU) Q^irdosouuL^ir 


%?nf *hU|«l-MN 8?RTt II 

siremeB^fr<sti>Lh iu&d&j 18. 

jfmfiof/i^ir^^eifitirjMih Qilso Q^^iLfuJTUt tummi 18 . 


69 





aimjB^eir (Simo aJS lumeu 9* i3«jr^^ G)«:fl0a9 

jfiimQetr iS^ireiutireu^, 

II 

Sifi [diirmr*]uispth tu^eu 17 * 

Sffidi arsm uik^^^siiBeirj[»LD sir^m^sm(Si Senih 
tBirio 4|} 3(oip Kir^ieuja (= Q/BiriB(^su^). 

9,4qigdff s^iwT ^rn^f^Pir qw ii 

sir^^ (tfippsArQu ujnjLj eQireo 1 , iSlppeini^m 
uouL\ Sireo IJ. (^(yippsiirQ~(y^ekjgiuekefrpoihr(Sly id^^onr®- 
i9ar^m€n- fsem®). 

4 l <it<ll*^^B*T ( Wgf SRTRVr^ 5Rt: I 

^ 0 ‘eitr® psAri^eir aesrih eBjreo 

sn^yRR ^qi?r ^ ii 

§}irm® p€Ar®i(^ih ^mu^uBeo Sffio 4|. 

StAft^d^uujp. 

5 I 

sirfieo «rM«o/r ^ojiTQfiLDira «9jr^ ^0iucnfiu [(^mpiu 

10 ] {^pirmja ^irii 9 ; luestai 7 -) 

l^'q^Nswffe fegof ft II 


68 




^iwf /^w«sikicRri^*: II 

^nfe 5RT+ ^ II 

iftjf *^g^i 
W<Jiw RWKHWlt^kii<l6d*t. II 

^5Wrn?iS[??ifrti a?Ptro«i^Hm?i§ I 
g cra^t II 

^IFTI'?: SgjfN^*^ 3*Ti«T 

iHTJT ^ 5§§ II 

iSJfNw m ?rn5<iMi5<!J*i I 
^i»j,«iii sf5»iragN Jft# ii 

3 ^d<f«dHr* I 

dWK I » l S^*<M II 


* 'ars?r«ife fi ?iTRr' ftfcT fe y R w ?T s : t '?ra: ' ^fir ftm- 
?mra: I § ' aFJPrer^TTJPF’^ Ri»M<cw qig; i V a g <Bmkffi^ 3 
fffT«i«i!qr^ qq’fin^ i 1 1 g g qs qi l k ft rf ^ ftiw<Hm«: i 

§§ >q>7feq»i^<l ft t ww qrati ** nff q qatti 

q^w^ r fclqwT i g ^wHE^^nf ipRss’f^nwI^wirajnn^ii 

atirf i qi^N^Tg qif»< T N* ?5n»« i’ i 


64 



II 

qt 5 gi^ wmm ^ % i 

?n^?flilif^ ^ qrea^l^ f ^ ! ii 

q > i»qi«si^q> [^y#] qngif* ?imf^(Rit) 
qr^^ftjTRT ^wrf^g^ncr^ II 
g qeqsqrag^icn^. I 
qw^qwf^^rr® g ii 

jfrfiRj^ g ?nt5*r%^ + i 
g II 

qi^Pw^^TPt g l^i%7D^ si^ ^?g5T i 
g?^ ^ ^nrrw^ ?Rt4wT ’qg4qg.ll 

«?qt <KftHlTh qr45qrag<5ifdg i 
qi%i¥irqi^i?sJ g ^RRnqg^UdgJ ii 

g q i^l^SW i q WfHddg,^»l (4»tdH. t * | 
^q^ai i ^^ifei g JT^ qi^ qg II 


ftiwwma: I t *8nft q » <^q>! ^ Tr^wrrainfreqft’ ft t w^w - 
qrs: I 1 1 'qmqql^qW’g "rr^ 5 flRgfir: i’ fl% few r fR «ns; i 


56 




3TW^<ERri«l%<^: I 

^stI II 

«i|W4NWIHhiW II 

qf^ sftq ?tT%*nf5qi;, ii 

qs ^i'at^^P ra 5 ?n^5qf^ ii 

jftq g?5PT qn% Jftqrll I 

qi03^ qq ?fRj ^%q ^g^ii 

ft«NM<SJ«iqt ^§ I 

ft«w « q ig**q>^ ii 

w»(r-^wq i 

«qq Plf w ^ T ^ f S TOii ^ H 

* ' I f "sfuf g tq qr^^g 
qlcT ftiw?R*ni5: 1 1 

qis: « § ‘fturqqrfeqsrafH’fir ftiwwfw: i •* 'ftitRrarriW- 

l?r ftW I <m T 8 : I 1 1 ftww»l l 8 : I 


66 






% *R05»^ [3#] «l8RRII*noT?TJ I 

g T «w fq w6S ^ TO q ^g* rf ^g rg >3 . (?) li 

5Ri ^RJ?rn«5TI3R!5<^ I 
f^w<g i > i R g i ^ jRifq^ II 

Kq^Jiqffslw I 

?p*r^ 3 5 *trt %g qgjjpc. I 

Hl«>wgw sifluf^ II 

snfiiiRfiFn?^ i 

<l^|*^j<iair>qw 5Trf5l^ fl^RR 1 II 

8rf^ qvnw^ni. i 
?rrl8?rf33**^* ii 

^4tS 3* Tl fg*(> I 

WKWiHui i ^ fet^irg^npni. ii 

fetl< n « l (^f^<«>*W<|WWWd »T^§ II 

I ?R«feTh®r»n# 3 *»3» wt’ftfir fiiJTOinns: i 
§ '«NI)tv9iir sfs [#*] ^ 3 «n^«’l9)f}r ftw wwta : i 


67 






3 *ra*fR I 

<^? q g^gww» t q n «w q a*q> i ii 

ijmwwl^ra 3 *1^ I 

^ fn^prNr 5 11 

,,d6/r<oV 8^. jiyS^saL^iu ^so/sfiCosc 

^LLi)j0^L^uSl^mUmtu un^muar^^. 

sqRi 1 

jlllLti 9 ^Mfiirffih d9/r^ 7i‘ 


»iR!g»^, II 

^LLlLj ^«\'/irP^a<l)L-:U iiimjg^LL 

(’t^scih LLa'Uien)SiHMii S(j^uu^. 


^,rjiiUisAlL^S\ tOwfifTlTU^ 00 4i. 


Mt0 


?n^*Tn|g iERTf^ *f 5 T 1 ^: (| 

L909k^L^^frjfjtB^ m^ih ^Qir^ 2i. 

gi’hpnfg ^RR ^ngRof^jfRPRjj, I 

Sitrji/ LLsAnL^s)i> S^tru oOir^ 2}* 


* 1 ^ 3 n 

nQJi^u. uirira-aiiBSMifijifiUi LupjpiQp^m ^l^ib 
^^6040 ifLmtrsfQfiuturiir. 


58 





*»wrf^ iwRr i W^9ws4^ ^- 

?TjrNn:r «»9 rt goon q^inonr: j^iw. i 

l^w* I fiMi^gyPNfl «wR.i «?w- 

#PT*TRif^wi.i *rs*nni.i ?T^^Nt?f|5m»nii 

!jww f ^w i i (arnw gr) graif- 

m, I ?T^gf?r 

I 


g^rmwfSRt ^ I *iw 

^R«5li5p1^rai#5q'ii^ qwjfsPT i < f Rft<t^^*^^^ - 
J | NSfl»fi l «KISWKM«l«(? l( ^«h^«< ; I <7RRg(^WRnfr 


MiisiwH, I 


69 




I R cT fe T j<a m mftrlWRft ^ 
arf^PRft swt^f g w i *? 3 «sg$ 5 nf - 

^ I qg g[^t | pgw I 

I w t ^ < |Rl^<^8<^<nifg gT \ 

I I I 

« T lgf<taS(^ T ^ ; I I I 

3 ?^iy^: qari^: i i inpi i 

I 


*TRT^ I IIR aRf OI ^^ ^T R MRfllOigqqR 

<iwn 5 nf^ I 


3 n*n*Rpra <0^**<R< ^ ^<f >i ^«f i ^<h i: i %iri 
5 nt 5 *iRr fiN i ifi^ 113^ ?R 

jRi®iFT t ^ sftw sRp»^ \ gira^rag^^igf^- 
gs^ftgsuFRqi P^«flR 4 ftvBfilPlJTH ^ 1 

J1I5R 5 Rt qftoTf^ Ri tRr<fwft^ ^t Rr ot w i ^ 
I <<R ' qewwRp >fit I 

‘ ' 3 ?^" ’TRHRUI 


60 




?T^ inwif^: I *raw ^?i?ti^i 



;Gmitiign;ximEii!^^t.'LMEii:ii:iLE^iKim[.HL^iLima^u 


5Rn^ I I tg T ^<w)< - 

it?r%5n^’^^^iT®rRi5^i*R^5n^ i ^^^f?W3^Rf 

I ft^u^^??ioifi?g<njrl ^ 5R?n^ i i T ^ T k^ tg ^ i- 
I ^rrr^Rl eH?n%5T i ImnTt i fg^Hi 

qg RT f t q I ?rnHRT i f^^iort ^ ^%si 

(isn^ i ?R3P^Ri»N>?n^ i %«rt M^«hji^M - 
i ^#5r®3?Tr|3g^ i 

»rKTO I 







^ Ii55»w q?!Nw 



Wt«ll 4»«<tll *z^l sftWT Mwlil- 

*mPTWri% I ^ ^ ^TBRpr ^-. 

^32q4s?r^ Fnr^i?!WR^«qvri^5r!i#?T, 

?RJTr^ >m|j«9 

W#?T <itHi^^ r ijg<!^ fUfrf&r 

q^g^rw q r ^q g q^q ?T?nt 

?R*nT g®^, ?Rqr^ 

gqf^ ^ m*TR^ 

^g< f ^ ffiq^ »r^- 

iTKT WR^i 5R»Ti^ 8?rf5j q?W^ 

?Rin?^5?^ l^:i5iq?TR^ ’TOi'srw/^ i 

^^qJrRJFTT^ gsTF^T qJT ^ ?RR^Rl||f gftt ^ 
?i^ *rqRR*n5rrf&r gWt Jir^rfoi# ^ 5 - 
jfq ^?qir qr 1 

wr^raw qwrgji 

;TRnqw "ar vm- 

tifgsR^ sTRrm Sfiw«T^l g ?n »4tw« i i"ff qif», 

68 





i'lWRT IFW 

33W«r5ii^,3rPTO 
3T||ix!i<#rBff55, («ren5® 

^0 8i*i »r«ra!i?r- 

anf q ^^Hq «Tr»§^ I 3/^^- 

»Ti5*Rft srn^W: qr^ srfg'srjigsqjHl 1 

*Tt^ 3^ «i4»if^<Kiqid^»i%>4mwffHi ^ » r g T q;q 
q5f*si5*<i^ I j^:qr^ qfSRf^ wqr^ sfhfirqr^? 

«fterq- 

^»arF*Rn^ rRi^fdF?#^ I «TRPRqh5%rqw 

i[^q*qwRp^ qj^ ^rrf^ 3TRR?^iqft i it«irjjt 
4i | gg T fi!fei^w ^« nf ( qi^l^qRai^^iw ?Fq«q»t 
^srp^T: qr^^lwt qrfwrt ‘q wf q?r ?) qspq^r?^ 1 q^- 
W«RRijj!^qn«RnT ^ qg ^ f g sqif® 

q^R qpqgfl 1 

aWRT gqqpr q# 1 trepiW *#q*qRR*l8Ifg- 
gwflqiqjfqiRRrt gqf, qifs, «niq- 

WRq qqt^qifg, RFrawnwir- 

W*q*?lt qqnfSf, q^ iWri^WRK swi^, qw^wtn 



3 T w t wq r «ii % (^ : i 


^gqt4«l <wrfg, 


3?e{i^R!^ qan|?j, ^a<yg , 

3T||BP?RqBff^, sffqsrw 
Mi^ i p<n4«j qiw4^t >Tr»t, 

wR^t »?*igq*?R ^ s805r^ I 


ffir irPNr: to: ii 


«nT 5ra^ I ^«ni^- 

* i q»pa”fr^ > ^5^ 

?IFR* 32 Rr, 5R5R 1^, q4lwa<f«, 

^Jitnn f3?TRf i^qwF T ^ g r ri ^ lf^ i ^ siiHiRrqqi/^«hsr4l- 
^qnp, ^ [ <i5fa« T qng f5iwf^ 

3iy ■^WffWWm , m ?n^TO3?f®, MWW 

jqp, ?FrRnnf5nw 

TO?f^, dNt qqrf^q!qwipr,3Frrfiwr wwri^, «p 
*Jqfl^qwFf, qrf^sp ?wwt 1^ WRl I 


64 





«w iwp>t I *i*nf^, 

?8^RrF^ asif#, (i^m fNmt) tf aCa ri yg 

snt Ite:, I8?T:^?Wt^s^ sw l^ailfg , 
Sl^l|5i?T^, ^ «u?41«<!Ih’, gq t fr H T >*i>iftj , 

(9?5lf^ ^^T^'WJjRW ?) HWWBT- 

'df#, antr: q^ 

•qgftaRqf^, R qftWK^ ^- 
3Tf^, w(^mt (^qn^O q|^- 

f#, ^fiiRwKq g i^^f g, qjiSiteT 

swr^%#, '»i^<ijiq8if^, 5r|R«q%irt ?raT^, srt- 

<wf^ qrfW^^n^^iw, (qi^iffel^- 

BwiH H’‘q*ii^, 

(^HWIMl»ll (’ i>q»l , qiPlf&qilf^RR (^, q>( ^ 8i q|8W 
ih4<iwH i 8 i g i ^«iq ’ ^<qP ( ^Vfg i q ( l^wit, (^ ^) 
asnfi^i gfgR«r ^ sEn^Hmjsj, 

»if^pp8r *83#, ^ ^n^qouw, 


I 


65 





8llX<hl^ 8 l^|WquCl , ?IW^- 

j^qg^gq^rif^ arpq^q^iwfi^iinf^, fip^- 

*wqt, ^r3$5PT#, *rsqqt s ra li^^mi , amq# 

gRSFig, a?BR^, *r«iqt qtg^nwi, 

3nwl «*»iiA'hi<j«w4 ?n^^3®^jnnir, wq^ 

SRSiw:, qif ^if/^^i^qj sr^pw, 
Hmq?q>K^q m, ^wq# 3smr, 
sram, qri%?5ra5T ^1^, tPram gq^^pnw^- 
q?#>r, 3?w!f^, *#r3p«?ra^?qpi »TI»t, 

iWl^r 5q|^, qif«&ig^l^^ fiJqgN^* 


^ 51^ (5rtni, 

{w^ «rr ?) qj^ftqn^gPi^M- 
«n^, *i«(qif5qwt 

qftgr, TOtftwi INff 

TP^\ gqWif fit^, «F5RW§ wp*^, 









*i4 5R5RwW J!«i5Run^i 

'RSR ^wiHoy^, n^^t: qpS^- 

tci<5,Wift‘WM'nl S^RP?^, «h«Dif^*riif^wi<i<ili4 *IW, «t^RRTK 

m^, wil/5l4^q*iioT, ?fl%PTr^r«l^?ra «rt- 

< T 4 o!rq? * T ^4 , 5R^: qwlHnCt, ^ q?»T, srrf^qsiqq- 
«n^F^ JTri^qnJwip^^, »M- 

?prf^>^, g«q»Rgq^l?#T, feqq, *i«t- 

<^^sir^q?R.,anTl%^ ^,32^5p> 
g2W8T5^, qq^rmpRiri^ f^«qR^hRreqr 
H l f^«B i gd^i fWT <»W #3fta2 fl!^- 

qtat, fi^wr ^n^qqftesrr, 

^ I ’mKi 3^ ^iferqqi- 





%n4»Tr i «w^r- 

5q^H|« ftiJUlWd 

m ^mrnm ftgop^, ?m^re*w, 

?nW, ?T|5w wfW, 

(?) *T^Rfj05*Tf^, »T^«irwi>f^«RRr 

^ WSgRRT, 

%1RI^ (?) ^I^R13*J^ qi^raiW, 

qp»W ?n^wRTr, qr^ ^^qr, q»^i?ipq^ ^34qf^wK i 
fl^u i Ndi , wfgRwi mqqRi irr <iyi qiWiqeff- 

q#T3g4qqf4ft?cfRr:, 

qpftfi qiwqi^i R tq^q t gq r : qr^ qi^^«f%*TT qq- 
ft«qiq^CT i, f4*q^ qwqprar qg^qftqrM, #Srs«fr 
*K«4qi® qpn^qqs^, qi^ ?«iMlr 
ftqt mqq qt ^q r i E qi^ I «h«6*i«K»?r ^3*. 


68 





*1# >n*t (?) ^ jfkRw 

JWPW’gW cFT^S«W^ a tr gfo r wPMi^l - 

H*iij | g ^inR i O 5ff- 

qfl^ »qfgwd^t^>i (?) 

*IR5|^ sftSfT 3^ I q >og! « pg i^^HII*ldl8«h) - 
^(?) <Kfe^*« T *d ^hnM*Trf^ 5ra4 ^^s- 



p, ^^nv3% 

aroi^ ^RgRg *Nnn^f 

«l^5I*n^, <i^ll<3Ml^»l<h<^ w- 

^ fim **«f 

^rapr wmjTifrt <i^^r(^ ^ ?fHig^ w- 

«ra*w w%ii9 w^waivi: rwi 


68 . 



mi 5T«nf^ gi^ jpst 

fl!*jprtr f# wrr 

ftWW‘ ^ «RWl5BTg® ’Wf# !Rjg?{ 1^. flt»T- 
^rrf^ i^qp^jRiftegipnlif^ 
w^ n fewT ’ s r f^ : f^f g *w w 

^?I5^ ^cRW QI«TWR «R f|W 

5^ ^ S?lf^ Sflfttfeon^ 

snf^j ??rf5ni^ &vfig | «4q»f^jiit 

oqi#4 5^^ ^rHhwig^ i^rct m JtRR g«^g»i 
?R?R^«Tlt IWSpRIOT 

fiRf 5rf3»T08?5^NF*r s??^»ir qT»5^ ?5i«ng 

(ltHtjn^<<<TP><g T R rf ^ 18^ ^Nj*f *»wmpf $r qpWKf^ 

(?) m i8st|i^ >iaRqt«off 

Hg q l lptt ^S g qi(*KiK 

?i5jr ^ragw ^ fiwKtw- 

^tiwi8<4^ftwKW s^igpfw sflm *w 

spH^I H i ac t < <g wt < ^Nfrt4 > kf^» « l (»lM>A: 9MIWii«(f 


70 





^ g ra n< r « i w4*^i^a- 

4lrat ^#r, H4sqHp« T *«i i ^ (W}%, ?Rn^?rewRir 

f j ^nv^s r i i^Ri® qif«6nn5t ^ ^ 

^ ^Rl^ I qi^ 1^ I ^ gsqtR 

5?ispl M ;q>pffwt>ar «?qT 

^ fi«R»#iir^oT ?Rqj^ ^trra^ I uppM- 

^isjTf^ sr tsm i gq?qr 


snfrtii^t qsgyj II 


71 








APPENDIX C. 


II II 

^TRR 5rrPt q^rft% i 

g anpr 'ft i 
«TR 5 f^g 'TRf m ?rpf *n«iia*Til%^fii ii 

M g^q^Hif^d*!. I 

arwif ^wiif m ?«rR% g ii 
arraft ?^Ri5T ^ sTiw^ g 5rw^ i 


1. «Rr fftcTRt ge er» n Ft « i Rl fl»fl(l|iwiftq|««s^- 

q ^ »prag ^w t «i!iwi- 

*W!ir5m^^i I 




^ ^ q o g^w ?RRip|| 

II) 

»nm^ ?3[?i^ I 

•v 

g TPT qgl qg ft^^ ^Jif^lofi^sirgqij n 

qwra% II 

'RS I 

^ WT^T ^ < rr * !qTPTW « f t? T gii ii 

«rr«r 

gy r ^ qg ft gr ^ i 

w fiHi ^f|f«ir g% qRT “sr ii 

WFRfX' ^rFEnT *T3Rf I 

^^^g i » = < T W* T q i ftsrrj I ii 


*rft?rwRi "ft?TPWr: wrt’ 4inK|wpi.i 
\. fii8*<w><irt«i I 





q?rw #r tor i 

«nPr II 

^ wr^«i^ ^5Rr3fRra5*Ti^i^s«wr i 
^TR ^ wTf 3^S«IgT || 

5^ ^ *Tfe m& I 

?*nWI cwr 5rl% wm R*th<h. l 
3?^ Ptot ^ ««fi!fl?q'^a[|*l, II 
ggf^ I 


MW^wr ?wr 3^ ^pi g i 
^?5F5flf ^?cl^|5*F5RIWl II 

^gj^f ^ ^ qRnfw f^i 

3 «iR > pn fi ^ fl^rrjl | 

^qw ?Frlj «f^RR5l1|^: I II 

(gqRq#qiFitr qaR^qrferewq?!^ II) 


^ti i q^jq q g pTi Pl ftlRRTrqst TOi 
^ ?«ifgqi^^ II 

1. q*wr a rtqrf i l g r ^w a Hgx^^^qwq^ 






«re«s«rr g ^ g r ^f^rew^ r g qi ^ ll 
tTFTt g 

•K^ g *rw 5 ^ I 

g *r3i^ g li 

q i ^* T f g Jflrli I 

arraw wRq» qrf^ qn^rffeRiqq^i^ii 

(gsRt^m^r ( ^‘ q^q iR^' g qnd^ II) 

Rhww t qi?Tri^ gl^ f^qq|/iW)^i 

iRqqsf ^1^ ^ II 

?5i«qq»«Jr i 

^ i ^qgOR l ^' ^ « ft^^^n | qiRii>\ ii 

%q!»Fqg9?^^g5ni^ 1 

(?) II 

5(iPm«ani \. ‘?r^rjpr’ ffir nR r doqq. i v. 'm«i^«if<)|f^* 





gt r ^g r p^ #? f^g ^R qf^i T is ^T n 

(%5qR5RHrf^ II) 

snwrf^ fTSfpr: R^5re<j fiSR^ i 

(tg^^^i^i*< g Naii^iTi4iMi^ II) 

f^«IW*K^ »R5R5R^rgiS^: I 

W3^1 ^ 5!FT ?f^or5?5rit: || 

qi^ =5r q^glhr qm^r: i 

?p?n^iFr 5T qiW wi^r I ii 

qi^ ^ 9TRR»ft I 

sl^'qt^qiMi^^ ^ q;^ 5Rq qii^ct^ii 
qn^^sqqj^qf «n^ ! i 
w Tre ^q^H^q ^ w^q^lq^ i dqiH^ , ii 

( ^*i i i^qd q m^ ^sg^To lO 

^ ^ q^ qqJ *Tfeqq«r irfr: i 
nW * g R ir ^j1 ^iqffl< l q i w^ ; ii 

(^5?i;iDq?r II) 

1. qjqqq^ Pr ^ r q qi ^ ’ iiMq^l^ i wdX xnrqsen^ftftr 
ftq^fqqLi ^ x- ‘*fiq»pn^q(?t 
q(q«wm i 


6 





q?rra% ^ ^iwg sragCf ft a ^N : ii 

»T3%: II 

qRTffWdW’ 

5ire3g5R^f^ I 
STFTRR jfrmSdNl^- 
■ ■ 1 1 
<HISk!Hl^f ‘W 

^ ^ ?«rFT*^. I 

|in?RRT fll^ »nn^ 
dHl<i d smrt^ II 

%- 

ms t <l»ftw<>d«l<t^ l # l «l1 I 

R t ^<i*i(4^mwP l »^< fT q > gwi«h^4i*^WdH, n 

1. ^rfiRTHi^ I g T < PTr %g i4: t 


6 




I 

^ ^ qswrR iRHsnr i 

II 

?i«rf#nT (^ ^ gailr 1 ii 

...^ ^ ^ ?f«m 

^ ^ S*w II 

#lt ^ g*f^ W^RR I 

(^R«R^ q«f2i[5l|w<l^ II) 

M 5T«ni^ ^ ^ I 

*n^ anorrerqRf ?Rr ii 

«rR*RT Rli^^w i 

(<^H^w«^l II) 

qiw^rrawRr- 


qif»w ^ I 

qg qwyq ^t 

q i qq>q f ^q <^; qig ^^^ rpti ii 



q igf»< i «jL I ‘»qi^fir qTgwRUi 


X. * P^q q qq ^R r q :* i:(% qqrqt? » 


7 




I 

’TRn^5W q^i 
*ii<; : i*{< T g ^ ^ wsfvfm, tl 

(?KqHoi?r II) 

^TsnoRfir: I 

Jl^d*ii4ls^*iP^*i«hl»^ I 

»r3fg?tr II 

WB I 

srwit ^l*qf <i«3<j«cfliif«Jiif|j^ II 

^ ^IPfT 3i^5»F?r WPCT i|ORW<*»*i I 

(f^Rq^ qjp^Rf^riwrr^J ||) 

an^^sT ’ ff r q iF f « i r^< i g ri l^q<i, 1l 

mwi^«is[.qqi>i^f«i'3r*^<!j f^g i ^g*iP) i 

wnsRofrsw^r: q w i R T g^q f ^a^ gq ?) ll 

^qTB^^Rr: I 

H i ^>><wq > ^^^ q w^w iftPFH. I 
5RWIVIRreW -MTh^lOllf^MH, II 
^. ‘^' B<?r wni: I 


8 




^ ^ ^^?nK5'S5R5R’^ 

^RRT 11 

^i^isn^nr: I 

«nt^^ ^ ffelt I 

w«im mvfifiJi 2RF?T wmi ^ i Rkj i &w41% II 

(fipTlHW^II) 

»T^ II 

(«rt»»wP9Rfl6|t II) 

*T: g^(hl«ilUKU4(h44Uf^«fl- 

^R>^’«Wfonf^ I w. II 


a 


9 


^ ’WJ « ft^ gwa ^ ^«T%?y 1 il 
9(^8«1UImR|: I 

g ft g F » gr ^TftR g«®raT^5PKn^ i 

»T0t^ W II 

II) 

m mwii o ft I 

f^^^qgwn j|<ciiiu'qa^ g * » *^tg^*^<* ^ ^g*^ n 
^xfRig fi|5|^ q i ^if^t t *n^q»mg | ^g ^ i 

(«rt»F*?»5Rfnft% II) 
ftw<iqf> m q f ^ : i 

qw i y^ fci<^ i ire ^ reO ^n^qiw: i 
ftif srwir ii 

<iMt» ' iQ> qi: I 

♦ 

ft»iiiui^«h4^'i!ajtqi*R 

»qref q55q^ ^ •iiui«Kfe«bM?0««i<lP^w^: (?) i 


1. RRt I 


10 





aftaifr w 

(ft?nq5*rat^ II) 


TOrfl^ ?qrfr «h<wqw < ^ q g i 

*h*i*«N*ft% II 
(«fl*FHRfRc4^ II) 


q^Plfilqr: I 



^ qfRC.ll 


^q^qnmql^: i 
qp3qq5rf^q»RRi^: i 
^fll*qCr qwsftqjfk: II 


^nrqqfif: I 

q^I^NfRc. I 

»flwT qSrtRc. II 

X 

— . ■ ■ . J - ■■ ■ ■ 

1. ffir wri i ’i. “"nwrlirt^ fura; i 


11 



I 

(fshiTPK**^ II) 

sraiFi^iWJ I 

Pr^gw q ll ; 

qRn^rrowF^c^ i 

mi^tt(mf t nf^igN<unfi i igi<w> II 

(«ftir»?s5R?5TRit II) 

^tgS^ qRiT|^ *Tl?W5qf?RP^ I 

(*?»5Rt»?P?l II) 

qwnf^ qRgswRW?. i 

sTfi l 4 ^|Srg <ifi i ^i^w4l^ II 

(•fNR^mRwR H) 


12 



*R®pf 5 ^ i 

g ?i^ i 

qWt wrrsw gj%: II 


i T ulqM ’ Wi^W ; I 

^ ^ «n»RRiRR#*rw i 

?i^ q^g: q^TR^ <o«t«*h: n 

<l4,f | ^iq^^ R^lftpRRq;: | 
whft Rtji^ g ^u^twigq^q;: ii 
?r^ ?[0^iq^ aRSqPR^ I 

?Hi5ft R i uN i q ^ ^ ^ iniq!<iiqi; ii 

*fMr: qfti^r wf' i 
^>^^qw| j f r ^ g^Nqr: ii 

?NNl^oiTq^ ^ % SR^iqqi; i 
g f ig Kil^ ^ in«?#«re II 

(^?i?nn?r II) 


1. Rl^qRRI ffil I 
19 









W ^giS^ ^ 

<f i a f q g pii< ! iHiniT f w ^^gg T Rft iT rwr *n^r 

^ ^ fJif^Ri^ l*inT 

^3|q(aiT|^si?«*)0«<5M<*l*i<<<h«J«J»!jfiild^W TOloigW^- 
g^ag^ ^ranw •^g^'H 
^|5C ^(^WT fi ig <a an^ i 


1. 

»praW ^wwsi Rt f f w l wB«w«HiiP i Htpwnrinf^n# i ?rtl*niT* 

at5P?PRRT |pw[ftftr . j<iq i *ia lar- 

aw 1 fina^ * ffir 


8 


17 





fcfW #TWFW 5*TRW Wf^*R^\*i*iM^«- 

sRn/^^Rmrf ^ <%te»fl?PT ^rat, «n5r 

^ l%f^5?!»ftspr ftrcrt^Fi?^'* I ^- 
^ qitr wr «rr^i ’pj '^[feorsngfrRflsT 

3^iw qi5»5r 3jTg5n#r ?rqii?5flFifw[«n*Tl^^ l^w re wi »w >c 


1. qtfy i wi T gff c « ta t «BjtP i w i if>[wfi» WT q ^ 1gg> mfr I 
X. mrvifpart < i ^« w O ;r fi lf « 

V. */i i ^< r w pT rq^1sq\ snfer i '^. qqimvfis^ft 

»n q > v». igw^f^ qqgqq p wV 

»?ft *n <. qft«r ifir (|iit^ i 

%. qf|i » wig^<^K« r fr »wiH^wgw r wi*^ ' H%«ignK<t' 
atg<$fe< ro^ V qf*^ ff m g< i»t ft wwi«< r qff gwt i 


18 







g’P’TRsiwrt^ *i!5l^«im<i«il ^ i 

^ 

^i233o*Tn«n (%f^‘^y'«.i«rt'» 

^R^WRf«rt< I 

?R^R5f^*IRPRf ^ *rR*J 

^te«n?RR.i 

s?R;#wrt ^|5R«R «rhp?rR«iR. | 


1. msiwTiH I wfRf>8fitHi(i < Ri <ngRroti 

\. mRWim 

%i^r • K. ^R <^ r ^^sftR^ *r i \. ir w^i( 4^4 " ^ 
RRtiWfR^^I '».SR<lwnftfir qiSRIRtl 
R^?if??ft‘8qw^iwrT’ftRfir^ iRfti.s. qranwRi 


19 




^ ftgw «Tr f?wi| 

?*?nwwt g^pnw g«RTff ?nTl3onf^m*ij^i nw^- 

fiM ^ gg TJti d^ ^ I 

«rNRRqflt I 

^ #TRR *1?^ I <fl?WRRr •flgSgr 

q ^T i^q^^c i ^feuNK4jNH«i«<wm<*if - 

iR*m«<iw 4»< ^ifWR^iq^ %?pNfl^ «tqafl?r fw- 

iRRoig^ x*trgpKi^- 

#TRRR.I 

>^^*5F^37IWTf ?PWRR?5PRRIWTt JraWWC.1 
^4<i4i«i<4iw<l i9snrimR,i 

1. gp45nri?»9iw wT«t ‘^’ I «#- 

WRwr iwwnnmft- 

Hnwftwifjfe « i wifw»jt qpft apan^flt^ifqn^^ ft?fT 

Hnft" I X- 9 «n5F?RR I 

v.‘53jpn%>^?ipait ^ )R’*>nwp®9*sif^?*n*>iti{hTxnnwR^*iRPsrt' 
i&sj^ ftu^r j 


20 




1 . 

®rTftrep!T g^TORft sr 

V. ^?R«npn^kft sri '^. ‘ H’ 'nsRRflt i 


ai 



I 

TOR j%i%- 

m aro^ ^rrowt s[5itoi% ^ 

uro ^ TO 
^ R jfNfo^^ r I TO5?R^RRr»rt 

fprowit I 

^ $i*5<}Hi«i*sl ?RTOTgWW»rt ^ftjfl^sjrvfliflwil 
i^lsr *rTO.i 

'TOTITOT q^W«lf S?rTOI% ^®fl«lt 


«rrf5lfRTftTO5!^M 

TOftJT fersr -qg^sr «rr to- 
TOt • '»^s*n#^ TOI^ 


1. <%fw^9TR[wr ®t i 

\. TORR*^ I V <(d<<T^f;»i^ »nRq|RWn^f^- 

^ V. *r I ^ TOTO^fi^«T I 

f^. ‘ iisRRflt i '». '^fri^- 

TORRH > 


93 




siflmrw»n(%i 


w 41* T ^w( i i r > ^ «ra^ I ^ fi5rsnra^^^rq*T 
>/lqyTW ^ ^feo r gwgq'^ s*?ft 4l5*m 
qpT ?mi3i»«T lOT iftf^WJawqmcii ?i^ 

sRTi^ srr, TR swn^ «<IH*l i a>*« l 5PTFT 

*TS%S5TO3tF? 

^ srerrot *tw 

TOM «n?r 5rft m qn^ i <??»5fnT 

I 

^ f^Nr i 

*<aV*< i *^l ^srnsnr %f?% i 


I. «?%3t?*TRwr JRTpJ qr "TwrftjJRiw 

I gwii«iP*i<iiSlfil qfSRi^i \. *t • 


2S 




I 

IW ^ gjBif 

^iq«R5RT m ?(^P*I3«Wl5r P^^PT 
* » $gHfg«w T (%(^cm«i4 m *rRtf^ iRn^ w JRii^ 

WWlfsar WT «iin^ I ^ 

<hd^*iwtwl qp^rr^^ 
*n^ 5#r ?feoJ%tTOrt mm 

» n 4 q ^4 ^ ^ hwr 

«n?r «rjRgo^ ^ i^g ^ Tar rfiNI 

q^td^Tfiq^iraq]^ ^STHIT- 

qr.qn^ l jtji^ ?nTRfl4 iraiw 
q?ffi3Wi^ <i«dlq<^6«%$r WEqj^gqft'' 5wi 

*KR4?^ I 4lqqFFn^ I 

g*gq;iR?rwrt'» <^q> qi %< T ffwwq^ i 


<Hiq4il'«i> q « 'qiqf4^iSl4 *n4 'nsRr- 

I V wrj^rewftW^lr qnrRRflt i v. «nq«?pl iPTRwr 

»Ti ’A. q(%«rffir <n5i??r<ni ffir 



Mfin ri w r tffi i I 


firthRR «w iRn4 ^RR q^qi^ sfrjpRit 

<ia^^wRl ^ *n^ot«r ^ 

^ sn^tqir wnof q«ig«?R^ »R5r 

I 5Jf<R 

«fl?SR5|^l 



ftjTT *!«RH. I 


fRIR5fgWRr»rt ifl^- 

IWR,I 

^PT5PR 5«!tqi(W X jt<KDr ^:qr^, 

^ !ft^ ^gi§F^ *Tr »T gf(^R«?iaTK 

SRRW SRSlf RRWit «RR:^ I «R- 

5«RnPrml^ sfFR*^. I 


1. fj?r *r I sr I 

V ‘fTwr’ «n3RRH I V. i h. o» n RHiS|f^ 

qraRrmi «*wm^(3>Ri I s- 4^ t i<ji4imiiiij-^i- 

qrg Ri^n I 


« 


25 





^5Tr ^niw^5J^nRwn^, i 

(I^^Fmrn^r ii) 


1. ^T*R(?rf^r <rT3RRJ3t I 


26 







1 1 1 


? 5 rR?rRr: i 


I 

I 

II) 


I 

qriP^raw 

HfiJ|WlPl< 1 <i(^«NI 5 ^ *Tflr 5 [«^r 

«rw![#T ?ngq»zi^ g%*T ^ ?rt 


^. ^swi i v r wP w ftft r TreRf^i qi^r^rRWT f^reRW 
wi5r «[%«i srntHRJT q»qr n T ft wwT<^ 

*n(lw*r sn^wnart 5 # 
< E ^w ^«R*r ’rn^l ?R*rnwnir 

wnsRC ^«R«r flk ^ iStsRT irr »br^ i’ f5«Rl 1 


29 



^?RF5ft srr 

qarai^ iri^pr I 

(t^sTPraFl^r II) 

?TOf irsnpnfJr qjR^i^ ^W^Rni^ i 
WT^ft <iBiiw II 

<Wt ^ ^ I 

^ mt 

q^ II 

9?w ?J?!TR»R *f|RfPT I 

^flitu|^UP^|oriviW-'t|*hu'ff4<l*l«hH. II 

(l^nsm^r qat^ q g% n) 

sRFffi qw q^ i 

ql%^ qiq% 51^ sqjfNI qqftq qr || 
gtfq?q «5^ ^ g = q <pna<? i i 

q<i^wiqqi5Rq ^iqi^qcRof II 

(arftjo w% qro n) 

^q^ i gtsqqr qipi^Wq^: qg: i 
^q^pS^r: qn^wR?*rKonNfr: ll 


so 



Mfil^TIIWywilPl I 


^4tw« *TT^ I ti 

?rf«Tl?T«r ^!^5*W5 t 5^ ^Ridia i ^ ; i 
an^ffe^TR^WRreacst II 

*^WKf> r * mT ?R*T 4tl^i I 

sw^iRTO fm ^i^sqr fi^gsn g^rr ii 

^ ^ ci5r ^it<h<) I 

ar^ 51^ ’^PCr: ^Jrat: TJTSRfiT^TWs II 

^*K<^ s<qgrr i 

%o*?Tafr I 

?T It 

^STO^S«Rr i^iPTf «*T^ *h1^ g 5 T fi»q cr; I 
f!^wsi5i^^l>yd: II 

«*IM«»?l44fJ|u| ^j^CRsnrs^PT: I 
?*RT€t «wif%^l^q: 11 

((a|«g'?4W^ II) 

<KI*^^ I 

aiTtg r ^ g(8I^ T l^d l ^SRig. II 

(^ q * i o4^^ II) 


31 


JRRiTOfJ I 
^Rfl4 sffew^ 

^ qi^ qumifswT iiii i 4 i ^«<l ^mriti ?wl- 


qipra^t I 


9w qiRTit ^RTW ^gS^r qnrriRqt arwqnt m- 

5s»q jRn^ 

qiRl^ ?Rq ^ ^ |*Tnnf qwqi^ wn~ 
f5«q ^%Tir qq w l^sftq f q?ni<qRiWwre[s» fiR^ i e^fepi - 
f?5[f qnNi^ ^ qnr 

rvrs.__ - -A ^ * r>t 

RlfcWni^WT ^ Rj* 


qn^ I SWRTt «RRfOrt 
q> i aq>M ■qgfq m qn^ i 


jRl^t I 

wl%{l I ?R^ f^tf^- 

qr*q qr <[q>K m ^ftqri^RRnf^. 

1. sftm^fPVRwr «<ffqt<fti T> Pft«R r qfq ^i 1g q ft srrfer i 
^Ijrw ffir *rRnwim 


32 




^ qii 

sRn^ <iw*iigi««? were«it 

^ ^ «K«r*i«P^^iHSW *rr *Rn^ i 5f?W firt ^ 

^TH< q i<jJ^dl arRqr^ ^ 

5l%of ^ 5Rn*lfeTHIiJ«HcJfc|WI^U|twWWi» 

|%lt?WR|Wt ^^IPTmt ?Rff»Ropqp|?Tt I 

«rni ^ dsn^ 

J t 5ig<c r5r s wi4 ^ 

«ffR^ I 


^ w’flshtBi^tr qifr sq^q^ 

W^R5«R*PT!S^ ^ qn^ I 

(IqrRwi^ II) 

^qgsfrswrf^ qr ii 

1. swrt^qftf^ qr aw< wg q> i 


33 



«r 

sng ^ i 
?rtPr «n*r ?jt ?n??q?r: ii 

« ni»rt qf^f ***^1 

qi^r *T?mr»qt’ ii 

((^g q ^cq<i 4 t f^ ii) 


1 1 


3 PT ^ 9 jpHRl^ <i)MWR i ^g ra ? t^ «n*fqR*nf®«#q 
f|d4l*1^w’ c ft tp >P ;^<MOf VP^f^ ^I?nvf 


w«R«R ^qy*<<»wa^ qiP^'* 1 5IFT ««> iq^ i^4 qplqy- 

JJfRT q^*tR ^ qiR^ I ^ 

»TRf«r q»i^l 

^TO5FF1%||) 


1. ' »n?t ^cnjT’fin% f%5 wrat? ’t. i #tr 

ffir ’iraRRn i v. "jjfiiJRfirt^ 'tisrrh i k. 
sn#T I %. 'w*PF ?CTin»w^’ftwq*ifrs 5 ft i 
'». ‘»mT sl<wa[K^m^|^ ^rpt ^ irmtd 

^sjf wnwrt si^Kf^ftwr H%rjiji^h. 

^iRtTjiJPr «tT# < T fOTgm«^^«i gften^- 

TOfiBt f?fT’fgif^^CTiq^if*eft FWFi 


84 



ji^prrewf»TrtSr I 

j^nwR^RigrRt ^^fp«rfl5!wlSJm»c. II 

3id^R «fl5iw <gy %g ? wlfi«iH ii 

ft«s3T’< 5rri3^ RNrH i 
wl^rwTf snfvqt ^f%5r ^i Rq f^ ii 

»T^ ^ s ir yw Ti R i R t «rr*m: i 
% srr ii 

(Rr^q^ qsffRNrqs^ II) 

5nW f^wiwl wnTl^85cRi5ra: I 
5raslt 5R?P*n^ 11 

(9T(?I3o STo II) 


«r ^ 



I 




‘/l-l«»'<4«h(iifi<l: «iWq: «i^: I 
Rt^rstT iwri^: II 


1. ?*rra: i »Tft?j«rn i i 


36 





g ^ ig| ifew*nn<» ; II 
qraq5P^: | 

*kW II 

II) 

(?F??Jio85r II) 


«rPws;R#?[t I 

3W ^Sf l W > ^1qRKI<^MlW| fRRftsr 


qwfir: [m] 91^ 5ifwrc 
?fn^ I wrerfirtt^BiM ww 


I 

(%0I*RfR^ II) 

«fnRt I 

aw qarawftj^i mnpw^ ^WIsrrw 
Rl«l3W^*l^a^^«ft<^»•«llP5lH«»ll^id q fi r g p Tifgr arw??? 

(^KsFRrt II) 


1. TgPFRft * 3>^(^ q wq r isti i 


S6 




sifiwn»«pirisri 


fO¥^ g5R} nfr^: It 

II) 

ssfr e?o^r wrag^: i 

(3|%o vv9 are II) 

*R^ arURl I 

iflsnTWr ^ =enwTinTt?RT: II 

iis«iii^*itiw«Tr I 

(RwIhW II) 


II) 

s^RiTRf ■^qi fr I 


1 . f I r P h Mf qhff 

qr af^ apBi^rol^ qi^ Iraq^ 

qqgqqq^^qqqg^ qaiSaft qftj^ *qq qr^ ?iip flIJ'fOti 
w i q»i i < qftfpit f|qq qf*f sreiftef qf ^ q gw i qqi qm qqiftqqi^ 
qq swn^ jpnqnf rtuFqwt a»w|U»4a(iwq?- 


87 






^*3^ ^reg% 

^5fRTfn^Rn#5^ flrnr- 

f#r wf«?^*!»nT ^ m erwisi ^orf^, iwrf^il«i 
iRTnl^^RR5?RT ^ g |?R; fe rorq i ^ 


<i!qf»T<unjp«, ?n^ qwqjpfl^*iRgyqg»?*?r: qr^^t 
^«i«f<ir^ 5fli9rftqrq!t qi^ff^iwRC 

?WT ^ iscqr sRTffeiqi5Wt<^*rnt 


?i?qi^ JJW l^?nwif iwi^q^ iRsrr 5i?#Rft >iwt ^^rnri 
qrf^ ^ i qi^qi^ 

q»TRr(0 qiw^ *fiji(^q;< ^ gfeqr n#, 
qRST ?Rqr^ 5#.|qnT ^fqejftqi ^ qrf&r«n 

^ qn^ I 

^ qn^ I f^Plqi*^^ 1^ 

^q^S^^q qn^ i 


(^qiH'WIM*! II) 


g4t «n^ ajq*r ?pj^ q fl pri ^ i q^ B t qftfrfir 

qqr MwfrdqHnq g»4qi^ jwm 

?iwrq siqiT ??5n»rt swrj# f^qr (!*Hj^qiqh>qqvi^f **4- 
qpqw^ i' ^di i qqW^ 0 [ P i %q<w«l 1 1. w^- 

wrq, i 


38 




srfiwrtwwrr^ i 


«n*i!PRf IWi^T li 

q^l ^^|^d^ II) 

?vW8W5R: II 

5if^!iPKnwr: g^?i^»i ; i 

sr ^ 5 3^ II 

sRRf ^ (*|Mt»lR^^«at>r; I 

II) 





^ ^fJR^ I 


(l^amm^ll) 

(3ltl»3o 9To II) . 




39 





^SW 5 II 

II) 

^rr^: <rtg ^ i 

(?CT»! 0 »% II) 


<fvfa|!i:w: I 

5 r«r: *n 5 R ^TRt ^^iurn^ 

gwRon^^ *R?^ I ^«R*T ^ ?ft?it^ sfsn^. 

iWlfi ? d^/^q T g Rf ^ir^l qpf f(|i/|<^iD- 

fpr I s?mqi^ 

^?i%?fNRT wri*5f wr ®R<JT ^ifRiR ^nRnf^ra»5Rn||5j 

^<«M*i»i q |il^< t fepr 


1. ‘ ^RJRRft’ f/% « <ISI*t! r R I ?WrwJSlWT* 

€5*R^ I ftMRrrPrfir ttsrrh i v. topwr i 

H. Hd^wiWi «r I «r i 

'». ^ ggte^ TR w r ifR^'%Rre*r w*l '»5Rnt?r 

iWr^ 5 *mn»wt iwwfiRff t * 5 ^ 




40 




•« 

^ garW 

f%f^^?f%onTitSt9T ^ WJTF^T m 

«fiR^ I 

(Wrtr?^ II) 

^Wft <sl!fr 5lfr ^ fllPWT: I 

(3Tfil3o are II) 

*T^ 55 Rqlpr 5 i^«r ii 

^ ^ ^ 5 1 

(f^«g'5i^ II) 

II) 

anl^ 'r^Prg’§g^?:iftg<a m\ mr# 

^rFR^r «(N?5ni^ ftg^ ?l%i)i 15- 


a!r*n5^ sfhw «wwt^Tl%^?sfrf^wrT 
fiigaJ ^(^ 9 r < T i ??t f^hsTR ^rrarf^ <pnt^ ^51? ?rft- 

"rtl^ angiraww'^f^sRT «br^ t ’ i 

^. ( ^< t yRp T (% ^RfSrfirwra; 

\. t t<nw i w»5 »Wf»fN ‘asR^i ^t’ 


0 


41 




Sf(r ^ »?raillfr 




?IFr WM «raT viW SW*^<r wi 'WTO ^mV^' 
^URfif^ ?[%ir ftrw 

<i>^P^w3«qgff>i ^r ^<ii<w!<*ft4i«fw4 ^«ft^, ^ft?n*pfr- 

fs , t #^rvf\, . 

W 3 R 5 ?Ffl fl?®Ww I 


^ 4fit^ ?W 3 R ftfSTt 
?rwrwtF>?#?ragat ^Mtoj?5n^ s^rwfr^s- 
^nTf 3 ^ g 8 pfN>? q P^(^ i 


?fli 9 r ^n?fR?*rnTRr 

<ay^gq > > 5 rer ferir%*n(%Ri^ »t»ti^- 

aflsRi^l^Sfqsnl ^nr^, ^ l^vffliS^r 


w^rsRi# ^wwaa^i ft ^ ^ 




V fSiiriWt»ifirawin« 



srfimmigmfin * 

a[%oNFw j^PT ?nJ|5T ^ ^wrapr^d^iisiHn^ii^ii 

iT^RR^: srpi^ *n% 
«ROR: 5i^RT:l ^ i^<||g 

I 

^ 5T^ ^iTHTR j^ 

m «n3^ <Ta9«r3f %# jet^ »ippn^ srrewRRr^ 
?R <lgR«1^4N I 

^ 

^?rplr 5[TfiRtr ?K^ l|g^: qi^- 





swpmt <’cK^^ i y ET ^<f|^ (0 fiSj^ f^S5rj%- 

^grfir j^RTi# 5ppn^ 

^wj^T wm 

f5|q^ I 


1. *fflRinBEH I \. qwfl^wftft r «Tft?f«rn i 


X. j»Tw?<tf?rfw ffir »fftra»qqL \ 






Jrrar^- 

C?T:^ 

«iTfeg?r ^unirF I 

(^JsTTTOFm i ^>*>f^ q g % II) 

>Rn?5?HT: I 

3W *rs*nt^ ii; !r g i igf^ fi^ ^- 

®F?^ 2n^R '^^TPT rTKq^N<g&<a^^ 

^ q^rf^aHiquiT ^feolsr 5^ 

qim jmiRcRF»T5«i*i«i q«i^i ^ 

^q»n[^l - 

«! 

(^*qfRgPl^ II) 

^«3»w'i«!9*l«ii qi|p5gon^jft?3g; n 

, ^C^^ i qii qypTt ^ «t^^qg i w p i| ;^ w r i 

«(l<ii(^\p r II 

qipft ^rgS^ ?n qnrqRiwrt q5*Rni.i 

uwif <#?jqi^ q^qf^Fugq ii 


1. 'srTiRft*?Ti^ f% *?fiRT»*m» 'wiri«iqi<*ft«' ffir q*n?ti 
X. * *<*»<i*iqwqiqfi r F? r *<%% >n^rq»qq(, i 


44 








(arfilgo aro n) 

II) 

cor: I 

liwiFT^anor^*^ I 

??TnTw ^j%5ft^5iig[i^^ 


^ wm*F*i?Ri^*r I V. i?5T?[WRRT^ sr*i V «?ftj5i?igmwr 
jn5l^r5RR*r wi*l ^%»rerFPRi*f *TFfi?M ^ 

?re*n5t. <|iiaHlW< l’ f<5lw^d<l- 

^ 15 *i!I' I 


46 



l*iwt *rr 

?rmwp!rt m srwqi^ mm^ mw ^ferNinpsr- 

SWflWT- 

I srwTf^ *T# gftm «»»f^ i 

^ «TW^ ?Rrf «rr *br^r^ 1 5Tir^ 

(l«FRPi^r II) 

S'wwraTJ ^RI^ I 

?injiw 11 

II) 


1. ^INisrRwr «Mwwc< iir ft>a g w f ^ ‘fti<l««ii(Ni- 
*TRi# sRn^ i 

^ . Nfii<<if ’TrsRT^ i i 

»RRirt^9Ffre*r <PTi% ‘«rw?^ ?i3»t wnt sRrrf ftW^4 

«»fhpr ?Rkr»nSg^ ^sR^Rfr’ ?l<nFTO’n^ i '^. ^*ftwn- 
fttsir-or ^w’^fsPWFJRRi^ •r i 
qrapiT^i 


46 





' 5w«ft?i3^ *Tr ^ ^ JWRfrtPT'^ ^- 


*fl#fh»fN5»nl^: qfhff q^4)q^m<i m 

^ljjt^«K,iti4l'*H 

<«^*T|C^d'» JTFT^I 

(I’sniRn*!^ II) 

sn^pflrf ^FRFTRt ftS3TPJv|yf^5n^ || 

II) 


tt^Ntr^; I 


?rqrq -#??f q?r^ qfeqi ^ 


1. TOF?R^i qrsRi^ I 

V q?T<{wfinft *T I V. ir qr i %tR <^ R r qtsT Sff<n i 'a. ‘«i»^<ink- 

g?r’^qT3Ri^jflfr3‘af*qw( s.wiqRqf ‘^’ 

v». * ftpmPT^'fitfir fqnci <• * <R T qfew *<%^ i 


47 






?ftjon[#T o*fi¥iR- 


IrCT^if I 


^lft4(h«KI*44im^lip^41iyi||>i^ II 

Jtrqr^ i 




(qRTi^ II) 


g |>i f^<f i Rf p fl# ^ <fl r g r c ^ ?rRw ^- 
#2!5T iRP^I «Wl^q|oq«|Jrrl^ ^ 5r 
qr I 


I 

iR5i#^g5fMRr«r i 

( f|tqf^fflqw gi’w i^TW i « n ^ II) 
MI*«IRI j||<lt*IWlW: I 

1^ *l<<l*<«< g ;w*K ; 11 

(«Tfil3o •To II) 


48 





55 ; swfli^: 11 

II) 

5?: 'Wra^ I 

WTFR^ fla'»n<hll«l l fin> : (?) II 

II) 

I 


qjflqRl iTsq#^ <^ldl<i|i)d*IWRlt pi»F«PSRl^ 
^32'*^ y J| ^d*h*i ^*1^4 %«^l 

^13^ ^ I 

(I^I5RTPT^ II) 


«wr'S#RT: ^ Slf-Mili^KlPild: || 

(3Tfil3o 3To II) 

^ W5I^{ I 

II) 

II) 


*TORTra!ftRr’j^i% I 


49 














wio«<5 ^ ^|Tlf “fs^ ^TOg% ?n!Tr ll 

II) 

I 

^ ^?TR ^ fld«iro< i ^3 ?k 

3^ gwnw qr g^ 1 


^sf^j 1 

ariW qrf^ ^?TmrS 8 ??^ ^fWRr*WT* 
ifi«sMd*!»f*^*idn^*^fqRT5W8qTl 
qif^ g^lqt at i 

(t^TfJRTT*^ 11) 


q^ ^ l^pqRqjrf^ ?T 5 *?ift«T 5 r:’^ I 
^ g q;^: q> i 4«^cdyid ; ^K'. ii 

^l§5T w dW ?iiwrt I 
MHWdlql^^ «iR^«flf^ %a^; II 

qf^: ^ '*ldl*iu««*l(&yd: I 

mut-dWW: II 


1. f«reR i \. qdcMtllMl^MR^^I^sT 


64 





; sr^: II 

%^pTitgr q^ ^ I 

wnw«n^ '>^fm %tt g^: g^R: ii 

II) 


^?f3^R5Rl»T^0P3j^ 

<fi|ui«iiH4)wi5i«'^rgTKi qtr, q^Rr goq 

3f5g^^ I* 

(%^i»RrPT?l II) 


5?n^: I 

iRT; *wr?ig«^Nr: f^if^s^^i^nsR*. i 

^ ^ II 

?n*T fit«qw ^»^3qT«RW. q#TP^: II 


q gR gqft ; | 

*h<4<i^id*iiw n 

II) 


fifi 


I 

q i ^sq^ti gwag^Jir: i 
5wiqw q Ryaq# q 4t» i it<^d ; li 

qqsqi^sw q»^ gtp g ^iy i d ; swtt I 
5 nTrR«r «h^«q<si^ 5 Rnf 2 r?T: || 

q;^ sn^^5R«renTr dwm t I 
qsr: qn^ ^qw fj f$r^: || 

5Tnift^R% qw% ?rpT qiqq I ii 

siFq?qn^: f^ q r qf ; I 
qiggi H ^ qqiqq II 

^ q >n flfiT g^npRq qi i qToqqi^if^ ?w i 
Krraqf*^ qjgiftrf^ ^qqq ^ q^ciwq ^ II 

(( ^"gqqfq ft ii) 

?Tgqq^ q?9r 5 I 

%^|qtls9i qw^ ?fs^sq qifs?rq; 11 


1 . sqqjqsifir qmt I 


66 




qi *54i ^ ^d4 r ii 

(’ 97 WC«?ril) 

^wpftsircRpjf^ I 


5nFfl^TRRo?r qn4f ^ 3 ^ i 

<f^ oT ^ r *nq?T* 11 

q%flT: <hus^«li«l qi?r 

3 qwTr: fd^nfnir/^siTO^ 11 

<^<fiqqq^ai pi 1 1 

g^^qqr^tsqwr II 

<%f%; qqq^ ^nftq^i ^ ww i R o fi SR I 
qifST ^ ^qiqtWR ^ 11 
?R*r Ir q»r^ gq^ g^: 1 

PRliNri^qiR^ 1 


n) 


^ s r 4 l «qq ft 4< T ireriqft ?tI%rr. ii 


8 


67 





♦ ^ 

^arR|J|«f g»*T I 

rPTf ?Fr/^; ?«Rqr cr^^rsncRir/^: ii 

II) 

IC^Hfhr: I 

•fl<!4|*4l'jR:: ^TrT 5«ll5tcNT: II 
^ firl^r^RT; I 
^3^ II 

5T# ^ »T^r w I 

>« 

^r: ^»R? %^RTf ^^'srrftQTR. II 



5r: 5W^ fitg^^ *TfR^: i 


^pfW58r«?R5R^f54l II 


58 





^wn^rsT^ scr# ^ wo g gwiR *^ ll 


'Titter ^%fr qi^ ^ ^mgrk i 

qji4f 5ftoT ®wfrsf^ sTRRorgrq^: ii 

(f^wifciqW II) 
: I 


tfTO 3 JR 5 PTffir ^Sgq?l%q^: | 




II 


»T^ ^jfif ^ =5r5K ‘qggqn. i 

^|[ ^ q^T sn^r II 

wrt: 3wq»R ^ i 
3Tqt ^Frg^rqqt qw^req ?nqlTi^ ii 


%g>Fq^^g T; I 

g^rri^ i^qTOFT«T ^qqqM: I 
?T q|«^rg 3 R?n?fqfes: qr» 8 Wfg§^r (0 || 
JTcCT -fel^ l ll^t l qfOT ^«PR qt qnTT?^. I 
gj?^: qrawnf^fi^sTfiR^qii ii 
qi^rs q|»Tgg[iqi^ffq*l, I 

SR ^ qR < %tt ^ ^ qJfJ^^qsRg, n 


69 



srftwrwvnA i 
«i5F?r: I 

«HRRn%w^hff II 

J T ^fg qro r^ i t^ i 

5Tf%2 qw ^o^qi^ ^ qjiTd: | 

^r>9?Fq: I 

^Nrar ^^a^«r^«sr: i 

q?nq»r ^ q^mpRiw^n ii 

^ ^ =5r qtr ^uNr^s i 

qdiqiT ^o^qrqft ^ *T^rerti?q^rf^ || 

3?T^»wff ^ ^qr^^gqkqriss i 
€W#.<I q!»T3^ %5T (?) J T ^qfiil^d ; || 
sF»nqp[^^r?!5ft^ui[g^q^j I 

II) 

qqrrepRwreftd: I 

gtonir ^dw^qR f^: ii 

qw<iRi P f<? t ^wi^wdi^qwm» fl i 
d<TOW ^ II 


60 





3!^ ^ I 

%Twft 3 sp4r ^rarrf^WtW^: it 

(/ ^!g r <S^ffw i <^ II) 


^ I «T5prfl?3t ^WRftsT 

1131^ ^i*w^»wri ?/^5?3?T5RfNf ^ ®rni8n*nrnj|^ 
jRrr^ Tion^: m- 

aw «t*rr ^ sn^ 

sf^forra^wr siifeot irjim ^ 5ri|f< ^ s?srr ct^ ^ 
^ ito I 

( WRTRfir II) 

«r^: I 


3«fimoi«li|cll ^ ^STFRTI II 


'wwwr ?R*r«n5r ^ \ 

gP»TF8q*WR^ ^ ?%onTRRT: It 


^. *n»T 5t^*%qfigRr <n • 

ll% <n5fs?RH I ‘qwRL w «H «rr’ <TOi»fRH i wi^: 
«nrf5TWHftrVI 


61 




5rtfmTw«sr>rrtSr i 

4 - 

?Rr: q<*«!Kq^K • 

qvq»^r g ?T«rr ?i^: || 

(«nf^gqg^ ii) 


%?ram5qr i 

sTRRor: Wr<Cf^8RV§Fg^: *Frr?i^ II 

»Tr«r^«i?iRr§iwrf q^Fr I 

qr || 

/^ « g^g;qt<T % sftj i 

^ * I <^tR^iin*>5 i gTy> ( ^tQi f >qiq ^ i 
^i U«&4l<q<iq^^ i i f qw^*i^^ II 


•e|i|il«'S r ^W T f^% 5W: sfNR^^ I 

^ II 


?IT5^§W‘TO?^FTFT^*I^ I 

5r§F3Pip»FT/^ ^ I 

^n^|j^»T^T»3n*T qrg^I ft II 


62 



k 

H*hsP^^«T »T^|F3nf^^vrri^ ii 

'TO»KRr|#TrR6t I 
'?^nfer|f»Tf^ i T 4lsg gT ^ff »i ^^ II 
»T?T«3nR?RTfW SR: sftfiwr^ I 

(’7^13^ »7RT^ o^ H) 

^ ^ ^ sKmP) I 
strROT: «h*^MVSKN^^ || 

STR«R5 »T^ 'fJli» ^ RpR; I 
ST^ qv 'q qjsfSTT 11 

«i?l4l<*h1[ qqr qnff^ i 

^ ^ II 

(^ ( ^SflSSj^ifq ^ i^ qqsqTfT l^q M q: I 

II 

sfNrCI qrt^ ^ sRf qr^ q: i 
rft^qfr q3[t *q5R qqf w 'q qR^ ii 
qqsfPT: qpTipf qq qsR siqrsrf^ i 
qmtq^rssfsf qi# qqt q% II 


63 




»w: II 

ST^r^ 11 

g^^lTR^ ^ qw|»Rr ^ I 
aiwt^'iiHKl^l'ii ir?Rr|g^^R»I. ii 

^<l> I M^ I <^ l <h*^P l ^^ { I 
3Tg5!^ iKrw^*iRr|w*r^: II 

»T^ II 

?R»| ?n»iw I 
fEWJT: qiW^pq iKR®^ 5?^ II 

#71 ^ ?%om2r:OT7!*in^ i 
«f i g^q i R<im'i^w<A*i^^ ?[^v ii 

(^;qjI0?s| II) 


TniWT^: I 

W *Tig^ ^*n% *Twrt^ ^WOl^sN 

^R^ i fi l Traifg ftg^ ^sfsnnft ^ ?nW 


1. ‘im^fRra^rW ««igitf<mi i Rmi T?i7 w r ^^ wPipimni i 


64 






l^jprewiTi si^*n? ?fw|wT jtow raafsr 

?Tv^ ^^g 5 CPFf ^ 

*iW 4 i^sPrt?i^ ftsN' ?ra[i 5 ^ *ai*R ^- 

5j^onpcxiFRoivrt>r ?w ^ *T^ ’T *in^ I ^ ^- 
«KW<0[|ft ^4J3j^|S^I^ «RI^ I ^^l^«Rn%^ «WR 
^urq*^ *ki^ I amr ^ *!«^ ^ ^§5r^r«r 
I 


I 

^(^«rig ^4 ?WRftiT ^wr 

«flH?*TT^ ?if^ ?wr ^^npT ^f^Rsrmt: S 5 lw%r- 
i ^ ^ ' t nR q 5 i%o^'» ^ ^Rft npreq 

PN sijf^ I 

(%^RRrii% I) 


1 . '? 5 wn^’fir^ TORRHi 'sfiraini ’ ^ tisri^i 

V ?TSRt^l V. ST I 'A. ‘ 5 T^’fir^ 

TORRRi ‘«#njfiTvin’ I5ri% '»: :t i 

*T ^. 'arfJiwiw TisRr^j^i i •. ^n*^- 

fTsi^t %’<?r «n 5 RT<R I 11. ‘^wrr’ ’T rg rg?T <H . ' 


9 


65 




« i g »Ti q<i r qiiP t i 

*n% 5if wre^rorg^^ II 

«flg^^ ^5^ w«n«ii«iPi<l I 

5T«lt II 

’TOPT «Tr^ g siRl*ip^^« i w^<i, II 

(«t8I3o «to II) 

'ft?n«R¥ JlWI>TW^»TWg|^t II 

^<H<U|g^*l f|Uf«J|^<4jj^U|| II 

9iW^r sRwiPrgjior: i 

gw 6iw wr II 


f^:qilFltNTFT ^i^«n^«R(3W5: I 



^Mt ri R pf l «|Hr d<MK*|W(iTT 11 


1. ‘ wnftHJPTT’ ffir?ini;i 


66 





f [r q | giH^^^ r q ; f%^rf%«fl(rRi5f^: II 

«?g5^ (?) ^ ^rraf i 

^«r «Rnff ^^g p wP^Hi || 


*lfR«ft^ «K^ II 

'Tn^ I 

«ii*iHiPHin ?nf ?[r|[Rnt 3 li 

3 ^ ?I3»rsqr I 

5*^r ?rafvkap|;^cn II 

sRPT? ^RWlRofl I 
dl^ldMMIdOaWi: «»*^l<<.'*sll« 4 i I 

^gyeftgirqRRq?:; 1 

g< fl ^<f«t>< ^ ?TW 3^ II 

(Pi«a'»i^-<ft II) 

xT 5 W<ifTf 5 |?rac^: I 

^diVh'ftdijwri: g ii Ti ^dgJ Ti f^ II 


67 



siff Uf UM jj unP r I 

^PT ’sr a»5»rR^ II 

(9?F!01% II) 

?np^: I 

^i4w*h4ui ; sig: i 

?r 5 g?Fjg: *f)<g«iw r 1 ii 

»T5re«fr% g?T^ ^ ®i|f^ I 

dg< r 4 l g II 

51^; I 

n^iwr cPTT I 
?T g g^ftpS^TWI^RTSTRTT II 

xPKWT^ JTJHWF^ WIT 5IT: I 

?RIT<^ ^ WIT gqggll^^ II 

=WWrTOPI^: *RT^: Sigw gask: I 
^r <s T ft T q pT fi r i^ T * T ^«« T i^ i ii 

'^Pl’^ 'Blt I 

WIT JRTI^rg I 

IrK T^ T ^HW g II 

1 . 


68 




VRWIn ^T^IWmSWWN I 

^-WW^Vh^I 5115: WfUft PMWn II 

^PKr^ «^^iP>i Rif^l g^<i%?i; 1 
<wi i wigNyMi(^ ^gM 4 ! l ^ *n^! ll 

NWMnS^ffi : *Rprf ^!*rRf imj wsn: I 
5 «WTO 5 ?fr ^1^1 *i^wr# II 

^>^ %ll(^^ sfi ^ini^eR: Jig: I 
^ipiiJ ^ II 

fll*^|pl^ ^rWRf^ I 

II) 

I 

mfir ii 

(t^Ri(l<iw i * re i T g i w^i« Ti ^ II) 

f^t I 





«nT*T I 

g ar^ g ^ ^ 3C%ot II 

qirfrsN^sig i 

•trO^ *n ^ f^pn^: li 

?aig5f7: ^wpj^JpT^ I 

^?Fl»r*?WRPT2% II) 

^ ^a(f^liwgtni II 

arw ^PTRftsT ?ri^ «nf^ >Kr^g. i 

’^gfih^RR'T^ II) 

*Ff^sB5^ *FraT«rg^^ ^ ^ I 

SRWgaS: I 

<gtgj|<;Rfr TT fii^(^pwiwnfi T g [ « ig<fa^t i 
aiRaf^ ^ *hlS*h^A^^»M(& r ^«r II 

am ^ arownm: i 

<^ f^ p rq i^ it# a# ai^ ar n 


70 


5 i fln n w F»n P ! I 


^wit: Sifii^rr II 


( fgfqfe^m« T 8 i q<gism4< i» K< i ^ II) 


*WI I 



II 


^>a [ <ai^^q^i<i ?!«Tr i 

g^ ^ 5nf#r fiapnw«rr ii 

3^ 5TR(^ g ^%oni^ I 
'Tftnr wsn ^ i^iis g^ i ^q, II 

51FT «ii«iiRg^®i*i^H. I 

=8^ ^ 85nTrf^: II 


^t^«r xig: i 


go*t!N5Taj ^ *TRROT I 
^nf*l<; 'rfti^l ww *ig?55*r5 II 


1. fr«i^ 
l^wi fflu, I 



^ JFfWW’ 


71 




sn % « r ww iw iP r i 


w« ff *i ^ an^ afr«?4 ?i«rr ii 

araaRWWroff ^iS^4lS«|a|l | 

*iT air amrriiW^ II 

< 5i <g ^ 4l5«i« i i I 

ftwit: sre ff^ TCT: I 
an^ aKH!?^ | 

?T^ ^ ’^po^ ^ ^»f8ir»n?^ I 

8n?r wF*r: 11 

W ’Sif %2W ^ I 

M<HaK4lPJ'^a|4^ thailva^^^T, II 

cT^ anoi^ ar^ «rR!T 3 (0 I 

JK i M^g^ ^<liffh r r^ r arw^v^l; il 
* 

?l^ aRiRy ^ *T^ »||^; I 

S I IWN< | 8a T^ > R « l >ilHW^3> H 

II) 


72 



siftwRWjwrft I 


I 

SWW¥S|H^«l'fi*ft?5|i)i| II 

^ 3 ^ ^^^ I P T HI «m^ I 

g wan f^f ^ffii r fe n 

^T* T « rF g| ^ I 

JT <R#i4i g «fi^5ti II 

PkR l I^Hl^^ ; *h l ^wq1*l<»l<jR^ : I 

II) 

3^|sj[wrJRr: qetfr g^i^qr: C5nir%: i 
?»3«r3ng*T^ ^ ^ qjf&nif^: II 

g R tf iq ^i Frr ^ swifq?: i 
fWg: ’Tfl[ig?»»«r ^^Rng^r: ii 

(sfienq^ II) 

* 

^N i «i ^ l RiWw [^q*] ^qsiWTRif^ ?n«ffr- 
^iq ^o &i<$ fq t *r ^TF5ni.i 


10 


73 





?TB^ «n<!>i*wwg l ^ ( ^frTOq q < BgyT *wri^ ti 


^vnor: *wiqr^ i 


«(N!^ 



II 


II) 


1. ‘Trqf^’ 


74 


g n gqgwi ; i 






3n3«i3^: I 

^ 5rt%^ '^r ^ ^ qRf ?T«i^»i. 11 

w =sPF %% ^^ngtr^c. i 

fl^ ^fRTJ^JTgsrfN^ni;. II 

l^iirf^gs)^ flsTi ?f§^?£[oi*i: I 

ff^r^ejforSlrjwi^^rsr li 

^ !Tg5H% I 

<i i <»iBiw f ^%gm g ’^jg^n^iTOFRiH. ll 


%R^r«mt?F*n»f?T: i 
^ ^Fi^*mr MS^qf^ ii 


1. »TPrawin I Fi^Nry^ «Tf*ra«*TH i 





«T^r ?!wi5r H 

«re«rffenrT3% ii) 

5rl^ ^if^^ranrr ^rf^uft ?wf5r?Tr i 

?o^sf^ g¥r: 1^ ^ II 

^«r g55^WW^I^<: f g^g f; I 
qr^iwa^uiw'Ja^N: 3«3«gg: || 

g^: sijffeiiwl iT^R^: I 

JT^ tfitisw gsiTT II . 

g^ ^s*i?g»TjP5«T^PR: II 
^Ri^gfN^C?) gr # fi>^c«*ni?5Tg: gin?^^ i 
5R^WRg^ ^?l»nfr f ^sq^^«f ; || 

qn^^URT iS^si^irr??^ i 

^rRRf ?pjqt | 

^ ll g SR!^ ?Rr 5 ^: || 

II) 




78 




5lfiW l «l8 » i| | lgt I 

w ^ ^ **r ^ qref i 

*5TO qv %% II 

fiSrsn« ft^W W!|f*!^OR^: I 
«?nirf^ 32 t^: qiTo g *iSw&ij> ! i<!i ; || 
^RR^fsrsnTidR i 

«lM | g pfa q i g^ sfrsr^pjjf^riRiqt. II 
5fl^ qqRFT ^ spnt ^F^sft^qR. I 

^ qin^ 3 ii 
(^^icqraq^ 5ig?i#> | 

^?TRn; ^ftirRiRa^ni^: ii 

(a,§qiKOim^ ii) 

fpNNs^: 1 

qrf ’qr ’wrt ^i^qRnprrfi^ 

^»«rp»r 1 

5*n«iq%?r 

q2[*^ror^ ^q i^ <^>i<g T Miu i <iiiK^qL li 

II) 

1. I %. wT^r ffir *fP i qw<H . • 


79 






gg<ign^«t f <fepM OFT W>TOqn ^ aj> | o i ^<ff i 

?r: Jif^*T3q^; 4twT II 's'^ II 
sjwy i iwgqfffe ^Rfs f03# 


l: Lo I U>1Z 11 to I L' K^I> 11 i isii n LI^ i; 


r nUgg m^ sw^ qi^ q sq qnH 
^^s^>?^^n%few3fNi2itrq5^rqw ii vs^ ii 


fptT ?Rnjf 

5ni 




5^:3l^r^sf5mT5ft 


3I*WRTf#l^?r:l|<io|l 
(^[5^r5RRj% II) 


80 




11 






Ifcprr: ft^ir: i 

«<■ c rs. 

^RPRTipijW: I 

^4)<^*lla^{|{ | ^TITO II 

^«w!«r JTRftwst ^rnwtr i 

(5|(«lw: II 

5niT «isirtai R^i^hc i 
% ai i ^^ i i( ^ r * h -q? <^« i i» Ti( ^gn ; ii 

(«Tg»ilr?CPi% ii) 

«i^ njsrr i 

«ni^ 'TTcTT ^^1 J II 


83 





jfcprr: wfww ^ffWiTRi^ i^; ii 

ignh^imhi ; I 

II) 

fitfST 3 I 

HSi2f35r»i m wwi>8^wwhh> I 

jpg"^ ?T3qRf^ 5 II 

«jw ^qw5T: apqr qir^ i 

^iHT^q^wqw «iwT qiq«fi^HH . il 
<Ti;qq(ra«T«’ ft «irr ^ «f55q^ I 
«^f^f>ftft5ir II 

(5ii 5»^ < (^>iq w i qm qqd^ II) 


1. ffit I \. wn: I 


84 






*Trf&l«P?|!<>s^: 'HRPif^^; il 
?:w»aR^ ^<E§«i»fThHf i *1%^: I 

«T5]^?n^: *Rr^: Sllrrt ^ *114^: il 

q3BfiNn«Ti^ ii) 


^l5Rnf^ I 
qr^ qi^ II 

qrf&T«ii q!E% i 

qg» qgr C r ^q?[??r: ii 


qifqi3^#*RrsRRi9^q: i 
^H T taq gq v T Rq q^ q r || 

#qr 5 qg^ ^wsiqlR^i i 
^qgfJratiiq ii 


(f5?^%nqm8iqwiwTr«n^ ii) 


1. m^&/^qfti< i >TOi(^4 i qMdq3<i»»i<<qi^ q 
gws*req q^s f f<Sqffi? q »^qq r qqifi^ qfqqsqui 


85 






qR?JR»Rra^1 *J^M«IT 11 

wr ^ ^ I 

qwwit ^t? r fi i d Rf i< i m «rf5ft jmr ^ ii 


^ ^ I 

ti5ft 5nF %FFn 3^RFTfm^ il 

sw^t 5 ^ ?T«Tr ^ ^ I 
«i/^< i ^Fq ft |*ir mf^iMesi^: ii 


3wj»n^ ^ !T^fl?n^l 

m *ijff ^ fRfs^ sr^tHT q’u^^ II 

^ 5 «WT ^ qRRg^fFR: I 
?rr q^rsqjRi^w ii 


?F >itf?TOr T irl%' ^%i II 

qiFi^ g^: i 



qqr5^5iT g»Tr wt 


! II 


«I«T qw^ qM W(^ I 

f^qw^q^i wi<q^ i ig i ^^l^<ii ii 


1. ‘ ?r»i?5rewnB:’ ffir i 


86 






a;ww*T q< iT gff^« r \ 

?!§qrq5U l*ir ii 

5 »RT qwr sn^r g^: i 
qqfWM g ?TrfN^ »#Rwff4?Tpq!ft ii 

^ ^ ^fl'*iqil(^'hf*^. I 

*T%??n WTtq*i54«R<«qr ii 

g<j t 4«h^[i q^r^^RTT g «rm?T: i 

'JTM ^s^Nrr ^ q^oRq^ qq ^ I 

>?5fr R«w i ^qi 55nR?ffr: n 
qqn^w^n^qgr ^^gsksir 3«q% i 


q f f^H yt W ; f^»^5jreoigjnT: I 
anqNi ^qtw i ^ i iwq1*«o T *a,P t d { ii 

W5n ^TTFT qiJfNrj^ ^%?Tr: ii 

1. ar^nfr * ’ 

ffir wnii 


87 




H [% » TTq v q n f S t I 


?T»?R#WRr gm ii 

3[03‘J «fif4t5W *inRT: I 

^ ^i^wfrlf^: II 

sTPft^i^ rrri»Tr^ *n^ 1 i 

^ ^ II 

l5<ii*flq^% qn^ i 

^«R?T«iT II 

^ s^«r qj^sqw’qr qwcr: i 
rrr:«ft q > ^f^? PT fww qr^^^T: || 

^q55T¥ *nT^ R I 

qrrqf qM^: II 

cud ?Rofr ^r R 5f«Tr ^ gdhrr i 
R?!^«rRq q;^: q^q^ ql^4^: || 

qqrqili r «Rrar qr wtqft I 

■dqPig^ ^ wqoRTRf^t II 

(*wqg^Rr ii) 

1. ‘ftir^’ qfq?J»qqi ‘q^lwrWl’ qllr qf%9<qi^ l 


88 






q^TRR: I 

fepw WT%: ll 

(ftwrsrtf^ II) 


g wrq5|5q4 ^^ ■srr g l ^M^uiH^ ll 
^ < rw ^ w i 


*igti ^ a 4 i qg g<j i , 11 


^3!?rer ll 


f^srr m q<wj^T?i»i. i 
qi^ tf^<j«jfl^ W( ^ q«r??T^ I^ir5nj.ii 


^iiif^f^f 5 qq«ir«i (?) q ^ qo g etn ^ i 

Iqi^STT qRTto^ »TRqj^r II 


^tqssRjRiqjIlq ^Iq;^ i 

«ItI^ 3 W m\ «?gqtqi ^qiqR: II 


1. f^’ fir «TfilRTwqT^ I "K. ‘^ra^^BT’ f^fir 

V • firfir qfiwwrn i 


8» 


19 




fi^«r qw«n: «T<T ^w ^; ii 
<T»>IH<iJ*l«ff<^ SWT*l0*5R|8l5?Tr: I 

«nl^g n gRft<f 3 1 

(^^4)KU||4|«) II) 

q# I 

an^sqFi ^ ^ 11 

(55JW»3^ II) 

3 II 

qi5t 3 sfit ^P^W( I 

qf^ ?R(t II 

•r^WT'q^ERl^: «RF^ ^TI^: I 

qyiWijiHwi ^ «€^l^r«r«w qc: ii 

1. *i?wg?i«HM«ii<3?jft«i 'qwr' «rr 

' qwrt ’ fT »rtira»»m I ’i. ‘Pr^’fir wfiLi 


90 






'STRTr > w fe < Ti q :. i 

^«gq>: ii 

wfiRq> i f^iw ii; i 
«i^ »RTJra7: || 

qrt^: tftd qq fiti gqn^rr i 

4h«<id;uii^ivKq: ^WRuniT: ii 

^ gsprr m*i($«0 i 

q?r«Kt^ qrt^ ^ sitnspft ii 

STd'l-dl "q ^ 5R!!*r: I 

(«rft3o 9fo II) 

^RR^: ^tkT fjq: q?^ jj^RPTr i 

^*hs^dwf^ : ««oft il 

m r g^ ^ I 

^rrepfr ^ gC^ ^q > * fo g^ It 

«Wgr: <K4{OV^% I 

«r5qiw(^^ ^Tf : %g; qRgsrar^: || 

?wrw«T a nf ^g r y i^ ^^qfe*id : i 
JPWWCJt gqWMt^dl^d: || 


91 



si<?r»TTW^prrt% I 


^ *r«Tn^ II 

to: Wgiog^^ ^ ^r fiRTT: || 

^j^wwg f^ f«n«*n ^l^*h)uiif^d : tort;, i 

^RT^r II 

(^?mo3r^ II) 

TO^ 5 ^ TireriT^ 1 

fP3i^W*TO5Rrt^: II 
5wrwqff^r«*Ti55fi«r: fioaroRri^: I 

’suft W I 

(«T6»go H? »To H) 


I 






: II 


3?Rfr^r 5TT «rrf^ gsg^>a«T«^' ^t I 


92 





^ ^ ?TWTRr; % 3 PT f^€ r ^ ! v | ^ M 

(«T5**t^FT^ « ^g T q^<t T Mg % II) 

^msq^^dl*a|<4^ ^Tl g^ ; I 

WF^ II 

«!:%^ 'iro^ ^ i 

srr»T^ «R^ ?^R5Rrrip*T II 

qair^fTparr^ II) 

^s^R5^?rag: *hi^«>d i *d<t ^: sig: i 
^sl«fis4^i^Mii«i«fi*i<ui*iPd : II 

5*3^ ^ dFT 5^PTf: i 

^iPh^J^drO dFT qr^ g ^%OT II 

qi^r ?iimi d«Tr wjpfr <yi|o riq R i q r 3^^ i 
5Fmir qmqr^slsq^iir?^. || 

^ ^ f|«5i% qR^re4l I 

(*i«^3^|ot II) 

^ld^dl*«l<'M<^dW^^d3J<uf: I 

TT ^ iq ifirfi a rfy ii 

II) 


93 





fiSTTf^I li 


3TRft% ^ ^ I 

5TFT 3 II 




(a«f«hl<.«IMI*i 5T^T^'T3% II) 


4^: I 

wg^iFT ^apT# ^aspjf i 

JlPfrnTWifnra^nTfi^: || 

^<%or 5!^ TO I 
3?*# ^ ii 

( f$ rgq ^ qart^^ T r«4 i ^ II) 


4l4rs^g5*r: qs^s^refro^ ^ i 

II) 

^rg^ 5rq*mr q«wi«ig<! : ii 

(Pi«aw4f'<ft II) 


94 



a i ffi ' wag jWT fS t I 


I 





I 

II 


^ ?nn3Tii $r«tgB?ni. ii 

(^Rqr^ q y^ ^ r « nit n) 


Pl«ag^ 5«?: ^ 5T«n I 

(^«g^r^ II) 


?T^ ’JJPRtT: I 

*»»»(U3^b|<^ ?i«tt I 

^ 5W Sfltr [qf^*]^i5«^ II 

( i %gq?: <g | qg B^ [ w(i<i n) 


< 1a ^»^ l *tgf^ r q ;l ^ fltg^«r i 

g^ ^ rwwfgr ^ qw:^i^i¥T li 

««ifwcqgtw ?PTr 3 ^: 1 

«re[^ *frw% II 


96 





^ 5Rq ii 


3:^ «rr ?:5r ^ti*ff ^gsp^: \ 

II) 
: I 


^^im: I 

«h<»^« T $^^dW¥y*T< 0 P|?Tm ; II 


W5T^ wfft 5 ^SW<5iy<^5j(^: II 





I 


(ar^ulwr <<^g Tq g|W T g^ ||) 


»'qqr^n«WT ?i«0Rqr^; qn^sfe?n*Rs i 

qsrferq^jior; n 

«f»iwfrq% i 

II) 


I 

<4iji«Stk ^!*rRi; ii 

q i tf tqr pw ff ^ ii) 


96 



^ ^ ?Jf : ^ I 

3^ ^ ^3?n3C. II 

3 3 I 

(R«ji'=r^^^ M) 

%5Rr: I 

gjTT WRT: I 

Jia^s^nn^ %^35fiW li 
Jisrr: f^Of^^r: ^jpfr *mdl«M*1lwr*hi: I 
<Tti5>u^^4\3it^«l*Rq^f ^: II 

(i^Rq^^ q«f^?if«Ti^ II) 

4l*pw ?i«rr ^ %%: qn4 R^trcit i 

^TRT ^ II 

II) 

d'5'q§JdW-^^<'i^<^0^ 3 ®TI^: I 
dv3»f)^lfihf^<uK«Aw i R q ff ^; cr: II 

q-IKU^iqH^ qRUfr I 

f^; It 

^. ‘ ^wnq^’ ^qm: i 


IB 


97 





si% ?T ^rnrer: i 
^4ifi<^ogima [ oH f ^f^g r y 3r(%9r ^T?r: ii 

^ f% ^ q T f<a^ I 

s T rf r gr^cM^^ ; ll 

■«isja5^5i «wf«if i 

II) 

smqrf^r ^os'STFrqif^lf^ i 
<w<41hi^^p^ f^^qr ii 

qqr ^ H»TRT*q g^ I 

qq II 

% g ®»eraRr ^cqr ^nri^Trar 5npft9?w: i 
«TTf^ qs=qqRI^ WF^ il*tig«ldl: II 

<iwi%q | ^^TRTi^ xmT«r i 

wnf^: 5T l^qiqRR. ii 

qiqqr^ ^rfe«icT: i 
qo^qiqqR^i^ w Jig: ll 

?r d4.i^oi *fq JT^snqos^nqqf: i 
qRTrRqrR <u«HN«h: II 

f^qi% q: JHiRt ’q q^r I 

«Tfilt%orqr^ 5 f^w^: ll 


98 



5 i (^rg« gg»ri^ I 

9T*95?7R?^?q^ ^ 5rrafMr ii 
ftKq i ^ ?TFT ^i?: JTfpr^ i 

^if ; Sr8«irf^^ 5^«f5T; || 
5n^r^ ^mt i 

giC^^mRt^g r 5r iR^rnd'^ II 

5R*ncH 4»l(34Wg ffWT <if ?55i: I 

fJT^ ^ «5n#w ?T qw^iwffl: II 

iFScftf^ ^?cRJTRq«lkR^ 3^ I 
xm ismWfwn 33Ttoi. II 

3l|^ ^ ®l^f»ij*4t I 1 

fIcftqpTf g ^Rpnqnrsi# sqqf^^ II • 

Tl^Jlrfii^^ srrw i 

*p^3r »h«!Mw «w: f!5*n^ 3 ^ 11 

ma i q^l^ q: q^ 1 


wft’fir *i1iRrwm I K. " 4<<w[q ’ *ir’ fRr 


99 






3^^ I 


^cir ^ref 3>^K*?<*<v4Wd i 

srrarr «R?c«??r: it 

3Wm«l4dr=IWl %5r 5TPRi I 

srair «pwn?r 3 dw i <^q r w»> : 11 

'bRf^ ^ I 

cRTt ^ ^aRreFWr II 


^ II 

^IfcTRFT % t^|d|f^fiXg^|«<| ^Rq% | 

^0^ % 5 t ^utt iTgtf l l^c r: II 

srtt: siIw « 5 n?aR^r I 

^ 3 %qs^r % Pi^KiP^ 1 11 

«rfMl ^ 3^ Nt I 

^ ddWi<?l 11 

1?^ *wr I 

3TBR[5r ^*ll^ld ^ W^^^lcd'f^«^ ^ w II 

(>i!^«i3Ti3r mo qo mo n) 


100 


I 




I 

^ I 

^sqriwpiiitFT i 

%: s>4 i «if^*ii crt: ii 

qw;<*8* i g»diP^<ii II 
qiS T (^^ich< i P^di I 
SIT fit^g fr ^ M«!5f^d«h<lPMdl II 

q’w^^dif^Rn’rTT ^ m **»H^M<Tr i 
S4«hltM«!»sH<i srrf^ ^jpqRT^Rif^ m ii 

sfT 5 q ^ jggrr i 

<i^i*h< i «^s f gt*ii q’ffreqr ii 

«nf^ ^q r if^fpmg q^ i 
«nf^ wi*w»i«d«3di II 


108 




^ «rrf^ %«Ryr «it snft^ II 

^qnrr ^?fiw i 

»ii'«ii*hi<3<3i II 

qq ^ jRs^Ssqr ?rpn«nfr it«iT nw i 
g yr^ g str^T; ii 

*nr q!5R^ ?r i 

?Rr 5w^ teRwr: 1 ii 

< f| qN i Rq t i 

fitgsrt wr*R®il g *5R'Riwi*3j^ni i 
^^|5W fm qRfOT JRTI^RUI 

qr *h<q ¥ i^ gf p ft^f q qR^w^ i 
f^«g^ ?RT^ II 

w 

( g qi ^R^ ■q gl^q T T wq g ^ ll) 


•q 

*h<oyqf^ i Vq i «4i^wgp?ii II 


104 



srfinnwprrtSt i 


?3gf BTR?^ n^fiBRni;. II 
»/i^i T oyi ^ 'ft*R?FRm^RTr I 
f^ i i^ r ^ sprnTPrr iifi* T ^twp |i n 
srm^ I 

* T B n gqrg^^ ^ i g R fly rr gR^^^ ii 

^ ( ^^«Rf<p n ^ i *^ di i ^< a Md^ II) 

- ■* , 

5»ft I 

^ ?rT to i 

^flro «l^?Tr«r^i^r?ir ii 

«nw ^52^ srmTOT^ii 

TO[^ 3 5 ^ Bfi^r g I 

%«r q^p tt trq fi ^r ii 


5nJ|^ «H arro i 

1^ jifr fiwaviiauig^i^ n 

(«rgailr?m% II) 


?I|[^WTO ^ 


^wpnoiTfsrr ^ i 

II 


14 


106 


m gwfftr n 

gappTf f^irfiiPTOTK i 

w *rr u 

giof cr«7T ^ ^ ^ I 

«n5r %2*j^ *K qi ggi»a^ ii 

91^ ^ ^ ^Nrrorr f ^g i yat ^ i 

qqr ^ ^i^ei 5 ^ ^^i^qgiRoO n 

(^®sr9^W II) 

<iwr%gw ^ f^ramf&r: i 
9 i f^<g i qg f %^2 g m »?iK 9 WR tfTOH > Ii 
^HgRfiPg ^ <6i TOOg ^ qnJRWgST*^. I 

^ ^ qrt *8^ gi%5!3 ^ II 

Mw^d«h9iii^q i qiW qwq^i ^ i 

**1331% •q’ q|5t 3 9I|f qi<^gwqi*g. II 


106 





•iRIT ^ 3 ?RI3?Tr | 

^|ww^ II 

(^^hSROjpT^ dLK^md^ II) 

^ qw^N ^ I 

^g<h>fe ?Wr 5TPTT1 II 

w ^ qprTPT cwr i 

5Rir ^rw %»Ti^Nwi?ri^5ft || 

q>» iq g<i •sr ^ qRqmai’^. i 

gy (%f ^ :w^r srw II 

(<^M*tU«^i II) 

I 

fcwf^ i :fir ‘ gF a [ ^ Bn » i ii 

(aireoTFiir II) 

1. '4Mi«iO’ w I 


107 





*w ?Tr irittwinf^wr sT^^ij^rerE^fr jjfr ii 

(«nin5r II) 

arftr^ I 


f*lfEnwmJwt «fiw 

f^«rjfPw%^jitifNrtwTrf^ I 

f^ioTi*fd«»il&jthl ?rj^rw 5*fr f^i^ II 


'ai«iyfi I 

?Tf ^ sqivr i 

IrsRTr 55PRff 

wnJijnf 5jwrt II 

ftwaiwrfirsft i 

^ ofi < g 5 t < T W T»Tt 

5IW ^9R*RW*n^ *f»®t I 

wi^ifi‘^l^<ii(*^ wi^ji'WwrwL II 


106 


^twfr gn^ qsgft I 

^ «nfqr qg»C. II 



%II5» ^ (?) 5Tqr I 

«ff^ «Bi§«R qi^ qrenj^^i^RSFs*^. ii 

qtqct W ‘qrf^ qRTFcff • 

i%«rwi% <dn^4*h»MiRoi»iiL i 


109 







^reof II 


5%ot srf^ri^^ I 

(f^TFRcsrewt^ ii) 


< ^ig irq^ i; siwrf^r ^ ^nrr i 

?PTroiTOPr 1-fWd‘hKlTi‘t‘lf^‘^flH. II 

v*ldl'*lji«4||5VW*l^-4*^54l|j|U|IH, I 
3m^ftg«TO^^RTf ^nf^lfBf I 


fiwfIrwFRiWRt »rf|qig^»T^5fK II 


tfl^ur«iiui ^TOT wr(^ iitoSI’ ii 


^ MIW*I5^I*»«I ^ I 
TOt ^ <R 5 II 

g WW F* ife «f W<llftfil^yh I 

iiimw ii 


110 



scftwnnwrPf \ 


i Ti n q i^ ^3^41tlU|(H«i ' H, I 
?P7RT*fWf^ “ST 5^ II 
?R5fsK*n^ ^sqifer? JR^ 


^fRTRsff TOt ^ I 

!^3r:jRir'RT ^tpit tj<«i4)(fc|«fl ii 

^ »!it wiw ^ ^ritffSFin^. II 

ipHR ^ I 

^«R3PJ^5nic^1 II 

«?WP*#sf JR^r^l 








n. ' TBTf^^rajnrBrtt ’ fir ^ i '«nf^w'firfir 

WRI 


111 


«7r^ i 

?wr qw*<f8 qR * ^ q R li 

(^q*!oi% II) 
I 

Pi* TO ^ ^nrr t^mn ^rr g^J^rofr i 
^i«RWT ^ 1 ^ »mr ii 

<^ q»q q^ 3 giflqr ^igf^q i f^g^i ii 

^^iRR!|fq?Kn®r srPwRliqjfN^ i 
«nw %q ssRrqst qR li 

m ^ g^ I 
5n»t qiqr ?nTr ^ 3*6i<i«%iq»iS«h<i ii 

woaiw f Nify r^ i^ gj?t qnr qq I 
?iqqt ♦iRqRd^Hj^ q^?rRreiq»: ii 

w* T q : i 

quqtgr II 

R!i%5T qnqwRjq qiqrai^ i 

qrwiiwr*Ri^f%5i ^ ?f5qnR»n^ra?n|^ ii 

^hiRTO#*t qRrqRgqiRn^l i 

(MqgqqfqR II) 

312 

fUkr ^'■. 





«ri®5q«{rr «rRT ^^MiRufl it 
^iRNrt RNRft qisPTr ^ n ^ r q i fiMri i^ I 

(?^i?iiRn^ II) 


»^»fr qK R W<sqig«» ; il 

^ f^ii%5n i 

qjRrsrr ^ %ikr Pl^dw i ti 

sqm^q^lw gNjij f r« r <miPtid i i 
qjqiwM «wrr ^rawsr ii 


%2qi qif wg: qninf^ w:: \ 
finftx ^ 5I03T 5rf«rJF qf^j tl 

^ gR?^ < ^ Mq i ww tg ^« r i 
'qwgiMfJiviiRisfl II 


1 . ‘ wwwwsT ^ q«3j3fr ’ ftr Pjwjjmifnwra! t 'qPM 
f^wff qjr qfuqrsrwqts^q:’ i fsre 

wru t V. gcc ffii: wra: i 

118 

u 




%^I19: 9iT24«r fii f wft ii 

?:tRT^ g®!^: | 

apS^CT g * ? gia i »f t I 

?r^ %aT II 

gsr: i 

«TVPT ^ ^ f^lF99hnr: || 

aiWiq^w r q lH- ^ a T ^faifea n * l «K : I 

?T^ q-niy^ ^ ^ II 

?|WirTOsqq|it^ I 

?r^ ^ ^ ^ifHf ^ ^ II 

^Tin^ snanl^ ^ ^ i 

^ag[Rq«ga^ ^ jRrerr fiw-iwqii: ii 

(qCT*n>^ II) 
I 

swqqni^ span 4ifiuq»i(Tfn: I 

•n^ mmn^t ii 



»i;^ smswi^ ?HNff <^5: 1 

s^ m ^tvRft wmrfSrt^; 11 

^iltK«is^?*j 9 ift ^ ^ifwnpni^ I 
WRit *fnfR ^ ^wprr ?l^: 11 

S(v«sft*n iT 5 Wpr: I 

Hnfor 11 

^s[^u?T siRu^ xf Trortiff v|o<wi f i^«M I 
Ro^r %i«r RiR^TTri^N&mr it 

^ RUiRoyr R »!«iwr I 

(N^TnTfw iR>n •ftw ^sr r fjliw 11 

R qn^ iRr «ti^ 3 wt I 

qftqwi t gr ^i^is r g fe Ki u 

(q^t«ng^ II) 

1. '«Rhgifw%’ftr ^ f ’cqwq t ng ; « ' <*iftr 

»K"»mq>l | g t I ‘irt %K » »t R q q |g ; i v. ‘fftfST’ 

ffif %K*IMiqqW! I 


116 




I 


WRft ^ 



I 


*iTqRnf?rF3n^ ^NRft ^ ^jni^ II 


^ «i(%2sww I 


,_J iilL_iLJ - L H , ,1,^ I A - - -^. ■ . 

srei^^npn ^irt i 

«njRi®r ^1# ^ I I 

an®Rn^ ^ 95^ 5I^R r II 

R 5WT ^ 5WMRR0»^^ I 
?o?Wft R *W|lPlH|<lrtl^l II 

?WRt I 

<RjlR WWT 1 II 

(f*l’g^W II) 


1 . * ^ ( ^^ 5 ii«m q >s ; i ’i. 

ii^’l?r?RnniTOR«n5: I v wwr l^wf^nwg ’ ffl» 
qw: j Y. * ni | ^ i l>fl«H(lyR ’ fRr %(^(5irai^qi3: i 


116 




siftpflnwnlSr I 

^ gg o ^ f^: 

^ »T5Riri^ 

^ %2ipr^ ii 

n) 

«TOT^%^rnn «f >i g*^qq* T i r *i i i 
5ri*TOTS[ifPT(!g5i^i^^rqRTg^ II 

«rir ^ ^ fr: i 

II) 

m fJtwinwT^wn <^i^ ' ^> t <r^i i 
^ ar^ ^*ra w i II 

fterr ^«rnm ^ II 

«T«IT I 

•I’aiT m^iiMi*(l(^mf^iun I 

II) 

^(N« b i I 

( ^? Sg lfi«l«M 5«ni|T ^ ^g g i I 

^^tW, * 15 ?CT^ — 


H 7 



3 ^ I) 

»sTif%awT ajwTf «fi^sin ^ II 

(^5B0Wfgi^ II) 
I 

^ ^gW 3 a*iP>«n I 
II 

g^ «3?jofl^<Ti g??i^ ^ret r fe«fi || 

(^4rg^ II) 

■*ig^ S; SRK^ I 

arajg^ ^ II 

II) 




^TfKRt '5R3[t ?rt ^ R- 

^ «ft»nr?rf Hi^ II 


(?R5(|?F% II) 


118 



sirfNnws«nl^ I 
I 

srar i 

^wm<^g^ig t t^d i «t»ud^^M» i i X I 

'!hw<i(^^i*iiR/l II 

I 

5r|gwTWf5^ «ii*mi4d: i 
*n^ <K g fq i ^is<di gijjsiorr ii 

I 

M f*T#RW?TF «TPT*IRr I 

?rr %3rr $R^r ii 

wiRjjinii^ q^ ?Rqw«r qsw^: i 
jM »i^nsp^t q ^ giqd i ii 

(^WS'^#!^ II) 


1 . ‘q:^s*fl^t ’fir fii^gsnJhrwre: i ‘«»^’fir<^- 
I * q t qM fi ^ n wf ilt tgqw»H?i^ ’fii f^«gP T ^ Tr <<ri& : I 
V. ' ’ fir I 


119 




Jrt?r«rTw«gr»rri% i 


w smnif Hp S fi r < ?| i|4i ^ i 

^^rsrr ^ ii 

«ivg5nf»3% ^ «h*n*K^ I 

vi44HlW) >Al'4l|?f4PH<il II 

«T?B^ f$w ^ »mroERff I 

^ nffwi il 

«rair^ ?wr ^ srt cw i 

jfhrrasrrf^r ^ II 

^ ^vmirr i 


d><g r 4K f ^di n 


%^nT*r 5 to «r^ i. 

firgrr srm *T(^di II 

II) 




^ ^rflt: ^l«n (?) Vr qflii? I 

WiTffI ?ITO3fft II 



sr<?r»rrmjpn<% i 


*r^ 5ri?lW'*n‘ n 


«fNI ^ g R7 i f fe<B i: I 



^ 3 I 


q5 qfq ^«^4)?iri ^^snTr 5Tm ?rr u 


'SI li 


«TpiTstr mr i 

^ %ar arf^ ■«im<if^?ii || 


R^m r *Tif^ %sr irtP^ ?wr i 
*M «nsra^ ^ «itr ^aSwri%q»r: ii 

(?K<w»«% M) 


^jTRiwr I 

yi i Hqo fi f^qn^Rifr 8rf!<i«uift<rRT5n i 
fitJpn ^ ^ 3 ii 

g?i»RT0P5l^ i 
3 f^< i: II 





«TV«iFn«rlt ^ %?Tr ii 

^W%JT I 

<%a[r 3 fFRWsr g^wir I 

qnm«3RT^ tesrr l ^fi«ri)^^< ll n 

II) 

^T I 

l^rwT 5rtS^ 5?ip ql l^ ig R W iT ffl ^ i 
^ qrw ^gwt i i i «imNiH*tk<!»M<i li 

ftqq^qnqfNr i 

I 

qR^nrr q>^giq >qi g qT^ q r R of ) i 
gqr qi^sft ^rai-brr 11 

^1 

WWW ?wr qiqi^^nrtN^ 1 

^iqspfr 3 ^|qr iwjnwr g«ftw n 

1 . ‘ «R%l55f' fir TWI^ftrfNTS: I ‘«TWWft ’ fit WT- 
<<f|qwg ; I 


132 



I 


5TeT: ^TRTrfrf^FFTr I 

4im<ss«K/9 t «f ? rg^ r ^iwr M<isriRr^ U 

«b<«Rl<bfA«FT I 

ir^snfr^^’STFST^sfr ^srqinfe^iR. i 
^wrr ^nP^i^i ii 


WSHTRWSft 1 

WWW %wwofr wreKwiwsft s*rr I 
^nTT?5qrf$l^ %W II 


>3?R?rFft li 

II) 


19S 


^TRH »W»**TSfr I 

4Km?3<sifir*fl ^ »r«w>f5ft ii 

II) 

^rnsnft’ ^ngw¥F i 

#V ^ - 

»rfnTf»n ?T«n ii 

?F>F#Rra!OT(?) ^ ^RFoft I 

^igo¥r ?r€^ET?TOnir^ i 

(/%^fci*ifis> II) 

i ^rT rguc f I 

^rar ^ i 

wwRfF «K^fgo ¥r ^ 'w II 

«r5Tqr 5iTr?nT%5j ^w rsRgripTg. i 
ipn *i: «Tmr% ii 

«?vf^ «r ^ (?) I 

fT <Tr Tf^ ^*T^ar?|f«TT || 

(!!KqHO¥% II) 


194 



I 

f^^ijSy ri ^ 9^: q fi i> / l < i f II 
W Tf g ^T f fe i ft ^fl»Tr rwr ^|Hf<^rW i 
g ^arn^qf^r gw ii 

«TRJteRr5RTWRr ?TW ^F3r««^rT i 

^y r i g w cr ^ 51W 11 

*h<wifl[iww 1 

(»!?wg^n»^ II) 

wwwt ^?5f?r?r ^ it^ ^sqRfr 

w fsft ^ »Tfrair*Fif^ ^ I 

^ ^ 3 it j|^* T mg(S^fi r «gq *TFn 11 

It) 

I 

^ «ntr wt ^i3SK>i II 
<if|rflf ^ ^ wrr i 

II) 


126 



I 

qig Ti yigd i <?uii i 

^^s^TRgqr 3 g^ak5r^i?TT 11 

II) 


(^TR^ricte#? II) 

ftrn I 

%5rr f«[rfT5Tr ^r«^f ^cqr^Rn 1 
^ f5l9l^nT*??if^r 11 

I 

g»T«TT sft^Rqi^sqsr/^rrn^. I 


126 



I 


^«rt%: I 


q5%Ri5Rfl^T?Tra: i 



%g4V«ira^i(5|«iTH. II 


«0FTT I 

«Frr 3 ^sp^r 41<T q fl^^^eivi i 

qyRys ra > ^ r>in^ n q^^^g rqr fi r q i i ii 

SRTFrlT I 


I 

%^si^qrr i 

I 

^<iw*iwi 5i»rr ^ ^qwimoTtfdi ii 


127 



5rflt»mwjr»rrt% i 


*R!IWr 4>*raR >T CTI II 
I 

scSfs^TOirr i 

»»?CT I 

*1^ g»ncr *R^wn »nn^T^»*wf^mr i 
^gqg i wmft o fl 11 

'3f<llf3|;3l^ I 

'SFTf w f%?nTt i 

«nc>^ ^ ^^«h4n^ i fc rg f > ^ II 

I 

®sio^rqRft^i?Tr i 

MU«SI<l»«it I 

^ ro a r ^ pf f si<K^g ’?i yodiBi^ijsNil^ i 




ipNNr ^prrW^: u 


128 



I 

^ ^ spqr *ng^ 1 1 

3 co¥ra 5 r^T 5 rr ^ li 


»RF«5Rft I 

II 


^TTO^nST I 

«Tq^if^i ^ ^s«ir R i gi ^r »t5r^ i 
f5|^»^-4'.|dHKI «>d«llti^’<hl^n I 

II) 

>n<i»3tftd4i^ l W l Pl«HI*ll«l^^<ll<< II 

^<l*l<l^i<l*^vK t yuwiPSPlHlRl-flH. I 


17 


129 





(sTR^wtoWP^. II) 
I 

5<R»Trg<^ ^ g^TT y[«f^^oii i 

^ragft ?p!iT 3?»^ ^w»Tr II 

(^^g'fiSWt II) 

^rwfT I 

«Tfllig# ^ 350^ ^ gsrarf^ i 

wyifi t 3 ^ < i W T wi inwrf ?rRg«fR^ 11 

(*ii4u^*iii<iij| II) 
^P3rr8|t I 

p5[r«ift ^ I 

«TWf^ snrw II 

II) 


ISO 





^«Rff qrf^rq^r 

^rKTlfr 


(^FSjCRTt 




(wTorraiJl II) 


I 

'«Tr^fr 3^*5ff ^ ?*TRf I 

iRWt q y ^^w? : ii»T< T ^g § < ir[ »i || 


181 


II) 


I 


^ %# <dl^«idd<i»ciim^N« girrw?r i 

^ ^ JRWr | 5 | 5 j 5 |T 

^qr^^iRmr ^ jtj II 


gqtMg f R^qqfD r g^if io g^i q?rfR«TR, i 
tK^^q«hi^*«fii* T g FT g^^ggwH * g i q^i - 
»?raT qRripn»iR*R*Rq!^ >Tiq^?fN5RfK i 

(qiRRpftesRfl^ II) 

^TSfT I 

N»«mgtgq^l ? iq n i 

g II 

II) 


<Ml^ i 5»TW»TPfr ^®WRff Sl<h«[^dH. I 


183 




<TK^W^*i II 

^idiff sn>T*n«?^ I 

(^CRHiraifNR^ II) 


«nFA$ I 

feiirr ^jwsnw i 

^?R?%ni#^3|^iO¥§: q?if*Tl^cfr II 


^W(t tflq WT ^ II 


«Fg5r ?ci%ut 5^ ^ !ifi4J3/*l«4rl II 


g*iwn ^3^wlofr ^ft^RFSTc^f^ i 

^ ^T«frpn[opfj^ II 

«<«hldMairaq3^ II) 


^ ^ swnr^ •fq4!*i«roif^«rtH i 
<Tl<iifl*wqiy<i^i ii 

??nRT (?) I 

«fhf!^ qnih «rT% q^ 5 f^wlK ii 


188 



5r%»mjaiTOrt^ i 




q<r q^n 

'q II 

■eiwM^^iHl ^ qr4qt^qt: i 

<Tq i ^^f«:q*IHl II 

( % g q ^ s ra *4 > f^? r II) 


qf^sqr fitg^ ^ 1 i 

»M gsFaiTr ^^ pr wR > *<i 3^^ i 
yrq^g^ srr qirq*r ^ ^^Rf^rr g*Tr li 

'wreqjlB^qR. I 

aroqsi q^nfrnr ! qr/Srqnqr 3 ^rr 11 
^ ^ i qq > 5^i^qi ^ 9jf?^r qfig^rr 1 
qit qn^ cR*irqr qnr^ 11 
^feot qr^q^l I 

qi%s35R5: q >r 4^< n ^r^I II 

?Rqr«r ^ ^ qn^ 1 | 

qji4 < 1 ?^ «p«t8?T3. U 
^«r »w?i% qv 5W qn^ q%«3.i 

(^qrf^RT^P^ 11) 

184 





wraRTsiRftsrr q^rnfrr i 

ST i R g i O g g ^jofiToy^ II 


S^^FTT g^winft f!%cr^lt«Rr II 


q 'P i^^<r4 t gif I 

q^ ?Jiw %q qR% gf^sf^ “g || 


qfr»T5Ti*gwq9Tr ?TNt ^ ^ 3 ^ w 1 
^<gi^i*h1^H^uyi geF ft ^y ft ^ er^ II 

(34qi|i(OTi»T^ gjg^rqj^ II) 


^sTRqiqgRfrqr ^qf^rcopjf^ li 


g»«l qqs^s^ qirswrt^ i 

qi^sgff gi ^ «r% gfW qigf^ffqi»i. 11 


(^qqwr^ II) 


135 



I 

qwrr 5 1 

- «T^nTn%ft %?, sfjrfewn^Ri^ ^ n 

<i<!r(^*r?rao% o ^^) 

«tfWfr: I 

g y ft^f 5R7 11 

?r5ni*^ 5 m: 1 

fnrJ^ ^ «fl^ 51^:^ II 
^«Rft *r^ ^ g^^fsfr^rr 1 

II) 

«ra^f7^g <wt <^ 3 : 

^ ^ ^ ^ g^PTHirsni. 1 

^ qRTf^ 'sr ^?ff Ji^f^xnrt 
^ %R*(n^W) f *lg< T g f g<F»fl II 

II) 
I . 

X 

^<fM«mqil%e TT I 

.« 

MiAiHj p d^a^ Rldi«i<i II 


136 



5WTR ^ ^ 3 ^ II 

5^ 9®*^ ' ^ nwi^«n I 

«5TrFlt^ II 

sflFi^gfCT «ni^ qfefc I 

i^siqaiiVMd^ II) 

^ fiPT? I 

^ ^ ^ II 

^irr^ ^ ctwr ?f$rjnpgr%: i 

J?Wr ^ tcT^ft ^ II 

(M^sRrao^ ^®gwo II) 

^ »T fg^g^i gTRif05y®*ri6*?Tni.ii 


1 . ‘3W^ ffMff ^nft’fir <TORR»l,i ^ . ‘ 
•nsRTij^i ' *fi!l»M% wm: « 


18 


137 






^ II 

?RSf ^ ^ arnif^ g aw«K*c I 

^ «rR% ^ II 

gifr*TrarfN«i^ I 

gi^^qa^ II) 

3oj?fNRniRfi5Tr sfNf^r^rr ii 

( H»|^< | u| ^cl^dN I *i, II) 

^gi^r f ^ r f^g r i 

siHl« T 04ig<;igg>f *p o ygfP^d$ r <g R t ii 

sT^f^r i 

"Kiypg g^ ^ ii 

(^qgoi^r 11) 

I 

^*ffgrg «Kg g|^g i i 
«h<o«<s^^ t <ag | ?*Tt gT>i ft g r ii 

1. g^'wfir^ »0? i wP i fii qi g t i 


188 




srt?HTra«eri»rri?» i 


%r®r i 



^TrefNrr qr f^qenf^r qr i 




^wWr qrpfr ^5€rpi^opi;^cir i 
^ig%3rr i*^<i ii 

«wqi^ qra^rqi^’ogp’i. » 
qqr qit qi^ ^ ! il 

fijj i vi i Mi ^ qipfr ?B»Tcrr cwr i 

«qTq(^3cir ^ ^ssqofr ?ra^?^r || 

II) 


%qqwMt?ir ^ fias^ ^ fit%5iqir \\ 
q*<qgqggil^di i 
?SKf«K*^^ ^ <!iMt«ri?q^i1^^Ti Ii 

feR.mi»1^>q wi>»^8iqi^ f ^^^ i 

(?(j^qnTon*i^ j^qrqafe II) 


389 




^IVWWC I 




I 

mmr^: I 
*iT^oit WTq?r i 
?iifeR*T «wp!frsr jururr f^fi|?rr: ii 
TOToff I 

fpRiT^w R«^«s<Il«h« 4I ?nir ii 

«fii«rR5Tt 5 ^sft 3 ?^rg«rni. i 
^jaRTofr n 

g^ t ^ q f^^^* r K t ww^qrT i 

^ t go^ ^jnc^^: ii 

II) 


14S 



siRwwwj^nt^ I 


q^: II 

q^q ^qFT q^ qm^qjqqr^qq: i 
5ra[^ % cT««f^<5<l«f>^qiq4V II 
CHgq t R r q pTi^ ^ng^q ^fiq o gg ; i 
^nqRTT qwoT: ^f^^g r r o H ?Trf5r^^q% ii 


qF^»qfr iqi?^5r f^gq ? >T r Rgft i 
qgif^qgqi qrar -q^^'q i ifSl^^ q a r r ii 

^iqnfr ^ qq^wqi^^i i 

^i^q«nq^ ^^rnrf^qfr II 

futrq %wNt i 


^ W qr f^«r^ 5 ^; i 
^ T i^wi^ T iq^ qq qro^ ^«fclt ?^qc, ii 


#3: I 

srmr qq q3r%qf^q3erqq^: ii 


qq^r qq^r^qf^i^^r 1 

qrarr q^qq^rr ^ qq ? ^^ qr 11 


144 



clcf: I 

?Rf^ Rfi^hWlR^+ONUII I 

>a 

» Tr^ o%<^a<iu> It) 


snift I 

=W3lf3rr =^a^fS€3TKr ^<n^*rr i 
=sr ^ ^s s prrf^ ^ r li 

Jisnoff ^qr^Rri snai^^RTf^RTn?^ i 

?Rfqt5rrfi^q5% II) 




^ ^ ^ SRITR^ I 

«n^ n 3^ ^mrqxi^r it 


(/^«awqT<ft II) 


19 


145 





^ ^ ' * TP g^8a> nf %g Kr ii 

55rs^^ g^gr ^diHfidJfiRufi I 

i rer iq f ) ii 

g i j g^ qg^ ii) 

«l«|un ?TW^i|«h*|U«g: I 

^ 3 3 ^ g»rr ii 

II) 


^ ^T^^CrTW^rSTOT I 
«X!d|Hq<K<l qi^r 5R5^5!I II 
^^q^rsRrnigTRT ^i t sw^g^g grr i 
|j q^U|^qqi ^ %qr II 

<iH^«qift^qs^ li) 

»nt*qtr ^qi^sr q g q ^f i 

g«r ««fif<iiiRi ii 


146 





^ ?PiT I 

q^ronrq «n 5 r fr^r < 5 r^ II 

II) 

^ ^rraw fgq i^i pcid i || 

(s^^iRon»T% II) 


qqi(5sqF rwra^RT^q^rr i 
q»qr^<! 5 ^|j#q^^<sii II 

II) 


^ !c?f;q««qpsidi i 
^T^^’q^rgrw qrf%q»rq5»ir^^ (0 ii 

^rft»^4$d^wr ’q q?:^RTqqrf&Fft i 

q^JCwrsr^ «l^^*«l<ft*lll^d| II 

^Nnfr f%^[?Tr ^^$q>^^^F55^^r i 

(^gq^^^r-'R ?iH=anqi^Rrqd% II) 


147 




<Rqiis4^<wr ^ri^wrRoft ii 

q^lFKf fSNRft ^ qiq arUT ^ I 
qi^r qojt g > qg g fqw: || 

rftqoT 5R>^reqqqr^5n i 

(ft»gqqW^ II) 


%q q > ^<5qr i 

q»f«^i =q <^qigq i || 

II) 


qpqr «pirqT55T^gl%: i 
qT%qiraif*T^5r (?) 5r/%qnig5TqTiRqft ii 

?:?Tsrerr ^r^qigjr^qoft i 

qK i *iqtwf w ^fwnfl fi^jqsw ii 

(^qiROTPi^r II) 


^q t ^yqf *5lqnft q^wqrfqr i 
na'es^^^iRh^ iq:iq^ II 


(^qwr^ II) 


148 



sr fej T WMmift I 


I 

g^^ T f ^JTRwr ^ g^i^iH i ii 


^r^iriaj ^Rn^r?? yrgg>gr v»f°iiR»ti ii 
%«<»r5ft 'fteiTT ^ (?) Plwa^i,MUi^?Tr i 



twfcft rTT^^r ^wr •sr^srr erswrf^ i 
5 R^r irf^ d 

^ r f ^eK n wT ^ i ^ w ^ i 

II) 

'^t^TWi g^iT^di II 

(^*ftgTr^ II) 


wiwoft i 

(y fa i ?: p nn ^ irec^nrz^ n) 


149 





?rf^5|>iT^r«fu ii 

(^?TW% II) 



®n?i^ I 

sT^«?P55^if%*n I 
^f*im<«IlP^dl II 


5^ ^ am^Rifrl^ I 

^ >^ 4 ?mrf5r?T JTsrs^nsRTsrrfe^K II 
R^ipqicrr srrerr ^r^Ti^iRcr i 


(^S4^^i44 ^iH=^?«nfi^rrq2% n) 


fiw pr o ^ 3 stri^ ^j^riftt I 

sR^ <f i ^4y ^ 5%3r II 

^«idMRU*i< T i^ i4 %«r | 

(l4«g^wN^ II) 


s«on 5rriff I 


150 



srfn«rRW0r®rTm i 


^svm^ g^r^ ^( 5 )»Fq#J i 

«rRR& q^y t OTg^ufl II 

(i^qjRTqR?^ gi^^ r qd^ II) 

qroiff g nwr^ q^^rqft i 

q^it ' <fre^fl ^ MUdMiq^qrf^ II 

^KM3hM<I d0L«i^i«t^-*l5^t||Rl«f) I 
^«RRt ■q %Ti«fk ?i^sqifferf^rl^ II 

(^qo«Jr II) 

%aRqcft qqi^r gtu I 

gjR^ifqr qjqi^sg^ ^o^rRofi u 

II) 

qig^qr 

^gS<iii ^?rqr ^ ^ [ ThquH»4qif^^ii i 

4)41^71^^^ I *q q^^ q qr fi f gft II 

fir<Jqc^q«ftfli *q q ^ B «^<s>qfi ^qr i 
5qr«psw!*qw^ qsf^^rqr^r ii 


151 



5ri?i’^Fraw®rriSl’ i 


«(i* Tq t ^ R gRTr wq?w*qqr?si^l^?ri : ii 

II) 

^rgosffr ?r?PTr ^^rreqrf^^^orr i 
=q ^ralefft ii 

^pn%: ajmsrf^^r q»q^ i 

aT«5r <3ni ^oT 5q«T qPRT: II 

'ft 

qRT Hrg^ fisit ^«Rft I 

II) 

^ «wrqiT g «PT <ifeq>i i 
siTrftfg^ < a q¥^^qfi^di || 

qjqRwr^f ^ ^rqr^ i 

qi^ ^ r g q qi qsr^igqjr ii 

qrqr^ qw q if » ^-mct> i 
%q qt^<tfqqi<w<h ; || 

5qra^qN?:r qii^ qiffiov^ i 
^Nnqf qrt^ |qr: ii 

(st^qjKon^ii* ll) 


162 



t 

^ <ff 5 *rofr j 

«qTH<uw*^,w TnrenreRiftsft f 
5 ^aoft %% (% ^ 1 <H II 

^ ^^«w 1 «ii ^»?nin JT ^ ro f^di i 

^ 5 m 5 ?%at II 

5n% 3 fm ^rm ci^:qJ^ 

u) 

^ g^ 5 (^r«wffr f^r i 

*mi^iw ^ II 

(t 5 (? 3 ^ ID 


«ni^ 5H i y«ii tgt^5Tg:5T^a^i i 
iT%* 5 rs^^rf 5 n ii 


(i^qiRwrr# ji^qi^ ii) 


^. «K5ra^Tftr » fi d^P r f^ «ng; i x. wTf%^(tfir wni. « 


ao 


153 





JTsn^H^ldl ^ II 

(^??»jwi5r II) 


gO^^ T gga ?q!» i I 
^ 5 r gI< T $gq f Bte T »^. I 
?raf*TC0Rr3TK %?Tsn^ II 



I 


w?f jrrefMr ?rt: «• 





10 


»r^ ^ qRi^; q?p^r «r% ^ ^arnwr: i 

(^?T»nw^ II) 


1. wraci 


164 



I 





f^[5irar*RnfRn «^bi i 

fwft ^ II 

wif^ %«T ^s^‘< II 


?raf*r^oRQTf>i 


0) I 

Rl^athlpMdl II 


5JFrr 3 1 ^ % I 

flig^ q]5j 3 *i5|«h*C^ II 


%?iqohnnqiiqr ^rqfvRopjf^ II 


1. ‘q?^ 5 Ti5i5?Rjj.i X. 55l*«n^ ?*rra[, i 

^ ‘ OTiw vn ?T^ ’ fir gs iSr qq^H t^ t^g i fq»Tr*R ^fir wra. » 
qrrqiw |f»qwTT(N?t9Pm*Tf qJhrofir ftliwuit f<n?^^T- 
Sfiwnqr i v. ^firifirfir »jT5i5rt^>i, • 


167 




SiftWRHimiA I 

^ ^ II 

g^ 4t^r}ff ^ ?T«rh?^or^crr i 
««i>niw(^ g gj^err || 

*R<o»*)S«ii a?raft m»rq ^ I 

'<«fil^nwwqd% II) 

^wrwrqJT q^»^i 
3Tifei^«rgfq5rr ii 

»iwnn% ?f 'wl^TcTT ?rr ^rrst ! i 

Na 

q»wifrHp^*Tr ^ ?iqf>7TO;^ il 

q >%q wft g^Rfrr gfen^ig:^ I 
sngqi^l iiMw fro iq^r tw || 

?q>Tr *ri0t: qnTOTiPTr i 

*!qr g ii 

(gii^i^ qn^*«iiR^iq2% ll) 


1. *r i wit 8Wrtl*iT 

ftmag’ ^qjsRFP^i 


108 





?f 5 rr ^ ii 

II) 


(fl^liffl cfhfTTO^ =S[ c ft; T ^q - * T d<0 I 

^nwrar;ri%«Tr ^ | 

'€r =^ ^g?t ^ot ^ u 

^sqr II 

3% TTt T ^^swg flrg^ ^ i 

j^Bnrr «TRFf^#r q?T3rr«^^5«T^ II 

(yij?«ihiiuiMiil II) 


I 

<fK3fitsr ^ ^ ’j5f^rl%qT3cqjr i 

»U!i^ ^3«H% $r»iV ii 

II) 


159 






Quujir — Q^a^cVisu ssofi 
^rissisiQmri^JUT^ SQ^stDjgeu/r^^ Q^lL^l^ 
Osl. 60^^0 (S^lLq^l^ QutuQa, 

^(Sa^ii^m/Seuir^inhy Qfitueuu(3uiuiQfiir(^fSi.^ 

dfiQ ^^uSmQuiuj — aQfsttijgj^ir^ sirien^iQsirif. 

ujireArQfiSSif. Q^etremsu aeo^ (jpQfitSi. 

iLjbjpi (tfi(S^€Qu9€ir Qutuir — 9nrQst^ QstLenu. Qsl^ 
^a9na3ss(SeueKfi (S^LLenuJolium tSeirihLfeuii. 

(yy(S^€9j^irfi uenu. Oainf.u9eir Qutuir — euiramm 
USBIL^J^SIDi^LJUta dStT^AQa/Tt^OtU CStA 

^tfipeo CSeueArQth, 

Q3Ass0^>lSss^a^®^ QuiutrtSifieij euirmmiir€uanai.) 

Q^iLesiL^ a9i5^&nirJs(^ Opppirerr SirQ^i^ SpuiSeoirptr 
effiLt^tu QeussCciimfi QtsQtB^iraipjpeu^Qppqff^ 
QsLLmLJSiu Qsi^ei)6iaiiB(^ aQfstnpeu/rmafi (SsQi^Aevjr 
QpiL{f.aj seofi Qpetretneu y^Qp^BtuirQui, 

^^L^fTtMtaPtSssAiQ^ QptLjeuuQuiuirjiQpff(^^') 





INDEX. 


Page, 

Abanfndranatb Tagore ... 100 

Abhanga ... 57 

Abbaya-hasta 14, 53, 57, 58, 65, 
80, 81, 87, 89, 97, 98, 100, 102, 
105, 127, 128, 136, 143, 151, 
152, 158, 161, 165, 206, 213, 
219, 221, 240, 248, 271, 286, 
319, 322, 338, 339, 341, 344, 
346, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361, 
362, 366, 371, 372, 383, 384, 
385, 386, 387, 389, 393 
Abhioharika, a variety of 
image of Vieh^n, 84 f.n., 86, 
90, 95, 96 

Aohyuta 230, 232, 233 

Adbama, form of image, 80, 83, 
84, 86, 89, 90, 91, 94, 96, 96, 
98, 109 

Adbarma ... 295 

Adbirajas, kirlfa-makata for, 29 
Adbirajas, karaGda-makafa 
tor, ... 30 

Adbirajas, queens of, wear 
ksda-baodha ... 30 

Adbirajas wear knntaja ... 30 

Adbokshaja 230, 232 

Adimurti 261, 262, 263 

Adilakti ... 342 

AdilAsha 93, 95, 104, 107, 108, 
109, 110, 114, 115, 132, 133, 
134, 139, 140, 141, 143, 154, 
' 169, 261, 262, 263, 264 

Aditi 74, 75, 161, 163, 299 
Aditya-purma ... 266 

Adityas ■ 74, 76, 96, 299, 307, 
309, 310, 311, 317 


Page. 


Adivaraha, same as Bhu- 


varfiha 

... 132 

Igams 50, 78, 110, 132, 137, 


175, 342, 381 

Agastya 

... 267 

Aghorasivaoharya 

... 53 

Agla 

331 f.n. 

Agni 7, 60, 76, 125, 144, 283, 

292, 303, 304, .350, 357,399 

Agni-Durga 

342, 343 

Agni-ku^das 

360, 370 

Agnimatha (?) 

... 394 

Agnipurana 125, 131, 134, 181, 

186, 195, 200, 201, 216, 219, 


221, 223, 241 

Agni'tattva 

... 399 

Agniyakari 

... 398 

AhaAkara 

... 293 

Abimsa 

... 266 

Ahirbudhnya-samhitd 234, 291 f.n. 

Aibole 

108, 113 

Airavata 

46, 111 

Airyaman 

... 311 

Aisvarya 

234, 236, 237 

Aitareya-brahmna 

... 46 

Ajita 

... 362 

Ajmere 

... 254 

Ajna 

... 329 

Ajnana 

... 295 

Ajyap&tra 

11,250 

Akfisa 

61, 398 

Akalarupii;if 

... 898 



HINDU lOONOQRAPHY. 


PAOB. 

Akshamala, 18, 54, 56, 57, 58, 

81. 202. 253, 255. 256.258. 266. 
310, 316. 320. 321, 335, 357, 359, 
360,361. 366. 368. 370.372. 377, 
378.383.384. 887 

Aksbara ••• 335 

Alaka-obudaka 27, 30 

Alakshmi • • • 398 

Alamba • 293 

Alldbasana, 19. 134, 141, 154, 158, 
161,169. 263.269.357.358, 365 
Alvars ••• 390 

Amba ••• 368 

Aoabika 196 f. n., 358 

Amrita 251, 284, 285 

Amrita-gbaU ••• 374 

Amja 36. 119, 120. 382 

Amiumadbhedagama 306, 318 
321.373, 377. 384. 394 
Anabata ••• 329 

Anandakumaraswami, Dr. . . . 221 
Ananta 200, 257 . 258 

Anantisana, description of,. 19 
Anantasayana ... 114 

Anasuya 251, 252 

Andhakara ... 382 

Andhakasara 379, 380, 381, 382 
Angada 242. 344 

Adgulas, a measure 21, 23, 28 

31.92, 163, 164, 186. 189. 
190, 201. 203, 239 
Aogolfya ... 59 

AAgdr ... 279 

Apimapdavya ... 251 

Animals in the hands of 
images ... 11 

Animddha 212, 280, 232, 238, 
234, 236, 287. 238, 240 


Paob. 

Anjali-hasta 16, 91, 108, 113, 188, 
134, 139, 141, 144. 168, 166. 
169. 176, 178, 194, 204. 211, 
259, 263. 266, 268, 285. 286, 
288. 323, 370 
Ankusa 1. 2. 8, 49, 52, 54. 55, 56, 
57. 58. 59, 63. 65. 66. 144, 257, 
258, 287, 288, 291, 292, 294. 
335, 338, 339. 343, 345, 346, 
347. 355, 357, 361, 366. 366, 
371, 372. 878. 886 
Annapurpa 12, 370 

Antaratman ... 145 

Antariksha-loka 162, 166 

Anugraha ... 398 

AnuiaBana^parvan ... 227 

Aparajita 362, 369 

Apsaras 94, 95, 308 f.n., 370 

Aramuja, in Travanoore. 
manufacture of metal 
mirrors in, ... 12 

ArchcBlogical Survey of 
Mayurabhahja, 19, f.n., 301 
Archalogicckl Survey of 
Western India, Belgaum 
and Kaladgi ... 174 

Ardra, naksbatra, 85, 90 

Arikdsari-Parfikrama P&udyaddva, 
64, 210 

Arishta ... 197 

Artha ... 306 

Arinjigai ... 390 

Arjuna 210, 211, 273 

Aruna 283, 312, 313. 316, 317 

334 

Arundbatf ... 369 

Ary a ... 836 

Aryaman 77, 809, 811 

Asanamurti ... 78 

Asanas 17-91, 85, 889 



INDEX. 



Page. 

A«b|ami tithi 

... 90 

All, same as kba^gSi 

292, 293 

Ashts'tila measure 

... 288 

Asokatree 

... 277 

Alrama 

348, 397 

Asuras. 3d, 36. 115, 120, 121, 122. 

123. 126, 127, 131. 

144, 146, 

147, 149, 162,162. 168, 167, 171. 

172. 216,217, 304, 334, 345,346. 

348, 351. 352, 353, 

366, 357, 


379, 380 

A8ara<m4ya 

... 381 

Asuya 

... 381 

Alv4ru$hadev{ 

... 371 

Asvattha 

... 362 

Ajvatfrtba 

... 182 

Asvins 75i 94, 306, 314, 315 | 

Atasi 

345, 346 

Atma-murfcj 

... 400 

Atman 

... 294 

Atharvam-veda 

... 73 

Aticba^dika 

... 357 

Atma^vldva 

... 382 

Atri 

... 251 

Auroav4bba 

... 73 

Avara^ia 247. 248, 249 

Avaraua-dSvatas 

247, 248 

Avataras of Visbuu 32, 

103, 119, 

120, 124. 127, 128. 

156. 189, 


247 

Avdsa, definition of, 

... 119 

„ of Parasuiama 

... 120 

Avidy& 293, 296, 382 

Avigbna 

... 48 

Avyanga, same as ahyafiga, 308 

f.n., 314, 316, 816 

Avyonhana, 

308 f.n. 

AySdhya 

... 188 


Page. 


Ayudhas, Ayndha-paruibas, 63, 

91, 93, 95, 97, 

106, 107, 109, 

110, 111, 112, 

113, 115, 166, 


167,288.293 

B&d4mi, 104, 140, 

157, 159, 172, 
174, 255, 287 

BddarAyanl 

... 124 

Badara tree 

... 276 

Badari 

... 274 

Baga, same as Bagho ... 311 

B&gali 

... 103 

Baiohoja of Nandi 

214, 263 

Bala 

234, 237 

B&I& 

333, 372 

Balabhadra 

... 200 

Balaohandra 

48, 59, 60 

B&la-Ga^apati, desoription of, 63 

Bafaji 

... 270 

Bala-Evisbpa 

... 215 

Balapramathani 

364, 400 

Balarama, 3, 20, 195, 200, 201, 

202, 212, 239, 240 

Balavan 

48,49 

Balavikarnika 

363, 399, 400 

Bali, 161, 162, 163,166. 167, 171, 

172, 173, 174, 176, 180f. n.. 397 

Bali-pitha, 

... 332 

Bambajala-SUtta 

... 301 

Bana, 6, 49, 63. 54, 56, 65, 144, 

172, 186, 189, 

202, 223, 256, 

257, 258. 261, 269, 278, 289, 

292, 293, 342, 
366, 367, 369, 

343, 346, 347, 
363, 364, 369 

386, 388 

Bellary 

103, 279 

B8lur, 143, 177, 178, 243, 269 

Benares 

... 271 

Bengal 

100, 142, 359 

Bbadra 

... 368 


8 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


BhadnkAlI 196 f. n., 857 

Bh^drapltha. deaoription of, 20 
BhadriMoa 17, 18, 868, 393 
Bhaga 309, 310, 311 | 

Bhagavad-gita ... 311 i 

Bhagavata-purdna 133, 134, 137, ! 
138, 180, 185, 186, 195, 216, | 
366 I 

Bhagavatf ... 361 | 

Bhairava 9, 381, 383 

Bbairavf ... 366 

Bhakti ... 315 

Bbakti-Vighndsvara, desorip- 
yoDot, ... 52 

Bharadvaja ... 355 

Bbarata 194, 195 

Bharata-saslra 318 f.D., 

Bharatf ... 335 

BbitbA ... 335 

Bbiakararaya ... 294 

Bbauma 300. 305, 319, 330, 323 
Bbavanf ... 340 

Bhamhyat-purana 47, 301, 303, 
(.0.. 304, 305, 306, 308 f.D., 314 
BbAri ... 167 

Bbima ... 399 

Bbima ... 334 

Bbindi ... 289 

Bhiihrm-parvan of Mdhdbharata 

275 

Bboga, variety of image of 
Viflbpu, ... 79 

BbSgasaoamurti 87, 88, 106 

Bbdgasayanamurti 92, 94, 112 
Bbogaetbenakamurti 81, 82, 83, 
97,98 

Bbramarae ... 884 

BbtAmarf ... 884 


Bbvigu 80, 83, 83, 84 f. q., 86, 88, 
89, 91, 93, 95, 96, 109, 121, 
181, f. D., 183, 262, 821 
Bbtingi ... 37 

Bbu 330, 331 

Bbujabga-valaya, ao ornament 
of Siva, description of, 28, 371 
Bbuloka 163, 166 

BbumidAvi 13, 80, 82, 86, 87, 88, 
89, 90, 93, 94, 99, 100, 102, 106, 
107, 108, 109, 111, 113, 115, 
132,133,134,136,139,144, 151, 
153, 309, 340, 342,264,;375, 376, 

378 

Bbdta-gapas 37, 362, 398 

Bbuta-mftM ... 362 

Bbttta'tanmktrAs ... 293 

Bbnvandsa-Gapapati ... 58 

Bbnvandavkrf ... 371 

Bbuvariiha, desoription of, 133 
Bij&ksbara 390, 330 

Bilva 20, 374 

Bindu ... 330 

Birudas ... 314 

Bodhagana-Qrihya-SiUras . 390 
Bombay 142, 173 

Bombay Sobool of Sonlptore. 63 
Brabma 11, 13, 29, 45, 78, 76, 81, 
82, 83,86, 88,89, 90, 91, 93,94, 
95, 111, 112, 132, 133, 124, 125, 
126, 128, 139, 130, 131, 137, 
138, 139, 140, 144, 146, 146, 
149, 167, 166, 170, 171, 178, 
179, 180, 389, 252, 253, 254, 
262, 263, 264, 365, 266, 335, 
336, 347, 360, 855, 356, 372, 
377, 379, 882, 883 
Brabmaeb&rin ... 338 

Brabma>pada 85, f. n. 

Bribmapa8 76, 180. 181. 183,184, 
349f.n..861 



INDEX. 


Page. 

BrabmaoBspati 45, 46 

BtahmaEl 381, 383, 384, 389 
Brahm&ni^a ^69, 336 | 

Brahmat^-puram 60, 61, 171 ; 
Biahmasana ... 85 | 

Brahma-sutras ... 92 ' 

Brahmavaivarta-puram 45, 46, 

195 

Brahmf ... 335 i 

Brihad-brahma-saihhita 78 235 | 
Brihad-dharma-pur&na ... 265 1 
Brihat-iamhita 201, 202, 219, 228 
Brihaspati 45, 46, 121, 300, 305, 
320, 323 

Buddha 25, 102, 120, 123, 216, 
218, 219, 220, 221, 265, 273, 

301 

Buddbi 44, 48, 62, 293 : 

Buddbism ... 219 i 

Baddhisl; period, vajra re- I 

presented in, 8, 219, 273 ! 
Budha 300,305,320,323 

Burgess 8 f. n., 79 

Calcutta Museum 175, 179 

Obakra 1, 4, 53, 64, 80, 81. 86, 
89. 95. 97, 99. 100, 101, 102, 
104, 105, 108, 109, 112. 113, 
120, 127, 128, 132, 186, 136, , 
144, 150, 152, 153, 165, 156, 
158, 161, 164, 166, 167, 170, 
176, 177, 178, 179, 195, 201, 
204, 209, 210, 223, 228, 229, 
230, 231, 236, 239, 240, 243, 
248, 260, 263, 254, 265, 256, 
257, 258, 261, 262, 267, 268, 
869, 271, 275, 278, 286, 287, 
288, 290, 291, 292, 295, 310, 
317, 330, 339, 341, 342, 343, 
346, 346, 347, 356, 867, 358, 
380, 384, 385 
Chakra-parasba ... 290 


FiOB. 

Obakrattajivar ... 290 

Obakravarttins 39 f. n., 30 

Obalukya 2, 7, 23, 103, 104, 141, 
219, 255, 312, 315 
Cbamara 107, 165, 242, 243, 259, 
289, 290, 316, 347 {. n., 367, 
374 

Cbamunda 81 , 364, 380, 381, 383, 
386, 389 

Ghapda ... 361 

Ohands ... 357 

ChapdS'Dayika ... 357 

Ohapdsrapa ... 357 

Chapdavati ... 357 

Chapdika 333, 346 

Ohapdogra ... 357 

Chandra 82, 83, 86, 88, 89. 94, 95, 
138, 139, 165, 171, 173, 174, 
300, 318, 319, 320, 369, 399 

Chandrajnam ... 19 

Ghandrakala ... 345 

Cbandrasana ... 368 

Cbandrasdkbara ... 335 

Ghapura ... 198 

Cbara-rasi, same as obara- 
bhavana 85, 85 f. n., 90 

Cbaturvimsatimurtayah 175, 225 
Ghauri 140, 361 

Chennakdsavasvamin temple 177, 
243, 244 

Cbhandas 249 f. n. 

Ghhannavira ... 31 

Gbhaya 307, 314 

Chibna ... 336 

Obinmudra, same as vyakhyana- 
mudra and sandarsanamudra 
14, 16, 111 

Ohiranjivi 119 

Obitraiatha ... 184 



HINDU lOONOORAPHY. 


Ohoj» 390, 391 

OoDjeavtram 104, 105, 269 

Cranddn ••• 6 

Oairid, Indian, ... 210 

Didikkombu 107. 108, 167, 158, 
160, 269 

Daikyas 198, 199, 217, 218 

Daivika-pada 85 f.n. 

Daivika'Vasttddva ... 240 

Daksbipa ■■ 145 

Dakthip&ohara ... 101 

Dakahinamurti, viina in the hand 

of. 9 

DaoMTu, 9, 253, 343, 346, 353, 

357, 365, 366, 387 

Dambodbheva ... 274 

Dnaaaha 395, 396, 397 

Damodara 229, 232, 238, 231, 237, 
... 238 

Danavaa 126, 171. 172 

Dapda 167, 212, 248, 267, 258, 
287, 288. 289, 302, 303 f.n., 305, 
309. 312, 314, 315, 320, 321, 
323, 357, 361, 368, 386. 388 
Danda-haata 14, 16, 48, 58, 67 
Dapdanayaka 303 f.n., 304 

Dandfiaana ... 369 

Dandi ... 306 

Danta 53, 56, 57, -58, 59. 63, 64, 
65, 66, 67 

Darbha ... 1^^ 

Datbbi ••• 57 

Dantavakra ... 117 

Darpapa, deacription of. ... 12 

Dadaratha ... 187 

Daaatila, meaaure, ... 190 

Dalivatara Cave ... 174 

Dalavatana of Viabpa, ehapter 
on, ••• 119 1 


Pion. 

DattatoSya, 104, 123, 181, 

251, 252, 263, 254, 256 
Daya 233, 266 

Deogarh ... 110 

DAva-gapas, same aa Ddvaa 105, 
360, 379, 380 
Dgvaki 195, 196 

Ddvala ... 267 

D6vanagari ... 331 

Dfivaa 35, 36, 115, 140, 171, 360 
DSvatas 308, f.n. 

Ddvl, 14, 43, 54, 55, 101, 137, 
141, 142, 143, 144, 204, 205, 
206, 249, 263, 260, 327, 332, 
333, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 
341, 345, 346, 348, 349, 350, 
353, 354, 367, 361, 372, 378, 
390, 394, 

Devl-bh&fiavata ... 260 

DiviffMhd>titi>yo> 333, 33b, 337, 378, 
385, 388, 

Dbammilla 27, 30, 107 

Dbananjaya ... 379 

Dhanua, 5, 49, 54, 65,96, 111, 170, 
186, 189, 202, 223, 256, 267, 
261, 269, 278, 290, 292, 342, 
343, 346, 356, 357, 359, 386, 
388 

Dbanvantarin 123, 251 

Dharma 123, 265, 266, 306 
Dharmaraja ... 42 

Dharma- iaatraa ^.. 23 

Dhata ... 336 

Dbatfi 309, 310 

Dbdnnka ... 197 

Dbl ... 935 

Dhrava*b5raa of Viahpu ... 79 

Dhumraka ... 48 

Dhvaia 58, 287, 289, 846, 857. 


6 



INDEX. 


Page. 

Dhyaja-QA9apati, description 


of. 

... 68 

Dhyana 

136, 220. 247 

Dhyani-Bnddha 

... 265 

Dig-gaias 

... 376 

Dikpalakas 

94, 244 

Dipdi 

... 306 

Dindigul 

107, 167 ! 

Dipti 

... 368 1 

Diti 

146, 147, 379 i 


Divya^prabandhas ... 268 

Dandabhi , 351, 352 

Dnratyaya ... 335 


Page. 

Freemasons 331 f.n., 

Gada g, 4. 52, 55. 87. 95. 98, 66. 
100^ m 108. 108. 109, 110, 
lllSm 138. 155. 156. 167. 
170. 175, 176. 177, 228, 229. 
230, 281, 236. 240. 242, 253. 
254. 256. 267, 258, 261. 268. 
269. 286. 287. 288, 289, 291. 
292, 293. 310, 319, 320, 322, 
336. 346, 356, 358, 365. 384. 

885, 389 

Gadhi ... 182 

Gaja-hasta, same as dapda- 

hasta ... 16 

Gajakaroa ...48.49 


Durga 4, 11, 43. 93. 196 f. n.. 202, i 
333. 334. 341, 342, 345. 352, | 

354, 356, 357, 391 ; 
Durgama ... 334 j 

Dvapara-yuga 41, 266. 333 j 
Dvaraka ... 198 j 

Dvarapalakas 37, 48,307 ; 

Dvibbanga ^ 

Dwarf incarnation of Vishnu 123 ‘ 
Earth-goddess ... 260 j 

Eastern and Indian Archi- 
lecture^ of Fergnsson 79f. n., 

Egyptian Tau ... 331 

Ekadanta 39, 46, 47, 60, 61 ! 
Ekavdpi ... 395 

Ekavira ... 335 j 

Eiephank-headed ... 43 ’ 

Elura cave temples by Bur- 
gess ... 8f. n.. 


Gajanana ...39,46 

Gajdndra 266, 267, 269, 

Gana-Gopala 207, 208 

Gapapati, same as Ganesa 2, 32 
35, 39, 44, 45. 46, 48, 49, 51. 
56. 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 


67, 93. 361, 388, 389 
Gi^papati, Bala, ... 52 

„ '^'Tarupa, ... 52 

„ Lakshmi ... 53 

„ Maba ... 53 

„ Pihgala ... 53 

,, UohohhishU ... 53 

„ Urdhva ... 53 

,. Nritta ... 59 

„ Prasanna ... 57 

„ Bhuvanesa ... 58 

„ Dhvaja ... 58 


Unmatta-uohohhi- 


Ellora78, 107, 112, 157, 158, 174, 

213, 313, 389 

Emusba ... 128 

Fergosson 79 f. n., ; 

Flowers in the hands of god- 
desses 13, 14 j 


shta ...58,63 
„ Haridrft same as 

Batri ... 56 

„ Kdvala ... 63 

„ Sakti ... 53 

Gapas 41, 45, 380 


7 



HINDU lOONOOBAPHT. 


Paob. 

Oandharm 267, 269, 808, f. n. 

362 

Oandhamadana mountain 274 
OauSibaBatba ... 170 

Ganga, same as the Ganges, 41, 
178, 180, 272 
Garuda 91, 93,95,102, 104, 105, 
107, 108, 113, 146, 150, 154, 
156, 166, 175, 178, 204, 240, 
243, 253, 254, 255, 257, 258, 
259, 262, 265, 267, 268, 269, 
283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 306, 

384 

Oaruda-Purma ... 129 

Gaurf, 48,333,336 337, 340, 360, 

361 

Gaya ... 216 

Gayatri ... 248 

Gbauta 9, 10, 114, 294, 346, 347, 
356,357,365,368, 387,388 
GhautAbarpf, 368 

Gbritavari, layer of a pftha, 20 
Girija-Narasimba 149, 150, 154 
Gdkarpa 48, 49 

Gokula ... 196 

Goloka ... 46 

Gdroobana 357 

Gdvardbana ... 197 

GoTardbana-dhara-Eifisbpa 214 
Gdvinda, 130, 229, 231, 234, 237, 

243 

Grahas 318, 322, 323 

Grabapati ... 320 

Gndimallam 11,22,312 

Gttbagraia 46, 47 

Gupas 284, 293 

Gupta period, Yajndpavlta found 
in, ... 23 

Gupta*rupi Oftvf ... 334 

Guru 176, 323 


PAOH. 

Haibayas ... I 85 

Hala, 6, 134, 165, 201, 212, 239, 
248, 258, 292, 865, 388 
HalAbfdn 66, 155,208,210,214, 
252, 264. 278, 279 
Hamsa 323, 888 

Hannman 16, 187, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 195 
Hara ... 271 

Hara, 86, 97, 98, 103, 106, 109, 
111, 236, 306, 344. 370, 371 
Harasiddbi 342, 843 

Hari, 125, 181, 195, 200, 222, 230, 
232, 243, 271 
Harihara 270, 271 

Harl>bara'pitamaha,238, 255, 256 
Haridra-Gapapati ... 59 

Harivamia ... 195 

Harsha ... 233 

Hasta, a measure, ... 21 

Havis ... 145 

Havya-kavya ... 145 

Hayagrfva 125, 126, 260, 261 
Head-gear, varieties and desorip- 
tions of, 23-31 

Hbramba 46, 47, 57, 65 

H6ti ... 289 

Himalayas 45, 273, 334 

HimavAn ... 351 

Hindu Mythology, by 
Kennedy, 39, 200 f. n. 

Hirapyagarbba 336, 337 

Hitapy&ksba, 131, 132, 133, 144, 
147, 379 

Hirapyakadipu, 145 146, 147, 
148, 149, 162, 163, 164, 155, 
167, 159. 260, 292, 379 
Hittory of Pine Arts in 
India and Oeylm, V. A. 


Bmitb, 


241 


8 



INDEX. 


Paoe. 

Homajakalika (?) ... 310 

HoyBa|dsvara temple, 66, 214, 
252, 278 

HoyBa}8, 99, 176, 177, 209, 214, 
220, 227, 243, 312, 317, 378 


Hotvi 

145, 147 

Hrada 

... 217 

Hrishikesa, 229, 

232, 233, 234, 

237. 233, 293, 336 I 

Huhu 

... 267 

Ikshukoda^da 

... 210 

Ikshvaku 

... 184 

Iluppai, wood for makiog 

kurmaeaua 

20 f.n. 

India Museum 

... 175 

Indra 35, 42, 43, 

76, 77, 111, 121, 

122, 153, 161, 

165, 182, 197, 

284, 350, 351, 355, 362, 380 

lodrapi 

380. 381, 388 

Indradyumna 

... 267 

Indrakshl 

... 370 

lodriyas 

... 293 

Indukari 

... 241 

lebtis 

249 f.D. 

Isvarl 

... 336 

Itihasas 

... 77 

Jagannatba 

273, 376 

J agati, a layer of a pitba ... 20 

Jaimini 

... 250 

Jainas 

... 220 

Jalamayi 

... 399 

Jala-rupipi 

... 398 

Jalasayin 

263, 264, 265 

Jamadagni 

181, 184, 185 

Jambavan 

167, 171 

Jambu 

... 62 

Janaloka 

... 130 

Janarddaoa 

230, 232, 336 


' Page, 

Japamala ... 353 

Jaraaandba ... igg 

JfttS 180, 250, 254, 291 

Jatabhara 347, 369 

Jata-makuta 27, 28, 85, 96, 111, 
113, 135, 150, 186, 254, 345, 
359, 362, 377, 378, 387, 389, 

390 

Jata-mapdala 247, 276 

Ja^ilavarman Par&ntaka 
Papdyadeva ... 391 

Jays 37, 102, 147, 349, 361, 368 


Jaya-DargS 
Jayaoti 
Jbansi distriot 
Jina 
JnSna 

JnSna-mudrS 

JnSna-sakti 

JnSna-svarupi 

JnSnIudriyaa 

Jubu 

Jupiter 

JvSlas 


342, 344 
... 369 

... no 

... 217 
234, 236, 237 
17, 114, 366 
... 354 
... 235 
... 293 
... 250 
... 318 
... 4,82 


JySsbtbadSvi, aatce bb Alak> 

Bhmi, 335, 363. 890, 391 392, 
393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 
399 

Kadru 283, 284 

Kailasa 40,60,78,180,213. 

330, 379 

KailasauathaBvamin temple 105 
Kaitabba 91, 93, 94. 109. 110, 
112. 113, 147, 264 


Eala 

Kaladi 

Kslakiita-viBha 

Kalsratrl 

Kalasa 


350. 399 
... 395 
... 395 
43, 335. 369 
366, 386 


9 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Page. 

KalavikaraQa ... 399 

Kalavikar^iki 363, 398. 399 

Kalayavana ... 198 

Kalh&ra ... 53 

Kali 9, 363, 368, 398, 399 

Kalindi ... 212 

Kaiiya 197. 212, 213 

KaUyabi'tnarddaka'Eridhna 

212, 213 

Kaliyuga 41 , 221, 222, 266, 333 
Kalki avatara of Vishnu 

120, 123.* 221, 265 
Kallesvara temple ... 102 

Kalpa 124. 125, 129 

Kalpa’SUtras 249 f.n. 

Kalpaka 56. 88. 165, 1G9, 179, 
385, 388 

Kalpaka* lata ... 53 

K4ma or K&maddval99, 210, 381, 

382 

K4madh5QU ... 335 

Kamala 336, 373 

Kamalaksha ... 13 

Kamandalu 11. 58, 81, 111, 138, 
163, 166, 202, 247, 253, 255, 
256, 257, 310, 316, 320, 323. 
343, 357, 359, 360, 361, 370. 

377, 384 

Kamikagama ... 293 

KAminl 82, 89 

Kamsa 195, 196, 197, 198 

Kanadhuma ... 121 

Kanchi ... 268 

Kankana 23, 371, 374 

Kaptba, layer of a pitba ... 20 

Kanti 233, 319 

Kantimandala 306, 315 

Kapalall, 13, 358, 362. 363, 364. 



Page. 

Kapila 123, 125, 247, 248, 257, 


395 

Kapilapatni 

... 395 

Kappd ohennigaraya 243, 244, 


259 

Karanda-makuta 

27. 29, 66. 67, 

101, 139, 151, 

190, 193, 204, 

288. 306. 338, 

341, 375, 383, 


388, 394 

Karavira 

... 375 

Karivarada 

... 266 

Karkataka 

85 {.n. 

Karma 

... 294 

Karmeodriyas 

... 293 

Karnatadesa 

... 312 

Karpikara flower 

... 320 

Karpura 

... 368 

K&rtavirya 

... 181 

Kd*rtikeya 

... 304 

Karutigali, wood for making kur- 


masana, 20 

Kashaya 

... 219 


Kasburi ... 368 

Kasyapa 75, 145, 147, 182, 283 

284, 379 

Kataka-hasta 14, 15, 82, 88, 91, 
92, 93, 97. 98, 100, 103, 106, 
109. Ill, 114, 138, 192, 205, 


207, 265. 338,341 
Kuti-bandba ... 25 

Katyavalambita hasta 14, 16, 
80, 81, 97, 99. 101, 151, 239, 

248 

Katyayani 347, 350, 351, 352,363 
Kaumari 380, 381. 387 

Kaumodaki 310. 375 

Kaupina 163 

Kauravas 199. 210 

Kausika 182,251,252 


10 



INDEX. 


Faqb. j 

EaulikI 184 ; 

Kaustabha-maQi, jewel on the ; 
oliest ot Vishau, 25, 26, 191, < 

242 ! 

Kautuka-hSra 93, 95, 168, 202, 
204, 223, 240 ' 
Kavaoha ... 386 ; 

Kav6ripakkarQ ... 318 : 

Eddardsvara ... 203 

Kennedy, Vans 39, 182 f.n., 
200 f.n. ; 

Edsa-bandha 27, 30 | 

Edsara flowers ... 277' 

KSlava 176, 228, 229, 230, 231, 
233, 234, 237, 238, 243 
KSai ... 197 ; 

Kettai ... 395 ; 

KStu 300, 305, 318, 322, 323 , 
Kevaln-Oapapati ... 63 

Kevala-Narasiiiiha 19, 150, 155, 

156 

KSyura 23, 86, 97, 98, 103,111, 
236, 242, 371, 374 
Khadga 2, 5, 49,95, 112. 113, 144, 
1.58, 170, 186, 212, 223, 248, : 
2.56, 257. 258. 261, 269, 287, j 
288, 289, 292, 293, 295, 320, 
322, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, ! 
347, 356, 356. 357, 358. 359, 
362, 364, 365, 369,386,388 
Khatvanga 1, 2, 7, 256, 365 
KhStaka 1, 2, 5, 49, 144, 158, 170, 
223, 256, 267, 261. 269, 292, 
320, 322, 336, 342, 343, 345, 
346, 347, 355, 357, 358, 359, 
362, 365, 369, 375, 386, 388 
Kfka^as ... 216 

Kinnaras 82, 88 , 95 

Kirita-makuta, 27, 29, 91, 92, 97, 
98, 100, 101, 103, 106, 109, 


Paob. 


111. 112, 114, 

115, 128, 180. 

189. 191, 193, 

203. 209, 227, 

236. 242, 262, 

273, 307, 312, 

314, 323, 343, 

356, 371, 384, 
385 

Eii'ti 

233, 366 

Kishidndlia 

... 83 

Kolhapura 

... 375 

Krauncha 

... 62 

Krishna, 9. 45, 46, 77, 119, 120, 

123, 195, 273, 301, 336, 376 

Krishna 

... 370 

Krishi^adevaraya 

... 179 

Krishnajina 

276, 358 

Kritiamala river 

... 125 

Krifcayuga 

... 266 

Kriya 

... 233 

Kriydkramadyoti 

53. 54 

Kr5Jha 

381, 382 

Kshama 

62, 367 

Kshatriyas, 60, 181, 182, 184, 238 

Ksliudha 

... 335 

KsLemaiikari 

... 342 

Kubeta 

48, 306, 350 

Kucha-bahdba 

23, 101, 378 

Kudulagar temple 

... 79 

Kukkuta, animal 

in the band of 

Subrahmanya, 11, 387, 388 

Kuldltungacholadeva ... 300 

Kulobtunga-clmla- 

Marttiindalaya 

300 

Kumar a 

361, 380, 387 

Kumbbak5i>am 

64, 65 

Kumuda 

20, 319, 322 

Kunda 

... 323 


Eupdalas, same as karna- 
kundalas, 24, 86, 109, 111, 152, 
163, 170, 201, 241, 265, 306, 
344, 359, 371, 377, 386 


11 



HINDU lOONOQRAPHT. 


En^dalini 

Eu^il 

Eunta 

EuDtftla 

Eurma 


Paob. 
328. 329 
... 206 
292. 369 
27, 30 
123, 127, 160. 265 


Kurma-purdna 146, 147, 381 
Eurmasana 17. 18. 20 

Eurukshetra 182, 210 

Eu^a 147, 163. 188, 284, 285 
Eusumbha .. 182 

Kuth&ra 59, 365 

Kuvalaya ... 198 

Labha ... 62 

Ladduka ... 55 

Lajja ... 233 

187. 190 

Lakshmana 191, 192. 193. 194. 
Lakshnii 13. 30, 50. 87. 88. 89. 
90. 92. 94, 99. 100. 102, 104, 
106, 107, 108. 112. 134. 135. 
161. 160. 161, 209. 233. 258. 
259, 263. 264. 327, 334. 335. 
336, 372. 373. 374. 376. 378.394 



Paob. 

Lihga-purdna 35 

139, 131, 396 

Libgddbbavamurti 

... 136 

Ldbba, 

... 381 

Ldkapalas 

... 163 

Mada 

... 381 

Madana-Gdpala, 

... 210 

Mada-Sakti 

... 378 

M&dbava, 205, 

229, 231, 233, 

234, 

237, 238, 243, 

Madbu 

... 264 

Madbusudana 

229, 231, 234 


237, 238, 243 


Laki^bmi-Gaqapati 
Lakahajf Narasimha 
Lakatioii-NAi&ya^a 
Lalfta 

Lalitd&dhasrandina 

Lambddara 

L&nohbanaa 

Lacka 

Lava 

Linga 114. 193, 1 


53. 64. 
... 160 
258, 259. 
333, 359, 
... 294 
46. 57, 50 
161, 254 
... 187 
... 188 


Linga 114, 193, 194, 273, 362. 

376 

Linga at Gudimallam. ram 

in the hauii of the image 
of f^iva on the lififfa ... 11 

Linga, YajDoiiavita not 

found on the image ... 22 


MadhvAob&rya 77 

Madbyama. a class of image, 80, 
81, 86, 88. 90, 91. 95. 96. 106. 

110 , 112 

Madbyama-dasatala 186, 189, 
201, 203. 239 
MadbyaudiuaRsavana 2^9 f.n. 
Madras 97, 98, 100. 103, 107, 
142. 192, 268, 279 
Madras Museum, 142, 143, 160, 
205, 207, 213, 316 
Madura 79, 107, 158, 391 

Maga<BrahmatiiS 299, 301 
Magba month ... 290 

Magi of Persia ... 299 

Mababalipuram 78, 96. 97, 109 
140, 170, 172, 173. 194 

Mahdbhdrata 45. 75. 124, 131 
147, 185 f.n.. 227, 273. 283 
Mababuddhi ... 61 

Mabaddva 40. 121, 400 

Maba‘Ga9apati 53. 55 

Mabakali 334. 335, 337, 375 

Maba Laksbml 333, 385, 336. 337 
Mabamarf ... 335 

Mabamaya ... 335 

Mah&pa^tika, layer of a pi^ha 20 


12 



INDEX. 


MahavM ... 335 

Mahavidya ... 335 

Maheadra 182, 186 

Mahdndra-parvata ... 119 
Mabdavara 380, 383 

MahSavarl 380, 381, 383, 387 
Mahisha^ura 333, 346, 348, 349 
350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 356 
Mahishasura-marddani 333, 345, 
346, 347 

Mabishi ... 349 

Mahishmati 348, 349 

MaitrSya ... 217 

Makara 85 f.n.. 102,277 

Makaradhvaja ... 302 

Makaraku^dala 24, 25, 98, 103, 
244, 254 

Makara<kuta ... 28 

MakarAsana ... 17 

MaauH 64, 152, 173, 393 

Mala ... 294, 400 

Malabar, glass inirrors nob 
used in temples iu ... 12 

Malabar ooatit, pendant ear- 
lobes of ladius iu ... 24 

Malabar ... 287 

Malitamma ... 261 

Mdimsa ... 365 

Manas . . . 293 

Mapdala ... 307 

Mapdapa ... 300 

Mandara mountain 348, 349, 354 
Mandb&tri ... 123 

Manes ... 125 

MafigalA 359, 362 

Mangalisa ... 104 

Mariipura ... 329 

Man-lion or Narasimba ... 123 


Pagb. 

Manmatha 276, 277. 278, 279 
Manmathanath Dutt 185 f.n. 
Mannar ^ ^ 204 

Mannarkoyil 79 

Mandnmjini 29, 340, 363, 364, 400 
Manonmayi 398 

Mantramaharnava 54, 56, 65 
Mantramahodadhi ... 53 

Mantras 145, 249 f.n., 328, 

329, 345 

Mantra-saatras ... 328 

Mantra-svarupa ... 294 

Manus 123, 124, 125, 126, 309 
Manusba-pada 85 f.n. 

Manusba-Vasiideva ... 239 
Maiiohi 15, 19 

M?i» kanfl 0 /a 80, 82, 83, 84 f.n., 86 , 
88 , 89, 91, 93. 95. 96, 109. 113, 
262, 265, 396, 397 
Mdrkindeya-purdna 251, 333, 334, 
337, 378 

Mark-AIaaon 331 f.n. 

Mars ... 318 

Marttikavata ... 1 84 

Mabliiira 197, 198 

Matrika deities 330, 381, 382, 383 
Matsarya ... 381 

Matsya-purdna 39, 41, 120, 126, 

308, 319 

Matsyavatara 120, 123, 124, 127, 

265 

Matulunga ... 336 

Mauli, Sanskrit for head-gear, 
... 26 

Maya ... 351 

Mava 38, 82, 88 , 91, 93, 94, 109, 
110, 112, 113, 147. 294. 336. 

355 

Mayavati ... 199 


13 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 



PAGE. 

Mdlha 

... 233 

Mddha-bhillas 

... 238 

Mddinidavi 

... 247 

MelohSri 

... 313 

Mercury 

... 318 

Moru 

... 330 

Mdsha 

85 f. n. 

Mibfr Yasfc 

... 301 

Milra 301, 302. 

309, 310, 311 

Moiaka 50, 56, 

57. 58. 59. 61. 


63. 65. 66 ; 

Modakapatra 

... 67 • 

Mdhini 

... 362 

Moksha 

46. 328 : 

Mongoloid features 

... 100 ' 

Mriga, animal in the hand of Siva, * 


... 11 i 

Muchukunda 

... 198 : 

Mudevi 

395 i 

Mudgara 52, 57, 257, 346 i 

Mudras, varieties of, 

14. 16. 17 

Mugadi 

395 i 

Muir 45, 75, 122 f.n., 125 f.n. ; 

Muladhara 

328, 329 

Mulaikkachchu 

... 378 

Muraji 

9,10 

Murtis 

... 340 

Murtisvara 

399, 400 

Musala, 25, 134, 201, 239, 258, ' 

291,292,365, 386, 388 ^ 

Mushtaka 

... 198 ; 

Mushti, a measure 

... 21 i 


Musical instruments, represonta- ; 
tions in the hands of images, i 

8-10 i 

Muttra ... 99 

Mysore 65.143.175,243.268. : 

279 

Naga 139, 141, 142, 294, 308 f.n. ; 


[ Page. 

I Naga-pasa 345, 346 

; Nagajapuram 142, 179 

; Nagondranftth Vasu 15, 19 f.n., 

I 301, 302, 303 f.n.. 305 

I Nagelvarasv&tniii temple ... 64 

I Naginis ... 141 

• Nagnas 217, 218 

’ Nalrrakupdala, same as ma- 
kara-kupdala 24, 373 

Naksbatra 85, 90 

Nama ... 160 

Namuohi 166. 171. 173 

Nanda 333, 354, 355, 356 

Nanda-gdpala ... 333 

Nandi ... 37 

Nandikesvara 392 

Nangapuram 390, 391 

Napumsaka ... 289 


Nara 123, 273, 274, 275, 276 
Narada 38. 82. 83. 88. 89. 94, 95. 
123, 138, 153, 275, 348, 350 

Narada-panchardtra samhitd 78, 

233 

Narasimha, an avatara of Vishpu, 
123, 145, 146, 149, 155, 161, 
230, 232, 238, 256. 257, 379 382 
Narasimhavarihan II ... 106 

Narayapa 29. 74, 123, 126, 129, 
184, 185, 229. 231, 233, 234. 
236, 237, 238, 258, 259. 278, 
274. 275, 276 

Nareudras, queens of, wear 
kuntajaa 29 f.n., 30 

Narmada 218, 349 

Nataraja ... 340 

Nava-Durgas 342, 356 

Nava-grahas 299, 305, 318, 323 
Navanfta-nritta-Krishpa 206, 213 
Navardba-tala 189 


14 



INDEX. 


PAGE. 


PAGE 


Nayakas 107, 158 

Negapatam ... 65 

Nidhi ... 321 

Nidradevi ... 335 

Nighaptu ... 395 

Nikahubha 302, 305, 314, 315, 

316, 317 

Nila ... 379 

Nilakantha ... 335 

Nilakanfchf ... 342 

Nila-Jy5ahtba ... 395 

Nilayatakahiyamman temple 65 
Nilotpala 13, 14, 83. 93. 101, 

102, 133, 136, 151, 190. 204. 
209, 345, 368, 369, 371, 375, 
393, 394 

Nirdosha 234. 237 

Nirguna ... 327 

Nirrita ... 383 

Nirukta 249 f.n. 

Nishadas ... 283 

Nisumbha ... 333 

North Aroot district 143, 179 

Nritta-Gapapati 59, 66 

Nrivaraba or Bhuvardha 132, 
133, 135 

Nuggehalli 177, 179, 214, 261, 

262, 279 

Nupura anklets ... 388 

Olai, ear ornaaient ... 25 

Omkara ... 130 

Osbadbi ... 399 

Osbadbi-patra ... 376 

Ornaments of images 22-23 


Padma 13, 14, 49. 67, 87, 100, 
103, 108, 133, 134. 150, 163, 
155. 156, 159,167.177.210,219. 
228. 229, 230, 231. 236, 240, 
241, 253, 254. 255, 256, 257, 


258, 261, 268, 269, 287, 288, 
291. 321, 342, 357, 358, 359, 
360, 362, 365, 368, 373. 384. 

385. 388 

Padma 336. 373 

Padmakalpa 123 

Padmanabha 229. 232, 233, 234 
237, 238 

Padmapitha 97, 98, 306, 321. 376, 

389 


Padma-purana 61, 144, 148, 230, 
231, 354 

Padrnasana 17, 18, 19, 20, 49, 51, 
56. 57, 59, 66. 85, 87. 103, 150. 
156, 160. 170, 172, 219. 221. 

228, 247, 253. 254. 341. 367, 

371, 372, 386, 389 

Paila ... 250 

Paisacha pada 81, 85 f.n., 90 
Paisunya ... 381 

Palasa ... 383 

Pali ... 301 

Pallava 2, 97, 106, 172. 313 


Pallava Architecture by Bae, 79 f.n. 


Palur ... 287 

Panobajana ... 3 

Panchajanya, sankha of 
Vishnu 3. 87. 198 

Pdhchardtrdgayna 77, 234, 292 
Fanoha-tala, measure 133, 163 
Pandavas 199, 210 

Papdharinatha ... 271 

Pandharipura 271, 272 

Piin typo of face 100, 317 

Pdpdya 64, 267, 279. 391 

Paniyanga ••• ’*108 

Parabrahman 46, 291 

Parasakti ••• 398 


16 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Page. 

Parasara ... 217 

Parasiva ... 400 

Parasu 2. 6. 32, 49. 62. 56. 57. 60. 
64. 65. 67. 81. 186. 220. 292. 
293, 345, 346, 347, 386, 388 

Paras ardma 60. 120, 123, 181, 
185, 186, 189 

Parasuramdsvara temple ... 312 
Faravasuddva 234, 236( 239. 240, 
... 241 

Parishadas ... 267 

Parshpikas ... 30 

Parsis 308 f.n., 311 

Parfchasarathi 201, 210, 211 

Parvatf 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 
44. 45, 46. 60. 61, 111, 327. 

334, 360, 378, 379 

Pasa 1, 2, 8. 32, 52, 63. 54. 55. 
56, 57. 68, 69. 63.64, 65, 66, 
67. 145, 167. 210, 248. 253, 
257. 258, 287. 288. 289. 291. 
292. 293, 294, 310, 338, 339, 
342, 347, 356, 357, 358, 361. 
362, 364, 365, 366, 371 

Pasupati 399 

Patala 130. 142. 163, 176, 381. 

386. 388, 400 

Patala-khanda of Pddma-purdna 
230, 231 

Pataka-hasta 213 f.n., 258 

Pabra 336, 358. 365. 375, 385, 388 
Patras ... 369 

Patrakupdala 24, 25 

Patrakutia ... 28 

Patrapa^ta ... 27. 30 

Pattika, layer of a pf^ha ... 20 

Pattis varam, temple at ... 66 

Pavitra ... 163 

Payata ... 52 


Page. 

Pinaka ... 369 

Pipdas ... 135 

Pingala, 303, 304, 305, 307, 309. 

312, 314, 315, 317 
Pingala-Gapapati 53, 56 

Pisaohas ... 362 

Pitambara ... 383 

Pitha 19. 241, 256, 332 

Prabhamapdala 103, 106, 107, 
241, 312.318 


Prabhavali, 66. 98, 102, 103, 156, 
220.244,254,316 
Praohapda ... 357 

Pradakshina ... 62 

Pradyumna. 199, 230, 232, 233, 

234. 236. 237. 238, 239, 247 

Pragjyotisha ... 355 

Prablada 121, 147, 148, 379 

Prajapati 76, 124, 127, 129 

Prakara ... 48 

Prakriti 235, 293, 295, 335 

Pralaya ... 335 

Pralayavaraha ... 132 

Prana ... 399 

Pranayama ... 328 

Prasanna-Gapapati 57, 58, 66 
Pratassavana 249 f.n. 

Pratisakhyas ... 45 

Pratishtbana ... 251 

Pratyusha 307, 313, 314, 315 

Pravargya ... 145 

Prayapiya-isbti 249 f. n, 

Prayasohitta ... 145 

Prdtas ... 362 

Prdtasana, desoription of ... 21 

Pvishtba-karpa-bhaga ... 361 

Pylti 233, 277, 278 

Ffitha ... 128 


16 



INDEX. 


Prithvi 

Prithvi-mayf 

Palastya 

Pupdalik 


PAQS. 

... 399 
... 398 
... 360 
271. 272 


Pujakamunis 81, 83, 84, 89, 91, 
96. 170 

Pujari 392 

Puranas 36, 39, 77,82, 114, 148, 
299, 381 


Puri 

Puris 

Purna-patra 

Pururavas 

Purusha 

PurushottaiDa 


... 273 
... 28 
347 f.n. 
... 182 
123, 247, 276 
230, 231, 232 


Pii^rva-Karanagama 319, 340, 

376. 377, 384, 385, 386, 388,394 
Pusban 309, 310 

Pushpa-patta 27, 30 

Pushparaga 26, 307 

Pushpa-vastra • • * 202 

Pushti ••• 

Fustaka 11, 13, 253, 266, 321, 
335, 372, 378. 384 

P,if.ana 196, 197 


Pdtana 

Bae 

Baghavarama 

Baghu 

Baghurama 


Bajui 302, 303 f.n., 3Q5, 307, 313, 
314, 315, 316, 317 
Bakshasa 35, 36. 126. 166, 173. 

174. 260, 261. 308 f.n. 
Baktabahu 335 

Bakta-Obamupda 333, 364 

Bakfca-Jyeabtba ... 395 

Bakta-patra ... 365 

Btoa 77. 119, 123. 181, 186, 186, 
187.188. 189, 190, 191. 192. 193, 
197, 198, 203, 376 

Bamaohandra ... 186 

Bamanujacbarya 78, 270 

Bamayana 124, 128, 187, 188 

Bambha .*• 361 

Btofisvaram 193, 194 

Banganatha 269, 273 

Basatala ••• 397 

Bathas ... 357 

Bati 199 f.n.. 233, 277, 278, 279, 

368 

Batnakupdala 24, 25, 244, 323 


79 f.n. 
... 189 
... 187 
119, 120, 189 


Batnakuta 

Batnamukuta 

Batna-patra 

Batna-patta 

Batri 


... 28 
54, 366 
... 376 
27. 30 
... 233 


Batri-Ga^iapati, same as Daridra- 


Kahu 300. 305. 318. 322. 323 
Baivata ••• 

BajakSaarivanaan 98 

B&jamata6gi ••• 872 

Bajapatana 

Baias 993. 335. 336 

Bajaaa-gupatmika — 837 

Baja-vrikaha ••• 884 

Bajna - 


Qapapati 

Baudri 

Bavapa 

Bavapa ka khai 

BSpa 

BSpuka 

Bdvanta 

BdTatIddvt 

Bichika, 

Biddhi 


... 59 

363. 398. 399 
... 187 
... lOG 
... 184 
184. 185 
... 309 

202. 240 
181 f.n.. 182 
... 367 


17 



HINDU lOONOOBAPHT. 


PAQll, 

9mida 78. 74. 317, 249 f.n. 
Bik 249 t.n. 

Bipomfiri-Durga 343, 346 

Bifsbis, 60, 80, 81, 82, 88, 96, 96. 
109, 123, 124, 126, 136, 139, 
273, 276, 284, 308 f.n., 316, 348, 
349, 366, 396, 396, 397 


Itiahabba ... 123 

Bitn 308 f.n. 

Bitnmat ... 266 

BSbipi 196, 240, 319 

Bndra 29, 40, 76, 96, 309, 310, 
336, 836, 337, 351 

Bndra-ebapd& . . . 367 

Bodr&kaba ... 13 

Budramantra .. 398 

Bndrkmsa-Dargk 342, 343 

Bukmftb&yi ... 271 

Bukmipi 198, 199, 203, 204, 


206, 211, 239, 376 


paob. 

(jakti.Gapdaa, or ^aktl- 


Ga^apati 23, 26 

l^akti-maya-yyuha 234, 235, 
238, 261, 276 
j^akti-pf^h&laya ... 332 

Samabhaaga 144, 340, 377 
S&ma-ghdaba ... 144 

Samavida 130, 217, 249 f.n. 
Samba 240, 241 

Sambara ... 199 

l^ambhalagrama ... 222 

Sambhavf ... 333 

Samhara-sakti 293, 398 

Bamhitas ... 78 

Samkarahapa 212, 229, 232, 233, 
234, 236, 237, 238. 261 
Samhladini 82, 88 

Samaara ... 134 


Sanaka 82, 83, 86, 88, 89, 95, 
115, 165, 315 


Bupamandana 48. 228, 229, 231, Sanandana ... 130 

238, 255, 265 f.D., 322 Sanatkumara 82, 83, 86, 88, 89, 


Buvftri Nandiyabba ... 170 

Sabala 181 

Sddhanamdld'tantra ... 15 

Sagapa ... 327 

^aivagamaa 293, 294, 398 

J§aiva-3amaya-neri ... 20 

^Akapupi ... 73 

^ftkadvlpa 301, 302 

SAkambharf ... 334 

f^Aktas 327, 341 


l^akti, a weapon 2, 8. 52, 55, 56, 
232, 234. 236, 237. 257. 287, 
288, 289, 320, 345, 846, 347. 
357, 359, 363. 365, 385, 387, 
388, 892, 399 
^akti, goddess 278, 294, 828. 
329, 337, 348, 378, 380, 400 


90, 95, 115, 165 
Sandarsana-mudra. same as 
the obinmudra ... 17 

Sandhya ... 332 

Sandlpana ... 198 

^ani, same as j^anail- 
ohara 46, 300, 305, 321, 323 
^ankaraobarya ... 63 

Sankara 42, 335, 350 

^ankba 1. 2. 3, 9, 32. 58. 64. 80, 
81, 83,86, 87, 89,94, 97, 97,98, 
99, 100, 101, 102, 103. 104, 105, 
106, 108, 112, 113, 120, 127, 
128, 130, 182, 134. 135, 136, 
148, 144, 150. 151, 152, 153, 
154, 155, 156, 158. 161, 164, 
167, 170, 171, 176, 178, 179, 
195, 201, 203, 209, 210, 211, 


18 



INDEX. 


pagb. 

223. 228. 229. 230, 231. 236. 
239. 240, 241, 242. 243. 248. 
250. 253. 254, 256. 258. 261. 
262. 269. 271. 278, 286, 289. 
292. 293, 295, 317. 339. 341. 
342, 343, 344, 346. 357, 358. 
359. 362, 374. 384, 385 
Sahkha'patra-kuQdala 24. 25. 386 


Sftnkhya 

SanDy&smB 

^antaladevl 

BantaDa-Gdpala 

Santana- manjari 

S&nti 

l^&nti-baata 
^Antiddvl 


... 248 
... 247 
... 243 
... 215 
... 264 
233. 266 
... 358 
... 244 


&anti-parvan of Mahdbharata 275 
Sanyasa 
Saphari fish 
Sapta-matrikas 


Sapta-tala 
Sarabha 
^arad&devf 
Sarasa birds 


... 165 
... 125 
86f. n . 379, 381, 
389 
... 190 
... 155 
... 63 

... 277 


Sarasvatl2, 9. 11, 13, 30, 48. 233, 
260. 272. 333, 334. 335. 336. 

337. 361, 377, 378 


Sarnga 

Sarpa 

Sarpa-kupdalas 

Sarpaeana 


... 165 
...60. 67. 388 
24, 25, 254 
... 323 


Sftrvabbaama>obakravarbtin8 29 
SarvabbutadamanI, 364. 398, 400 


Sarvamangala 

l^astra 

Sasya-patra 

llatabhiflharfig-nakshatra 

^taksbl 


359 

202 

376 

290 

384 


FAGB. 

Satapatha-Bmhmana 74, 75, 124, 
128, 299 

Satl ... 336 

Satrughna 191, 192, 194, 195 
Sattva 293, 335 

Sattva-gupatmika ... 337 
Saturn ... 318 

Sdtvata-mmhitd ... 78 

Sattvic 329, 335 

Satya ... 266 

Satyabbama 198,203. 204,205, 

376 

Satyaki ... 212 

Satyavatl 182, 183, 184 

Satya-yuga ..• 222 

Saumyamurti ... 307 

Sauta-purdm ... 147 

Saurirajapperumal ... 205 
Savana, 249 f.n. 

Savitrf 248, 309, 310 

Sayana-murti ... 78 

Bovthic Brabmapas, same as 
MagaB.. ... 301 

Sbat-kopa-ohakra 291, 292 
Sbermadevi 192, 205 

Shield of David 331 f.n. 

Siddhanta-saravali ... 390 
Siddhartha-samhitd 87, 103 
Siddhi, 44. 48, 62.259.344, 361, 

367 

Silappadigdram 205, 270 

Silparaiiia 133, 134, 150, 155, 
167, 178, 276. 286, 307, 319. 

321, 345. 374 

Simhasana. 18, 19. 20. 21 87, 88. 
89. 102, 105, 106. 135. 136, 
160, 162, 240, 318, 319. 321. 

369. 362, 374 


19 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Paok. 

Simhakar9a,8ame as kaUka- 
hasfca 15. 87. 89 

SiDdhudvipa 348, 349, 355 
Sirasohakra 31, 32, 242 

Sirastraka 27, 30 

Sisupala ... 147 

Sita 186, 187, 188, 189, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 376 

Siva. 32. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40, 41. 
42. 43, 44. 46, 47. 48. 60. 61, 
66. 73. 76. 77. 80. 81. 82. 83, 
86. 88, 89. 90, 91, 93. 95, 98. 
HI. 114, 135, 137, 138. 139. 
150, 155. 157, 166, 170. 180, 
193, 252, 253, 254. 262. 270. 
287, 294, 304. 306. 313. 327, 
336, 338, 339. 340, 341, 350. 
353, 355, 369, 372. 378. 379, 
380, 381. 382, 386, 390, 391. 

392, 396, 399, 400 

Siva, as Tripurantaka, ... 19 

Siva, akshamala in the hand of, I 
... 13 

Siva, bhujanga-valaya worn by. 

23 

Siva, the hand of 9 

Siva, mriga in the hand of 11 
Siva, earliest known image of, 11 

Siva, image of, in the lihga at j 
Gudimallam ... 22 

Siva, use of kapala by ... 13 

Siva, ushpisha of ... 28 

Siva, weapons associated witia 

27 

Siva, ago! as represented in tlie 
hand of 7 
Siva, prabhavali of ... 32 

^iva 336, 366 

Sivadutf ... 365 

&iva-puraiia 36, 61 


Paqb. 

Skaiida 302, 304 

Skanda-punma 40, 41, 378 

Skandha ... 195 

Skajida-ydmala ... 357 

Smith. V. A. 22, 112, 241 

Sobha ... 319 

Solomon 331 f.n. 

Soma, 42, 76, 145, 305, 310, 318. 

322 

Somanatha ... 43, 44 

Somes vara ... 42 

Sraddba ... 233 

Sraoshavareza ... 305 

Srausha ... 305 

Sri 336. 373 

Srlbhdgavata ... 248 

Sriohakra 330, 331, 332 

S^ridevr 82, 153, 361, 378 

Sriihara. 229, 232, 233, 234. 

237, 238, 240, 241, 247 

Srf Krishna 230, 232, 243 

Srihga 257. 258 

Sri Rama 186, 189 

Srirangam ... 269 

Srishti 335, 398, 399 

&rit(Uvanidhi 165, 210, 215, 286 
^rivaishpavas 269, 390 

Srivatsa, a mark on the chest of 
Vishnu oriBuddha, 25, 191, 220, 
275, 367 

Srosha 304, 305 

Sruk 11. 12. 250, 253. 310, 357 
Sr uti or Ved ic revelation ... 331 

Sruva 11, 12. 145, 250, 253, 357, 

384 

Sthalapurapas ... 390 

Stambhini ... 362 

Sthanakamurti ... 78 


20 



INDEX. 


PAGK. 

Slihaou ... 335 

S6baui:ia-NaraBiniha 149.151, 154, 

155 

Sthiti 398. 399 

Subhadayaka 48, 49 

Subhadra 273, 376, 

Subhaga 336 

Subrahma^ya, oharaoteristio 
vreapona of, ... 2 

Subrahmanya, kukkufca in bhehand 
of. ... 11 

Subramapya 11, 38. 47. 61, 62. 

101. 211. 270, 387, 392, 393 
Suohi-hasta, deacription of. 15 
Sudarsana-ohakra 87, 290, 291, 

292 

Sudras 42, 83, 238 

Sugriva ... 187 

Sakra 121, 122, 123, 124, 162. 

166, 300, 305, 321. 323 
Hakraoharya, same as Sukra 176 

Sula 2. 7, 52. 64, 144, 253. 255, 
288, 309, 310, 320. 322. 339, 
342, 342, 343, 346, 357, 359, 


261, 364. 365. 

368, 369, 383, 
386, 387, 389 

Samantu 

... 260 

Sumbha 

... 333 

Sundari 

... 336 

Suparsva 

... 348 

Suprabhbdagama 19, 44, 306, 394, | 
340. 341. 382 ! 

Supratika 

284, 287 ; 

Surabhi 

... 370 

Surpakarpa 

46,60 

Suryarupa 

... 398 

Sutra 

386. 387 

Suvarohasa 

307, 313 

Suvarpa 

307, 313 


PAGB. 

SQirya 76, 82, 83. 86. 88. 89. 90. 
94, 95, 139, 165, 169. 170. 173. 
174, 299, 301. 303 f.n., 304. 
305. 306, 307, 308. 309, 310, 
313. 314. 315. 316, 317, 322. 

323. 350. 351. 400 


Surya-bimba 

... 346 

Surya-mapdala 

302, 308 f.D. 

Surya-Narayana 

... 74 

Suryanarkoyil 

300, 323 

Susaumya 

48, 49 

Sutasamhitd 

... 378 

Sutra 

... 384 

Svadha 

... 260 

Svadhiah^haQa 

... 329 

Sv&ha 

... 260 

Svara 

... 336 

Svargaloka 

166 f.n. 

Svayambhuva-manvantara, 354 

Svayam-pradhana 

... 376 

Sveta 

... 368 

Svdba-kalpa 

... 36 

Svetanga 

... 336 

Tadpatri 

... 99 

Takshaka 

... 379 

Taittiriya-Aranyaka 124, 128, 331 

Talavana 

... 197 

Tamas, Tdmasa-gupa 90, 293, 335 

Tamasa-gupatmika 

... 337 

Tauiore 

66, 300 

Tanka 

1, 7, 357 

Tantras 

132, 137, 330 

Tantrasdra 

... 77 

Tapas 

126, 396 

Tarjani-hasta, 14,16,48, 343, 346, 

367 

Tarupa-Gapapati 

... 52 

Tattvaa 

398, 400 


21 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


PAGB. 

Tatvaksbarai ... 356 

Tauvai ... 395 

Tdjas 234, 237 

TeQkasi 64. 209. 279 

Theosophioal Sooieties 331 f. n. 
Theosophist ... 221 

Tilaka 59. 367. 372, 393 

TiDDevelly 79. 192. 205, 209 

Tlrthankaras 220. 221 

Tirodhana ... 398 

Tirukkottiyur ... 79 

Tirupati 269. 270 

Tirapparaagupram 391. 392 

Tiruvottiyur ... 98 

Topdar-adippodi ... 390 

Torapa ... 317 ! 

Tortoise avatara. see also 
Edrmavatara ... 123 j 

Totala ... 361 I 

Travancore 12. 287 | 

Trail5kya*mohaDa ... 257 ; 

Tramsa ... 291 | 

Trdbayuga ... 266 I 

Tribhanga 49. 66. 152, 189, 192, 

206 

Triobinopoly ... 390 

Tri-k5pa-ohakra ... 291 

Trikuta ... 269 

Triloobana ^ ... 335 

Triloobana-Sivacbarya ... 398 

Triplioane ... 211 

Tripura ... 361 

Tripura-Bhairavi ... 366 

Trisula 256. 287. 289, 293, 342. 
344. 345, 347, 365. 366, 367, 
368, 380, 383 
Triaba ... 336 

Triabpa ... 336 


Pagb. 

Tritlyasavaoa 249 f. n. 

Trivandram 64. 66. 108, 114, 194 
Trivikramavatara 2, 100, 120, 
163, 164, 166, 167, 168, 169, 
229, 231. 233, 234, 237. 236 
Tula 85 f. n. 

Tulasfdovi ... 371 

Tnmburu 82, 83, 88, 89, 94. 95 
Tupda ... 145 

Tusbti ••• 233 

Tvasbta . . . 365 

Tvasbtri 309, SIO 

Uobobbishta-Gapapati 53, 54, 55, 
64. 65 

Udarabandba 23. 97, 98, 311, 312, 

315 

Udayapiya-Isbti 249 f.n. 

Udgat^i ... 145 

Udumbara tree ... 387 

Udyoga-parvan of Mahd- 
bhdrata. ... 274 

Ugra ... 400 

UgraobapdikA ... 357 

Ugrasdoa ... 198 

Um& 40,44.336.360 

Unmatta-Ucbobbisbta- 
Gapapati 58, 63 

Cpaaa, layer of a pitba ... 20 

Up&sakas ... 259 

Upavlta, a fashion of wearing 
deer-skin. 22, 111, 138, 163.220 
Updndra 230,232 

Uraga ... 291 

Urdbva-Gapapati 53, 56 

UsbA 240, 307, 313. 314, 316 
Usbpisba 27, 28 

Usbpisba-bbushana ... 28 

Iltensila in the hands of 
images 11-lS 



INDBX. 


PAGE. 

ntkafcik&sana 17, 19,82. 150, 253 
Utpala 99, 136 

Dttama, a form of image. 80. 81, 
83. 86, 88. 89. 91, 94, 95. 96 
Uttama-dasa-tAla, a 
measure, 81. 164 

UtUra-kamiJcdgaina 27, 54. 338 
Uttara-kandd of Bdmdyana 188 
Vdchaspatya-kosat 87, 346, 384 
Y&ohika, same as Vasika, ... 387 
Vahana 290. 380, 383, 384. 385, 
386, 387, 388. 393, 394 
Vahni, same as Agni ... 293 
Vaijayanti, description of, 25, 26 
Vaikhdnatdgama 77, 78, 132, 152, 
164, 167, 170, 192,201, 203, 
204. 211, 215, 223, 239, 241. j 
247, 248. 287 ! 
Vaikuptha 137, 200, 256, 257 ! 
Vaikupthanatha 256, 258 

Vaiku^tbapperumal temple of, 79 
Vaisampayana ... 250 

Vaishpavagamas ... 294 

Vaisb^avl 348, 354, 380, 381, 383 
... 384 

Vaisya ... 238 

Vaivasvata-manu ... 125 

Vaivaavata-manvantara 334, 354 
Vajra 2, 8, 56. Ill, 257. 258. 287 
288, 292, 346. 357, 358, 361, 
362, 364, 370. 385 


Yak 

... 335 

Yalakhilyas 

... 284 

Yalaya 

... 69 

Yalkala 

... 219 

Yalmfki 

187, 188, 255 

Yama 

362, 398,399 

Yamadgva 

... 899 

Yamaohara 

... 101 


Page. 

Vamanavatara 20, 123, 162. 163, 
164, 166, 171. 172, 229. 232, 
233. 234, 237. 238 
Vamana-purma 47, 350 

Vana-Durga 342, 343 

Yanamala 111, 236, 241, 305 
Vma-parvan of Mahdbkd- 
rata 124, 274 

Yarada-basta 14, 57, 58, 65, 80, 81, 
87, 99, 101, 104, 114, 127, 128, 
152, 165, 179,202, 203,211. 212, 
219, 257, 258. 319, 320, 321, 
322, 338. 339, 342, 344, 355. 
358, 359, 360, 361. 366, 367, 
368, 370, 371, 372, 383. 384, 
385, 386. 387. 389 

Varadaraja 266, 267, 268 

Yaradarajapperumal temple 

107, 269 

Yarabavatara 20, 23, 128, 132, 
133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 256. 

257, 379, 380 
Vardha-purdna 39, 168, 295, 348, 
355, 381, 382 

Yarfipha-VishTiu. colour of the 
image of. 133, 135, 136, 238 
YArahl 3, 380, 381, 383, 388 
Yarata . . . 238 

Yaroha ... 302 

Yarna 165, 182, 309, 310, 350, 

354 

Yaru^i-Chamupda, VarunI, 364 
Yasanta 277, 279 

Yasava ... 77 

Yasbatkara ... 130 

Yasini deities ... 331 

Yasishta 125, 128 

Yasudfiva 77. 108, 130, 195, 196, 
200. 230. 232. 283, 285. 226, 
237, 238, 289, 241, 242, 339 


23 



HINDU lOONOaRAPHY. 



Pagb. 

Vasuki 308. f.n. 

369, 379 

Va^ 

215,389 

Va(apatra8&yi^ 

216, 264 

Vatsftsora 

... 205 

Vayu 76, 77, 165, 290, 350 

Vayu-p7irana 

144, 147 

Vayu-tattva 

... 399 

Vayvakara 

... 398 

Vddagarbhft 

... 335 

Ved&nga 

... 145 

VedftDta-Desika 

... 78 1 

Vedas 42,46,74,75,125,126,1 

129, 131, 144, 148, 

217, 218, i 

222, 248, 249 f.n.. 

255, 261, i 


299, 301 j 

Vddavyasa 

... 123 1 

vadi 

... 145 1 

Vddik&sana 

... 90 I 

Vd^gadam 

... 270 ' 

Venkatdaa 269, 270, 371 • 

Vepu 

... 9 ! 

VeQU>65pala 207, 208, 209, 210 

Venus 

... 318 , 

Vdtala 

... 62 ; 

VStrasura 

355, 356 j 

Vdtravati 

... 355! 

Vibbakta 

... 362 i 

Vibhavasu 

284, 287 : 

Vidhi 

294, 336 j 

Vidya 293, 335, 366, 382 I 

Vidyadhara 82, 83, 88, 241 I 

Vighnaraja 

41, 48, 49 

VigbnSla, Vira 

... 52 

Vighnesvara 35, 36, 38, 

39. 41,44, 

46, 47, 48, 49, 

50. 51. 57 

Vigbnesvara, Bhakti— > 

... 52 

Vighnesvara-pratishthd-Vldki 56 

VighnOlvar! 

... 55 


Paoi, 

Vijaya 37, 102, 147, 361, 368 

Vijayanagara ... 179 

Vimalasana, description of, 19, 20 
Vina 9, 54, 138, 139, 163, 175, 
241, .335, 363, 367, 368, 372, 
377, 378 

Vinata 283, 284 

Vinayaka 41, 44, 47, 50, 306, 389 
Vindbya 333, 361, 364 

Vindhyavasi-Darga 342, 344 

Vipraobitta ... 333 

Vipraobitti ... 345 

Vlra, a variety of tbe image of 
Visbpu, 79 

Virabbadra 9, 379, 388, 389 
Virarajdndraddva ... 98 

Virasaua 18, 90, 367 

VirAsanamurti 89, 108, 109 

Virasayanamurti 94, 96 

Yfrastbanakamurti ... 83 

Vira^arupa ... 174 

Virinoha ... 336 

Virdcbana ... 161 

Virya 234, 237 

Visalaksbi ... 323 

Vishnu 2, 3, 4, 9, 15, 25, 32, 38, 
47, 48, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 
161, 162, 163, 252, 263, 254, 
273, 283, 284, 287, 289, 290, 
291, 294, 309, 310, 320, 327, 
336, 337, 338, 341, 346, 360, 
352, 355, 367, 372, 373, 374, 
375, 378, 379, 380, 382, 383, 
384, 385, 390, 396, 397 
Visbpu-bhaktas ... 398 

Vishnudharmottara 134, 135, 163, 
167, 186, 191, 204, 219, 223, 
241, 250, 251, 255, 260, 276, 
278, 289, 290, 320, 321, 346, 
373, 376, 377, 383, 385, 386. 

387, 388, 396 


24 



INDEX. 


VkQZ, 

Vishnu-purd]!,a 26, 124, 129, 131, 
149, 182. 185, 195. 217, 222, 

293 

Vishnurahasya ... 26 j 

Vish^urata ••• 124 | 

Vishiiu^sahaara-ntima ... 227 I 

ViBbi;;iayarddhana 66, 243 j 

VishipiuyasaB ••• 222 

Vishvaksdna ... 81 

Vismaya-hasta 14, 16, 67, 144 
Visuddfai • • • 329 

Visvakarmao 275, 350 

Viivakamia^sdstra 259, 302, 309, 
322. 375 

VisvAmitra ... 184 

Vfsvanathasvamin, tomplo of 64, 
209, 279 

Visvarupa . ■ . 258 

VisvSsvara ... 323 

Vithala, samo as Vitbob& 271, 

272. 273 

Vivasvan 309, 310 

Vvika ... 289 

Vrisba . . . 266 

Vyajini 82, 89, 107 

Vy&kbyaaa-ixiudra, same as obin- 
mudrdi 14, 17, 211, 377 
Vy&sa 45, 250 

Vyavas&ya ... 266 

Y&dava 195, 198, 200 

Yajamana ... 400 

Yajna 249 f. n. 

Yajnamurti 248, 250 t n. 

Yajna-N&r&ya^a ... 75 

Yajna^purusba . . . 162 

Yajbavarftba 132, 135 


Page 

Yajnesa 248, 249, 250 

Yaindpavlla, i'ouud only in later 
images, 22, 23, 50, 86, 97, 98, 
103, 106, 109, 143, 186.248. 
306, 319, 376, 377. 386 
Yajurvcda 73, 249 f.n. 

Yajus 123, 184,217 

Yaksha 82, 83, 88, 362 

Yama 198, 302, 303, 306, 309, 350, 

380 

Yarn! ... 381 

Yamuna 197, 212, 272 

Yanaka-Narasimba ... 154 
Yantras 330, 331, 332, 356 

Y^ka 45, 76 

Yasodd 196, 197, 216 

Yati ... 238, 

Yoga 17, 80, 103, 292, 367 

Yoga-mudras 17, 8G, 87, 103, 220, 
221, 254, 257, 258. 323 
Yoganidra ... 362 

Yoga-Narasimha 155, 291 

Yoga-patta 150, 253, 259. 367 

Yogasana 19, 20, 85, 86, 88, 102, 
103, 221, 254 
Yoga-sastras 328, 329 

Yogasayanamurti 90,91, 110, 
114, 269 

Yogastbanamurii 81, 82, 96 

I Ydgesvara 86, 102 

I Ydgesvari 364, 365, 380, 381 
Yogia 87, 115, 236, 252 

i Yojanas ... 126 

; Yupastambba ... 144 

i ZaratbuBtra ... 301 

i Zend Avesta ... 301 



INDEX TO APPENDIX B. 



Page. i 

Page. 

Abanindranatb Tagore 

1 

8 1 Atyasb^i 

4 

AbjajdDaDa 

3 j Avriti 

5 

Adhama-dasa-tala 

6 1 Ayama 

5 

Adhama-manangula 

1 Ayata 

5 

Adityas 

6 ; Ayurekha 

... 17 

Agamaa 

0 Bahaja 

5 

Agni 

3 Babu-paryanta-sutra 

29, 30 

Aki'iti 

1 . Bbrigu 

6 

Akshi 

3 ■ Bhru-aiitra 

... 8,23 

Akshi-suiia 

9,18 Bbuja 

... 31 

Ambhooidbi 

3 Bbumidovi 

6 

Ammvuidbhcdatiaim 

to 28 ' Bbuta 

3 

Aiiga 

3 Bh litas 

7 

Aiiga-parava-madbya-autra 

Brabma 

6 


30, 31 : Brabmaua 

3 

Angela 

2 Brahma- rekb a 

... 17 

Antara 

5 Bribati 

3 

Ad tarbhu ja vadh i • su tra 

32 Gbakra 

17, 28 

Anushtup 

3 Gbapdosa 

7 

Apsarasaa 

7 ' Chandra 

6 

Arka 

4 Gbarapas 

7 

Arya 

7 ; Ghatustala 

7 

AsbU-murtiis of Siva 

7 Gbiiohuka 

... 27 

Asbta-tala 

7, 8 : Daityesa 

7 

Asbfci 

1 ! Dapda 

2 

Astra-murtis 

• ! Debaiigula, same as the Deha- 

Asuras 

7 labdba-aiigula 

5 

Asvini 

. 3,6 ! Dbanurgraba 

... 226 

Atidbyiti 

4 ’ Dhanurmusbti 

2 

Atijagati 

4 DbAtus 

3 

Atikriti 

4 Dbriti 

4 

Atisakvari 

. 4 I Dik 

... 3 


26 



INDEX. 



Page. , 

Page. 

Dfrgha 

... 5 ; 

Earpa-bandha 

23 

Drigantari-sutra 

... 31 ; 

Kdranitgaina 7, 9 to 28 

Darga 

7 : 

Karna-kdsa 

18 

Dvfpa 

3 i 

Karna-paryaDta-Biitra 

29 

DvitAld. 

... 7 i 

Karna-vAsa 

23 

fika-tala 

7 ! 

Kdsautat.bbruvdr' madhyaui 

18 

Ganas 

... 3 i 

Kinnaras 

7 

Gandharvas 

... 7 ' 

Kirlfca 

29 

Garuda 

6 ; 

Kisbku 

2 

Gayatri 

3 

Krikati 

25 

Ghana 

5 

Kvitani 

25 

Goji 

... 20 

Kriti 

4 

Gokarna 

6 

Krittika 

3 

Golaka 

3 

Kviya 

4 

Grahas 

... 3,7i 

Kshetrapalakas 

7 

Guha, same as Subrahmanya 7 i 

Kubera 

7 

Gu^a 

... 3 1 

Kubjas 

7 

Guru 

7 1 

Kumarauaua 

3 

?Ianu-chakra 

... 22 

Kusa 

17 

FlikkA-sutra 9, 10, 

11, 27, 30 

Kushmapdas 

7 

Indu 

3 , 

Lambamana 

4,5 

Indu-kala 

i i 

Lambaua 

5 

Indra 

6 ' 

Lamba-phalaka 29, 31 

Indriya 

3 ’ 

Liksba 

1 

Ishu 

3 

Ldkapalakas 

3,6 

Jagati 

4 

L5kas 

3 

Jati 

3 

Madhya 

3,11 

TySshtha 

6 

Madhyama-dasa-tala 

fi 

Jydtirmandala 

... 19 1 

Madhyama-manfingula 

1 

Kabandha 

... 7 ! 

Madhya-sutra 2o, 2G, 28, 29, 30 

Kaksba-paryantaautra 

... 20,31 i 

Mana 4 

5,9 

Kala 

3 , 

Maudalat agra-kesautam ... 

17 

KalA 

3 

Mandalat-karna-kdsautam 

18 

Kamikagama 

... 9,10: 

Mandalat-prishtha-keaUntam 

18 

KauInikA 

... 19 

Manu 

4 

Kausika 

3 

MArga 

5 

Karna, (or Karapa), 

3 

MArkandSya 

6 


87 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


paob. 


tfarud-ga^as 

7 

tl&tr&ngula 

2 


5 

Sddksha 

3 

Idttkba 

4 

Monig 

3 ! 

Murti 

3 

NSbbi'Sutra 

... 25 

Nidi 

3 

N&gas 

3 

N&ha 

5 

Nakebatras 

4 

N&ja 

23, 24 

Nandas 

3 

Nft8&-puta, same as NAsikk-puta, 
19, 20 1 

NAaA*puta-sutra, 

8, 20, 29 i 

Do same as puka-paryanta- i 
. satra 31 

Nata 

5 ; 

Nava.tAla 

7 

Ndkra-pary anta • sutra 

... 29 

N5tra*s5tra, same as 

akshi-sutra 
23, 24 

Nirgama 

5 

Nirgati 

5 

Nishkrama 

5 

Nisbkriti 

5 

NIvra 

5 

Padma 

... 17 

Paksha 

3 

PAli 

... 21 

PaSoha-tala 

7 

Padkti 

3 

ParamAnu 

1 

ParimApa 

4, 5, 17 

ParipAba 

5 

PArsbpi.hasta 

... 16 


PAQB. 


P&tala ••• 3 

Pinohhali, same as tragus ... 24 

Pippali ... 24 

Pftha ... 30 

Pr&ddsa ... 5,6 

Pr&japatya ... 2 

Prakriki ... 4 

Pr&mapa ... 4, 5 

Pratishtha ... 3 

PrftturbhAva ... 3 

Pr&vfisa ... 5 

Prdkas ... 7 

Prithvi ... 3 

Bakshasa ... 7 

R&ma ... 3 

Randhras ... 3 

Rasa ... 3 

Rftsi ... 4 

Rathardnu ... 1 

Ripa ... 3 

Rishis ... 7 

R!tu ... 3 

^hipi ... 3 

R5m&gra ... 1 

Rudras ... 3,6 

RudrAksha ... 3 

^akvari ... 4 

Samaya ... 3 

Samskriti ... 4 

^ankba ... 7, 28 

Sapta-tAla ... S 

S&rdba-sapta-t&la ... 6 

Sa-tryadgula-nava-tAla ... 7 

Sfisha ••• 7 

Sbat-t&la 7 

Siddhas ... 7 

f^ikhAmapi ... 29 



INDEX. 


§ilparalna 

Page. ; 

9 to 28 

Sirah-prishfchftvas&na-sutra 31 ; 

^Iromadbya-maprlalA 

... 17 ; 

{^iva 

6 

Sm^iti 

4 

^rlddvi 

6 


...26,80 

^roviddsa 

...11,26 

Stana’Sutra 

26 

i 

Sthanaka-murti 

... 29 ' 

Strlti 

5 

^ula 

3,17 

Snpratishfcha 

3 

Surya 

6 

Sutra 

... 3,5 

T&la 

...4, 5.6 

T&ra 

5 

Titbi 

4 

Trisbtup 

3 

Trit&Ia 

7 

Tubga 

... 5 

Turfya 

3 

Turya 

3 ' 

Uoboha 

5 1 

Udaya 

5 ! 

Udgama 

6 ! 

Ukta 

3 

Uma 

9 

UnmAiua 

4.5 

TJnmita 

5 

Unnata 

4 

Upamana 

... 55, 

Uraga 

3 

Uragdsa 

7 

Usbpik 

3 

Ushpisba 

... 9, 18 

UtobohbrAya 

5 

Utkriti 

4 


Utsddha 

Page. 

5 

Utitama-dasa-tAla 

... l.G 

Utitama-mAnAdgula 

1 

Uttama-nava-tala 

7 

Vaikhanasagania 

9 to 28 

Vakfcra-b&hya-sutm 

30, 31 

V&manas 

7 

Vardhaua 

... 21 

Varga 

3 

Varna 

3 

Vaaus 

... 3. G 

Vedas 

3 

Vdtalas 

7 

Vidyardkha 

... 17 

Vidydsa 

7 

VighnSsvara 

7 

Vihaga 

3 

Vikyiti 

4 

Vis&la 

5 

Vishkambha 

5 

Vishaya 

3 

Viehpu 

... G 

Visvambbara 

3 

Visritam 

5 

Visi’iti 

5 

Viat&ra 

5 

Vitasti 

4, 5, 6 

Vivara 

5 

Vriti 

5 

Vyasa 

5 

Yakshas 

7 

Yakabdsa 

7 

Yama 

4 

Yava 

c... 1 

Yuga 

3 

Yugma 

3 

Yuka 

1 




CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 


I.— LINOA : 

Sarva-sama-linna, Adhya-lihga, Auadbya-liaga, Surodh- 
ya-linga, JSana-linga ; sahasL-a-lihgu, mukba-lioga, 
oto. 

II.— SIVA ; 

SukbaeaDamurti, Kovalamurtii, Umasabitamurti, Aliuga- 
namui’ti, Cbandi'aaokbaramuiti, Somaskandamurti, 
Chanddsanugrahamui'ti, Nandisanugrabamurti, Vish- 
ovanugi'ahamurti, NvitUmurti (eight varieties), 
(lahgadbaramurti, Triparantakamurti (eight varieties) , 
Gajahamurti, Kaukaiaoaurti and Bhikshatanamurti, 
DakshiiiiamurtiKVyakbyana-D, ViQadhara-D, Jnana- 
D, Yoga-D), Kalahamurti, Lihgodbbavamiirti, Vrisb- 
avanamurti, Kalya^asundaresvaramurti, Kainan- 
takamurti, Ardbanarisvaramurti, Ilaryardbamurti, 
Mabeaamurti, Sarabbesauiurti, Pasupataniurti, 
Baudra Pasupatamurti, Sadasivamurti, Kalagnirudra, 
Budra, Umamabesvara, Bbatrava, Isana and others, 
Vidydsvaras (eight in number), the eight mnrlis of 
Siva, Virupaksha, Bevata, Hara, Bahurupa, Tryain- 
haka, Suresvara, Jayanta and Aparajita. 

III. — SUBHAHMANYA : 

IV. — The Dik-palas ; 

V.— Miscellaneous ; 

Ghaudesvara ; Avarauadevatas belonging to the tomplo o( 
Siva : Ayudbas ; Bbaktas: Dvarapalas; Nandi, Naga- 
ddvas ; Sadhyas ; Marud-gapa ; Apsarasas ; Asuras ; 
Pisaohas ; Vetalas ; Asvinidevatas ; Arya ; Ksbetra- 
pala ; the eight Vaeus ; the seven Bishis ; Kausika : 
Bbrigu ; the Pitris : etc. 








The Asiatic Society Library 

Author 

Title 

Accession No 

Call No 






