Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



HINDU 
MANNERS, CUSTOxMS 



AND 



CEREMONIES 



DUBOIS 



II. 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 
PUBLISHBR TO THE UNIVBRSITY OF OXFORD 




LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK 



HINDU 
MANNERS, CUSTOMS 



AND 



CEREMONIES 



BY THE 

ABBE J. A. DUBOIS 



TRANSLATED FROM THE AUTHOR'S LATER FRENCH MS. AND EDITED 
WITH NOTES, CORRECTIONS, AND BIOGRAPHY 

BY 

HENRY K. BEAUCHAMP 



WITH A PREFATORY NOTE BY THE RIGHT HON. F. MAX MULLER 

AND A PORTRAIT 



VOLUME II 



©xfotb 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1897 



Ojcfoth 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M^. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 



^^ 



CHAPTER XVIII 

Mourning. — The Condition of Widowhood. — The General Contempt for 

Widows. — Remarriages forbidden. 

The happiest death for a woman is that which overtakes 
her while she is still in a wedded state. Such a death is 
looked upon as the reward of goodness extending back for 
many generations * ; on the other hand, the greatest misfortune 
that can befall a wife is to survive her husband. 

Should the husband die first, as soon as he breathes his 
last the widow attires herself in her best clothes and bedecks 
herself with all her jewels'. Then, with all the signs of 
the deepest grief, she throws herself on his body, embracing it 
and uttering loud cries. She holds the corpse tightly clasped 
in her arms until her parents, generally silent spectators of 
this scene, are satisfied that this first demonstration of grief is 
sufficient, when they restrain her from these sad embraces. 
She yields to their efforts with great reluctance, and with re- 
peated pretences of escaping out of their hands and rushing 
once again to the lifeless remains of her husband. Then, 
finding her attempts useless, she rolls on the ground like one 
possessed, strikes her breast violently, tears out her hair, and 
manifests many other signs of the deepest despair. Now, 
are these noisy professions of grief and affliction to be attributed 
to an excess of conjugal affection, to real sorrow? The answer 
will appear rather perplexing, when we remark that it is the 
general custom to act in this manner, and that all these demon- 
strations are previously arranged as a part of the ceremonies 
of mourning. 

Afler the first outbursts of grief, she rises, and, assuming 

* Children are even consoled with ^ This is the last occasion on which 

the thought, when their mothers die she is allowed to wear ornaments of 
in a wedded state. — £d. any kind. — £d. 

*♦ A a 



354 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. h 

a more composed look, approaches her husband's body. Then 
in one continuous strain, which would be hardly possible 
under real affliction, she apostrophizes her husband in a long 
series of questions, of which I give a summary below : — 

'Why hast thou forsaken me? What wrong have I done 
thee, that thou shouldst thus leave me in the prime of my 
life ? Had I not for thee all the fondness of a faithful wife ? 
Have I not always been virtuous and pure? Have I not 
borne thee handsome children? Who will bring them up? 
Who will take care of them hereafter? Was I not diligent 
in all the duties of the household ? Did I not sweep the house 
every day, and did I not make the floor smooth and clean? 
Did I not ornament the floor with white tracery? Did I not 
cook good food for thee? Didst thou find grit in the rice 
that I prepared for thee ? Did I not serve up to thee food such 
as thou lovedst, well seasoned with garlic, mustard, pepper, 
cinnamon, and other spices? Did I not forestall thee in all 
thy wants and wishes? What didst thou lack whilst I was 
with thee ? Who will take care of me hereafter ? * 

And so on. At the end of each sentence uttered in a 
plaintive chanting tone, she pauses to give free vent to her 
sobs and shrieks, which are also uttered in a kind of rhythm. 
The women that stand around join her in her lamentations, 
chanting in chorus with her. Afterwards, she addresses the 
gods, hurling against them torrents of blasphemies and impre- 
cations. She accuses them openly of injustice in thus depriving 
her of her protector. This scene lasts till her eloquence 
becomes exhausted, or till her lungs are wearied out and 
she is no longer capable of giving utterance to her lamen- 
tations. She then retires to take rest for a while, and to 
prepare some new phrases against the time when the body 
is being prepared for the funeral pyre. 

The more vehement the expression of a woman's grief, 
the more eloquent and demonstrative her phrases, the more 
apparently genuine her contortions on such occasions, so 
much the more is she esteemed a woman of intelligence and 
education. The young women who are present pay the most 
minute attention to all that she says or does; and if they 
observe anything particularly striking in her flights of rhetoric, 
in her attitudes, or in any of her efforts to excite the attention 



CH. xviii] Professional Mourners 355 

of the spectators, they carefully treasure it in their memory, 
to be made use of should a similar misfortune ever happen 
to themselves. If a wife who was really afflicted by the loss 
of her husband confined herself to shedding real tears and 
uttering real sobs, she would only be thoroughly despised and 
considered an idiot. The parents of a young widow once 
complained to me of her stupidity as follows: 'So foolish 
is she that, on the death of her husband, she did not utter 
a single word ; she did nothing but cry, without saying 
anjrthing'.' 

In several parts of India, as formerly among the Greeks 
and Romans, professional women mourners may be hired. 
When called in to attend the obsequies, these women arrive 
with dishevelled hair and only half clothed, wearing their 
scanty garments in a disordered fashion. Collecting in a 
group round the deceased, they commence by setting up in 
unison the most doleful cries, at the same time beating their 
breasts in measured time. They weep, sob, and shriek in 
turns. Then addressing themselves to the deceased, each in 
succession eulogizes his virtues and good qualities. Anon they 
apostrophize him, vehemently remonstrating with him for 
quitting life so soon. Finally, they point out to him, in the 
plainest possible terms, that he could not have committed a 
more foolish act. In discharging these duties, which are 
a curious mixture of tragedy and comedy, they take turn 
and turn about, and their affected sorrow lasts until the 
corpse is removed. As soon as the obsequies are over, they 
receive their wages, and their faces, which were so lugu- 
brious a few moments before, once more assume their wonted 
calmness. 

Widows, who in the learned tongue are called vidhava, a 
word akin to the Latin vt'dua, are held in much less respect 
than other women ; and when they happen to have no children, 
they are generally looked upon with the utmost scorn. The 
very fact of meeting a widow is calculated to bring ill-luck. 

' The Hebrews also, on the death their hair or beards, or else had them 

of friends and relatives, made a great cut, and even inflicted cuts on their 

parade of all the external signs of bodies. See Leviticus xix. a8, xxi. 

sorrow. They cried, rent their gar- 5 ; Jeremiah xvi. 6, &c. — Dubois. 
ments, beat their breasts, tore out 

A a2 



356 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

They are called moonda, a reproachful term which means 
'shom-head/ because every widow is supposed to have her 
hair cut off. This rule, however, is not everywhere followed, 
especially among the Sudras*. When women quarrel, this 
opprobrious term, moonda, is generally the first abusive word 
that passes. 

A widow has to be in mourning till her death. The signs 
of mourning are as follows : — She is expected to have her head 
shorn once a month ; she is not allowed to chew betel ; she 
is no longer permitted to wear jewels, with the exception 
of one very plain ornament round her neck ; she must wear 
coloured clothes no longer, only pure white ones; she must 
not put saffron on her face or body, or mark her forehead*. 
Furthermore, she is forbidden to take part in any amusement 
or to attend family festivities, such as marriage feasts, the 
ceremony of upanayana, and others; for her very presence 
would be considered an evil omen. 

A very few days after the death of her husband, a widow's 
house is invaded by female friends and relatives, who begin 
by eating a meal prepared for them. After this they surround 
the widow and exhort her to bear her miserable lot with forti- 
tude. One after another they take her in their arms, shed tears 
with her, and end by pushing her violently to the ground. 
They next join together in lamenting her widowhood, and 
finally make her sit on a small stool. Then, one of her 
nearest female relatives, having previously muttered some 
religious formulae, cuts the thread of the tali, the gold orna- 
ment which every married woman in India wears round 
her neck. The barber is called in, and her head is clean 
shaved. This double ceremony sinks her instantly into the 
despised and hated class of widows. During the whole time 
that these curious and mournful rites are being performed, 
the unfortunate victim is making the whole house resound with 
her cries of woe, cursing her sad lot a thousand times. 

The thread of the tali must be cut, not untied. This practice 
has given rise to a very common curse ; two women when 

* And also among the Tengalai a widow of the Saiva sect, and mark 

Vaishnava Brahmins. — Ed. her forehead with red powder if a 

' She must, however, smear her Vaishnava. — Ed. 
forehead with sacred ashes if she is 



cH. xviii] The Sad Fate of Widows 357 

quarrelling never forget to say to each other : ' May you have 
your icdi cut I * which means, ' May you become a widow ! ' 

The signs of sorrow manifested by a Hindu lady who loses 
her husband are of so exaggerated a description that one cannot 
help doubting their perfect sincerity; yet it is impossible that 
any Hindu widow could face the sad future awaiting her with 
tearless eyes. Doomed to perpetual widowhood, cast out of 
society, stamped with the seal of contumely, she has no consola- 
tion whatever, except maybe the recollection of hardships that 
she has had to endure during her married life. 

I do not refer here to those unfortunate girls of five or 
six years of age, who, married to Brahmins of over sixty, 
very often become widows before they attain the age of 
puberty. Fortunately their youth and inexperience prevent 
their brooding over the sad condition in which they have been 
placed by such inhuman and iniquitous prejudices. But think 
of the numberless young widows in the prime of life and strength. 
How do they bear up against this cruel expulsion from the 
society of their fellow-creatures ? The answer is, Better than 
one would be inclined to believe. The fact is, they must per- 
force be resigned to their fate ; and however despised a widow 
may be, there is this consolation, that one who remarries is 
a hundred times more so, for she is shunned absolutely by every 
honest and respectable person. Thus there are few widows who 
would not look upon proposals to remarry as a downright insult, 
though in this respect they are seldom put to the test. Even an 
old gouty Brahmin, as poor as Irus, would feel indignant at the 
very suggestion of marrying a widow, though she were rich and 
endowed with all the charms of youth and beauty. 

One result of this prejudice, which is firmly and irrevocably 
established in India, is that the country abounds with widows, 
especially among the Brahmins. Among this caste shom-heads 
are to be seen ever3rwhere. Of course a certain corruption of 
morals is the inevitable result of such a state of things, but it is 
not pushed to such an extent as might be expected. The natural 
modesty of Hindu women, the way in which they are brought 
up, their ordinarily chaste and circumspect demeanour, the 
calmness of their passions : all these go a great way towards 
providing as it were strong barriers against the attacks of the 
licentious, who, whatever may be said to the contrary by ill- 



358 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies 

informed writers, do not succeed in winning over women of 
the better class so easily as in many other countries where 
the lawful union of the two sexes is not beset with so many 
obstacles. 

Besides, even if we refuse to believe that young widows 
possess in themselves sufficient strength of will to resist seduc- 
tion, there are many other obstacles beyond their own control, 
which also serve as so many bulwarks to their modesty. Chief 
among such obstacles must be reckoned the diligent watchfulness 
exercised over them by their parents ; the severity of the cottve- 
nances which forbid any kind of familiar intercourse between 
men and women ; the very heavy punishments which follow 
even the most trivial lapses; and, finally, the mere disgrace, 
which in India, above all countries of the world, entails the most 
tremendous penalties on the person detected in an indiscretion*. 

' The social refoimers of the present their husbands is possible. So far, 
d|iy are dqing all th^t they can to en- however, the success which these re- 
courage the remarriage of virgin formers have met with is extremely 
widows, those unhappy girls who, small, and those who brave caste 
married before they come of ag^, be- custom in this respect are invariably 
come widows before cohabitation >vitb outcasted. — £d. 



CHAPTER XIX 

The Custom which at times obliges Widows to allow themselves to be burnt 
alive on the Funeral Pyre of their Deceased Husbands. 

Although the ancient and barbarous custom which imposes 
the duty on widows of sacrificing themselves voluntarily on the 
funeral pyre of their husbands has not been expressly abolished, 
it is much more rare nowadays than formerly, especially in the 
southern parts of the Peninsula. In the North of India and in 
the provinces bordering on the Ganges, however, women are 
only too frequently seen offering themselves as victims of this 
horrid superstition, and, either through motives of vanity or 
through a spirit of blind enthusiasm, giving themselves up to 
a death which is as cruel as it is foolish. 

The Mahomedan rulers never tolerated this horrible practice 
in the provinces subject to them; but, notwithstanding their 
prohibition, wretched fanatics have more than once succeeded 
in bribing the subordinate representatives of authority to give 
permission to commit the deed in violation of the laws of 
humanity and common sense. 

The great European Power which nowadays exercises its sway 
all over the country has tried, by all possible means of persua- 
sion, to put an end altogether to this barbarous custom ; but its 
efforts have been only partially successful, and, generally speak- 
ing, it has been obliged to shut its eyes to this dreadful practice, 
since any attempt to remedy it by force would have exposed it 
to dangerous opposition. 

Nobody is a greater admirer than myself of the wise spirit that 
animates this enlightened and liberal Government in manifesting 
to its Hindu subjects such a full and perfect tolerance in the 
practice of their civil and religious usages ; and nobody is more 
fully alive than I am to the dangers and difficulties that an open 



360 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 



defiance of these prejudices, which are looked upon as sacred 
and inviolable, would give rise to. But does the abominable 
custom in question form part of Hindu institutions? Are there 
any rules which prescribe its observance by certain castes? 
All the information which I have been able to gather on the 
subject tends to make me believe that there are no such rules. 
The infamous practice, although encouraged by the impostors 
who regulate religious worship, is nowhere prescribed in an 
imperative manner in the Hindu books. It is left entirely to the 
free will and pleasure of the victims who thus sacrifice them- 
selves. No blame and no discredit are attached nowadays to 
the wife whose own honest judgement suggests that she ought 
not to be in such a hurry to rejoin in the other world the hus- 
band who so often made her wretched in this. It would be 
quite possible, therefore, by the display of firmness, combined 
with prudence, to strike, without any considerable danger, at the 
very root of this shocking practice. Certainly it reflects dis- 
credit on the Government which tolerates it and manifests no 
great indignation ^ with regard to it. 



^ During recent years, owing to the 
number of these abominable sacrifices 
being on the increase, especially in 
the Bengal Presidency and in the dis- 
tricts bordering on the Ganges, the 
Government has thought fit to inter- 
fere to check this inconceivable mania 
by adopting at least persuasive mea- 
sures. It has, therefore, directed the 
difierent magistrates scattered about 
the country to examine very minutely 
all the circumstances attending the 
custom of suttee (this is the name by 
which these barbarous sacrifices are 
known), and never to sanction it 
except after exhausting all the means 
to oppose it which prudence may sug- 
gest to them. No woman can, there- 
fore, now devote herself to a death of 
this kind without the sanction of the 
magistracy. When such permission 
is sought, the magistrates cause the 
victim to appear before them and 
question her carefully to assure them- 
selves that her resolution is entirely 
voluntary, and that no outside influ- 



ence has been brought to bear upon 
her. They then try by every possible 
exhortation and counsel to induce her 
to give up her horrible design. But 
should the widow remain firm in her 
resolution, they leave her mistress of 
her own fate. The Protestant mis- 
sionaries, when they first arrived in 
the country, expressed a just horror 
of these abominable sacrifices, and 
strove to diminish their number ; but 
being ill acquainted with the character 
of the Hindus and with their devoted at- 
tachment to custom, they used brusque 
and violent measures which only re- 
sulted in augmenting the evil. I have 
seen the lists of widows who had 
sacrificed themselves on the funeral 
pyre of their husbands from 1810 (the 
period at which the missionaries com- 
menced their labours) up to the year 
1890; and I have remarked that the 
number of these victims progressively 
increased every year during that space 
of time. In 18 17 there were 706 
suttees in the Bengal Presidency. It 



CH. xix] Suttee, or IVidow-burning 



361 



It was principally in the noble caste of Rajahs that the 
suttee originated. It was looked upon as a highly honourable 
proof of wifely attachment and love, which enhanced the glory 
of the families of these wretched victims of blind zeal. Should 
a widow, by reason of a natural fondness for life or through lack 
of courage, endeavour to avoid the honour of being burnt alive 
on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband, she was considered 
to be offering a gross insult to his memory, 

I was once able to thoroughly convince myself of the influence 
which this false point of honour still exercises over the minds 
of fanatical Hindus, and at the same time to discern that 
this act of devotion to which these wretched victims sacrificed 
themselves is not always the result of their own free will and 
resolution. The poligar or prince of Cangoondy in the Carnatic 
having died, neither entreaties nor threats were spared to induce 
his widow to allow herself to be burnt alive with him. It was 
urged that this honourable custom had been observed for a long 
time past in the family, and that it would be a great pity, indeed, 
to allow it to fall into disuse. The funeral ceremonies were 
delayed from day to day in the hope that the widow would at 
last make up her mind to prefer a glorious death to a remnant 
of life spent in contempt and opprobrium. It was a fruitless 
attempt I The obstinate princess turned a deaf ear to all the 
pressing entreaties of her relatives ; and ultimately the deceased 
was obliged to depart alone to the other world. 

It must, however, be confessed that some widows commit this 
folly readily enough, spurred on as they are by the thought of 
the wretchedness of widowhood, by vanity, by the hope of acquir- 
ing notoriety, perhaps also by a genuine feeling of enthusiasm. 
It should be remembered that they are awarded boundless 
honours, and are even deified after death. Vows are made and 
prayers addressed to them, and their intercession is sought 
in times of sickness and adversity. Such remnants of their 



is true that this insane practice is 
much more in vogue on the banks of 
the Ganges than anjrwhere else. In 
the southern parts of the Peninsula of 
India suttees are seldom seen. I am 
convinced that in the Madras Presi- 
dency, which numbers at least thirty 
millions of inhabitants, not thirty 



widows allow themselves to be thus 
burnt during a year. — Dubois. 

Suttee is now, of course, absolutely 
abolished. Its prohibition by law was 
effected during the Governor-General- 
ship of Lord William Bentinck (1825- 
1^35), at the instance of the great 
Riyah Ram Mohun Roy.— £d. 



3^2 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

bodies as have not been entirely consumed by the fire are most 
devoutly gathered together, and on the spot where they have 
sacrificed themselves small monumental pyramids are erected to 
transmit to posterity the memory of these brave victims of 
conjugal affection — a tribute all the more conspicuous, because 
the erection of tombs is almost unknown among the Hindus *. 
In a word, women who have had the courage to deliver them- 
selves so heroically to the flames are numbered among the 
divinities, and crowds of devotees may be seen coming in 
from all sides to offer them sacrifices and to invoke their 
protection. 

To these inducements of vain and empty glory — sufficient of 
themselves to make a deep impression on a feeble mind — must 
be added the entreaties of relatives, who, if they perceive the 
slightest inclination on the part of the widow to offer up her 
life, spare no means in order to convince her and force her to a 
final determination. At times they go so far as to administer 
drugs, which so far deprive her of her senses that under their 
influence she yields to their wishes. This inhuman and abomin- 
able method of wheedling a consent out of the unhappy woman 
is in their opinion justified, because her tragic end would bring 
great honour and glory to the whole of their family. 

Some authors have maintained that this detestable practice 
originated primarily either from the jealousy of husbands, or 
rather, perhaps, from their fear that their discontented wives 
might seek to get rid of them by poison. As for myself, 
I have been unable, either in the writings of Hindu authors, 
or in my free and familiar intercourse with many persons 
well versed in the manners and customs of the country, to 
discover any justification for either of these two theories. 
And surely the lot of a wife, even when she is doomed to 
suffer wrong at the hands of a cruel and immoral husband, is 
far preferable to that of a widow, to whom all hope of a re- 
marriage under happier conditions is forbidden. It is hardly 
likely, indeed, that Hindu women would go to the length of com- 
mitting a crime which must render their lot much worse than 
before I At the same time I am by no means inclined to attri- 

* In some old Hindu houses, even marks of the hands of women who 
to this day, may be seen, impressed underwent suttee, — £d. 
with turmeric paste on the walls, the 



CH. xix] Description of a Suttee 363 

bute these voluntary sacrifices to an excess of conjugal affection. 
We should, for instance, be greatly mistaken were we to allow 
ourselves to be deceived by the noisy lamentations which wives 
are accustomed to raise on the death of their husbands, and 
which are no more than rank hypocrisy. During the long period 
of my stay in India, I do not recall two Hindu marriages 
characterized by a union of hearts and displaying true and 
mutual attachment \ 

When a woman, after mature deliberation, has once declared 
that she desires to be burnt alive with her deceased husband, 
her decision is considered irrevocable. She cannot afterwards 
retract ; and should she refuse to proceed of her own free will 
to the funeral pyre, she would be dragged to it by force. The 
Brahmins who regulate all the proceedings of the tragedy, and 
also her relatives, come by turns to congratulate her on her 
heroic decision and on the immortal glory which she is about to 
acquire by such a death — a death which will exalt her to the 
dignity of the gods. All possible means which fanaticism and 
superstition can suggest are brought to bear upon her in order 
to keep up her courage, to exalt her enthusiasm, and to excite 
her imagination. When, at last, the fatal hour draws nigh, the 
victim is adorned with rare elegance: she is clothed in her 
richest apparel, is bedecked with all her jewels, and is thus led 
to the funeral pyre. 

It is impossible for me to describe the finishing scenes of this 
dreadful ceremony without feelings of distress. But, in the mean- 
time, I must solicit the indulgence of my readers for a short 
digression which is not wholly disconnected with my subject. 
When a husband has several lawful wives, as often happens in 
the caste of the Rajahs, the wives sometimes dispute as to who 
shall have the honour of accompanying their common husband 
to the funeral pyre, and the Brahmins who preside at the cere- 
mony determine which shall have the preference. Here is an 
instance to the point extracted from the MahabhSrata, one of 
their most esteemed books : — 

^ It is impossible to regard the con- holds exceedingly strong, and it is 

elusion here drawn as anything but an error to picture them as the mere 

greatly exaggerated. The influence slaves of the men, though the ascen- 

of women, ignorant and uneducated dency of the latter is still a marked 

as they are, is in many Hindu house- feature of Hindu sociology. — £d. 



364 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

'King Pandu had retired into the jungles with his two wives, 
there to devote himself to acts of penance. At the same time 
a curse was imposed upon him, which doomed him to instant 
death should he dare to have intercourse with either of them. 
The passion which he felt for the younger of his wives, who was 
extremely beautiful, overcame all fear of death ; and, in spite of 
the fact that for several days she continued to represent to him 
the dire results that must necessarily follow his incontinency, he 
yielded at last to the vfolence of his love ; and immediately the 
curse fell upon him. After his death, it was necessary to decide 
which of his two wives should follow him to the funeral pyre, 
and there arose a sharp altercation between them as to who 
should enjoy this honour. 

' The elder of the two spoke first, and addressing the assembly 
of Brahmins who had gathered together for the purpose, she 
urged that the fact of her being the first wife placed her above 
the second. She should, therefore, be given the preference. 
Besides, she urged, her companion had children who were still 
young, and who required their mother's personal care and atten- 
tion for their bringing up *. 

. ' The second wife admitted the seniority of the first ; but she 
maintained that she alone, having been the immediate cause of 
the sad death of their common husband in allowing him to defy 
the curse which doomed him to perish, was thereby entitled to the 
honour of being burnt with him. "As regards the bringing 
up of my children," she added, addressing the other wife, " are 
they not yours just as much as they are mine ? Do not they 
too call you mother? And by your age and experience are 
you not better fitted than I to attend to their bringing up ? *" 

In spite of the eloquence of the younger wife, it was, at 
last, unanimously agreed by the judges that the first wife should 
have the preference— a decision at which the latter lady was 
greatly delighted. 

Most Sudras, as well as Hindus of the Siva sect, bury 
their dead instead of burning them, and there are several 

* The custom of suttee does not proceed from a feeling of humanity ? 

require widows who have young chil- By no manner of means ! It is actu- 

dren to bum themselves with the body ated merely by the fear that a large 

of their husbands ; they are even for- number of orphans would become 

bidden to do so. Does this exception a burden to the community. — Dubois. 



CH. xix] Two Incidents of Suttee 365 

instances of wives having been buried alive with their deceased 
husbands. But the ceremonies in either case are nearly the 
same. 

I will relate here two incidents which took place at no great 
distance from the place where I was living, and which wiil give 
a good idea of what these deplorable scenes of mad fanaticism 
are like : — 

In 1794, in a village of the Tanjore district called Pudu- 
j>ettah, there died a man of some importance belonging to the 
Komatty (Vaisya) caste. His wife, aged about thirty years, 
announced her intention of accompanying her deceased husband 
to the funeral pyre. The news having rapidly spread abroad, 
a large concourse of people flocked together from all quarters 
to witness the spectacle. When everything was ready for the 
ceremony, and the widow had been richly clothed and adorned, 
the bearers stepped forward to remove the body of the deceased, 
which was placed in a sort of shrine, ornamented with costly 
stuffs, garlands of flowers, green foliage, &c., the corpse being 
seated in it with crossed legs, covered with jewels and clothed 
in the richest attire, and the mouth filled with betel. Im- 
mediately after the funeral car followed the widow, borne in 
a richly decorated palanquin. On the way to the burning- 
ground she was escorted by an immense crowd of eager sight- 
seers, lifting their hands towards her in token of admiration, 
and rending the air with cries of joy. She was looked upon as 
already translated to the paradise of Indra, and they seemed to 
envy her happy lot. 

While the funeral procession moved slowly along, the spec- 
tators, especially the women, tried to draw near to her to con- 
gratulate her on her good fortune, at the same time expecting 
that, in virtue of the gift of prescience which such a meritorious 
attachment must confer upon her, she would be pleased to pre- 
dict the happy things that might befall them here below. With 
gracious and amiable mien she declared to one that she 
would long enjoy the favours of fortune ; to another, that she 
would be the mother of numerous children who would prosper 
in the world ; to a third, that she would live long and happily with 
a husband who would love and cherish her ; to a fourth, that 
her family was destined to attain much honour and dignity 
and so forth. She then distributed among them leaves of betel ; 



366 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

and the extraordinary eagerness with which these were received 
clearly proved that great value was attached to them as relics. 
Beaming with joy, these women then withdrew, each in the 
full hope that the promised blessings of wealth and happiness 
would be showered on her and hers. 

During the whole procession, which was a very long one, the 
widow preserved a calm demeanour. Her looks were serene, 
even smiling' ; but when she reached the fatal place where she 
was to yield up her life in so ghastly a manner, it was observed 
that her firmness suddenly gave way. Plunged, as it were, in 
gloomy thought, she seemed to pay no attention whatever to 
what was passing around her. Her looks became wildly fixed 
upon the pile. Her face grew deadly pale. Her very limbs 
were in a convulsive tremor. Her drawn features and haggard 
face betrayed the fright that had seized her, while a sudden 
weakening of her senses betokened that she was ready to 
faint away. 

The Brahmins who conducted the ceremony, and also her 
near relatives, ran quickly to her, endeavouring to keep up her 
courage and to revive her drooping spirits. All was of no effect. 
The unfortunate woman, bewildered and distracted, turned a deaf 
ear to all their exhortations and preserved a deep silence. 

She was then made to leave the palanquin, and as she was 
scarcely able to walk, her people helped her to drag herself 
to a pond near the pyre. She plunged into the water with 
all her clothes and ornaments on, and was immediately after- 
wards led to the pyre, on which the body of her husband 
was already laid. The pyre was surrounded by Brahmins, 
each with a lighted torch in one hand and a bowl of ghee in the 
other. Her relatives and friends, several of whom were armed 
with muskets, swords, and other weapons, stood closely round 
in a double line, and seemed to await impatiently the end of 
this shocking tragedy. This armed force, they told me, was 
intended not only to intimidate the unhappy victim in case the- 

^ Several travellers have said, and being led. This beverage, they say, 

I am inclined to believe it, that they consists of a decoction of saffron. It 

force upon these wretched victims of is known that dried saffron pistils 

superstition a kind of drink, which {Crocus sa/tvus)^ taken in large quanti- 

confuses the mind and prevents them ties, cause violent and convulsive 

from forming a correct notion of the laughter, sometimes terminating in 

dreadful torture to which they are death. — Dubois. 



CH. xix] The Suttee of two Queens 367 

terror of her approaching death might induce her to run away, 
but also to overawe any persons who might be moved by a 
natural feeling of compassion and sympathy, and so tempted 
to prevent the accomplishment of the homicidal sacrifice. 

At length, the purohita Brahmin gave the fatal signal. The 
poor widow was instantly divested of all her jewels, and dragged, 
more dead than alive, to the pyre. There she was obliged, 
according to custom, to walk three times round the pile, two 
of her nearest relatives supporting her by the arms. She 
accomplished the first round with tottering steps; during the 
second her strength wholly forsook her, and she fainted away 
in the arms of her conductors, who were obliged to complete the 
ceremony by dragging her through the third round. Then, at 
last, senseless and unconscious, she was cast upon the corpse of 
her husband. At that moment the air resounded with noisy 
acclamations. The Brahmins, emptying the contents of their 
vessels on the dry wood, applied their torches, and in the 
twinkling of an eye the whole pile was ablaze. Three times 
was the unfortunate woman called by her name. But, alas I she 
made no answer. 

The last king of Tanjore, who died in 1801, left behind him 
four lawful wives. The Brahmins decided that two of these 
should be burnt with the body of their husband, and se- 
lected the couple that should have the preference. It would 
have been an everlasting shame to them and the grossest 
insult to the memory of the deceased had they hesitated to 
accept this singular honour. Being fully convinced, moreover, 
that no means would be spared to induce them to sacrifice 
themselves either willingly or unwillingly, they made a virtue of 
necessity and seemed perfectly ready to yield to the terrible 
lot which awaited them. 

The necessary preparations for the obsequies were completed 
in a single day. 

Three or four leagues from the royal residence a square pit of 
no great depth, and about 12 to 15 feet square, was excavated. 
Within it was erected a pyramid of sandalwood, resting on 
a kind of scaffolding of the same wood. The posts which sup- 
ported it were so arranged that they could easily be removed, 
and would thereby cause the whole structure to collapse 
suddenly. At the four corners of the pit were placed huge 



368 Hindu Manners^ Cusioms, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

brass jars filled with ghee, to be thrown on the wood in order to 
hasten combustion. 

The following was the order of the procession as it wended its 
way to the pyre. It was headed by a large force of armed 
soldiers. Then followed a crowd of musicians, chiefly trum- 
peters, who made the air ring with the dismal sound of their 
instruments. Next came the king's body borne in a splen- 
did open palanquin, accompanied by his guru, his principal 
officers, and his nearest relatives, who were all on foot and 
wore no turbans in token of mourning. Among them was 
also a large number of Brahmins. Then came the two victims, 
each borne on a richly decorated palanquin. They were loaded, 
rather than decked, with jewels. Several ranks of soldiers 
surrounded them to preserve order and to keep back the great 
crowds that flocked in from every side. The two queens were 
accompanied by some of their favourite women, with whom they 
occasionally conversed. Then followed relatives of both sexes, 
to whom the victims had made valuable presents before leaving 
the palace. An innumerable multitude of Brahmins and persons 
of all castes followed in the rear. 

On reaching the spot where their untimely fate awaited them, 
the victims were required to perform the ablutions and other 
ceremonies proper on such occasions ; and they went through 
the whole of them without hesitation and without the least sign 
of fear. When, however, it came to walking round the pile, it 
was observed that their features underwent a sudden change. 
Their strength seemed wellnigh to forsake them in spite 
of their obvious efforts to suppress their natural feelings. 
During this interval the body of the king had been placed on 
the top of the p3Tamid of sandalwood. The two queens, still 
wearing their rich attire and ornaments, were next compelled 
to ascend the pile. Lying down beside the body of the deceased 
prince, one on the right and the other on the left, they joined 
hands across the corpse. The officiating Brahmins then recited 
in a loud tone several ntantrams, sprinkled the pile with 
their tiriam or holy water, and emptied the jars of ghee over 
the wood, setting fire to it at the same moment. This was 
done on one side by the nearest relative of the king, on 
another by his guru, on others by leading Brahmins. The 
flames quickly spread, and the props being removed, the whole 



cH. xix] Suttee Presents 369 

structure collapsed, and in its fall must have crushed to death 
the two unfortunate victims. Thereupon all the spectators 
shouted aloud for joy. The unhappy women's relatives stand- 
ing around the pile then called to them several times by name, 
and it is said that, issuing from amidst the flames, the word 
Yen ? (What ?) was heard distinctly pronounced. A ridiculous 
illusion, no doubt, of minds blinded by fanaticism ; for it 
could never be believed that the unfortunate victims were at 
that moment in a condition to hear and to speak. 

Two days after, when the fire was completely extinguished, 
they removed from amidst the ashes the remnants of the bones 
that had not been entirely consumed, and put them into copper 
urns, which were carefully sealed with the signet of the new 
king. Some time afterwards, thirty Brahmins were selected to 
carry these relics to Kasi (Benares) and to throw them into the 
sacred waters of the Ganges. It was arranged that, on their 
return from that holy city, they should receive valuable 
presents, upon producing authenticated certificates to the effect 
that they had really accomplished the journey, and had faith- 
fully executed the task entrusted to them. A portion of the 
bones was, however, reserved for the following purpose 2 — they 
were reduced to powder, mixed with some boiled rice, and eaten 
by twelve Brahmins. This revolting and unnatural act had 
for its object the expiation of the sins of the deceased — sins 
which, according to the popular opinion, were transmitted to 
the bodies of the persons who ate the ashes, and were tempted 
by money to overcome their repugnance for such disgusting 
food. At the same time, it is believed that the filthy lucre 
thus earned can never be attended with much advantage to the 
recipients. Amidst the ashes, too, were picked up small pieces 
of melted gold, the remains of the ornaments worn by the 
princesses. 

Presents were given to the Brahmins who presided at the 
obsequies, and to those who had honoured the ceremonies with 
their presence. To the king's guru was given an elephant. The 
three palanquins which had served to carry the corpse of the king 
and the two victims to the pile were given away to the three 
leading Brahmins. The presents distributed among the other 
Brahmins consisted of cloths and of money amounting to nearly 
twenty-five thousand rupees. Several bags of small coin were 

♦• Bb 



370 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies 



also scattered among the crowds on the roadside as the funeral 
procession was on its way to the pyre. Finally, twelve houses, 
were built and presented to the twelve Brahmins who had the 
courage to swallow the powdered bones of the deceased, and 
by that means to take upon themselves all their sins. 

A few days after the funeral the new king made a pilgrimage 
to a temple a few leagues distant from his capital. He there 
took a bath in a sacred tank, and was thus purified of all the 
uncleanness that he had contracted during the various ceremonies 
of mourning. On this occasion also presents were given to the 
Brahmins and to the poor of other castes. 

On the spot where the deceased king and his two unhappy 
companions had been consumed a circular mausoleum was 
erected, about 12 feet in diameter, surmounted by a dome. The 
reigning prince visits it from time to time, prostrates himself 
humbly before the tombs, and offers sacrifices to the manes of 
his predecessor and to those of his worthy and saintly spouses. 

Crowds of devotees also repair thither to offer up vows and 
sacrifices to the new divinities, and to implore their help and 
protection in the various troubles of life. 

In the year 1802 I heard accounts of a great number of 
so-called miracles performed through their intercession. 

It is only after long and serious reflection on the many eccen- 
tricities and inconsistencies of the human mind that one can 
look without astonishment upon the deplorable scenes of which 
a few of the main features have just been described. It is 
indeed unaccountable how these Brahmins, who are so scrupu- 
lous and attach so much importance to the life of the most 
insignificant insect, and whose feelings are excited to pity and 
indignation at the very sight of a cow being slaughtered, can, 
with such savage cold-bloodedness and wicked satisfaction, 
look upon so many weak and innocent human beings, incited 
by hypocritical and barbarous inducements, being led with 
affected resignation to a punishment so cruel and undeserved. 
I leave to others the task of explaining these inconceivable con- 
tradictions, if, that is to say, it is possible to assign any reasons 
for such superstitious fanaticism, whose characteristic feature is 
to suppress all natural and rational sentiment. 



CHAPTER XX 

Adoption. — Rules regarding the Partition of Property. 

When a Brahmin finds that he has no male issue, whether 
by reason of the barrenness of his wife or through the untimely 
death of all the sons he has had by her, he is permitted, nay 
bound, by the rules of his caste to procure a son by means of 
adoption, in order that he may, at least fictitiously, fulfil the 
great debt to his ancestors, namely, the propagation of a direct 
line of posterity. Although marriage constitutes the perfect 
state of man, this perfection is nevertheless deficient when 
a man does not leave a son behind him to perform his obsequies; 
and this defect alone, according to Hindu writers, is quite 
sufficient to deprive him of happiness in the next world. 

This notion prevails so strongly among the Hindus that 
I have known barren women not only consenting to their hus- 
bands taking other wives, but even earnestly advising them to 
do so, and helping them in their quest. There is not one of 
them, however, who is not fully alive to the annoyances and 
discomforts to which she is exposing herself by thus introducing 
as her rival another woman, who must naturally, by her youth- 
fulness and fecundity, soon become an object more beloved than 
herself by their common husband. 

It has already been said that polygamy is tolerated among 
the ruling classes only; and when we find other women 
besides the lawful wife living in the families of private indi* 
viduals of high caste, especially among the Brahmins, either 
they are living there, as already stated^ with the consent 
of the lawful wife, or else they are merely hired concubines. 
However, a husband who has had no male issue by his wife, 

B b 2 



372 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

being fully alive to the unpleasant consequences arising from 
a second marriage, almost invariably prefers to have recourse to 
the system of adoption. 

A Brahmin generally chooses from among his own relatives 
the child that he wishes to legally adopt as his son ; and if 
perchance he finds nobody in his own family worthy of the 
honour, he applies to some poor fellow of his own caste who is 
burdened with many children. So long as the adoptive father 
is rich, he is sure not to meet with a refusal '. 

The adopted son renounces wholly and for ever all his claims 
to the property and succession of his natural father, and 
acquires the sole right to the heritage of his father by adoption. 
The latter is bound to bring him up, to feed him, and to treat 
him as his own son; to have the ceremony of upanayana, 
or the triple cord, performed for him, and to see him married. 
The adopted son, in his turn, is obliged to take care of his 
adoptive father in his old age and in sickness, just as if he were 
his natural father, and to preside at his obsequies. On the death 
of his adoptive father he enters into full possession of his 
inheritance — assets as well as liabilities. Should there be 
any property left, he enjoys it ; but if, on the other hand, there 
are debts, he is bound to pay them. He is, moreover, by 
his adoption admitted into the gothratn or family stock of 
the adopter, and is considered to have left that in which he 
was born'. 

It is only natural that, in a country where everything is per- 
formed with so much solemnity, an event of such importance 
should be attended with great ceremonies. The following are 
a few of the most important : — 

The first thing to be done, as might be expected, is to select an 
auspicious day. They then adorn the portals of the house with 
toranams (garlands of leaves) and put up a temporary pandaL 
The festivities open with a sacrifice to Vigneshwara and the nine 
planets ; and the other preparatory ceremonies already described 
are likewise gone through. The adoptive father and mother take 
their seats on the small da!s raised in the middle of the pandaL 

^ The strict rule is that the natural is allowed to adopt any boy provided 

mother of the adopted son must be he be of the same caste. — Ed. 

a marriageable relative of the adoptive ' Gothram literally means ' cow- 

Cather. Nowadays, however, a Hindu shed/— £d. 



CH. XXj 



The Adoption Ceremony 



373 



The mother of the child is presented with a new garment and 
with a hundred or a hundred and fifty pieces of silver as her 
nursing wages. Then, with her son in her arms, she approaches 
the adoptive father, who asks her in a loud and distinct voice, in 
presence of the whole assembly, whether she delivers over her 
child to be brought up. To this she answers in the same tone 
that she does deliver the child to be brought up. This utterance 
bears a comprehensive meaning. It is a formal intimation that 
she gives up her son not as a slave who is sold, but to be looked 
upon and treated as a child of the family into which he is about 
to enter \ 

They next bring in a dish filled with water into which some 
powdered saffron has been thrown. The purohita blesses this 
mixture by muttering ntantrams and performing certain cere- 
monies. Then the mother of the child* hands the dish to 
the adoptive father, and at the same time, invoking fire to bear 
witness to the deed, she thrice repeats the following words : — 
' / give up this child to you ; I have no more right aver him* 
The adoptive father then takes the child, and seating him on 
his knees, addresses the relatives present as follows: — 'This 
child has been given to me, after fire has been invoked as 
a witness of the gift : and I, by this safiron water which I will 
now drink, promise to bring him up as my own son. From 
this moment he is entitled to the enjoyment of all his rights 
over my property, sharing, at the same time, the burden of my 
debts.' 

After these words, he and his wife pour out a small quantity 
of the saffron water in the hollow of their right hands and 
drink it up. They then pour a little into the hand of the 
adopted child and make him also drink it, adding : ' We have 
admitted this child into our gothram, and we incorporate him 
into it' 



^ Generally a boy is adopted wheu 
he is fit for the upanayana ceremony; 
and both ceremonies are performed 
simultaneously. — Ed. 

' It is the mother of the child who 
plays the most important part in this 
ceremony; the father being present 
there only as a mere formality. The 
reason is that in India all the children 



are supposed to belong by right to the 
mother. Should a married man, or a 
man living in concubinage, happen to 
separate himself, for some cause or 
other, from his wife or concubine, the 
latter would be entitled to take away 
all their children, without the possi- 
bility of the slightest opposition on 
the part of the father. — Dubois. 



374 Hindu Manners, Customs , and Ceremonies [pt. n 

This is the last event in the ceremony of adoption. I have 
remarked that at the age of six months Hindu children are 
solemnly invested with the girdle or waist-string, to which, six 
or seven years later, is attached a small piece of cloth intended 
to cover the private parts. Should the adopted child be already 
wearing this string, they break it and supply him with a fresh 
one ; but should he have none, they at once begin to invest him 
with it with all the usual ceremonies. It is by this act that his 
incorporation into the gothram or family clan of his new father 
is sanctified. 

The festivities, as usual, Mrind up with a repast and the distri- 
bution of betel and presents to the guests. 

The use of saffron water on this occasion accounts for the fact 
that an adopted child generally receives the appellation of the 
* saffron-water child* of such a one\ a term which, it should be 
added, has nothing offensive about it. 

The ceremony of adoption is almost identical among the 
Sudras and the Brahmins, with this one difference, that 
among the Sudras the adoptive father and his wife pour the 
saffron water on to the feet of the adopted child with one hand, 
and catch and drink it with the other. 

An adoptive father may choose not only a child of tender 
years, but even an adult, should that suit his taste and purpose 
better. 

Persons whose means do not permit them to perform the 
ceremony of adoption with so much pomp and circumstance, 
have a simpler and more expeditious mode of performing it. It 
is deemed sufficient if the mother of the child and the adopted 
father invoke fire to witness their mutual bargain. Dwellers 
on the banks of the Ganges need simply call to witness, in 
such a case, the waters of that sacred river. 

In whatever fashion the ceremony of adoption be performed, 
the adopted child no longer retains any right either to the pro- 
perty or the heritage of his natural father, nor can he be held 
answerable for the debts which the latter may leave at his 
death. 

^ The Hindus take a pleasure in reference to some mental or bodily 

giving each other nicknames, some of defect of the person concerned, or on 

which are very insulting indeed. They account of some dishonourable act 

generaHy choose such names with imputed to him — Dubois. 



cH. xx] The Division of Property 375 

The adoption of girls is rare, although instances of it are 
not wanting. 

The work from which I have extracted these particulars 
relating to adoption also furnishes a solution of some of the 
difficulties that arise in certain cases with regard to the division 
of property. The little that it contains on the subject seems to 
me sufficiently interesting. 

We find there laid down the supposititious case of a man 
who, afler adopting a son, has subsequently had, contrary to 
his expectation, six children by his legitimate wife, namely, 
four boys and two girls. The father and two of the boys 
die; one of the girls and the adopted son are married; there 
remain two boys and a girl who are unmarried ; and provision 
must also be made for the subsistence of the widow. The ques- 
tion is. How, in such a case, ought the property devolved by 
succession to be divided ? 

The answer given is to the following effect : — Firsts the amount 
necessary for the funeral expenses of the deceased father ought 
to be set apart, and the money required for the marriage of 
the three unmarried children ought to be placed in the hands of 
a trustworthy executor. 

Secondly, the property that remains after these amounts 
have been set aside shall be divided into six shares. The 
adopted son shall take for himself a share and a half, and the 
remainder shall be equally divided among the brothers and 
the mother. Should the mother be dead, the property is 
divided only into five shares and a half, unless all the brothers, 
with common accord, relinquish on behalf of their unmarried 
sister, with the object of providing her with jewels, that part 
of the inheritance which would have fallen to the mother, who 
is perfectly at liberty, before her death, to dispose of this share 
in favour of her daughters, without the slightest objection being 
raised thereto by the sons. If she has not done so, the 
brothers alone, independently of the sisters, set apart a reason- 
able amount for a decent funeral, and divide equally among 
themselves whatever remains of her property. 

This decision of the Brahmins, while in accordance with the 
general custom of the country, which entitles sons to equal 
shares of the paternal property, and excludes the daughters 
by merely granting them a dowry, departs from it in so far 



376 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

as mothers have no share whatever in the property of their 
husbands, their sons being conjointly bound to provide for their 
maintenance during their lives. 

Should a man, by reason of the barrenness of his first wife, 
marry a second, and the latter have a son, all the father's 
property belongs exclusively to this son ; the first wife, after 
the death of the common husband, can claim nothing from 
the estate: but the son is bound to provide for her main- 
tenance in a decent manner, and to meet all the expenses 
of her funeral. If the first wife does not choose to con- 
tinue to live with the second, the relatives meet togethei* 
and arrange for the allotment to her of a sufficient income 
according to her condition in life. 

A certain man, finding that his first wife was barren, married 
a second, then a third; but it so happened that these two, 
like the first, were barren also, and the man, therefore, died 
without issue. The deceased had an elder and a younger 
brother, besides several cousins, sons of his paternal uncles. 
None of these, however, had been living with him. They 
had long before divided their family property, and each was 
living separately. The question arises, Who ought to be 
regarded as the rightful heir of the deceased ? The answer 
given is, that the rightful heir is the younger brother, because, 
being the youngest of the family> to him, according to the 
custom of the country, belongs the right of presiding at 
the obsequies — a right which carries with it the heirship. He 
thereby becomes the head of the family and the master of the 
house. It is he, therefore, who is obliged to provide for the 
maintenance of the three widows left by his brother. Should 
any one of the three choose to return to her father's house, she 
would be at perfect liberty to do so, and even to take away 
with her all the jewels given to her by her deceased husband. 
Furthermore, the family council would determine upon the 
allowance which her brother-in-law, as the heir to her husband's 
property, would be bound to make to her to enable her to 
subsist. If she elected to remain in her deceased husband's 
house and to have an establishment of her own there, she could 
not be refused permission ; but in that case her brother-in-law 
would not be under the necessity of assigning her any con- 
siderable income ; and she would be obliged, at her own risk, 



CH. xx] Family Councils 377 

to supplement such income with alms. It is well known, 
however, that such a mode of living has nothing disgraceful 
about it, since begging is one of the six privileges of the 
Brahmins. Finally, the brother-in-law is bound to bear all 
the expenses of the funerals of the three widows should they 
happen to die before him. 

If the deceased husband be the youngest of the brothers, 
the elder brother would then become the sole inheritor, and on 
him would devolve all the rights and obligations connected with 
the heritage. In the absence of brothers, the nearest relative 
on the father's side becomes sole heir. 

In cases where doubts arise as to the transmission of the 
property, the relatives are called in to decide the matter 
according to the prevailing custom of the country, or as justice 
may dictate to them. But very often the partiality prevailing 
in these family councils turns the scale in favour of the one 
who is able to purchase the support of the others. The 
collusions, intrigues, and acts of injustice practised on such 
occasions are without number, and tend to throw discredit 
on an institution which owes its origin to truly patriarchal 
principles. 

It may be observed from what has been already said that 
the right of inheritance and the duty of presiding at the 
obsequies are inseparable one from the other. When, there- 
fore, a wealthy man dies without direct descendants, a crowd 
of remote relatives appear to dispute with each other the 
honour of conducting the funeral rites. The contest is occa- 
sionally so tumultuous and prolonged that the body of the 
deceased is in a state of complete putrefaction before a definite 
settlement of these many pretensions is arrived at. On the 
other hand, on the death of a needy man burdened with debts, 
the survivors take every possible care to disprove near 
relationship. 

There is another rule regarding succession among the 
Hindus, which will, doubtless, appear to us highly incompatible 
with the true principles of justice. 

A father dies, leaving several male children, who, from 
carelessness or some other cause, do not trouble themselves 
about the legal partition of the paternal inheritance. One of 
them, by his industry and diligence, acquires wealth, while 



378 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. ii 



the others, leading a debauched and idle life, become seriously 
involved in debt. These, after a life of dissipation and 
wandering from place to place, learn at last that their 
brother, by his industry and good conduct, has amassed a 
brilliant fortune. They at once hasten to him and call upon 
him to share with them the property he has acquired by the 
sweat of his brow, and moreover render him jointly re- 
sponsible for the debts resulting from their disorderly habits*. 
The creditors themselves, too, have the right to recover from 
him by law what is due to them from his brothers. More 
than this, should brothers, who neglect to divide their 
family property, die before such partition has been actually 
effected, the same community of property and of debts holds 
good among their children, and it descends from generation 
to generation so long as the property remains undivided. 
It is by no means rare to see cousins of the third and fourth 
degree engaged in lawsuits concerning rights of succession 
dating back from time immemorial. Neither is it an uncommon 
thing to see the richer members of a family coerced by the 
poorer ones to admit the latter to a share of their hard- 
earned fortune, while these burden them with their poverty 
and their debts. 

In a country where nearly everything is regulated by custom, 
and where the usages are as many and as various as the 
different provinces, these lawsuits in connexion with the 
partition of properties are an endless source of chicanery. 
There is one advantage, however, from a social point of view, 
arising from this singular system, namely, that it gives such 
relatives as are liable to be affected by the law of partition 
the right to watch over each other's conduct, and to restrain 
the debauchery and extravagance of those whose misconduct 
might involve them all in distress. 

The appointment of a single heir among the male children 



'In Madras a proposal was recently 
made by a Hindu member of the 
local Legislature to introduce a Bill to 
secure for every individual of an * un- 
divided ' Hindu family * the gains of 
his learning.' The Bill, however, has 
not yet been passed. At present, 
when a claim is made to ' the gains of 



learning* of one of the members of an 
* undivided ' family, those who prefer 
the claim invariably attempt to prove 
that the member to whose gains they 
lay claim was educated out of the 
undivided family property, and that 
therefore the undivided members have 
a right to share his gains. — £d. 



CH. xx] Rules of Inheritance 379 

of a family is a thing unknown in India. The brothers divide 
the paternal property equally, to the exclusion of the sisters, who 
have no share whatever in it. The father does not even possess 
the privilege of treating one of his sons more generously than 
the rest\ The Hindus cannot conceive how a father could 
despoil several of his children in order to enrich one of them 
in particular; and they are simply astounded when they are 
told that this custom prevails in many countries of Europe. 
But what makes us still more ridiculous in their eyes is that 
this favoured heir should very often be, not the son who dis- 
tinguishes himself above the rest by his filial devotion, his 
virtues, and his talents, but one who by chance happens to 
be the first-born, and who may perhaps be the most foolish 
and vicious of the whole family. 

' There is nothing, however, to pre- opposed to his oncesiral property, to 
vent a father from allotting the whole any one of his sons, or disposing of it 
or any portion of his self acquired ^ as in any other way he pleases. — Ed. 



CHAPTER XXI 

The Learning of the Brahmins. — Their Colleges. — Astronomy. — 

Astrology. — Magic 

It is certain that from the earliest times learning was culti- 
vated by the Hindus. The Brahmins have always been, as 
it were, its depositaries, and have always considered it as 
belonging exclusively to themselves. They saw well enough 
what a moral ascendency knowledge would give them over 
the other castes, and they therefore made a mystery of it 
by taking all possible precautions to prevent other classes 
from obtaining access to it. 

The question arises, Have they themselves systematically 
cultivated learning? Have they made any appreciable pro- 
gress in its pursuit? This we must answer in the negative, 
if at least we are to compare what has come down to us from 
their ancient authors with the present conditions of instruction 
and learning amongst them. I do not believe that the Brah- 
mins of modem times are, in any degree, more learned than 
their ancestors of the times of Lycurgus and Pythagoras. 
During this long space of time many barbarous races have 
emerged from the darkness of ignorance, have attained the 
summit of civilization, and have extended their intellectual 
researches almost to the utmost limits of human intelligence ; 
yet all this time the Hindus have been perfectly stationary. 
We do not find amongst them any trace of mental or moral im- 
provement, any sign of advance in the arts and sciences. Every 
impartial observer must, indeed, admit that they are now very 
far behind the peoples who inscribed their names long after 
them on the roll of civilized nations. 

The learning which won for them so much respect and 
reverence from their fellow-countrymen, and which rendered 
them so famous in the eyes of foreign nations, among whom 



Indigenous Instruction 381 

ignorance and superstition then prevailed, was connected with 
astronomy, astrology, and magic. Several authors have given 
details of their astronomical system, and it is fully explained 
in the Asiatic Researches. Moreover, Father Pons, a former 
Jesuit missionary in the Carnatic, had, long before this, 
discussed it in a highly interesting treatise published in the 
Me'moires de tAcademie des Sciences^ and likewise we find it 
discussed in the Histoire Generate de Tous tes Peuptes by the 
Abb6 Lambert. It is from these sources that the famous 
astronomer Bailly derived almost all that he has written on 
Hindu Astronomy. 

The accuracy of the investigations of the learned Jesuit 
missionary in this direction has been since confirmed; but in 
the same work he speaks of the schools and of what he calls 
the 'academies* of India. It seems to me that he is rather too 
favourably impressed with these latter institutions, and is far too 
profuse in his eulogies on the methods of teaching and the 
course of studies in vogue in the so-called academies. 

As a matter of fact, no comparison whatever can be drawn 
between schools in India and those in Europe. The system 
pursued in the former of causing everything to be learnt by 
rote is, in my opinion, essentially wrong, and tends to prolong 
indefinitely the course of study. Moreover, there is no regular 
plan of instruction, and there is no public institution which is, 
properly speaking, devoted to the diffusion of knowledge. It 
is true that in certain large towns, or in the precincts of some 
of the more important temples. Brahmins who are really 
learned, or who pretend to be so, impart the knowledge which 
they possess— some gratuitously and others for payment ; still, 
for all this, instruction is carried on without any definite system 
or any attempt at discipline — elements absolutely necessary to 
give to these studies a character of permanence and uniformity. 
Let a youth learn who has a mind to do so, and as long as he 
chooses: this seems to be their guiding principle. There 
is nothing in these institutions which is calculated to stimulate 
the teachers or to encourage the pupils. There are no public 
examinations to undergo, no degrees to aspire to, no prizes 
to be won ; in fine, no special privilege or advantage of any 
importance is held out to students who distinguish themselves 
by their attainments. It is true that those who have a reputation 



382 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

for learning are esteemed by the public, but empty reputation 
without any substantial benefit is not a motive sufficiently 
powerful to stimulate a Brahmin. It would be well enough 
if learned Hindus were frequently encouraged by the liberality 
of their princes, but the latter are too deeply immersed in 
the enjoyment of material pleasures to be able to appreciate 
the real value of learning and to take the trouble to patronize 
it '. Accordingly one seldom comes across educated Brahmins 
who owe their knowledge to one of these public schools. They 
are, in fact, entirely beholden for it to the exertions of their 
parents and to private tuition. Thus it is that learning is almost 
always transmitted from family to family, from generation to 
generation, and becomes, so to say, hereditary. 

So much, then, for the course of study, the universities, and 
the litterateurs of India. 

The Hindu system of astronomy being, as I have said before, 
sufficiently well known, I shall refrain from repeating here what 
others have said on the subject. But I shall dwell at some 
length on the other two branches of their scientific knowledge, 
namely, astrology and magic. 

Astrology. 

Astrology, together with the silly notions which originate from 
it, has at all times exercised a great influence over the nations 
of the world, civilized as well as uncivilized. In Europe the 
appearance of a comet or a total eclipse formerly spread the 
greatest terror in the minds of the multitude, who looked upon 
these celestial phenomena as the forerunners of some public 
calamity; and even at the present day these chimerical fears 
still exercise some influence over the imagination of the ignorant 
and superstitious. 

The influence of the stars, scrutinized with the eyes of 
reason, need not be looked upon altogether as an idle imagining; 
and there is doubtless a happy medium to be observed between 
the widely divergent opinions of authors concerning the action, 

^ Education on European lines is Abb^ describes it. It is only just to 

now widely extended, of course, but observe, however, that it has been, 

the diffusion of Hindu knowledge and and is, more largely patronized by 

the study of Sanskrit, its principal Hindu princes than the Abb^ implies, 

medium, is still pretty much as the — Ed. 



CH. xxi] Astrological Absurdities 383 

more or less direct, more or less limited, exercised by the stars 
over the vegetable and animal kingdoms of this earth of ours. 
Be this as it may, however, no other nation appears to have 
carried its astrological notions to such extremes of folly as 
the Hindus. With their wonted exaggeration in all things, 
it is only natural that they should entertain wild ideas about 
a science which opens so vast a sphere to the imagination. 
All the rubbish they have wTitten on this subject would certainly 
be too tedious to read. I will, therefore, content myself with 
referring briefly to a few of the important principles on which 
their so-called science of astrology rests. 

Each planet in turn is supposed to exercise its influence 
during the space of a year. The ruling planet is attended by 
another, which plays the part of a minister. The latter assumes 
in the following year the supreme functions of the former ; and 
so on year after year. 

Some of these planets are beneficent, others the reverse. 
The Moon, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus are of the former 
order. Under their sway everything thrives : men live happily 
and are blessed with abundance ; the fertile fields yield rich 
harvests, and the fruitful trees bear abundantly. The Sun, 
Mars, and Saturn, on the other hand, have a tendency to cause 
evil to animate as well as to inanimate nature. Their reign is, 
therefore, almost always disastrous. Men are oppressed with 
sickness ; they attain success in nothing ; they experience only 
troubles and disappointments : moreover, the rains hold off, the 
soil becomes unfruitful, famine and misery everywhere prevail. 
When, however, an unpropitious planet has for its attendant 
minister a planet of an opposite character, and vice versa, the 
good one counteracts and counterbalances, at least to a certain 
degree, the evil influence of the other. Thus one can expect 
to enjoy unalloyed happiness only during those years when 
two benign planets hold their sway at one and the same time. 
Similarly, one must dread continual misfortunes when both 
planets have an evil inclination to harass unfortunate man- 
kind. 

There are four principal clouds which yield rain, and each in 
its turn discharges this duty for the space of one year. Their 
names are Samvariaf Avarta, Pushkala, Drona, The first and 
the last are favourably disposed towards mankind, and yield 



384 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

copious showers. Avarta and Pushkala, on the other hand, 
produce nothing but storms and hurricanes, and are sparing of 
the rain which refreshes and fertilizes the soil. 

The frequency of rain depends also to a great extent on the 
good or bad will of seven elephants. Each of these is known by 
its own name, and each in turn is charged with the annual duty of 
carrying water to the clouds. Four of them display great activity 
in the discharge of their duty, and supply the clouds with an 
ample provision of rain. But the other three acquit themselves 
very carelessly of their duty during their terms of service ; con- 
sequently the ground remains parched up, and scarcity prevails. 

Seven snakes, each also bearing a particular name, exercise 
in turn for the space of one year supreme authority over all 
species of snakes. 

The snake AnantOj the first one, is the most powerful of all, 
and supports the earth on its head. The year of its reign is 
considered unhappy, inasmuch as snakes are then extremely 
venomous, and their bite invariably proves fatal. 

The reign of the snake Karkataka is equally unhappy. 

The remaining five are by no means equally mischievous. It 
is seldom that persons are bitten by snakes while these are in 
power ; and should a person be bitten, the bite does not prove 
fatal. The snake Maha-Padma particularly is the friend of 
men; it not only prevents other snakes from harming them, 
but also comes to their aid by sending the physician Dhanman- 
tan to cure such as may have been accidentally bitten. 

By the combination of the twelve signs of the Zodiac with the 
planets and with the star which is in the ascendant on each day 
of the moon, Hindu astrologers believe themselves capable of 
telling the secrets as well as the future events of life. 

The Sun remains thirty days in each of the signs of the Zodiac ; 
the Moon, two days and a quarter ; Mars and Mercury, a month 
and a half; Jupiter, one year; Venus, two years and a half; 
Saturn, one year and a half 

Each sign of the Zodiac has, besides, two stars and a quarter, 
which are assigned to it from among the twenty-seven constella- 
tions or stars of the lunar month. 

By comparing all these phenomena, and by joining, in regular 
order, certain words with the different signs of the Zodiac, they 
are enabled to know the past, the present, and the future, and to 



CH. xxi] Horoscopes 385 

recover things that have been lost or stolen. The coincidence 
of these words is, for this purpose, combined with the sign of 
the Zodiac, the planet, the star, and the time of the day or night 
at which the astrologer is consulted. 

By the same means it is possible to find out, not only the 
place wherein a stolen object is secreted, but also the sex and 
the caste of the thief. They are also able to ascertain whether 
or not the stolen or lost article will be recovered, according 
as the sign, the planet, and the star which correspond to the 
time at which the consultation takes place are favourable or 
the reverse. 

They discover in the same way whether a person who has 
been long absent is dead or alive; whether he is sick or in 
good health ; whether he is at liberty or in prison ; whether he 
will return or not. 

But one of the most important combinations calculated is 
that relating to birth. In fact, according to the Hindus, the 
future lot of men is supposed to depend on the sign of the 
Zodiac and the star under which they are born. This is what 
they call lagnam. It is supposed that each of the twelve signs 
prevails over daily occurrences during a fixed interval of time. 
Thus, for instance, the sign Aries (the Ram) prevails for two 
hours ; Taurus (the Bull) for two hours and a quarter ; Gemini 
(the Twins) for two hours and a half; and so on. Again, 
the sign which corresponds to the moment of birth is termed 
Janma-lagnam ] and by combining it with the planet and the 
star of the day, they ascertain beyond a doubt whether the child 
is born to be happy or unhappy. 

Of the seven days of the week, three are held to be unlucky, 
namely, Sunday, Tuesday, and Saturday. On these days no 
important business ought to be undertaken, no journey begun. 

Of the twenty-seven stars of each lunar month, seven are 
reputed to be more or less unlucky ; and everything undertaken 
on the days on which these appear is attended with disastrous 
results. 

The rest of the science is based on similar considerations. 

Magic. 

Magic, that art which gives shrewd people such influence 
over fools, seems to have found a favourite abode in the 
♦♦ cc 



386 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

Peninsula of India. Certainly, in this respect, India has no 
reason to be envious of the ancient Thessaly or of the city of 
Colchis, famous for the enchantments of Circe and Medea. True, 
I am not aware that Hindu sorcerers have retained the power of 
causing the moon, whether willing or not, to come down from 
the height of the firmament ; but short of this, there is nothing 
which Hindu magicians are incapable of doing. Thus there is 
not a single Hindu who does not, during the whole course of 
his life, dream about sorcery and witchcraft. Nothing in this 
country happens by chance or from natural causes. Obstacles 
of every kind, disappointments, unlucky incidents, diseases, pre- 
mature deaths, barrenness of women, miscarriages, diseases 
among cattle ; in fine, all the scourges to which human 
beings are exposed are attributed to the occult and diabolical 
machinations of some wicked enchanter hired by an enemy. 
Should a Hindu, at the time he is visited by any calamity, 
happen to be at variance with any one of his neighbours, the 
latter is immediately suspected and accused of having had 
recourse to magic to harm him. The accused, of course, never 
puts up patiently with an imputation so invidious. Anger is 
engendered, and the flame of discord grows hotter and hotter, 
until some serious consequences result from this new develop- 
ment. 

If the immense progress in enlightenment made by the most 
civilized nations of Europe has not yet been able to completely 
eradicate these absurd prejudices, if the rural parts of Europe 
are still full of people who believe in sorcerers and in their 
magical charms, and if in the public places of our towns one 
still sees crowds of impostors in wretched garb professing to 
furnish those around them with the favours of fortune, is it to 
be wondered at that in a country like India, plunged as it is in 
the darkness of gross ignorance and superstition, the belief 
in magic is carried to the very last point ? Thus it is that at 
every step one meets with batches of these soothsayers and 
sorcerers distributing good luck to all comers, and for a con- 
sideration unfolding to the view of the rich and of the poor the 
secrets of their destinies. 

But these sorcerers of the lowest rank, whose whole stock-in- 
trade consists of a large fund of impudence, are not held in much 
dread. Others there are whose diabolical art knows no bounds, 



CH. xxi] Professors of the Black Art 



387 



and who are initiated into the most profound secrets of magic. 
To inspire love or hatred ; to introduce a devil into the body of 
any one, or to expel it ; to cause the sudden death of an enemy, 
or to bring on him an incurable disease ; to produce contagious 
diseases among cattle, or to preserve them against such con- 
tagion ; to lay bare the closest secrets ; to restore stolen or lost 
articles^ &c. : all these are mere bagatelles to such men. The 
very sight of a person who is reputed to be gifted with such 
enormous power inspires terror. 

These professors of magic are often consulted by persons 
who wish to avenge themselves on some enemy by means of 
witchcraft. Their help is also sought by sick folk who are 
persuaded that their disease has been caused by the casting of 
some magical spell upon them, and who wish to recover their 
health by throwing a counter-spell upon those who caused the 
disease by such means. 

The Hindus have several books which treat ex professo of all 
these follies of the magic art. The principal and most ancient 
of them is the fourth Veda, called the Atharva-Veda^. The 
Brahmins would have it believed that this book has been lost ; 
but it is known that it still exists, and that they keep it in con- 
cealment with even greater care than they do the other three. 
In fact, the magicians being everywhere dreaded and hated, the 
Brahmins have good reason to conceal everything that may lead 
to the suspicion of their being initiated in the secret dealings 
of these impostors. It is, however, certain that magic occupies 
one of the first places in the list of sciences of which these great 
men profess to be the sole inheritors •. There can be no doubt 



* Atharva-Veda is a collection of 
formulae to avert the consequences of 
mistakes or mishaps in sacrifices. 
Atharvan, Brahmana*s eldest son, 
identified with Angirasa, is the author 
of this Veda, which belongs to a later 
period than the other three Vedas. 
This Veda is a collection of original 
hymns mixed up with incantations 
It has no direct relation to mere rituals 
or sacrifices. The recitation of this 
Veda is considered to confer longevity, 
to cure diseases, to obtain success in 
love or gaming, to effect the ruin of 



enemies, and to secure the reciter's 
own prosperity. — Ed. 

' It should be remarked that if the 
Hebrews and the various other 
peoples, whom Holy Writ represents 
as being addicted to these abominable 
superstitions, did not actually borrow 
them from the Hindus, they must both 
at least have copied the system from 
the same sources. We are aware of 
the extensive reputation enjoyed by 
magicians and soothsayers among the 
children of Israel, who were strictly 
warned by God, through Moses, against 



C C 2 



388 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. h 

- 

that their ancestors cultivated the art from time immemorial ; 
and it is not likely that the successors would have neglected 
so good an example and allowed the practice to fall into disuse. 
Many Brahmins, moreover, in spite of the restrictions imposed 
upon them, are known to have made a special study of this 
mysterious book. Besides, do not their religious sacrifices and 
their manirams bear a great resemblance to magical formulae 
and conjurings? Furthermore, do not the marvellous effects 
which they are supposed to produce, and the power ascribed to 
them of counteracting the will even of the gods themselves, 
place them on a par with the chimerical attributes which the 
vulgar mind ascribes to enchantments ? 

I happen to have come across a Hindu book treating of the 
subject in hand, which perhaps few Europeans have yet heard 
of. It is called the Agrushada Parikshai. The passages which 
I will here extract from it will never make anybody a sorcerer, 
but it strikes me that they may not be wholly uninteresting to 
those who like to meditate on the aberrations and follies of the 
human mind. 

The author begins by investigating the extent of a magician's 
power. Such power is enormous. A magician is the dispenser 
of both good and evil ; but is more frequently inclined by 
natural malevolence to do evil rather than good. Nothing is 
easier for him than to afflict anybody with sicknesses, such 
as fever, dropsy, epilepsy, stricture, palsy, madness; and, in 
fine, diseases of all species. But all this is a mere trifle 
compared with what his art can otherwise do ! It is capable 
of completely destroying an army besieging a city, and also of 
causing the sudden death of the commander of a besieged fortress 
and of all its inhabitants, and so forth. 

The Mahomedans in India, being quite as superstitious as 
the natives of the country, are no less infatuated with the power 
of magic. It is a well-known fact that the last Mussulman 
prince who reigned in Mysore, the fanatical and superstitious 
Tippu Sultan, during his last war, in which he lost his kingdom 
and his life, engaged the services of the most celebrated 
magicians of his own country and of neighbouring provinces, 

consulting such men (Leviticus xix. was weak enough to have recourse 
31, XX. 6). Saul, who had vainly to the enchantments of the witch of 
tried to exterminate or expel them, Endor. — Dubois. 



CH. xxi] Incantations and Enchantments 389 

in order that they might employ all the resources of their art 
in destroying by some efficacious operation the English army 
which was then advancing to besiege his capital, and which he 
found himself utterly incapable of repelling by force of arms. 
In this difficult and critical position the magicians very humbly 
acknowledged their powerlessness ; and to save the reputation 
of their craft they were obliged to maintain that their magical 
operations, so potent when directed against every other enemy, 
were utterly ineffectual against Europeans *. 

But if magic teaches the means of doing evil, it also affords 
the means of counteracting its pernicious effects. There is no 
magician so skilful but that others can be found more skilful 
than he, to destroy the evil effects of his enchantments and 
cause them to recoil with all their force upon himself or upon 
his clients. Apart from the direct influence exercised by them- 
selves, the magicians also possess an ample collection of amulets 
and talismans, which are looked upon as efficacious against 
all sorcery and spells, and which are largely distributed, not 
without payment of course, amongst those who consult them. 
For instance, there are certain glass beads made magical 
by mantrams, different kinds of roots, and thin plates of copper 
engraved with unknown characters, strange words and uncouth 
figures. These amulets are always worn by Hindus, who, when 
protected by such talismans, believe themselves quite safe from 
all kinds of evil. 

Secret remedies for inspiring illicit passion, for rekindling 
the flame of extinct love, and for reviving impaired virility, also 
fall within the province of these professors of magic, and form 
by no means the least lucrative part of their trade. It is to such 
men that a wife always applies when she wishes to reclaim 
her faithless husband or to prevent him from becoming so. 
Debauched gallants and lewd women also seek the help 
of love philtres to seduce or captivate the object of their 
passion. 

I was not a little surprised to find in the book which I am 
now describing mention made of incubi. But these demons 
of India are much more mischievous than those of whom 

^ It is generally believed by the ments — an ingenuous admission of 
Hindus that such sorcerers and ma- force tnajeurt ! — £d. 
gicians are powerless against Govern- 



390 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

the Jesuit Delrio speaks in his Disquisitiones Magicae. By 
the violence and persistence of their embraces they so tire 
out the women whom they visit at night under the form of 
a dog, a tiger, or some other animal, that the unfortunate 
creatures die of sheer lassitude and exhaustion. 

Our author speaks at great length of the means best suited 
to enchant weapons. The effects which weapons so treated 
have the virtue of producing are in no way inferior to 
those caused by the famous Durandal (Orlando's enchanted 
sword) and by the spear of Argail, which in ancient times 
routed so many miscreants. The Hindu gods and giants in 
their wars against each other used no other weapons but 
these. Is there anything, for instance, that can be compared 
with the Arrow of Brahma or the Arrow of the Serpent 
Capella? The former is never shot without causing the 
destruction of a whole army; and the latter, launched in 
the midst of enemies, has the effect of causing them to drop 
down in a state of lethargy— an effect which, as one may well 
suppose, made singularly short work of those who were 
subjected to it. 

There is not a secret of magic which this book does not 
teach us. It puts us in possession of the means of acquiring 
wealth and honour ; of rendering barren women fruitful ; of 
discovering, by merely rubbing the hands and eyes with some 
enchanted mixtures, treasures buried in the ground or hidden 
elsewhere ; of acquiring invulnerability and the most formidable 
powers in war by means of bones carried on the person. 
Strange to say, the only thing which it does not reveal is the 
means of rendering oneself immortal. 

It is not by entering into compact with the devil, as our 
magicians were erstwhile supposed to have done, that the 
magicians of India obtained the power of performing so many 
prodigies. These latter, indeed, are not the kind of people 
to run the risk of having their necks twisted in evil company 
of this sort. It is quite sufficient for a Hindu to become an 
expert in the black art if he receives a few private lessons 
from the guru^ or master, of the adepts. It is this guru who 
guides him in the right way, who confers his powers upon him, 
and to whom he owes obedience. Should a god, a demon, or 
a spirit be so stubborn as to disregard the orders of the newly 



ci£. xxi] Magic Mantrams 391 

initiated disciple, the latter has simply to repeat his injunction 
in the name and from the feet of his guru, 

Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva themselves are subject to the 
commands of the magicians. There are, however, certain 
divinities who are invoked by preference. Among these the 
planets occupy the first place. The term graha, by which 
they are designated, signifies the act of seizing, that is, of laying 
hold of those whom they are enjoined by magical enchant- 
ments to torment. The next in order are the bhoothams, or the 
elements, each of which contains a destructive principle. Then 
come the pretas or spirits of dead bodies, the pisachas or 
pisasus — a term by which the Native Christians designate the 
devil; the female deities called sakti) Kali, the goddess of 
destruction ; and Marana Devi, the goddess of death. 

In order to call all these spirits into action, the magician 
has recourse to various mysterious ceremonies, mantrams and 
sacrifices. The sacrifices are the same as those already 
described, with a few trifling differences. For instance, the 
magician must be stark naked while he offers up these sacrifices 
to Lakshmi, the wife of Vishnu ; while, on the other hand, he 
must be decorously clad when such sacrifices are offered to 
Rama. 

The flowers offered to the god invoked must be red ; and, 
when the object is to produce the death of any person, the 
boiled rice offered up must be stained with blood, for which 
purpose a human victim, a young girl for choice, is sometimes 
slain '. 

We have already spoken of the grand virtue of mantrams ; 
but it is especially in connexion with magic that they are most 
effective. Mantrams have such an influence over the gods, 
even of the very first rank, that they are quite unable to 
resist doing, either in the heavens, or in the air, or on earth, 
all that the magician requires of them. 

Among the said mantrams there are some, called the funda- 
mentals, whose effects are decisive and irresistible. They are 
composed of various strange monosyllables, harsh of sound and 
difficult to pronounce ; such as h'hom, h'rhum, sh'hrum, sho'rhim, 
ramaya, namaha. This last word signifies 'respectful greeting.' 

' Such a thing is unheard of nowadays. — £o. 



jffz. Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies \yT. n 



Th^ nu^ician sometiiiies repeats these mamimms in a humble 
and JMipplicatory manner, loading with praises the god whom he 
invokes; but he quickly resumes his imperious tone, and ex- 
claims as though in a vehement rage, ' Grasp it ! Grasp it ! ' or 
' Begone ! Begone ! If thou art willing to do what I ask of thee, 
well and good ; if not, I command thee to do it in the name of 
such and such a god, in the name of the feet of my gam ! ' 
Whereupon the god cannot do otherwise than comply with the 
magician's demands without a murmur ! 

From the haughty and indecorous manner in which the Hindu 
magicians treat their good-natured deities, it may be judged 
that they are not the men to allow themselves to be frightened 
as easily as were the poor witches of Horace, Canidia and 
Sagana, who, it will be remembered, were put to terrified flight 
by a commonplace sound, resembling the bursting of an inflated 
bladder, made by the God of the Gardens, who had been troubled 
by the enchantments which they came to perform every night in 
the place entrusted to his keeping. 

It is impossible to enumerate the various drugs, ingredients, 
and utensils that go to make up the stock-in-trade of an Indian 
magician. There are certain incantations, in the performance 
of which it is necessary to use the bones of sixty-four different 
animals — neither more nor less — and amongst them may be 
mentioned those of a man bom on a Sunday which happens 
to be new-moon day, of a woman bom on a Friday, the feet- 
bones of a Pariah, of a cobbler, of a Mahomedan, and of 
a European. If all these bones are mixed together, enchanted 
by mantramSf consecrated by sacrifices, and then buried in 
the house, or at the threshold of an enemy on a night that 
the stars show to be propitious, they will infallibly cause the 
enemy's death. 

In the same way, should the magician, in the silence of the 
night, bury these bones at the four cardinal points of a hostile 
camp, and then, retiring to some distance, repeat seven times the 
mantram of defeat, the result will be that within seven days the 
whole encamped army will either disperse of itself or perish to 
the last man. 

Thirty-two weapons, consecrated by the sacrifice of a human 
ylctiini will spread such dismay among a besieging army that 
• hundred of their opponents will appear to it as a thousand. 



CH. XXl] 



Secret Machinations 



393 



Sometimes a quantity of mud collected from sixty-four filthy 
places is kneaded together with hair, parings of nails, bits of 
leather, &c., and is then moulded into small figures, on the 
breasts of which the name of one's enemy is written. Certain 
words and mantrams are then repeated over these figures, 
which are also consecrated by sacrifices. No sooner is this 
done than the grahas or planets take possession of the person 
against whom such incantations are directed, and afflict him 
with a thousand ills. 

These figures are sometimes pierced through and through 
with an awl, or are mutilated in various ways with the intention 
of killing or mutilating in the same manner the person who is 
the object of vengeance \ 

Sixty-four roots of different kinds of noxious plants are known 
among the magicians, and, when duly prepared with mantrams 
and sacrifices, become powerful weapons for covertly dealing 
fatal blows to obnoxious persons. 

It must here be remarked that the profession of a magician is 



' At all times and in all places the 
same ridiculous and barbarous means 
have sufficed to excite the imagina- 
tion of the vulgar, the ignorant, and 
the superstitious. They were, are, 
and will be the same throughout the 
world. Thus Medea, in Ovid : — 
* Per tumulos errat, passis discincta 
capillis, 
Certaque dc tepidis colligit ossa 
rogis; 
Devovet absentes, simulacraque 
cerea fingit, 
£t miserum tenues in iecur urget 
acus.* 
The two witches of Horace who 
have just been mentioned also had, 
among their other magical apparatus, 
two figures, one of wool and the other 
of wax : 

* Maior 

Lanea, quae poenis compesceret 

inferiorem : 
Cerea suppliciter stabat, servilibus, 

utque 
lam peritura, modis/ 



The fanatical Leaguers of France in 
the sixteenth century carried their 
superstitious practices to such ex- 
tremes that they caused wax figures 
to be made representing Henry III 
and the King of Navarre. They 
pierced the different parts of these 
figures with thorns for the space of 
forty days, and on the fortieth day 
they struck them about the region of 
the heart, believing that they would 
thereby cause the death of the princes 
whom the images represented. In 
the year 1751 a pretended sorcerer 
named Trois'tchelUsy who was exe- 
cuted on the Place de Gr6ve, de- 
clared during his examination that 
there existed in France three hun- 
dred thousand persons practising the 
same profession as himself. Possibly 
he exaggerated, but at all events, if 
historians eliminated from their re- 
cords all the follies of men, they 
would certainly not have much lefl to 
relate. — Dubois. 



394 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. h 

not altogether free from danger. If the Hindus themselves are 
revengeful, their gods are also passably so. Again, the gods do 
not obey without some feeling of anger the orders given to 
them by a miserable mortal, and they sometimes punish in 
a very cruel and brutal manner the person who ventures to 
command them. Woe to him who commits the smallest error, 
or makes the slightest omission in the innumerable ceremonies 
that are obligatory under such circumstances I He is imme- 
diately crushed with the full weight of the mischief which he 
was preparing for others. 

Then again, a magician is in constant danger from rivals 
who exercise the same trade, especially when his rivals are as 
skilful as himself, or maybe more so. For these may succeed in 
counteracting his charms, and in bringing upon his own head, 
or upon the heads of his clients, the whole weight of his evil 
machinations. Accordingly there exists, in appearance or in 
reality, an inveterate mutual hatred amongst this crowd of men 
who pretend to be the interpreters of destiny. Occasionally 
they are seen to bid defiance to each other, and to enter the 
lists in the presence of witnesses and arbitrators, whom they call 
upon to decide which of the two is the more skilful in his art 
The test consists, for example, in having to lift from the ground 
a spell-bound object, such as a piece of straw, a wand, or a piece 
of money. The two antagonists, placing themselves at either 
side of and at an equal distance from the aforesaid object, 
pretend to approach it ; but the mantrams which they utter, or 
the enchanted ashes which they sprinkle upon each other, have 
the effect of arresting their course. An invisible and irresistible 
force seems to drive them back ; they try again and again to 
advance towards the object, but as often have to draw back. 
They redouble their efforts ; convulsive movements agitate 
them; the sweat pours from them; they spit blood. At last one 
of them succeeds in getting hold of the spell-bound object, and 
he is proclaimed the victor. 

Sometimes, again, one of the combatants is thrown violently 
upon the ground by the force of the mantrams of his antagonist. 
He then rolls about like one possessed, and finally remains for 
some time motionless, feigning unconsciousness. At last, how- 
ever, he recovers the use of his senses, gets up apparently much 
fatigued and exhausted, and retires covered with shame and 



CH. XXl] 



Charlatanry 



395 



confusion. . A sickness of several days* duration is supposed to 
be the immediate result of his strenuous yet futile efforts. 

It will, doubtless, be easily guessed that these pitiable fool- 
eries are the outcome of a premeditated understanding between 
the shameless charlatans who practise them. But the multitude 
who pay for being treated to a spectacle of this kind, and who 
look upon the actors with fear and admiration, are fully 
persuaded that all their contortions are due to supernatural 
causes. It must, however, be admitted that these men go 
through their parts with really admirable skill and precision. 
On many an occasion they have been seen to perform sleight-of- 
hand tricks with such rare skill as to astonish persons of a much 
less credulous turn of mind than the Hindus \ 



^ The magic art is still firmly be- 
lieved in throughout India. However, 
the rules whereby magical powers can 
be acquired are so rigorous and diffi- 
cult, and the consequences of any 
violation or infringement of them sup- 
posed to be so dangerous to the man 



who attempts to practise them, that 
only a very few ever become adepts. 
In all parts of the country men are to 
be seen who are said to have become 
mad on account of some violation of 
the prescribed ceremonies for the 
acquisition of the black art. — Ed. 



CHAPTER XXII 

The Poetry of the Hindus. 

From the very earliest times poetry has been very much in 
vogue with the Hindus, and it is still held in high regard by 
them. One is even inclined to believe that at first they had no 
other written language. Not one of their original ancient books 
is written in prose, or in the vulgar tongue — not even the books 
on medicine, which are said to be very numerous in the Sanskrit 
language. 

We may naturally infer that the practice of writing in a style 
and idiom beyond the comprehension of the vulgar was mainly 
due to the artful precaution of the Brahmins, who found in it 
a sure means of excluding all other castes from participating in 
a knowledge of which they wished to retain a monopoly. 

It is quite certain that all the Hindu books in prose are of 
modern origin. It is in verse that the eighteen Puranas, and 
other similar works, have been translated from the Sanskrit 
into Tamil, Telugu, and Canarese, and, I think, into all the 
other vernaculars of India. 

Tamil poetry seems to have been chiefly cultivated by the 
Sudras; and even Pariahs have been the authors of various 
poems in that language. The Tamil poets, however, while 
imitating the form and style of Sanskrit poetry, have added so 
many rules of their own that it is difficult to excel in the writing 
of it. 

Telugu and Canarese poetry is chiefly the work of Brahmins. 

Having acquired some knowledge of the most important rules 
of Hindu prosody, which, I think, are the same in all the ver- 
naculars of the country, Sanskrit not excepted, I will try to 
describe them briefly here. The subject seems to me likely to 



Different Kinds of Poetry 397 

interest philologists. I will, therefore, describe : (i) the dif- 
ferent kinds of poetry ; (2) the long and short quantities ; (3) 
the different feet ; (4) the different metres ; {5) the method of 
rhyme ; (6) the composition of verses ; {7) the style of their 
poetry generally. 

The Diffkrent Kinds of Poetry. 

There are five kinds of poetry, namely, padam, padyam^ 
dwipada, dandaka, yakshakaram. Some add to these another 
kind under the name of podia, but as this is, properly speaking, 
poetical prose, it is not generally considered as belonging to 
the province of poetry. 

The padam includes not only the odes in honour of gods, 
princes, and other great personages, but also obscene and 
amorous ditties, sprightly dialogues between gods and god- 
desses, and other similar compositions, some of which are called 
sringaram (ornament), because they describe the beauty of 
women and their different methods of adornment. 

The erotic songs are also called stttinbam (pleasures of the 
will). Of this sort there is an infinite variety. They are sung, 
for the most part, by religious mendicants when they go from 
house to house asking for alms. The more coarse and indecent 
they are, the better they suit the tastes of the hearers, whose 
generosity is manifested in proportion to the enjoyment derived 
from them. 

The hymns in honour of the gods are called kirthanam 
(praise), a term which these compositions well deserve on 
account of the high-flown eulogies with which they are 
replete. 

The word padam corresponds likewise to our strophe, stanza, 
or couplet. 

Padyam includes the great poems composed in honour of 
gods and heroes. They are divided into stanzas. There are at 
least thirty different forms of these stanzas, which may be intro- 
duced and interspersed in the course of the same poem. The 
padyams are also used in compositions dealing with moral and 
satirical subjects. The Telugu poet Vemana and the Tamil 
poet Tiruvalluvar excelled in these two kinds of composition, 
of which I shall speak again at the end of the present chapter. 



398 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

The species of poetry called dwipada (two feet) is not subject 
to very strict rules. It might be described as free improvisation, 
and is used in the recital of short stories and adventures. 

It is unnecessary to enter into details about the other kinds 
of poetry ; it is easy to conjecture what they are like from what 
has been already said. 

Long and Short Quantities. 

Hindu verses, like those in Greek and Latin, are formed of 
feet, composed of letters long or short in quantity. From 
these long and short feet are formed hemistichs, or lines which, 
combined in their turn, form stanzas. 

I have remarked that the feet are composed of letters, because 
in the Indian languages there are no such things as syllables. 
Every consonant carries its own vowel, which is incorporated- 
with it. In several languages of India combinations such as bra^ 
pla^ &c., which we call syllables, are also written as one single 
letter. 

The short letters are called laghu-aksharatn^ and the long 
ones guru-aksharafftf in allusion, no doubt, to the slow and 
solemn gait of a Hindu guru. Even in ordinary writing they 
seldom fail to make a distinction between the long and short 
letters with their particular marks. This is scrupulously observed 
in pronunciation ; and in verse it is quite indispensable. 

In Hindu as well as in Greek and Latin poetry, a long letter 
is equivalent to two short, and two long to four short. Thus 
the word mata, composed of two long letters, is equivalent to 
the word iruvadu^ composed of four short ones. But there are 
letters which, though short in prose writing and in ordinary 
conversation, become long in verse by their position ; thus the 
initial a in the word aksharam, though short generally, becomes 
long in versification, being placed before two consonants, k and 
sha. In the same manner the letter ka, though usually short, 
is long in such words as karman, karnant^ &c , on account of the 
two consonants which follow it. 

As I wished to know whether this rule admitted of that 
poetical licence of which we find some examples in the writings 
of the best Latin poets— that is, whether a final short letter 
could become long by position when the word which follows it 



CH. xxii] Superstition in Poetry 399 

begins with two consonants — I questioned a Brahmin whom 
I had asked to explain to me the structure of Hindu versifi- 
cation. He had already seemed somewhat surprised at the 
facility with which I understood his explanations, and I noticed 
that his professorial tone and arrogant self-conceit were gradu- 
ally diminishing. But when I asked this question he stood dumb- 
founded, and for a while stared me in the face without uttering 
a word. At length he answered : ' I wonder how such a thought 
could have occurred to you, knowing as you do so little as yet 
even of the rudimentary elements of our poetry.' I told him 
that the different kinds of poetry which were studied in my own 
country bore many resemblances to the poetry of India, and 
that the knowledge I had previously derived from the former 
had led me to ask this particular question. But his astonish- 
ment, instead of decreasing, grew still greater. He found it 
very difficult to understand how such sublime things could ever 
have entered the minds of foreigners, and how poets could be 
found elsewhere than in India. This absurd prejudice on his 
part easily impressed him with the idea that I was a person of 
wonderful mental penetration. One advantage which resulted 
from our conversation was that in future his conduct towards 
me became much more respectful. 

As in Latin, the last letter or vowel of a Hindu verse may be 
of any quantity at pleasure ; but in such cases the distinction 
must always be marked in accentuation. 

In an idolatrous country everything necessarily tends towards 
superstition. The poets of India, therefore, hold some letters 
to be of good and others of ill omen. The ambrosial letters 
(antritam) come under the head of the former, while the 
poisonous letters (visham) belong to the latter class. This 
distinction, however, is not observed in the poems in praise of 
the gods, who are supposed to be beyond such influences. But 
in verses which concern simple mortals the case is very different. 
Particular care must be taken never to begin any verse addressed 
to them with a visham or unlucky letter. In the Telugu and 
Canarese languages, the letters ke, ki, pe, pi^ te, ti, &c., are of 
this number, because these letters when written have the point 
turned downwards. On the other hand, the letters ko^pOy to, &c,, 
are considered to be lucky letters {amriiam), because they have 
the point turned upwards. 



400 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 



The Feet in Verse. 

The feet are called ganams, and there are two kinds, the 
simple ganams and the upaganams. The first are eight in 
number, and are expressed by the word mahajasanarayala^ made 
up of the first letters of the following: — (i) maganam, (2) 
haganam, (3) jaganam^ (4) saganam, (5) naganafft, (6) raganant, 
(7) y^g^^(t^, (8) laganam. 

The first consists of three longs ; the second, of a long and 
two shorts ; the third, of a long between two shorts ; the fourth, 
of two shorts and a long; the fifth, of three shorts; the sixth, 
of a short between two longs ; the seventh, of a short and two 
longs; the eighth, of two longs and a short. 

There are eight upaganams expressed by the word gavahana- 
gamanahf made up likewise by the combination of the first 
letters of the following words: — (i) gaganam, composed of 
two longs ; (2) vaganam, of a short and a long ; (3) haganatn^ 
of a long and a short ; (4) nalam, of four shorts ; (5) go/am, of 
two shorts ; (6) fnaiagam, of three longs and a short ; (7) nagatn, 
of three shorts and a long ; (8) lafam, of two longs and two 
shorts. 

The Hindu poets discern a certain relation between the 
ganams and the upaganams^ according to the effects which they 
are severally supposed to possess the faculty of producing. 
They are all under the protection of different planets ; and 
according to the good or evil dispositions of these latter, they 
bring good or ill luck. Those under the auspices of the 
moon, which in India is the symbol of comfort and coolness, 
are favourable; but the case is just the reverse with those 
governed by the sun. It therefore follows that a piece of 
poetry must never begin with a malign ganatn. The Hindu 
prosodies are very diffuse and wearisome on this subject. 

The Different Metres. 

The lines, properly speaking, of verses are formed oi ganams 
and upaganams, and are called padams or charanams, words 
which signify literally /eet. They may be compared to the 
hemistichs or lines of pentameter verse in Latin, or to the lines 
of ten and twelve syllables in French and English. The variety 



CH. xxii] Hindu Rhymes 401 

of padams depends on the number of ganams they contain ; 
some having three, five, seven, or more. 

In ctxidLin padatns any of the ganams may be used, and these 
latter may be varied at pleasure, provided the requisite number 
of shorts and longs is preserved. This variety, however, must 
be managed with a certain amount of taste and be free from all 
affectation; when it is done with discretion, it enhances the 
beauty and force of the verses, which otherwise would become 
too monotonous. It is just the same with Latin hexameters, 
which would be wanting in grace if the poet were to put either 
all dactyls or all spondees in the first four feet. 

The Hindu poets, however, cannot indulge in this interchange 
o( ganams in all their compositions. There are cases in which 
it is absolutely necessary for them to use only such as the rules 
prescribe. 

The various kinds of lines in Hindu verse have all special 
names. One is called the elephant, another the tiger, another 
the cobra; and so forth. 

Rhyme. 

There are two kinds of rhymes in Hindu poetry. One occurs 
at the beginning of the line, and is called yeti or vadi. Thus, 
where one line begins with the word kirti and the other with 
ktriana, ki is the yeti. The other kind of rhyme occurs in 
the second letter or syllable of the line, and is called prasam. 
Thus, in two lines, one beginning with gopagni and the other 
with dipantram, pa is the prasam. 

For the yeii rhyme the letters ka, kaha, ksha, ga, gsha, the 
simple tshay and the aspirate ishaha, &c., may be used. 

For the prasam rhyme attention is, strictly speaking, paid 
only to the consonant, which ought to be absolutely the same ; 
the vowel does not matter so much. Thus da, de, dt\ do, du all 
rhyme together. These kinds of rhymes, however, are not 
considered fine. 

Generally speaking, the more words there are in a line having 
the yets and the prasam alike, the more beautiful they appear to 
the Hindus. For our part we should look upon them as mere 
childish alliterations, recalling to our minds the line of Ennius 
so often in the mouths of schoolboys : 

' O Tite tute Tati tibi tanta, tyranne, tulisti 1 ' 

•♦ Dd 



4Q2 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

There are also other kinds of poetry, which, like ours, have 
their rhyme at the end of the lines. In these cases they end as 
a rule with the same consonant and sometimes with the same 
word. 

Generally speaking, the difficulties of rhyme are simply hope- 
less, and often puzzle Hindu versifiers themselves. 

Verses. 

With the padamSf or lines, arranged symmetrically with regard 
to quantity and rhyme, are formed the padyams, sometimes 
called slokams. They are, properly speaking, stanzas or coup- 
lets, sometimes regular, sometimes irregular. 

These padyams are of several kinds, and each has its special 
name. 

In the simple kanda-padyant certain feet only can be intro- 
duced, in the same way as in Latin hexameters in which 
dactyls and spondees only are used. But a single gaftam, 
or foot, may sometimes comprise a whole line, such as the 
following : Devaki-Deviki-Kamsudu. 

The limits of this work hardly permit me to enter into more 
minute details concerning the numerous rules to which the 
structure and arrangement of Hindu poetry are subject ; but it 
will appear from what has been already said that Hindu versi- 
fication is by no means easy. There are nevertheless a great 
many people of all castes who dabble in rhymes, and amuse 
themselves by reading out publicly and ostentatiously the pieces 
they have composed. In India, as in Europe, poetasters abound, 
while good poets are very scarce. The Indian languages, how- 
ever, being very rich in synonyms, afford a great advantage 
to the Hindu poet. 

There are five principal authors who have written on the 
subject of Hindu prosody ; and these have laid down fixed and 
unalterable laws for making verses. Their collected works are 
called Chandas. The Brahmin who taught me was guided in 
his instructions by a book whose author had so arranged that 
every rule was comprised in a verse which served at once the 
double purpose of an example of the rule as well as the rule 
itself. 



CH. xxii] Taste and Style in Hindu Poetry 403 



Of Taste and Style in Hindu Poetry. 

The predominating features of Hindu poetry are emphasis, 
affectation, and bombast Every Hindu poet would seem to be 
a prototype of him who, in Horace, 

' Proicit ampullas et sesquipedalia verba/ 

or of the Clitarchus compared by Longinus to a man who 
opens his mouth wide to blow through a tiny flute. The poetry 
of all nations has its peculiar turns of expression, its licences, 
its own vocabulary, &c., which render it difficult of understand- 
ing by foreigners; but in Hindu poetry the frequent use of 
elliptical phrases, of allegories, of metaphors, and of expressions 
not in vogue in ordinary language, renders the meaning so 
obscure that it is impossible to understand it properly unless 
one makes a special study of the subject. Even a thorough 
knowledge of Hindu prose works is of no avail. 

Were Hindu literature better known to us, it is possible that 
we should find that we have borrowed from it the rontanttc 
style of our days, which some find so beautiful and others so 
silly. If the Hindu poet has occasion to describe any particular 
object, he seldom omits even the minutest details. He thinks 
it his duty to present it to the view in all its phases. 

' S'il rencontre un palais, il m*en d^peint la face ; 
II me promtoe apr^ de terrasse en terrasse : 
Ici s'offre un perron ; \k rdgne un corridor ; 
Lk ce balcon s*enferme en un balustre d*or, 
II compte des plafonds les ronds et les ovales.' 

If a Hindu poet has a beautiful woman for his theme, he will 
certainly never be content with merely stating, in a more or less 
flowery style, that she is endowed with all the charms of body 
and mind. Like the painter who reproduces on the canvas one 
feature after another of his model, so does our Hindu poet pass 
in review a capite usque ad calcem the various charms of the 
beauty he is describing. The colour of her skin, the expression 
of her face and eyes, in fine, everything connected with her, even 
her most secret charms, appear to him objects worthy of his 
praise. The finishing strokes of his brush are generally reserved 
for the touching up of all the moral and intellectual qualities 

D d 2 



404 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

which his imagination can impart to the fair subject of his verses. 
It may be easily imagined that these descriptive details, over- 
loaded as they are with a vast display of epithets, become 
exceedingly diffuse; but we cannot deny to them at least the 
credit of exactitude. 

Hindu poetry at first sounds harsh and inharmonious to 
a European ear, by reason of the frequent aspirations with which 
many of the letters at the beginning, in the middle, and at 
the end of the words are pronounced ; but, on the other hand, 
this laboured pronunciation gives to the recital a stately and 
sonorous tone, which seldom fails to please one who has 
become used to it. At the same time it must be confessed that 
foreigners, and even natives who have not been well trained 
in it from infancy, find almost insurmountable difficulties in 
mastering this method of pronunciation. 

The short pieces that I have seen have appeared to me 
generally weak and uninspiring. I know not whether the 
Hindus have any real dramatic works. I only know of a few 
productions of this nature, and these are mixed up with songs 
and dialogues. The Dasa-avatara, or the ten incarnations of 
Vishnu, is among the number. But I am not in a position to 
give any particulars as to their merit, or even of their con- 
tents, seeing that I have never taken the trouble to read any 
of them. 

More fortunate than the French, who are never weary 
of repeating that no epic poem exists in their literature, the 
Hindus boast of a great number. The two most celebrated 
are the Ramayana and the Bhagavata, Both are of inordinate 
length. The former recounts the deeds and exploits of Vishnu 
under the incarnation of Rama ; while the latter relates 
the adventures of Vishnu metamorphosed in the form of 
Krishna. Their authors have introduced into them the whole 
idolatrous system of the country— a system on which they are 
often at variance among themselves. It may be easily under- 
stood that the ' unities ' prescribed by Aristotle have not been 
observed in these epics. The Bhagavata takes up its hero 
even before his birth, and does not quit him till after he is 
dead. 

The fertile imagination of the ancient Greeks conceived 
nothing that can be compared with the incredible powers and 



CH. xxii] Hindu Epics 405 

wonderful achievements of the Hindu heroes, whose exploits are 
celebrated in these books. Even the colossal Enceladus and the 
giant Briareus, with his fifly heads and his hundred hands, were 
but pigmies compared with the wonderful giants who, accord- 
ing to the Ramayana, sometimes fought for Rama and some- 
times against him. 



CHAPTER XXIII 



Brahmin Philosophy.— The Six Sects called Shan Mata, — The Doctrine 

of the Buddhists. 

I HAVE previously shown (in Part II, Chapter XI) that the 
ancient Brahmins recognized one Supreme and Almighty Being, 
possessing all the attributes that reasonable man should ascribe 
to such a Being. It is impossible to believe that these sages, 
being thus impressed with the idea of so perfect a Godhead, 
could have countenanced the absurdities of polytheism and 
idolatry. It was their successors who adopted these absurdities, 
little by little, until they led the nation, whose oracles they 
were, into all the extravagant doctrines in which they are now 
involved. It must nevertheless be acknowledged that the specu- 
lative theories in which these ancient philosophers indulged in 
the first instance, and of which I shall have occasion to speak 
later on, were calculated to corrupt this pure conception of the 
Deity and of the worship due to Him. Indeed, it was not long 
before divided opinions arose regarding the nature of God and 
the creation of the Universe. Two principal sects were gradu- 
ally developed, each of which possesses up to the present day 
numerous adherents among the modern Brahmins *. The first 



* There are, as a matter of fact, three 
sects. The first is that of Adtvaitct, or 
non-dualism. ' The Universe exists, 
but merely as a form of the one eter- 
nal essence. All animate and inani- 
mate things are but parts of the Deity, 
and have no real existence of their 
own.' Then comes the Dwaita doc- 
trine, or dualism, which holds that 
* God is supreme, yet essentially dif- 
ferent from the human soul and from 
the material world, both of which have 
a real and eternally distinct existence.' 



A third and important section hold the 
doctrine of VisishtadwaittL, or doc- 
trine of unity with attributes. This 
doctrine is like that of Adwaita, hold- 
ing that the Deity and the Universe 
are one, but it goes further in holding 
that the Deity is not void of form or 
quality ; it regards Him as < being en- 
dowed with all good qualities and 
a twofold form : the Supreme Spirit, 
Paramatnta or Cause, and the gross 
one, the efi*ect, the Universe or Mat- 
ter.' — Ed. 



Maya^ or Illusion 407 



is called the Dwaita (twofold) sect, whose adherents recognize 
the existence of two beings, namely, God and Matter, which He 
created and which is one with Him. The other sect, called 
Adwaita (not twofold , comprises those who acknowledge but 
one Being, one Substance, one God. It has a more numerous 
following than the other, and includes in its ranks the majority 
of those Brahmins who profess to be exceptionally learned. Its 
adepts designate the leading principles of their doctrine by the 
technical words Abhavena Bhavam Nastt\ meaning de nihilo 
nihil fit (from nothing nothing is made). They maintain that 
Creation is an impossibility, and at the same time they hold that 
pre-existing and eternal Matter is absolutely chimerical. From 
these premises they conclude that all that we call the universe, 
including all the various phenomena which we see to be com- 
prised within it, has no real existence at all, but is merely 
the result of illusion, which is known among them as Maya, 
From the large number of stories which they have invented for 
the purpose of illustrating this doctrine I have selected the 
following : — 

'A certain man, in a dream, imagined that he had been 
crowned king of a certain country with great pomp and circum- 
stance. The next iporning, on leaving his house, he met 
a traveller, who gave him a detailed account of festivities and 
ceremonies that had actually taken place on the occasion of the 
coronation of the king of the same country, and of which he 
was himself an eye-witness. The incidents related by the latter 
agreed in all particulars with what the former had dreamed. 
Illusion, Maya, was equally prevalent in both cases ; and there 
was no more reality in what the one man had seen than in what 
the other man had dreamed. In a word, things that we take 
for realities are nothing but illusions emanating from the Deity, 
who is the sole Being with an actual existence. Our senses 
deceive us in presenting to us objects which do not really exist. 
These objects indeed are nothing but appearances or modifica- 
tions of the Deity ; that is to say, there is nothing real about 
them.' 

I do not know whether these would-be philosophers deduce 
from this pernicious doctrine all the consequences which 
naturally result from it, and look upon God as the immediate 
author of all the evil as well as all the good that takes place 



4o8 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 



on the earth. Several of them, at any rate, are not ashamed to 
express this opinion. The Brahmins with whom I have dis- 
cussed the subject have candidly confessed to me that, in their 
opinion, neither good nor evil exists ; that, in fact, all crimes, 
even parricide, adultery, fraud, and perjury, are but acts 
incited by the divine power; or rather, that these acts are 
imaginative and are simply the strange result of Maya, a delu- 
sion which deceives us and causes us to take the shadow for the 
reality \ 

The doctrine of Dwmta admits of two actual substances — 
God, and Matter created by God, with which He is inseparably 
united. God, according to this doctrine, is omnipresent. He 
pervades all Matter and incorporates Himself, so to speak, with it. 
He is present in every animate and inanimate thing. He does 
not, however, undergo the least change or the least modification 
by such coexistence, whatever may be the badness and imper- 
fection of the things with which He is united. In support of 
this last contention, the adherents of the doctrine of Dwaita 
cite, for the purpose of comparison, fire and the rays of the sun. 
They say that fire can be incorporated in every substance, pure 
and impure, yet it never loses any of its own purity ; so also 
with the rays of the sun, which are never polluted even when 
penetrating heaps of filth and mud. 

According to these sectarians our souls emanate from God 
and form part of Him; just as light emanates from the sun, 
which illuminates the whole world with an infinite number of 
rays ; just as numberless drops of water fall from the same 
cloud ; and just as various trinkets are formed from the same 
ingot of gold. Whatever may be the number of these rays, of 
these drops of water, and of these trinkets, it is always to the 
same sun, to the same cloud, and to the same ingot of gold that 
they respectively belong. 

However, from the very moment that a soul is united with 
a body it finds itself imprisoned in the darkness of ignorance 
and sin, just like a frog caught in the gullet of a snake from 
which it has no chance of escaping. Although the soul, thus 
imprisoned, continues to be one with God, it is, nevertheless^ to 

* The Abba's opinion of the -<4^rfei//fl and Professor Max Mailer, who have 
doctrine is not supported by modern written of it in the highest terms of 
authorities, such as Professor Deusscn praise. — Ed. 



cH. xxiii] The Qualities of the Soul 409 

a certain extent disunited and separated from Him. However 
great and good the soul may be which animates a human form, 
it becomes from that moment subject to all the sins, to all the 
errors, and to all the weaknesses which are the natural conse- 
quences of this union with a body. The vicissitudes that affect 
the soul while it is united with a body do not, however, affect 
that part of its nature which is divine. In this respect the soul 
may be compared to the moon, whose image is reflected in the 
water : if the water in which the image of the moon is reflected 
be disturbed, the image also becomes disturbed ; but it cannot 
be said that the moon itself is disturbed. The changes and 
chances of the soul united with different bodies do not seriously 
concern God, from whom it emanates ; and as to the soul itself, 
it is immutable, never undergoing the slightest change. Its 
union with the body lasts till such time as, by meditation and 
penance, it attains a degree of wisdom and perfection which 
permits it to reunite itself anew, and that inseparably and for 
ever, with God : that is to say, it ceases to migrate from one 
body to another. 

The soul is said to be endowed with one of the following 
three gunas, or inherent qualities, viz. saiiva, rajas, or tamas — 
goodness, passion, or ignorance. It frees itself at one time from 
one, at another time from another, of these inherent qualities, 
and it attains perfection only after it is entirely freed from all of 
them. 

The five senses of the body play the part of councillors and 
slaves to the soul. For instance, should the soul perceive 
a desirable object, it immediately conceives the desire of 
possessing it. The feet are ordered to approach it, and when the 
object is in view, the eyes are commanded to behold it, and the 
hands to seize it, which orders are immediately executed. The 
nostrils are then commanded to smell it, the mouth to open, 
and the tongue to taste it; and these organs comply with 
its wishes. Thereupon the object passes into the body with 
which the soul is united, and the soul is then satisfied. Thus it 
is the soul that regulates the actions and the movements of the 
body. It may be compared, in this respect, with a magnet 
placed on a brass plate beneath which is an iron needle. If the 
magnet be moved round the plate, the needle follows in the same 
direction ; but if the magnet be removed, the needle at once 



4IO Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

drops down and remains motionless. The magnet is therefore 
typical of the soul, and the needle of the body. As long as these 
two are united, the body is susceptible of motion; but no sooner 
does the soul quit the body to take up its abode elsewhere than 
the body becomes insensible, is dissolved, and returns to the 
five elements from which it was originally formed. The soul, 
on the other hand, like the magnet, loses nothing of its efficacy, 
and in whatever body it takes up its abode, always remains 
the same. 

The two great sects of philosophers above mentioned were 
subsequently divided into six others, known by the general 
name of Shan Mata (the six sects, or schools). Their names are 
(i) Saiva, (2) Sakta, (3) Charvaka, (4) Kapalika, (5) Vaishnava, 
(6) Bouddha. To strive to purify the soul, to acquire wisdom 
and perfection, to dissipate the darkness of sin and ignorance, 
to free oneself from the thraldom of passion and from the 
wretchedness of life with a view to union with and absorption in 
the Great Being, the Universal Soul, the Paramaima or Para- 
brahma : such are the objects aimed at by these various sects. 
Each is distinguished from the others by differences of opinion 
on the nature of perfect happiness and on the means of 
attaining it. 

The different forms of knowledge taught in these schools 
are known by the following names : (i) Nyaya *, (2) Vedanta, 
{3) Mimamsa^ (4) Sankhya, (5) Paianjala^ (6) Vaiseshika, 

The first of these schools, the Saiva, founded by Gautama', 
who came from Tirat, near Patna, on the borders of the Ganges, 
is held to surpass the others in Tarka-sastra, i.e. Logic. It 
recognizes four sources of knowledge, viz. (i) Praiyaksha^ or the 
testimony of the senses rightly exercised ; (2) Anumana, or 
natural and visible signs, as for instance smoke, which is proof 
of the presence of fire ; (3) Upanianaf or Upama^ or the 
application of a known definition to an unknown object still to 
be defined ; (4) Apiha sabdam^ or the authority of infallible 
texts, which authority they ascribe to the Vedas, so far as 
religion and the worship of the gods are concerned, and to 

^ Nyaya is a compound Sanskrit ^ This Gautama is not to be con* 

root, meaning literally * that by which fused with Gautama Buddha, the 

we enter into a thing and draw con- founder of Buddhism.— £d. 
elusions.'— Ed. 



CH. xxiii] The Vedanta School 411 

the maxims of Gautama, their founder, so far as other matters 
are concerned. 

After the study of Logic, the professors of this school lead 
their disciples to the study of the visible world, and then to 
a knowledge of its Author, whose existence, although invisible, 
is demonstrable by the process of Anutnana. They gather from 
the same source proofs of His understanding, and from His 
understanding they deduce His immateriality. 

But although God in His essence is spiritual, they say that 
He possesses the power of rendering Himself perceptible, and 
has, in fact, exercised that power. From nirakara, or possessing 
no form, He has become akara, or possessing form, with a view to 
shape and animate the world, whose atoms, although eternal, are 
nevertheless, without His presence, motionless and lifeless. 

Man, according to them, is composed of one body and two 
souls, the one supreme, called Paramatma, which is nothing else 
than God Himself; the other animal or vita/, known by the name 
of Jfvatma, which is in us the sentient principle of pleasure 
and pain. Some hold that this is spiritual, others that it is 
material. 

In order to attain supreme wisdom and perfect happiness this 
sentient principle must be extinguished ; its complete extinction 
leading to union with Paramatma, The various gradations by 
which this union is attained will be spoken of later on. It begins 
with contemplation of, and ends in perfect identity with, God 
Himself. The process of metempsychosis continues in the 
meantime, the soul never ceasing its transmigrations from one 
body to another. 

It must here be remarked that by the word Soul the learned 
mean the fVill or else the Ego, the consciousness of Self. 

The Vedanta school, founded by the celebrated Sankara 
Acharya, is distinguished from the rest by its metaphysics, and, 
we may add, by the obscurity of its dogmas. Most of the 
Brahmins of the present day who wish to pass themselves off 
as learned men, blindly embrace its principles without under- 
standing them. True sannyasis are nowadays not to be found 
except in this school, which is founded on the system of 
Adwaita. 

The characteristic feature of this sect is the belief in the 
simple unify of the being, who is none other than the Ego, that 



412 Hindu Mamters, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

is to say, the Soul. Nothing exists except the Ego, yet this 
Ego in its simple and absolute unity is, so to speak, a trinity 
(irinus) by (i) its existence, (2) its infinite wisdom, and (3) its 
supreme happiness. 

But as the consciousness of Self is not at all in accordance 
with the sublime notions of this school, they admit another 
purely negative principle, which, in consequence, has no actual 
existence. This is the Maya of the Ego, Le. error or illusion. For 
instance, I believe I am now writing to you about the Vedanta ; 
but I am mistaken. It is true, indeed, I am Ego, I do actually 
exist ; but you are not You, you do not exist. There is nothing 
existent in the world, except the Ego. There is neither Vedanta, 
nor doctrine, nor any being except the Ego. In imagining to 
myself that you exist, I am under the illusion of Maya. I am 
mistaken ; that is all : the subject of my illusion does not in 
fact exist. 

Maya, or illusion, makes men believe that they have wives 
and children, that they possess cattle, jewels, houses, and other 
temporal goods : but nothing of all this is real. Hindus explain 
the effects of this illusion very imperfectly by comparing them 
to a rope coiled on the ground and mistaken for a snake. 

True wisdom consists in obtaining deliverance from this 
illusion by diligent contemplation of Self, by persuading oneself 
that one is the unique, eternal, and infinite Being, and so forth, 
without allowing one's attention to be diverted from this truth 
by the effects of Maya, 

The key by which the soul may free itself from these illusions 
of Maya is contained in the following words, which these 
pretentious sages are bound to repeat without ceasing : — Aham- 
Eva'Param- Brahma, that is to say, / am myself the Supreme 
Being. The hypothetical conception of this idea, they say, 
should eventually result in actual conviction and lead to 
supreme blessedness. 

The basic principle of the Sankhya school, founded by Kapila, 
is the doctrine of Dwaita] it rejects the Upamana of Logic, 
and seems generally less pretentious than the other schools. It 
also teaches that the soul is simply a part of God, and that the 
wisdom acquired by yoga, or contemplation, ends in either 
actual or spiritual unity with God. 

Kapila recognized a spiritual nature and a material nature. 



CH. xxiii] The Sankhya School 413 

both of them real and eternal. The spiritual nature, by the 
exercise of the will, unites itself with the material nature outside 
Itself From this union are born an infinite number of forms 
and a certain number of qualities. Amongst the forms is that of 
the Ego, by reason of which each being can say : / am /, and 
not another. 

As stated above, the qualities are three in number, viz. good- 
nesSf passton, ignorance. One or other of these three qualities 
predominates in all animate beings and accounts for the differ- 
ences to be observed amongst them. 

Another union of spirit (together with its forms and qualities) 
with Matter produces the elements; and a third produces the 
world as it stands. 

Such then, according to this doctrine, is the synthesis of the 
universe. Wisdom acquired through various stages of contem- 
plation produces freedom of the spirit, which liberates itself at 
one time from one form or quality, at another time from another, 
by constantly meditating on these three truths : — 

1. I exist not in any thing ! 

2. Nothing exists in me I 

3. I myself exist not ! 

This is expressed by the combination of these three words : 

Nasmeeha-namama-naham ! 

The time comes at last when the spirit has liberated itself 
from all its forms and qualities. This means the end of the 
world, when everything, returning to its primitive state, is lost 
in and identified with God. 

Kapila maintains that every religion known to him serves but 
to draw together more closely the bonds in which the spirit is 
held, instead of helping it to free itself from them. For, says 
he, the worship of subordinate deities, who are in reality nothing 
but the offspring of the most degraded and latest conceived 
union of spirit with Matter, binds us more closely to the object 
of it instead of liberating us from it. 

The worship also of superior deities, who are in reality only 
the offspring of the closest union of spirit with Matter, cannot 
but be in the same way an obstacle to complete spiritual free- 
dom. Such is the contention of Kapila, and one can but 
conclude that he wished to sap to the very foundations the 



414 Hindu Manners, Cusiotns, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

authority of the Vedas and of the Hindu religion. Indeed, 
the groundwork of his doctrine seems to bear a very close 
resemblance to that of Spinoza and other modem philosophers. 

His doctrine gives us also to understand that the gods of the 
Vedas are merely allegorical figures relating to the world itself, 
as much in its first principles as in its component parts, which 
are but emanations from or modifications of these first principles. 

Kapila rejects in toio the commonly accepted tenets of the 
Hindu religion, which, according to him, are founded on 
mythical, wicked, and impious stories. 

He teaches that everything that tends to cherish the passions, 
to which one must necessarily yield if they are not surmounted, 
is calculated to bind the spirit anew to Matter and to prolong 
its captivity. It is only after having overcome all such passions, 
and especially those of lust, anger, and avarice, that one can 
aspire to complete freedom and the supreme blessedness known 
as muktu 

The Mintamsa school, which recognizes a blind and irresis- 
tible predestination, professes absolute toleration with regard 
to other sects. Its adepts scrutinize and discuss the dogmas 
of these sects, without condemning them or venturing on any 
decided opinion with regard to them. They commend the 
utmost tolerance in matters of opinion, and affirm that every 
sect — nay, every religion — pursues the same end, viz. happi- 
ness, although they may differ as to the means of attaining it. 

I have already described * the abominable orgies of the sakti- 
puja^ practised by the votaries of the Sakta sect*. Their 



> See Part II, Chapter IX. 

* The Saivas are all worshippers of 
Siva and Bhavani conjointly, and they 
adore the linga or compound type of 
this god and goddess, as the Vaishna- 
vas do the image of Lakshminarayana. 
There are no exclusive worshippers of 
Siva besides the sect of naked Gymno- 
sophists called Lingis ; and the ex- 
clusive adorers of the goddess are the 
Saktas. In this last-mentioned sect, 
as in most others, there is a right- 
handed and decent path, and a left- 
handed and indecent mode of worship ; 
but the indecent worship of this sect 



is most grossly so, and consists of 
unbridled debauchery with wine and 
women. This profligate sect is sup- 
posed to be numerous, though un- 
avowed. In most parts of India, if not 
in all, they are held in deserved de- 
testation ; and even the decent Saktas 
do not make public profession of their 
tenets, nor wear on their foreheads 
the mark of the sect, lest they should 
be suspected of belonging to the other 
branch of it. The sacrifice of cattle 
before idols is peculiar to this sect. — 

H. T. COLEBROOK. 



CH. xxiii] The Materialist School 415 

principal doctrine seems to be that happiness consists in the 
enjoyment of sensual pleasures. 

There is another sect called Bouddha Maia^ which has no 
Brahmin adherents at all, its followers being chiefly Buddhists, 
whose number at present is very small in Southern India. 
Their doctrine is pure materialism. Spinoza and his disciples 
endeavoured to palm it off as a new invention of their own ; 
but the atheists of India recognized this doctrine many centuries 
before them and drew from it pretty much the same deductions 
which their European brethren afterwards drew, and which 
have been propagated in modern times with such deplorable 
success. 

According to this odious doctrine there is no other god but 
Matter, which is divided into an infinite number of substances, 
forming as many deities according to some, and forming but one 
god according to others. They hold that there can be neither 
vice nor virtue during life ; neither heaven nor hell after 
death. The truly wise man, according to them, is he who enjoys 
every kind of sensual pleasure, who believes in nothing that is 
not capable of being felt, and who looks upon everything else as 
chimericaL 

God, that is to say Matter, remarks a philosopher of this 
abominable school, possesses four saktis or faculiieSy which are 
like so many wives to him. These are Knowledge^ Desire, 
Energy, and Maya, or Illusion, The body, by applying all its 
senses at one and the same time to a particular object, enjoys 
unalloyed pleasure, which is said to be imperfect .when the 
enjoyment is limited to a part only of the senses. It is also 
from this want of consciousness, or from its partial application, 
that pain and sleep originate. Death is merely the total failure 
of the application of bodily consciousness to the senses. The 
body thus becomes insensible and perishes. 

It is, they say, simply to amuse and divert Himself with the 
pleasures of infancy that God, that is to say Matter, assumes 
the form of a child. Similarly He attains the respective stages 
of adolescence and old age. Such, briefly, according to this 
school, is the whole secret of birth, life, and death. 

The second sakti or divine faculty is Desire, the effects of 
which are as varied as its impressions. God is man, horse, 
insect, &c., in fact, whatever He wishes to be. This Desire is, in 



4i6 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

different creatures, as varied as their inclinations. But each is 
satisfied when enjoying what pleases him most. 

The sakti of Desire, however, obscures that of Knowledge : 
that is, it hinders one from knowing that there is no other deity 
but the body, and that birth, life and death, sin and virtue, and 
the successive re-births are purely chimerical. From this ignor- 
ance, occasioned by Desire, originate the inclinations of man- 
kind ; such as the affection of a mother for her children and the 
care she bestows in bringing them up. The truly wise man, 
who is anxious to acquire a clear perception of the truth, must, 
therefore, renounce all such Desire. 

The third sakti is Energy, about which these pretentious 
philosophers speak still more foolishly. The universe, accord- 
ing to them, was in a state of chaos ; men lived without laws 
and without caste, in a state of utter insubordination. To 
remedy this disorder, a general consultation of bodies was held. 
Energy spoke first: 'Collecting from all bodies whatever is 
found most excellent in each, I will form a perfect man, who, 
by his beauty, wisdom, and strength, shall make himself master 
of the whole earth and shall become its sovereign lord. I will 
be his spouse; and from our union shall be born bodies 
innumerable, each more perfect than another.' 

The proposal of Energy was approved and carried into effect. 
It fully succeeded; and from the wife of a Brahmin called 
Suddhodana Energy begot the god Buddha, who was a man 
incomparable in all his perfections and the lawgiver of the 
human race. He promulgated laws, the transgression of which 
alone constituted sin. And the greatest sin of all is to deny 
Buddha to be what he is. He who acknowledges him is the 
true Buddhist, the genuine Brahmin, the guru among Brahmins. 
He knows no other god than his own body. To his body alone 
he offers up sacrifice, and procures for it all possible sensual 
pleasures. He has no dread of anything ; he eats indiscrimi- 
nately of all food ; he scruples not to lie in order to attain the 
object of his wish ; he acknowledges neither Vishnu nor Siva, 
nor any other god but himself 

But, seeing that all individual bodies are so many deities, why 
is it that they do not all possess the same feelings, the same 
inclinations, and the same knowledge? Why is there such 
a great number of them ignorant of so many beautiful things, of 



cH.xxiii] Buddhists and Brahmins 417 

which the Buddhists make so much? Such were substantially 
the objections which a new proselyte of the sect addressed to 
one of its wise men. The latter replied that the evil was born 
of the fourth wife, or sakti^ of the divinity, called Maya or 
Illusion, which fascinates and deceives mankind, making them 
look upon what is false as true. It, moreover, misleads them 
into the belief that there are gods ; that there are such vicissi- 
tudes as living and dying, pollution and purification ; and, finally, 
that there are suflferings and rewards after death. The only 
method of preserving oneself from Maya is to cling to the 
doctrine of Buddhism in acknowledging no other god but the 
material body. 

The author from whose work I have extracted this very 
obscure account of the system undertakes to explain the theory 
of Creation, and to show how God, united to Maya, produced 
men differing so greatly in their inclinations. But all that he 
advances on this subject is merely the result of an extravagant 
imagination, and is no more worthy of attention than the talk of 
a sick man deprived of the use of his reason by delirium \ 

Returning to his doctrines, I may remark that he sneers 
at the Brahmins for their ablutions, fasts, penances, sacrifices, 
Vedas, Ac. The true Veda, or rather the true religion, he 
declares, is for a man to procure for himself all sensual enjoy- 
ments ; to gratify all his desires ; to avenge himself on his 
enemies, even unto death ; to renounce all feelings of humanity, 
and to live but for himself. Such sentiments as filial affection, 
kindness, gentleness, and pity are regarded in this infamous 
book, not as virtues, but (who would believe it ?) as sins. As an 
illustration of this principle, mention is made, in terms of the 
highest praise, of a certain king who scarcely ever quitted the 
apartments of his wives, and who condemned to death a person 
whose only crime was to pity the sufferings of his fellow-creatures. 

It is not, therefore, to be wondered at that human monsters 
who professed doctrines so detestable and so opposed to all 
considerations of social well-being, became objects of general 
execration, and that they were almost exterminated in India, 
where, it appears, they were once so powerful. 

^ This description of Buddhism con- consult more modern authorities on 
veys an altogether false impression, the subject. — £d. 
and readers are recommended to 

•* EC 



4i8 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

Nevertheless, I doubt whether the genuine Buddhists, even 
in countries where their religion is predominant, would dare to 
avow publicly such terrible doctrines. I even suspect that the 
book which contains an exposition of this doctrine is the work 
of Brahmins themselves, who, for the purpose of bringing odium 
upon a sect for which their caste entertains the most implacable 
hatred, invented these opinions, the very mention of which 
makes one shudder. At any rate the book contains certain 
maxims which betray the influence of Hindu sophistry. The 
following are examples illustrating the foolish extremes to which 
they go : — 

' One ought never to yield to taste or appetite in eating or 
drinking; one must habituate oneself to the most nauseous 
food.' 

' One must elevate oneself above the prejudices of the vulgar, 
and one must always pursue, in one's conduct and mode of 
thinking, a course opposite to that of others.' 

The Brahmins, in order to cast odium on the Jains, their 
enemies, accuse them also of professing the doctrines of Bud- 
dhism ; but the Jains resent with indignation the false insinua- 
tions of their adversaries. I have myself heard several Jains 
speak very forcibly on the horror which such principles inspire 
in them, and complain most bitterly of the dubious methods of 
the Brahmins, who, actuated by hatred and jealousy, are not at 
all ashamed to resort to these false imputations. 

There are also other sects, not so well known; and among 
them is the Nastika sect, whose fundamental doctrine consists 
in absolute pyrrhonism or scepticism ; and also the Lokayatha 
Sastra sect, whose adherents recognize no differences of con- 
dition amongst mankind, no precepts relating to pollution and 
purification, and who are, moreover, accused of devoting them- 
selves to witchcraft and enchantments. 

Such, in brief, is what I have been able to understand of the 
numerous doctrines about which there exists such diversity of 
opinion amongst the Hindus. With the object of obtaining an 
insight into these various matters with greater facility, I en- 
gaged the services of a Brahmin, who was said to be learned, 
and who, in fact, was not wanting in intelligence or knowledge. 
But I soon perceived that he was himself completely lost in this 
labvrinth of metaphysics; and the various Commentaries to 



cH.xxiii] A Brahmin Teacher 419 

which he referred for some plausible explanations of my diffi- 
culties tended only to increase those difficulties. However, 
being very often too proud and presumptuous to acknowledge 
his inability to make me understand what he did not understand 
himself, he tried to get out of his difficulties by hums and 
haws. By gestures and pantomimic signs, which were truly 
laughable, he endeavoured to make up for the explanations 
which I in vain sought from him, and he often left me to myself 
to clear up my own difficulties. 



E e 2 



CHAPTER XXIV 

Chronology of the Brahmins. — The Epoch of the Flood. 

The Hindus recognize four ages of the world, to which they 
give the name ofyugas. They assign to each yuga a period of 
time which, when all the yugas are added together, would make 
the creation of the world date back several millions of years. 

The first is called Kritha-yuga^ to which they assign 1,728,000 
years. The second, which they call Tretha-yuga^ lasted about 
1,296,000 years. The third, called Dwapara-yuga, lasted about 
864,000 years. And the last, in which we are now living, is 
called Kali-yuga^ or the Age of Misery. It should last about 
432,000 years. The present year of the Christian era {1825) 
corresponds to the year 4,926 of the Kali-yuga. 

According to this calculation the world has now been in 
existence for 3,892,926 years. 

It is hardly necessary for me to waste time in proving that 
the first three ages are entirely mythical. The Hindus them- 
selves seem to regard them in that light, since in ordinary life 
they make no mention of them. All their calculations and dates, 
as well as all the most ancient and authentic records at present 
to be found among them, are reckoned from the commencement 
of the Kali-yuga, 

This pretension to remote antiquity is a favourite illusion 
amongst ancient civilized peoples, who, as they sank into 
idolatry, soon forgot the traditions of their ancestors regarding 
the creation of the world, and believed they could add to their 
own glory by assuming an origin which was, so to say, lost in 
the dim vista of mythical times. It is well known to what 
extremes the Chinese, the Egyptians, and the Greeks carried 
this mania, and it is characteristic of the Hindus that they far 
excel these nations in their pretensions. 



The Kaluyuga 421 



At the close of each of the jw^as there took place a universal 
upheaval in nature. No trace of the preceding yuga survived 
in that which followed. The gods themselves shared in the 
changes brought about by these great upheavals. Vishnu, foi 
instance, who was white in the preceding yuga^ became black in 
the present one. 

But of all the yugas the most direful is the Kali-yuga, in 
which we now live. It is verily an Iron Age, an epoch of mis- 
rule and misery, during which everything on earth has deterio- 
rated. The elements, the duration of life, the character of 
mankind : everything, in a word, has suffered, ever3rthing has 
undergone a change. Deceit has taken the place of justice, and 
falsehood that of truth. And this degeneration must continue 
and go on increasing till the end of the yuga. 

From what I have just stated it will be seen that the com- 
mencement of the true era of the Hindus, that is to say, of their 
Kali-yuga, dates from about the same time as the epoch of the 
Deluge — an event clearly recognized by them and very dis- 
tinctly mentioned by their authors, who give it the name of 
Jcda-prcdayam^ or the Flood of Waters. 

Their present era, indeed, dates specifically from the com- 
mencement of this Jcda^alayam. It is definitely stated in the 
Markand^a-purana and in the Bhagavata that this event caused 
the destruction of all mankind, with the exception of the seven 
famous Rishis or Penitents whom I have often had occasion to 
mention, and who were saved from the universal destruction by 
means of an ark, of which Vishnu himself was the pilot. 
Another great personage, called Manu, who, as I have tried 
elsewhere to show, was no other than the great Noah himself, 
was also saved along with the seven great Penitents. The 
universal flood is not, to my knowledge, more clearly referred 
to in the writings of any heathen nation that has preserved the 
tradition of this great event, or described in a manner more in 
keeping with the narrative of Moses, than it is in the Hindu 
books to which I have referred. 

It is certainly remarkable that such testimony should be 
afforded us by a people whose antiquity has never been called 
in question ; the only people, perhaps, who have never fallen 
into a state of barbarism ; a people who, judging by the position, 
the climate, and the fertility of their country, must have been 



422 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

one of the first nations to be regularly constituted ; a people 
who from time immemorial have suffered no considerable 
changes to be made in their primitive customs, which they have 
always held inviolable. And curiously enough, in all their 
ordinary transactions of life, in the promulgation of all their 
acts, in all their public monuments, the Hindus date everything 
from the subsidence of the Flood. They seem to tacitly 
acknowledge the other past ages to be purely chimerical and 
mythical, while they speak of the Kcdi-yuga as the only era 
recognized as authentic. Their public and private events are 
always reckoned by the year of the various cycles of sixty years 
which have elapsed since the Deluge. How many historical 
facts, looked upon as established truths, have a far less solid 
foundation than this I 

Another very remarkable circumstance is that the Hindu 
method of reckoning the age of the world agrees essentially 
with what we have in Holy Scripture. In Genesis viii. 13, for 
example, we read : ' In the six hundredth and first year, in the 
first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up 
from off the earth.' We read in Hindu works: *On such 
a day of such a month of such a year of such a cycle, reckoning 
from the commencement of the Kali yuga* 

It is true that in the passage just quoted from Holy Scripture 
the date is reckoned from Noah's birth. He was then entering 
on his six hundred and first year. But according to many 
chronologists, it appears that in times immediately succeeding 
the Deluge the Scriptures reckon time by this patriarch, and 
that the anniversary of his birth commemorated the day on 
which the earth was restored to mankind — a memorable epoch 
from which they henceforth dated the years of the newly-restored 
earth, that is, of the new era which they had just entered. 

The mighty changes which nations underwent entirely upset 
their calculations relating to those remote times; but the Hindus, 
settled as they were in a country long exempt from the revolu- 
tionary troubles that agitated other countries, have been able 
to preserve intact the tradition of those events. 

Their ordinary cycle is of sixty years, but they have also 
adopted another of ninety years, used in astronomical calcu- 
lations. The latter is a much more recent invention, and was 
introduced at the time of the death of a famous king of India, 



CH. xxiv] Hindu Cycles 423 

named Salivahana, who reigned over a province then called 
Sagam, and who died at the end of the first century of the 
Christian era. It should be remarked that the use of these two 
different cycles could never occasion the least confusion in point 
of dates, since a period of three ordinary cycles corresponds to 
a period of two astronomical cycles, and they both start from 
the same epoch. 

The Chinese, likewise, have an ordinary cycle of sixty years in 
common with the Hindus ; but there is this difference between 
the two : the Chinese, according to Du Halde, are ignorant as 
to when their era commenced, at least with reference to the 
epoch of the Flood. On the other hand, it is hardly likely that 
the two nations could have communicated with each other on 
this subject, seeing that they do not agree in their computations. 
According to the author just quoted, the birth of our Saviour 
falls on the fifty-eighth year of the Chinese cycle, while it coin- 
cides with the forty-second year of the Hindu cycle. But this 
coincidence, nevertheless, goes to confirm the high antiquity of 
the cycle of sixty years still in use with the two most ancient 
races on the face of the earth. 

It would be quite useless to inquire whether this cycle was 
adopted before the Flood, and whether it was from Noah or 
his immediate descendants that the Hindus and Chinese learned 
its use. We do know for certain, however, that the weekly 
period was known prior to this remarkable event, and that the 
Hindu week agrees exactly with that of the Hebrews and with 
ours. Indeed, the days of their week correspond exactly with 
those of ours, and bear similar names. 

One peculiar circumstance is that just as every day of the 
Hindu week has its own particular name, so has each of 
the sixty years of a cycle. Thus, they do not say like us that 
a certain event happened, say, on the twentieth or thirtieth year 
before or after such an era. But they give the year its particular 
name, and say, for example, that such an event happened in the 
year Kilasa, in the year Bkava, in the year Vikary, and so forth. 

The only real difiiculty is that the Hindu computation with 
regard to the epoch of the Flood does not appear to correspond 
with that of Holy Scripture. 

But it should be remembered that there is a difference of 
more than nine hundred years between the period supposed to 



424 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

have elapsed between the Flood and the Birth of Christ accord- 
ing to the Septuagint on the one hand, and according to the 
Vulgate on the other hand. Yet neither of these calculations is 
wholly rejected, and both of them are supported by able chrono- 
logists. The Catholic Church, which adheres to the Vulgate for 
the Old Testament, adopts the calculation of the Septuagint 
for the Roman Martyrology, which forms part of its liturgy. 
The difference, therefore, between the Hindu calculation and 
ours does not appear a sufficient reason for rejecting it, or 
even for supposing that it does not proceed from the same 
source. 

According to Hindu calculations, the time that elapsed between 
the Deluge and the Birth of Jesus Christ is 3,102 years. This 
period differs from that laid down in the Vulgate by about 770 
years ; but it approaches much nearer to the calculations made 
in the Septuagint, which gives 3,258 years between the Deluge 
and the commencement of the Christian era. If we accept this 
last calculation, the epoch of the Hindu Jala-pralayam does not 
differ from that of the Deluge of the Holy Scriptures by more 
than 156 years, a discrepancy of no great importance, considering 
the intricacy of a computation which dates from such remote 
times. I am, therefore, fully convinced that the Hindu computa- 
tion serves to corroborate the accuracy of the event as narrated 
by Moses, and adds incontestable evidence to prove that most 
important event, the Universal Deluge. 

Some modern chronologists, with the learned Tournemine at 
their head, who based their calculations on the Vulgate, have 
professed to reckon between the Deluge and the Christian era 
a period of 3,234 years, and they have supported their calcula- 
tions with substantial arguments. Their learned investigations 
in this direction excited even in those days the admiration of 
competent critics. In relying, therefore, on this calculation, 
we have a difference of only 132 years between the Hindu com- 
putation and that of Holy Scripture as regards the Deluge. 

Deucalion's Flood does not approach so near the Universal 
Deluge of Scripture as the Jala-pralayam of the Hindus. All 
the critics place the former so near the Birth of Jesus Christ 
that its comparative modemness alone is quite sufficient to 
prove that it has not even been borrowed from other ancient 
nations. The Flood of Ogyges, the occurrence of which is 



CH. xxiv] Dates of the Flood 425 

generally placed in the year 248 before that of Deucalion, is, 
however, posterior by more than twelve hundred years to the 
Universal Deluge, according to the Hindu calculations of the/a/fz- 
pralayam. We have, therefore, fresh evidence that the Flood of 
Ogyges and that of Deucalion were only partial inundations, 
if indeed they are not altogether mythical. 



CHAPTER XXV 

The Epistolary Style of the Brahmins. — Hindu Handwriting. 

The epistolary style of the Brahmins and of Hindus in 
general is in many respects so different from ours that a few 
specimens may be not uninteresting to many of my readers. 

Letter to an Inferior. 

* They, the Brahmin Soobayah, to him the Brahmin Laksh- 
mana, who possesses all kinds of good qualities, who is graced 
with all the virtues, who is true to his word, who, by the services 
he renders to his relations and friends, resembles the Chinta- 
mani\ Asirvadam-l 

* The year KUasa^ the fourth day of the month of Phcdguna^ 
I am at Dharmapuri and in good health. I am very anxious to 
have news of thee. 

'As soon as this letter reaches thee, thou must go to that 
most excellent and most virtuous Brahmin Anantayah, and, 
prostrating thyself at full length at his feet, thou must offer him 
my most humble respects. 

'And then, without delay, thou must present thyself before 
the chetty (merchant) Rangapah, and declare to him frankly on 
my behalf that if he will now place in thy hands the three 
thousand rupees which he owes me, with the interest due there- 
on at thirty per cent., I will forget all that has passed, and the 
matter shall be finally settled. But if, on the contrary, he makes 
excuses and puts off the payment of the said amount, including 
interest, tell him that I am acquainted with certain efficacious 
means of teaching him that no person shall with impunity break 

' This is a mythical stone which is ^ The word Asirvadam means 

supposed to procure every blessing ' blessing/ — Ed. 
for those who possess it. — Dubois. 



specimens of Letters 427 



his word with a Brahmin such as I am. This is all I have to 
say to thee. Asirvadam ! ' 

Letter to an Equal. 

*To them, the lords, the lords Ramayah^ who possess all 
those good qualities and virtues which render a man esteemed ; 
who are worthy of all the favours which the gods can 
bestow; who are the particular favourites of the goddess 
Lakshmi ; who are great as Mount Meru ; who possess 
a perfect knowledge of the Yajur-Veda; they, the Brahmin 
Soobayah. Namaskaram ' ! 

' The year Durmatt) the fifteenth of the month of Veishaka, 
I and all the members of my family being in the enjoyment of 
good health. I shall learn with great pleasure that it is the 
same with you ; and I trust you will let me know in detail all 
the matters which give you joy and contentment. 

'The twenty-second of the above-mentioned month being a day 
on which all the good omens are combined, we have selected it 
for the commencement of the marriage festivities of my daughter 
Vijaya- Lakshmi. I beg you will be good enough to be present 
here before that day, and to bring with you all the members of 
your household without excepting any. I beg that you will 
place yourself at the head of the ceremony, and that you will be 
pleased to conduct it '. 

'Lastly, if there is anything in which I can be of service 
to you, I request you will be pleased to let me know. Namas- 
karam ! * 

Letter to a Superior. 

* To them, the lords, the Brahmin lords, the great Brahmins 
Lakshmanayah, who are endowed with every virtue ; who are 
great as Mount Meru ; who possess a perfect knowledge of the 
four Vedas ; who, by the splendour of their good works, shine 
forth like the sun ; whose renown is known throughout the 

* A superior and even an equal is greeting.' — Dubois. 

always addressed in the plural, both ' This is an expression used merely 

in speaking and writing. This is a out of politeness in the case of every 

rule invariably observed among the one who is invited under similar cir> 

uell-bred. —Dubois. cumstances. — Dubois. 

' Namaskaram means ' respectful 



428 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

fourteen worlds, and who are highly praised therein:— I, Krish- 
nayah, their humble servant and slave, keeping myself at 
a respectful distance from them, with both hands joined, my 
mouth closed, my eyes cast down, my head bent — I wait in this 
humble posture, until they may vouchsafe to cast their eyes on 
one who is nothing in their presence. After obtaining their 
leave, approaching them with fear and respect, and prostrating 
myself on the ground at their feet, which are in reality tatnarasa 
(lotus) flowers ; after saluting those feet with profound respect 
and kissing them, I address to them the following humble 
supplication : — 

'The year Vikary, the twentieth of the month Pushya, I, your 
most humble slave, whom you have deigned to look upon as 
some chattel, having received with both hands the letter which 
your excellency humbled yourself by writing to me, having 
kissed it and put it on my head, I afterwards read it with all 
possible attention and care. Your excellency may rest assured 
that I will execute punctually the orders contained in it, without 
departing from them by the breadth of a grain of sesamum. 
The business mentioned in the letter has already been fairly 
begun, and I hope that by the efficacy of your excellency's bene- 
diction it will soon terminate to your excellency's honour and 
advantage. As soon as it is finished, I, your most humble 
servant and slave, shall not fail to present myself at your 
excellency's feet to receive your orders. 

' Lastly, I entreat your excellency to impart to me the com- 
mands and instructions necessary to enable me to act in a manner 
agreeable to your excellency, and to point out to me in what way 
I may render myself most acceptable to your sacred feet, which 
are real tamarasa flowers. For this purpose it will not be 
necessary for your excellency to humble yourself still more by 
writing to me a second time ; but it will suffice if I receive from 
your excellency's bounty a leaf of betel indented with your nail, 
through some confidential person who can verbally explain to 
me the orders of your excellency \ 

' Such is my most humble prayer.' 

The complimentary expressions used at the beginning of all 

' This device frequently serves for credentials in conveying verbal mes* 
sages. — Dubois. 



CH. xxv] Flattering Terms 



429 



these letters, and the humble and servile tone which pervades 
them, especially the third letter, present when translated suffi- 
ciently remarkable examples of epistolary style, yet I have by 
no means brought out the full force, or rather the extreme 
platitude, of all these expressions. 

Our language has no equivalents for the expressions of base 
flattery and humility with which the Hindus are so lavish in 
their correspondence. These expressions are, moreover, used 
with a certain amount of moderation in the letters just quoted. 
I have seen some the complimentary preface alone of which 
would have filled two pages of this book. The eloquence 
of a writer is inexhaustible under this head, especially when 
there is any question of obtaining some boon or favour. A peti- 
tioner can, indeed, without fear of seeing it thrown back in his 
face, — 

'A son h^ros, dans un bizarre ouvrage, 
Donner de Tencensoir au travers du visage.* 

The thicker the smoke of the incense the more does it flatter 
him to whom it is offered. 

In letters written by one Hindu to another, one never finds 
respectful assurances or compliments offered to a wife. The 
mere mention of her in a letter would be considered not simply 
as an indiscretion, but as a gross breach of politeness, at which 
the husband would have every reason to feel aggrieved. 

When one Hindu has occasion to communicate to another 
the death of one of his relatives, the custom is to slightly burn 
the end of the palm-leaf on which the afflicting news is written ; 
and this is similar to the black seal used by us in such cases. 
The same practice is observed as a sign of displeasure, 
when one has occasion to administer a severe reprimand in 
writing. 

When a superior writes to an inferior, he puts his own name 
before that of the person to whom he writes. The reverse is the 
case when an inferior writes to a superior. Any breach of this 
token of civility on the part of an inferior would be considered 
a dire insult by the person to whom he owed respect. Politeness 
also requires that, when writing to an equal, you should place 
your own name last 

Having said this much on the epistolary style of the Hindus, 



430 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

I will now offer some notes that I have collected on their hand- 
writing. 

Learned European scholars have made endless researches 
as to the origin of the art of writing, the manner in which 
it was transmitted by one people to another, the different 
characters used, and the various kinds of tablets and other 
materials employed. Many conjectures have been offered con- 
cerning the systems invented by the Chinese and the Egyptians 
to transmit their ideas otherwise than verbally. The languages 
of India, however, seem to have escaped the learned investiga- 
tions of philologists. Nevertheless, a careful study of these 
languages would, if I am not mistaken, throw a good deal of 
light on questions still shrouded in uncertainty. I have not the 
slightest pretensions to having discovered any new origin of 
written language, nor have I the vain presumption of depriving 
the Phoenician Cadmus of the glory of having invented the 
elementary principles of — 

'Cet art ing^nieux 
De peindre la parole et de parler aux yeux 
£t par les traits divers de figures trac^es 
Donner de la couleur et du corps aux pens^es/ 

I shall think myself fortunate enough if what I am about 
to say be considered worthy of the attention of the learned, and 
if it present some points of interest to those who are fond 
of discovering traces of primitive times in the usages that 
still exist. 

The Hindu books attribute the credit of this invaluable 
invention to the great Brahma, the creator of men and the 
sovereign arbiter of their destinies. The serrated sutures to 
be seen on a skull are, they say, nothing less than the hand- 
writing of Brahma himself; and these indelible characters, 
traced by his divine hand, contain the irrevocable decrees 
regulating the destiny of each individual of the human race. 
It may be urged that this Hindu belief is a mere myth, and, 
as such, cannot be regarded as the basis of any reasonable 
conjectures. I am of the same opinion ; but it must also be 
admitted that it is one of the oldest myths of India, and it 
proves at any rate that when it was invented the knowledge 
of writing already existed. Otherwise how could the Hindus 
of those remote times have discovered traces of writing in 



cH. xxv] The Origin of Writing 431 

these marks on skulls ? Another fact, or another myth, if one 
prefers to call it so, may be said to corroborate this. The four 
Vedas are considered to be the work of the god Brahma, who 
wrote them with his own hand on leaves of gold. These books, 
which contain the ritual of the idolatrous ceremonies practised 
by these people, are held by them in great veneration, and their 
high antiquity is nowhere called into question. Other books, 
too, many of which are undoubtedly very old, speak of the 
Vedas as of a far earlier date. Moreover, the language in which 
they are written has become unintelligible in many places. The 
Vedas, indeed, by whomsoever they may have been written, 
conclusively prove that the origin of Hindu writing dates from 
a period which is lost in remote antiquity. 

One of the principal articles of the Hindu faith is that relating 
to the ten Avatars^ or incarnations, of Vishnu. The first and 
earliest is called the Matsya-avatar^ that is, the incarnation of the 
god in the form of a fish. And what was the cause of it? It 
was the loss of the four books of the Vedas. Brahma, under 
whose care they were left, fell asleep, and a giant, his enemy, 
availed himself of the opportunity to steal the sacred volumes. 
Having escaped unperceived, the giant hid himself in the sea 
with his precious booty, which he swallowed, thinking it would 
be safer in his bowels. Vishnu, having been informed of what 
had happened, changed himself into a fish, and went in pursuit 
of this enemy of the gods. After a long search, he at length 
discovered the giant in the deepest abyss of the ocean. He 
attacked him, vanquished him, and tore him in pieces. He then 
plucked the hidden books from the giant's entrails, and restored 
them to the god who was their author and guardian. 

Is there anything to be found in any books of ours whose 
unquestionable antiquity is recognized by European writers that 
might be said to compare with this fable, any indication of 
sources from which it could have been borrowed, thus proving 
its modern date ? I think not. 

Some of the Hindu authors ascribe the invention of writing 
to a famous Penitent called Agastya, who, it is said, was not 
taller than a hand's breadth. He is one of the most ancient 
persons recognized by the Hindus, inasmuch as they make 
him contemporary with the seven Penitents who were saved 
from the Flood in the ark, of which Vishnu himself was the pilot. 



432 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. h 

Again, the G3nnnosophists, or naked penitents of India, have 
never been regarded as m3rthical personages. Even in the 
time of Lycurgus, that is to say, nearly nine hundred years 
before the Christian era, these philosophers enjoyed such 
a reputation for wisdom and learning that their fame had spread 
to countries far remote from their own. There is every reason 
to believe that their fame could only have been established 
gradually, and that their philosophy dated from a very remote 
period. True, some authors assert that their philosophy was 
handed down by oral tradition, and that they never committed 
anything to writing. It is, however, hard to believe that 
men who gave themselves up to the study of philosophy and 
astronomy could have done so without having recourse to 
written records. 

Be this as it may, I will now briefly describe the present 
style of writing among the Hindus, mentioning (i) the written 
characters used, (2) the materials on which they are recorded, 
(3) the manner in which they are written, and (4) the shape of 
their books and of the communications which they address 
to each other. 

It is generally stated that there are eighteen living languages 
in use in India ; but as a matter of fact there are many more. 
All, or at any rate the majority of them, have their own distinct 
alphabetical characters. It is true that some of these characters, 
if carefully examined, bear a very close resemblance to each 
other; but in the majority of them one can distinguish no 
similarities. Yet, however diversified may be the characters 
employed in writing, there are many similarities to be observed 
in pronunciation and phraseology. In all these languages the 
arrangement of words admits of few changes or differences. In 
this particular they differ widely from the European languages, 
which, with a general resemblance in their alphabetical characters, 
admit of large variations in construction and phraseology. 

What resemblance could, for instance, be found between the 
letters 

{a short) (a long) {tha) 

of the Tamil language and the letters 

{a short) (a long) (fha) 



CH. xxv] Letters and Ciphers 433 

of the Telugu language? And the difference is not less striking 
in the other letters of the alphabet. Yet these two languages 
are spoken in countries bordering on each other, which in other 
respects present many points of resemblance. The same 
diversity with regard to alphabets is noticeable in other Indian 
languages. 

Other facts worthy of note are that in all the languages of 
India (i) the letters are arranged in' the same order; (2) the 
short and long vowels are always placed at the beginning of 
the alphabet and before the consonants; (3) these vowels are 
purely initial letters, which are never written except at the 
beginning of a word, special inflections being assigned to them 
when used in the middle of a word or after a consonant ; 
(4) each consonant must have a vowel inflection : thus, 6, c are 
pronounced 6a, ca^ and their form is changed when other 
vowel inflections are substituted. For instance, in Canarese 
the following letters change their form according to the vowel 
inflections to which they are subject, thus : — 



eo 


eS 


^ 


d 


CJ 


a 


i^ji 


90 


ba 


be 


bi 


tha 


they 


thee 


dho 


dhu 



How is it that there is so much resemblance between the 
various idioms of these languages, and so much dissimilarity 
between the letters of their alphabets ? Sanskrit appears to be 
the common type on which the other languages have modelled 
their phraseology ; how comes it then that they have, in opposi- 
tion to the mother-tongue, adopted letter formations so different 
from that of their common parent ? 

Similar variations are observable in the forms of their ciphers 
or symbols. Though they all use the decimal notation, they 
differ widely in the formation of their arithmetical figures. 
In the Tamil language, each decimal number is denoted by 
a different sign, thus : — 

a uH irr ^ 

I 10 100 1000 

In Telugu and in most of the other languages of the country, 
they follow exactly the system which we have adopted from 
the Arabs, the units being expressed by a single figure, the 
♦* Ff 



434 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [vi. u 

tens by two, the hundreds by three, the thousands by four, 
and so on. 

This method, with the exception of a few slight differences 
in the shape of the figures, is the one most commonly used. 
The similarity which exists between this method and that of the 
Arabs can hardly have been the result of chance. If one nation 
did not borrow it from the other, it is at any rate probable that 
both borrowed it from the same source. 

The Tamil arithmetical symbols seem, however, to bear a 
greater resemblance to the Roman than to the Arabic numerals. 
Like the Romans, the Tamils express the greater part of their 
arithmetical signs by letters of the alphabet, and use only a single 
letter to denote units, tens, hundreds, and thousands as stated 
above. 

But, dissimilar as are the written characters of the various 
Hindu languages, they are still more dissimilar to the written 
characters known to us as used by other ancient nations, such 
as Syriac, Hebrew, Arabic, Greek, &c. Unlike the majority 
of Oriental languages, which are written from right to left, 
Sanskrit and the various dialects of India are written, like the 
European languages, from left to right. 

Paper is not unknown to the Hindus. They manufacture it, 
not from cotton rags, as is generally believed, but from the fibre 
of the aloe. I am, however, inclined to believe that the use of 
this coarse paper is of comparatively recent date in India, 
subsequent, that is, to the invasion of the Moghuls, who must 
have introduced it. At any rate, following the example of the 
Moghuls, the Hindus living in the interior of the country, where 
palm leaves are not procurable, use paper instead. But more 
generally they use black tablets named kadatta^ on which they 
write with a white pencil, called in Canarese balapu, made of 
a calcareous quarried stone which is very common in the country. 
And it is with these materials that children learn writing in the 
schools. 

Nevertheless the ordinary practice almost everywhere is to 
write on palm leaves, of which there are two species, large 
and small. The latter are the commoner and are said to be 
the better ; they are about three inches wide and two feet long. 
Seven or eight lines can be written on each leaf. They are 
thicker, stiffer, and stouter than double paper, so that one can 



CH. xxv] The Stilus 435 

easily write, or rather engrave, on both sides of them. The 
other kinds of leaves are broader, but not so strong. They are 
therefore used only in those places where the smaller kinds are 
not easily procurable. They are sometimes used specially as 
a mark of respect when writing to a person of rank. The island 
of Ceylon produces an enormous quantity of the smaller leaves, 
and they are so cheap that a halfpenny's worth of them would be 
sufficient for copying an entire folio volume. 

Quintus Curtius relates that the Hindus, at the time of the 
invasion of Alexander the Great, wrote with an iron stilus on 
the soft and smooth bark of trees. It is quite probable that 
palm leaves were mistaken for the bark of trees ; for nowhere in 
India can any evidence be found to prove that the bark of trees 
has ever been used for the purpose of writing. 

Aeneas, in Virgil's epic, implores the Cumaean Sibyl not to 
write her oracles on the leaves of trees, which the winds might 
speedily disperse : 

' Foliis tantum ne carmina manda, 
Ne turbata volent rapidis ludibria veatis.' 

All the commentators are of opinion that the reference here is 
to palm leaves. It is therefore to be presumed that these 
leaves were quite different from those now used in India, 
which, on account of their weight and thickness, could not be 
blown about by the wind. 

The Hindus write with an iron stilus^ or pencil, which is 
from eight to nine inches long. The handle of the instrument 
generally ends in a knife, which is used to trim the sides of the 
leaves so as to make them all of one size. In writing with the 
stilus neither chair nor table is required. The leaf is supported 
on the middle finger of the left hand, and is kept steady by being 
held firmly between the thumb and the forefinger. The stilus, 
in writing, does not glide along the leaf, as does our pen on 
paper; but the writer, after finishing a word or two, fixes the 
point of his instrument on the last letter, and pushes the leaf 
from right to left till the line of writing is finished. This is 
executed with such ease that it is by no means a rare sight to 
see Hindus writing as they walk along. 

As the characters thus traced are only a sort of faint 
engraving, of the same colour as the leaf itself, and therefore 

F f 2 



436 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

not easily decipherable, it is the common practice to besmear 
the whole with fresh cow-dung. The leaf is afterwards wiped 
clean, but the new material fills up the engraved letters and 
gives them a darker colour, thus rendering them more distinct 
and readable. 

This mode of writing is undoubtedly more convenient and 
more simple than ours, so far at least as writing on a small 
scale is concerned, for it does not require all the materials that 
we need on such occasions ; but it will be readily understood 
that it is not equally convenient for writings of a somewhat 
voluminous nature. 

As in our ancient manuscripts, the absence of every kind of 
punctuation, and the confusion arising from words and phrases 
not being sufficiently separated, render the perusal of the works 
of Hindu authors extremely difficult. The complicated rules 
of orthography pertaining to some of their languages, and 
especially to Tamil, tend to increase this difficulty still further. 
Very often the most experienced person is unable to read 
without difficulty, especially if the writer has adhered strictly 
to the rules of grammar, which are generally, however, either 
ignored or neglected. 

When Hindus write on paper they do not use a quill pen. 
A Brahmin could not, without defilement, touch so impure an 
instrument. Consequently a thin reed is used, called kalam, sl 
word evidently of modem origin borrowed from the Portuguese. 
The kalam is somewhat thicker than our quill pen, and is 
mended in the same manner. Hindus employed under Euro- 
peans, however, lay aside these scruples, and use the same 
materials as their masters. 

When a Hindu wishes to make up a book of the palm leaves 
on which he has written, he has no need of a bookbinder. He 
merely bores a small hole at each extremity of the leaves, and 
fastens them all together by means of two small pegs or sticks 
of wood or iron. Two thin boards, of the same length and 
breadth as the leaves, are then placed at the top and bottom of 
them, and thus form the binding or covers of the book. A long 
string fastened to one of the covers serves to hold the leaves 
together. If this plan is simple, it certainly is not convenient; 
for whenever one wishes to consult the book, the string must 
be loosened, the pegs by means of which the leaves are strung 



en. xxv] Hindu Manuscripts 437 

together must be removed, and the whole volume taken to 
pieces. 

It will thus be seen that the Hindu system of writing and of 
binding books closely resembles that of the ancient Romans, 
who wrote on extremely thin wooden boards, which they strung 
together and formed into a codex. 

The following is the plan adopted by the Hindus in the 
transmission of letters: — They roll up the palm leaves on 
which they are written, and put them into an outer covering, 
upon which they write the address. At the junction of the 
two ends of the outer leaf, which are held together by means 
of a small incision in each, a kind of rough knot is made, 
serving ^s a seal. Due attention must be paid to the length 
and breadth of the leaves on which letters are written, which 
vary according to the rank and dignity of those to whom they 
are addressed. 

To be the bearer of a letter denotes a kind of subordinate 
position. This duty cannot therefore be entrusted to superiors, 
or even to equals, unless they undertake it voluntarily. In the 
latter case, etiquette forbids the letter being given into the hands 
of the person who has offered to deliver it ; the missive must be 
placed on the ground at his feet, and he picks it up and becomes 
responsible for its safe delivery. 

The changes in the form of writing which time brings about 
in other countries do not offer a safe ground for conjecture 
in the case of Hindu manuscripts. I have seen a deed of gift 
written more than two hundred years ago on a plate of gold in 
Canarese characters, the letters of which were perfectly legible 
and exactly like those at present in use, the form of writing 
having undergone no change whatever during that long inter\'al 
of time. 

Nevertheless there are certain monuments in the country 
of very great antiquity, bearing inscriptions engraved in charac- 
ters no longer in use. Some are also to be found in various 
places the characters of which are wholly unknown and 
evidently foreign. I must leave this matter to our learned 
philologists; as for myself, I admit that I am unable to 
explain the fact. 

The remarks I have made above concerning the dissimilarity 
of the written characters and the resemblance of the gram- 



438 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies 

matical style in the various Indian languages are equally 
applicable to Siamese. At least, so it has been pointed out 
to me by persons who are familiar with that language, and 
who have discovered in its alphabet an arrangement exactly 
similar to that of the Hindu alphabets. In some languages of 
India the sign or inflection denoting the vowel that always 
accompanies a consonant is placed before it ; the same practice 
is followed with regard to several letters in Siamese writing. 
Like the Hindus, the Siamese write from left to right. This 
coincidence can hardly be alleged to be the result of chance ; it 
rather indicates some common origin. 

The investigations of modern authors with regard to this 
subject leave no doubt whatever that the Pali language, or the 
learned tongue of Siam, is a corrupt form of the Sanskrit. And 
this mother-tongue appears to have extended even still farther, 
since we find a large number of Sanskrit words in the Malay 
language. 

However, in shape the Siamese letters as written appeared 
to me to bear no resemblance whatever to the Hindu alphabets 
with which I was acquainted. 



CHAPTER XXVI 

Hindu Fables. 

The Hindus are particularly fond of poetry and fiction, and 
their literature contains a large collection of interesting fables. 
Some of these fables possess a moral significance and are very 
popular; while others are merely stories, of no great value 
from a literary point of view. I have, however, selected a few 
stories which appeared to me calculated to interest my readers, 
and a collection of them will be found in the next chapter. 

The fables are to be found in large numbers in various 
Hindu books. They are generally based on excellent moral 
principles, and contain some severe criticisms on the vices 
of men. The following I have heard related many times : — 

'A traveller, having missed his way, was overtaken by 
darkness in the midst of a dense forest. In fear of wild beasts, 
he decided that the only means of escaping them would be to 
spend the night in the branches of one of the largest trees 
which he could find. He therefore climbed into a tree, and, 
without further thought of the dangers which might befall him, 
fell fast asleep, and awoke only when the rays of the morning 
sun warned him that it was time to continue his journey. 
As he was preparing to descend, he cast his eyes downwards, 
and espied at the foot of the tree a huge tiger eagerly and 
impatiently watching, as it were, for its prey. Struck with 
terror at the sight of the beast, the traveller remained for 
a while transfixed to the spot where he sat. At length, re- 
covering himself a little and looking all round him, he observed 
that near the tree on which he sat were many others, with their 
branches so interlaced that he could easily pass from one to 
another, and thus escape the danger which threatened him 



440 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

below. He was on the point of making his escape in this 
way, when, raising his eyes, he saw a huge snake hanging 
to the branch immediately over him, with its head nearly 
touching his own. The snake was apparently fast asleep, but 
the slightest noise might rouse it. At the sight of this twofold 
danger to which he found himself exposed the poor traveller 
lost all courage. His mind wandered, his trembling limbs 
could hardly support him, and he was on the point of falling 
into the clutches of the tiger which was watching for him below. 
Chilled with fright, he remained motionless in face of the cruel 
death that awaited him, expecting every moment to be his last. 
The unfortunate man, however, having somewhat recovered 
his senses, once more raised his eyes, and perceived, on one 
of the topmost branches of the tree, a honeycomb, from which 
sweet drops of honey were trickling down at his side. Thereupon 
he stretched forward his head, opened his mouth, and put out 
his tongue to catch the drops of honey as they fell ; and in this 
delicious enjoyment he thought no more of the awful dangers 
which surrounded him.* 

Besides the detached apologues to be found in their books, 
which they are very fond of alluding to in their everyday con- 
versations, the Hindus have a regular collection of old and 
popular fables called Pancha-tantra (the Five Tricks), which 
have been translated into all the languages of the country \ It 



' Two volumes of these fables, 
translated by the Abb^, were published 
in Paris in 187a and 1877, twenty 
years after his death. 

The East, the land of myth and 
legend, is the natural home of the 
fable, and Hindustan was the birth- 
place, if not of the original of these 
talcs, at least of the oldest shape in 
which they still exist. The Pancha- 
tantra have been translated into al- 
most every language, and adapted by 
most modem fabulists. The Kalila 
wa Damna (from the names of two 
jackals in the first story), or fables of 
Bidpai or Pilpay, is an Arab version 
made about 760 a.d. From the He- 
brew version of Rabbi Joel, John of 
Capua produced a Latin translation 



about the end of the fifteenth century, 
whence all later imitations are de- 
rived. The Hitopadesa^ or 'friendly 
instruction,* is a modernized form of 
the same work, and of it there are 
three translations into English by 
Dr. Charles Wil kins, Sir William J ones, 
and Professor F. Johnson. 

From Hindustan the Sanskrit fables 
passed to China, Thibet, and Persia ; 
and they must have reached Greece 
at an early date, for many of the fables 
which passed under the name of Aesop 
are identical with those of the East. 
Aesop to us is little more than a name, 
though, if we may trust a passing 
notice in Herodotus, he must have 
lived in the sixth century B.C. Prob- 
ably his fables were never written 



CH. xxvi] The Pancha-tantra Fables 441 

is perhaps the only literary work possessed by them which is 
instructive and worthy of attention. All castes, without any 
distinction whatever, are allowed to read it. The moral of 
some of these fables might possibly seem dangerous, because 
calculated to teach how to do evil rather than how to avoid 
it; but, speaking generally, their teachings are praiseworthy 
enough. 

The first of these fables of the Pancha-tantra explains how 
impostors and clever knaves succeed by artifice and falsehood 
in causing harm to persons whom they wish to ruin, or in 
sowing dissension among the most intimate of friends. The 
object which the author has in view appears to be to warn 
princes and other great personages, for whose instruction, by 
the way, the work seems to be principally written, against the 
intrigues of mean parasites and hypocritical courtiers who 
throng their palaces, and who, by base flattery, calumny, deceit, 
and intrigue, succeed in ruining and supplanting their best 
friends and most faithful servants. 

The following is a short resume of the story : — 

In the city of Patali-puram there reigned a king called 
Suka Darusha, who had a faithful minister named Amara-Sati. 
This good prince had three sons, who were noted for their 
stupidity and vulgarity, and who were viewed by their father 
with the most extreme dissatisfaction. The minister Amara- 
Sati, conscious of the sorrow which was preying on his master, 
advised him to convene a general meeting of all the Brahmins 
of his kingdom, in order to ascertain whether there was not one 
amongst them who would undertake the responsibility of educating 
the three young princes and instilling into them feelings more 
worthy of their high birth. The minister's advice was followed ; 
but of all the assembled Brahmins there was only one, named 
Vishnu-Sarma *, who felt himself capable of accomplishing so 
difficult a task. 

Vishnu-Sarma, after carefully studying the characters and 
dispositions of his pupils, began the work of reformation ; and in 
order to accomplish his task, related to them a large number 

down, though several are ascribed to last days by versifying such as he 

him by Xenophon, Aristotle, Plutarch, remembered.— Ed. 

and other Greek writers, and Plato * In the Telugu copy he is called 

represents Socrates as beguiling his Soma Jenma, — Dubois. 



442 Hindu Manners, Cusfoms, and Ceremonies [pt. n 



of fables, the lessons of which he took great pains to instil into 
their minds, 

The dramatis personae of the first of these fables are a lion 
holding sway in a vast forest, a buU named Sanjivaka, and 
two foxes, one called Damanaka and the other Karataka, both 
in the service of the lion king. 

The bull Sanjivaka had been accidentally lost by his master 
in the lion king's forest, where he was leading a peaceful, 
harmless life. Now the two foxes, as it happened, had been 
disgraced and ignominiously expelled from the court of the 
lion. One day the Hon was quenching his thirst in the river 
Jumna, which (lowed through the forest, when suddenly, while 
returning to his cave, he heard a most frightful noise like 
thunder, the like of which he had never heard before. It was 
in fact the bellowing of the bull Sanjivaka. Seized with sudden 
fear, and believing that an animal which was able to utter such 
a dreadful noise must assuredly be vastly superior to himself, 
the lion was consumed with dread lest a rival had come to 
dispute his forest kingdom. Greatly troubled in his mind, he 
reflected how he might get rid of this imaginary danger. While 
in this dilemma, a happy thought struck him : it was to reconcile 
himself with his former ministers, the two foxes, who might 
possibly help him with their advice. He therefore sent 
messengers to them, beseeching them to resume their former 
posts in his court, and promising to honour them in future 
with unbounded confidence. 

Karataka and Damanaka, aware of the real reason of their 
recall to the king's court, affected the greatest indifference 
with regard to the offers made to them. Before complying with 
the request of the monarch, they calculated all the possible 
consequences of such a reconciliation; and with this in view 
they related to each other a number of stories bearing on the 
advantages and inconveniences that might result from their 
return to the king's court. Suffice it to say they at last decided 
to accept the lion's offer, and accordingly waited upon him. 

The monarch welcomed the two foxes with much cordiality, 
and confessed to them the alarming fears which assailed him 
and the cause thereof. Without further delay he deputed 
them, after giving them the necessary instructions, to wait upon 
the rival who had caused him such uneasiness. The object of 



cH. xxvi] The Lion and the Bull 443 

their mission, they were informed, was to fathom the designs 
of this unknown personage, and, if he had come thither with 
hostile intentions, to'inquire of him on what conditions he was 
willing to live in peace with the titular monarch. 

The two foxes immediately went in search of the formidable 
Sanjivaka, and at last found him grazing peacefully on the 
borders of the river Jumna. At sight of him the two pleni- 
potentiaries gazed at each other with astonishment and burst 
into loud fits of laughter, for they could not understand how 
the presence in the forest of a poor helpless bull, forsaken by 
his owner, could possibly cause so much anxiety to their master. 
After thinking the matter over, they decided to make the best of 
it by encouraging the lion in his fears, and thereby increasing 
the importance and value of their mediation. Their plan being 
well pondered over, they went up to the bull Sanjivaka and 
haughtily told him that the place he had chosen for his abode 
was the dominion of a lion, whose authority extended throughout 
the forest. They rated him severely for his daring conduct, and 
told him that he was running a great risk of falling a victim to the 
anger of the king of the forest. 'But,* added they, 'as the lion 
is of a generous disposition, we will persuade him to pardon 
you and to take you under his protection. Come along with us 
to him, and above all be very careful to show proper respect and 
humility in his presence.' 

Returning to the lion, the two foxes began to make the most 
of their services. In their opinion the bull Sanjivaka was all 
that he was supposed to be ; and moreover he had the reputation 
of being passionate, hot-tempered, distrustful, and obstinate. 
' But,* added they, ' by dint of skill and persuasion we have 
succeeded in inducing him to be your intimate friend and faithful 
ally.' The bull was at this stage introduced to the lion, who 
deemed himself extremely fortunate in having, by the mediation 
of his two ministers the foxes, gained the alliance of so powerful 
a friend. 

Sanjivaka was not long in gaining the favour of his royal 
master, whose full and unbounded confidence he soon won by 
his gentleness, obedience, and other good qualities. 

Accordingly the two foxes were once more forsaken by their 
master, and found themselves obliged to live in obscurity and 
dishonour, as formerly. Sanjivaka, without even aspiring to 



444 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

any such honour, had become the channel and medium through 
whom all favours were bestowed by the king. Thereupon Kara- 
taka and Damanaka perceived that they had made a great 
mistake in introducing this stranger to the lion's court. The 
ruin of their rival was evidently the only means by which they 
could hope to regain their former influence. But finding them- 
selves too weak to get rid of their enemy by force, they resolved 
to achieve their object by artifice and intrigue. Accordingly they 
prepared themselves for the task by telling each other a great 
many fables, the main purpose of which was to show what one 
could accomplish by bringing into play at the proper season the 
active powers of an intriguing mind. 

Having skilfully devised a plan of attack, they succeeded in 
finding their way once again into the king's court ; and conceal- 
ing their wicked intentions under a guise of zeal and attachment 
to their master's interests, they succeeded by dint of slander and 
other machinations in poisoning the mind of the Hon with a deep 
distrust of the bull Sanjivaka. At last the king, really persuaded 
that his quiet and well-behaved favourite cherished the design of 
secretly getting rid of him, in order that he might usurp the 
dominion of the forest, fell upon the unfortunate Sanjivaka and 
tore him to pieces. 

The moral of the second fable of the Pancha-tantra is to show 
the advantages of union and friendship among the weak in 
times of trouble or danger. It tells the story of a dove, a rat, 
a raven, a gazelle, and a tortoise, who, by simply helping one 
another, escaped the greatest dangers. 

The third fable tells the story of the crows and the owls. 
It sets forth the dangers to which a person is exposed by confiding 
his private affairs to those whose character he is not well 
acquainted with, or to those who, after having for a long time 
been avowed enemies, return under the deceitful mask of friend- 
ship. It relates how a crow, by his cunning and hypocrisy, 
succeeded in stealing his way into the society of owls, the 
declared enemies of his race, and in winning their entire con- 
fidence. Thereupon, the crow made the best of this opportunity 
to study their habits, their resources, and their strong and weak 
points, until he was able to devise a safe means of attacking and 
exterminating them. For instance, he soon found out that their 
common abode was a vast cave, which possessed only one 



CH. xxvi] Specimens of Fables 445 

entrance. He also discovered that his hated foes experienced 
insurmountable difficulty in facing the light of the sun. Fur- 
nished with this valuable information, he hastened to convene 
a general meeting of the crows. He counselled them all to take 
in their beaks as much straw, twigs, and other combustible 
material as they could carry and to follow him quietly. Accord- 
ingly some thousands of his fellows spread their wings and 
arrived at midday near the cave, where the owls, their enemies, 
were slumbering in fancied security. The crows heaped up 
before the entrance of the cave the inflammable material they 
had brought with them and set fire to it all. The majority of 
the owls were instantly suffocated by the smoke, while those 
which attempted to fly away perished in the flames. 

A monkey and a crocodile are the characters represented in 
the fourth fable. It illustrates the dangers to which one is 
exposed by associating with wicked persons whose friendship 
and affection, however sincere they may appear to be to start 
with, result sooner or later in treachery, especially if their own 
interests are at stake. This is the attitude manifested by the 
crocodile towards his friend, the monkey, who had reposed the 
utmost confidence in him. The monkey, however, succeeds in 
evading by his cunning the treacherous plot which the crocodile 
devised for his destruction. 

The fifth fable is about a Brahmin and his mongoose, and 
illustrates the imprudence of judging rashly by appearances. 
A Brahmin once possessed a mongoose, to which his wife and 
himself were very much attached. The same Brahmin had 
a child which was still in the cradle. One day, being obliged 
to leave the house on some very pressing business, and there 
being nobody to take care of the child, the Brahmin entrusted 
it to his mongoose, telling the little animal that it would have to 
answer with its life for any accident that might happen to the 
infant during his absence. As soon as the Brahmin had gone 
out, the mongoose took up its place quite close to the cradle, 
determined to perish rather than permit the slightest injury to 
the precious being entrusted to its care. Now it happened that 
a huge snake had, unobserved, found its way into the house 
by a crevice in the wall. Issuing from its hiding-place, it 
approached the cradle and prepared to attack the child. The 
mongoose no sooner perceived the frightful reptile than it 



446 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

rushed furiously upon it, and, after a long and painful struck, 
seized it by the throat, strangled it, and in its rage tore it to 
pieces. Soon afterwards the Brahmin returned. The mon- 
goose, recognizing the voice of its master, ran to him and tried 
to express its joy by rolling at his feet, pla3rfully biting at his 
legs, showing indeed every manifestation of delight at having 
performed such a brave deed. The Brahmin, however, having 
carefully examined the mongoose, and finding it covered with 
the blood which had flowed from the wounds of the serpent, 
rashly concluded that the blood could only be that of his infant 
child, whom, as he thought, the mongoose had killed ; and, in 
a fit of rage, he seized a thick stick which was close by and 
killed the poor animal on the spot. 

However, what were his grief and despair when on entering 
the room where he had left his child, he found it calmly sleep- 
ing ; while around the cradle were the scattered remains of the 
huge snake which the mongoose had just killed I He bitterly 
reproached himself for his imprudence and rashness, but, alas ! 
too late; and was grieved sorely at the thought that he had 
inconsiderately sacrificed the poor animal, to whom alone he 
was indebted for the preservation of his beloved son'. 

The author of the Pancha-tantra has introduced into these 
five principal fables a large number of minor fables which are 
related by the respective characters to each other. Some of 
these latter resemble those of Aesop, but are far more prolix. 
The Pancha-tantra is so constructed that one fable, before it is 
finished, suggests another, which in its turn suggests a third, 
and so on. A great deal of ingenuity is displayed in this plan 
of narration ; but the continuous dovetailing of one story into 
another is very wearisome to the reader, who sometimes loses 
sight altogether of the beginning of a story, which only ends 
later on in the work. 

A literal translation of a few of these fables will give my 
readers a fair idea of the rest of them. The following are 
extracted from the first part of the Pancha-tantra : — 

' A tale exacUy similar to this has the same, with the exception that the 
been long current in Europe. It has animal which fell a victim to the rash- 
been told both in story-books and pic- ness of its master is a dog instead of 
turcs. llie circumstances are exactly a mongoose.— Dubois. 



CH. xxvi] The Brahmin Kala-Sarma 447 

The Adventures of the Brahmin Kala-Sarma. 

The Brahmin and the Crab. 

Once upon a time, in the city of Soma-Puri, there lived 
a Brahmin named Kala-Sarma, who, after existing for a long 
time in penury, suddenly found himself raised to opulence by 
a happy combination of circumstances. He thereupon resolved 
to undertake a pilgrimage to the holy city of Benares, there 
to obtain pardon for all his sins by bathing in the waters of 
the sacred Ganges. On his way thither, he one day reached the 
river Sarasvati, flowing through a desert which he was crossing. 
He determined to perform his usual ablutions in it; and no 
sooner had he stepped into the water than he saw coming 
towards him a crab, which asked him where he was going. 
Learning that he was on a pilgrimage to the Ganges, the crab 
requested the Brahmin to carry it with him to this sacred river, 
promising in return for this service to remember his kindness 
all its life, and to do all that lay in its power to be of use to him 
should an opportunity offer itself. The Brahmin, astonished at 
the crab's promise, asked how a creature so weak and despicable 
as itself could possibly be of any service to a man, and especially 
to a Brahmin. To this the crab replied by the following 
fable : — 

The Kingf the Elephant^ and the Brahmin, 

In the city of Prabavathi-Patna there lived a king named 
Adita-Varma. One day the king, when out hunting with a 
crowd of attendants in the midst of a dense forest, observed 
a huge elephant approaching, whose sudden appearance spread 
terror among his followers. The king, however, succeeded in 
calming the fears of his people, and told them that they 
must try to capture the animal and lead it away to his palace. 
Accordingly, they dug a deep pit, covering it with branches 
and leaves. This done, the whole company surrounded the 
elephant, leaving only one passage leading to the pit for him 
to escape, into which, in fact, the elephant eventually fell. The 
king was delighted at their success, and told them that before 
trying to release the elephant from the pit they must keep it 
starving there for eight days, when, having lost all its strength, 



448 Hindu MannerSy CustomSy and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

it might be more easily made captive. Accordingly, every- 
body retired, leaving the elephant in the trap. Two days 
afterwards, a Brahmin who was travelling on the banks of 
the river Jumna happened to pass that way, and seeing the 
elephant in the pit, asked the animal by what unfortunate 
accident it found itself there. The elephant told him about its 
sad adventure, complaining at the same time of the torments 
which it was enduring, not only from the fall, but by hunger 
and thirst. It besought the Brahmin to have pity and to help 
it to regain its liberty. The Brahmin replied that it was quite 
beyond his physical powers to drag out from such a deep 
pit a body of such huge weight and bulk. But the elephant 
still further entreated him, and besought him at any rate to give 
it the benefit of his advice as to how it was possible to escape 
from the dangers which threatened it. To this the Brahmin 
replied that if it had formerly rendered service to anybody, it 
should now invoke that person's aid. ' I do not remember,' 
answered the elephant, 'to have rendered service to any one 
except to the rats, which I did in the following manner : — 

The Elephant and the Rats. 

'In the country of Kalinga-Desa there lived a king named 
Swarna-Bahu\ who suddenly found his kingdom infested with 
myriads of rats, which destroyed every living plant and spread 
desolation everywhere. His subjects, unable to subsist in the 
midst of such a plague, waited upon the king and entreated him 
to devise some means of freeing the country from the ravages of 
these destructive creatures. The king immediately mustered all 
the hunters and trappers in his kingdom, who, furnished with 
nets and snares of all kinds, proceeded at once to make war on 
the rats. By dint of much labour and patience, they succeeded 
at last in drawing all the rats from their holes, every one of 
them being captured and shut up alive in large earthen vessels, 
where they were left to perish of hunger. 

' Meanwhile,* continued the elephant, ' I happened to be 
passing by the spot where the rats were huddled up in con- 
finement. Their chief, hearing me coming, called out to me 
and entreated me to have compassion on him and his com- 

' Swama-Bahu means 'golden-armed.* — £d. 



cH. xxvi] The Elephant and the Rats 449 

panions and to save their lives, which, said he, was extremely 
easy, since all that was necessary was to kick to pieces the 
earthen vessels which held them captive. Touched with pity 
at the sad lot of these unfortunate creatures, I shattered their 
temporary prisons, and thus rescued them all from certain 
death. The chief of the rats, after thanking me profusely, 
promised that he and his companions would for ever remember 
the signal service I had rendered them, and swore that they 
would requite my kindness should I ever happen to get into 
any diflBculty.* 

When the elephant had finished its story, the Brahmin 
advised it to call to its aid the rats, whom it had so signally 
helped. He then wished it a speedy deliverance and proceeded 
on his journey. 

The elephant, left to itself, concluded it could not do better 
than follow the advice given by the Brahmin. At the call of 
the elephant, the chief of the rats immediately ran to its aid. 
No sooner did the elephant perceive its little friend than it 
explained the misfortunes that had befallen it, as well as the 
troubles with which it was still threatened, and entreated the 
rat to help it somehow or other out of its prison. 

'The service which thou standest in need of, my lord 
elephant,' answered the rat, 'presents no difficulties to me; 
be, therefore, of good courage, and I promise to effect thy 
deliverance very shortly.' 

The chief of the rats immediately assembled several millions 
of its subjects, and led them to the pit where their liberator was 
buried. They set to work at once to burrow all round, throwing 
the earth into the pit, which gradually filled little by little until 
the elephant was able to reach the surface and shake itself free 
from all danger. 

At the close of this fable the crab thus addressed the Brah- 
min : ' If a rat was able to render such a signal service to an 
elephant, is it not possible that an opportunity might occur 
when I might be in a position to oblige thee and to testify my 
gratitude to thee ? ' 

The Brahmin Kala-Sarma, delighted at finding so much 
intelligence in such an insignificant creature, no longer hesitated 
to take the crab with him, and putting it in his travelling bag, 
proceeded on his journey. One day, while traversing a dense 

Gg 



450 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

forest at midday, when the sun was hottest, he halted to rest 
beneath the shade of a thick tree, where he soon fell asleep; and 
this is what happened while he was buried in deep slumber : — 

The Crow, the Serpent, the Brahmin, and the Crab, 

Near the tree under which the Brahmin Kala-Sarma was 
enjoying his peaceful slumber, a huge snake had taken up its 
abode in a white-ant heap, and in the branches of the same 
tree a crow had built its nest. Now the crow and the serpent 
had, in the capacity of neighbours, contracted a close alliance. 
When any wearied traveller happened to rest under the shade 
of the tree, the crow by a certain cry gave notice immediately 
to its friend the snake, and the latter, forthwith emerging from 
its retreat, quietly approached the traveller and bit him, causing 
instantaneous death. Thereupon the crow would call its fellow- 
crows together, and the whole of them would fall upon the corpse 
and devour it. 

No sooner had the crow perceived that the Brahmin pilgrim 
was sound asleep than it gave the serpent notice by the usual 
signal. The snake immediately issued from its retreat and bit 
the Brahmin, killing him instantly by its deadly venom. The 
crow hastened to summon its friends and relations, and the 
whole of them pounced together on the corpse. But as they 
were preparing to devour it, the head crow espied something 
moving in the bag of the traveller, and curious to know what it 
was, put its head into the bag. Thereupon the crab caught it by 
the neck with its claws and proceeded to strangle it to death. 
The crow cried aloud for mercy, but the crab swore that it 
would not let go, unless the Brahmin whose death the crow 
had just caused was restored to life. The crow made known 
to its companions the extremity in which it found itself and the 
conditions under which the crab agreed to spare its life. It 
besought its comrades to go in all haste and tell its friend the 
snake of its critical situation, and to request it to reanimate 
the body of the Brahmin without delay. The snake, informed 
of the misfortune that had befallen its friend, approached the 
deceased, applied its mouth to the spot where it had bitten him, 
sucked out all the venom with which it had poisoned him, and 
restored him to life. 

When the Brahmin regained his senses he was not a little 



CH. xxvi] The Cunning Crab 451 

surprised to see his crab holding a crow fast imprisoned in its 
claws. The crab gave him an account of what had just happened, 
at which the traveller, who had believed himself to be waking 
from a sweet slumber, was exceedingly amazed. 'However,' 
said he to the crab, ' since the crow has satisfied the conditions 
which thou didst ask of him, thou must also fulfil the promise 
which thou madest to him of sparing his life ; let him, therefore, 
go now.' 

But the crab, desiring to punish the wicked crow in a proper 
manner, and fearing to carry out its design in the neighbourhood 
of the snake, answered that it would set its captive free only at 
some distance from the spot where they were. The Brahmin, 
therefore, carried them both a little farther on, and then, opening 
his bag, told the crab to hesitate no longer in fulfilling his 
promise. 

' Foolish man ! ' answered the crab, ' can we attach the least 
faith to the words of the wicked ? Can we ever rely on their 
promises ? Thou art, of course, ignorant of the fact that this 
treacherous crow has already caused the death of a host of 
innocent beings, and that if I now set him free he will cause 
a still greater number to perish. Wouldst thou like to know 
what good people gain by obliging the wicked ? Wouldst thou 
like to learn how the latter ought to be treated when once they 
are in our power ? The following fable will teach thee : — 

The Brahmin^ the Crocodile^ the Tree^ the Cow, and the Fox, 

' Once upon a time, in the Brahmin village of Agni-sthala, 
situated on the banks of the river Jumna, there lived a Brahmin 
named Astika. While on a pilgrimage to the Ganges, he 
happened one day to reach a river in which he intended to 
perform his ablutions. No sooner had he stepped into the 
water than a crocodile approached him, and learning the purpose 
for which he had undertaken the journey, entreated him most 
earnestly to carry it with him to the waters of the sacred 
river, where it hoped to be able to live more at its ease than 
in that river, which frequently ran dry during the hot season 
and caused it the most terrible sufferings. The Brahmin, 
moved to compassion, allowed the crocodile to get into his bag, 
and, hoisting it on his shoulders, proceeded on his journey. 
On reaching the banks of the Ganges the pilgrim opened his 

Gg 2 



452 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

bag, and pointing out to the crocodile the waters of the river, 
bade it crawl in. The crocodile, however, replied that it felt 
tired out by the long journey they had made together, and was 
not strong enough to reach the water by itself It therefore 
requested the Brahmin to carry it in to a certain depth. The 
Brahmin, without the least suspicion of foul play, complied with 
this last request of the crocodile. He advanced as far as he 
could into the bed of the river and there deposited his travelling 
companion. Just as he was turning, however, the crocodile 
seized him by the leg and tried to drag him into deeper water. 
Filled with dismay, and incensed at such perfidy, the pilgrim 
exclaimed : " O deceitful and wicked villain I Is it thus that 
thou returnest evil for good ? Is this the kind of honesty which 
thou practisest ? Is this the gratitude which I have to expect 
from thee for the service I have rendered ? " 

'"Nonsense!" replied the crocodile. "Why dost thou talk 
to me of honesty and gratitude ? The only honesty of our days 
is to ruin those who cherish us." 

* " Be pleased, at any rate, to stay the execution of thy per- 
fidious design for a little while," entreated the Brahmin, " and 
let us see if the morality which thou professest would be 
approved by anybody. Let us refer the matter to arbitrators ; 
and should there be found only three who approve thy mode of 
acting and thinking, I consent to be devoured by thee.*' 

' The crocodile yielded to the wishes of the Brahmin, and 
agreed to defer the sacrifice until it had secured the approbation 
of three arbitrators who saw nothing to blame in it. 

' They applied first of all to a mango- tree planted on the river 
bank. The Brahmin asked the tree if it was right to do evil to 
those who had done us good. 

'"I do not know," answered the mango-tree, "if that is 
permitted or not ; but I know very well that it is just the kind of 
treatment which men like you mete out to me. I appease their 
hunger by nourishing them with my succulent fruits; and 
I shield them from the heat of the sun by sheltering them under 
my shade. Yet, as soon as old age or any accident makes me 
unfit to render them such services, they, forgetting my past 
kindness, cut my branches and lastly deprive me of life itself by 
digging up my very roots. Hence I conclude that honesty among 
men consists in destroying those who cherish them." 



CH. xxvi] The Wily Fox 453 

'The crocodile and the Brahmin then accosted an old cow 
which was grazing without a keeper on the banks of the river. 
The Brahmin asked if it was not an offence against honesty to 
do evil to those who had done good to us. 

' " What dost thou mean by the word honesty ? '* answered the 
cow. '* Honesty in our days consists in harming those who have 
rendered us service ; I have learned this only too well from my 
own sad experience. Till recently I rendered most important 
services to man. I ploughed his fields ; I gave him calves ; 
I nourished him with my milk. But, alas ! now that I am grown 
old and unfit to be of service to him, he has discarded me. 
Forsaken and helpless on the banks of this river, I find myself 
exposed at every moment to the fury of wild beasts." 

'The opinion of a third arbitrator only was wanting to complete 
the ruin of the Brahmin. Perceiving a fox, he asked him the 
same question that he had asked the mango-tree and the cow. 
But before making an answer the fox wished to be better in- 
formed of the points at issue. So the Brahmin gave a detailed 
account of the services he had rendered to the crocodile and of 
the treacherous act that the latter was meditating. The fox 
laughed heartily, and seemed at first to be going to decide in 
favour of the crocodile. "However," said he, "before pro- 
nouncing a final judgement on your affair, I must see how you 
both travelled together." 

' The crocodile, without the least suspicion as to what the fox 
intended to do, and without the least hesitation, got into the bag, 
which the Brahmin then hoisted upon his back. The fox told 
the Brahmin to follow him, and on reaching an isolated spot he 
made signs to the Brahmin to place his load on the ground. 
No sooner had the latter done so than the fox took a huge stone 
and smashed the head of the crocodile with it. Then turning to 
the Brahmin, the fox said : '• Foolish man that thou art, may the 
dangers to which thou hast been exposing thyself teach thee 
to be more careful in future ! Remember well that we should 
never make friends or associates of the wicked." The fox then 
called his family together and made an excellent meal of the 
dead crocodile; and the Brahmin, after accomplishing the 
object of his pilgrimage by bathing in the waters of the Ganges, 
returned home safe and sound. 

'This fable,* said the crab to his benefactor the Brahmin, who 



454 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

was attentively listening to his narrative, 'ought to convince 
thee that no covenant should be made with the wicked, and 
that we may without the least scruple fail in our word to them. 
When we happen to have them in our power, we should ruth- 
lessly destroy them.* Saying this, the crab tightened its clasp 
on the crow and strangled it to death. 

After this exhibition of exemplary punishment the Brahmin 
Kala-Sarma, taking up the crab again, continued his journey ; 
and when he reached the river Ganges, deposited his little 
benefactor there, as desired. After expressing his deep gratitude 
for the signal service the crab had rendered to him in saving 
his life, he performed his ablutions in the sacred river and 
returned to his own country, which he reached without further 
accident. 

I will not relate any more of these fables, though most of 
them are very instructive. My intention has been merely to 
draw the attention of my readers to a work which, in my 
opinion, is the most interesting and useful in the whole range 
of Hindu literature. 

It is impossible to determine the age of these fables, since no 
authentic evidence of their date is now extant. It is supposed 
that they were translated into Persian towards the middle of 
the sixth century, under the reign of the Emperor Nurjehan ; 
and the fragments which have been published in Europe have, 
no doubt, been extracted from this Persian translation. Indeed, 
La Fontaine himself appears to have gone to it for some of his 
fables. 

The Hindus themselves place the Pancha-tantra among their 
oldest literary productions; and the wide popularity which it 
enjoys may be said to be some proof in favour of this opinion. 
At any rate the fables contained in this work appear to be older 
than those of Aesop. It is uncertain what was the birthplace 
of that fabulist ; whence we may suppose that he learnt from 
the Hindu philosophers the art of making animals and inanimate 
beings speak, with the view of teaching mankind their faults. 

It is uncertain whether these fables were originally composed 
by the Brahmin Vishnu-Sarma in verse or in prose. They 
were most probably in verse, as that was the recognized mode 
of composition in ancient India. It is at any rate certain that 



CH. xxvi] A Shepherd's Tale 455 

copies exist of the Pancha-tantra written in Sanskrit verse. 
Thence they may have been translated into prose for the instruc- 
tion and amusement of those to whom the poetic language was 
not familiar. 

The five principal fables, together with the great number of 
minor tales interwoven in them, form a volume of considerable 
size. 

It is not surprising that such a work should have an extensive 
popularity among a people like the Hindus, prone to fiction and 
admiring the marvellous. Nor is it necessary, in order to charm 
an imaginative people like the Hindus, to exhibit any particular 
wit or erudition. There are numbers of Hindus who make it 
their sole profession to wander from one place to another 
relating fables and stories which are very often utterly devoid 
even of common sense. Men of the shepherd caste in particular 
often earn a livelihood in this manner. Hence the saying, It is 
a shepherds tale^ which is frequently used by the Hindus to show 
that a story is incredible. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

Hindu Tales. 

The Four Deaf Men, 

OxcE upon a time a shepherd, who happened to be deaf, was 
tending his flock near his village. Though it was past midday, 
his wife had not yet brought him his breakfast. He was afraid 
to leave his sheep to fetch his food lest some accident should 
befall them ; and so, after waiting some time longer, and being 
pressed by hunger, he adopted the following course. There 
chanced to be a taliari, or village watchman, cutting grass for 
his cow on the banks of a neighbouring stream, so the shepherd 
went up to him, though rather reluctantly, for men of this class, 
although placed as guardians over public and private property 
in the village and supposed to prevent any thefts being com- 
mitted, are, generally speaking, great thieves themselves. The 
shepherd, nevertheless, requested him to keep an eye on his 
flock during the short time he would be absent, and assured him 
that on his return from breakfast he would reward him hand- 
somely for his trouble. 

Now the taliari happened to be as deaf as the shepherd him- 
self, and not understanding a word of what was being spoken to 
him, answered angrily as follows : — 

' What right hast thou to this grass, which I have been at 
such trouble to cut? Is my cow to starve, while thy sheep are 
being fattened at its expense ? Go about thy business and let 
me alone ! * As he finished speaking he made an expressive 
motion with his hand, which the shepherd understood as a signal 
of compliance with his request. The latter, therefore, imme- 
diately ran towards the village, fully determined to give his wife 
a good trouncing for her neglect. But he had no sooner reached 



The Deaf Men 457 



his home than he saw his wife stretched in the doorway and 
rolling in the agonies of a violent colic, the result of eating 
a quantity of raw beans. 

At the sight of the sufferings of his poor wife the anger of the 
shepherd vanished, although he saw to his chagrin that the - 
necessity of rendering her help and of preparing his own break- 
fast would detain him longer than he had expected. Distrusting 
the honesty of the taliari^ to whom he had confided the care of 
his flock, he made all possible haste, and finally returned. On 
reaching his sheep, which he found peacefully grazing at some 
distance from the spot where he had left them, his first thought 
was to count them ; and overjoyed at finding that there was not 
a single one missing, he exclaimed: 'This taliari is a really 
honest fellow ! He is the very jewel of his class. I promised 
him a reward, and he shall indeed have one.' 

Now there was a lame sheep in the flock, which was however 
sound enough in other respects, and so he put it on his shoulders 
and carried it to the taliari, saying to him : ' Thou didst indeed 
watch my flock very carefully during my absence ; well, here 
is a sheep which thou shalt have as a reward for thy trouble.* 
But the taliari^ catching sight of the lame sheep, exclaimed 
angrily : ' What dost thou mean by accusing me of having 
broken thy sheep's leg? I swear that I have not stirred from 
the spot where thou now seest me ; I have not gone near thy 
flock ! ' 

'Yes/ answered the shepherd, 'it is nice and fat; it will 
furnish a good feast for thy family and friends.* 

'Have I not told thee,* replied the taliari in a rage, 'that 
I never went near thy sheep? and yet thou accusest me of 
having broken the leg of one of them I Get away from here, 
or I will give thee a sound thrashing.* And he showed by his 
gestures that he was determined to put his threats into execution. 

The shepherd, perceiving at last that his friend was getting 
into a passion, and unable to understand the cause of this unjust 
provocation, put himself into an attitude of defence. The pair 
were all but coming to blows, when a man on horseback happened 
to pass by. They thereupon stopped the rider ; and the shep- 
herd, laying hold of the bridle, said to him : ' Sir, kindly listen 
for a moment and say whether it is I who am in the wrong in 
this dispute. I want to present this man with a sheep as 



458 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

a reward for a small service which he has rendered me, and he 
falls upon me and wishes to fight me.' 

The tah'arif speaking in his turn, said : ' This dolt of a shep- 
herd dares to accuse me of having broken the leg of one of his 
sheep, whereas I did not even go near his flock.' 

Now the horseman to whom they had appealed as arbitrator 
was even more deaf than they were, and not understanding 
a word of what was spoken to him, replied : ' Yes, I confess that 
this horse does not really belong to me. I found him straying 
on the roadside ; I was in a hurry, and I mounted him so that 
I might get along faster. If he belongs to you, take him by all 
means ; but let me continue my way, for I have no time to lose.' 

The shepherd and the ia/iari, each imagining that the rider 
had decided in favour of his adversary, became more violent than 
ever, cursing him whom they had chosen as their arbitrator, and 
accusing him roundly of partiality. 

At this crisis an aged Brahmin chanced to pass by, and as 
he appeared more fit to settle their differences they stopped him 
and requested him to listen to them for a moment. Shepherd, 
taliarif and horseman all spoke together at the same time, each 
telling his own tale and explaining to the Brahmin the subject 
of the dispute, and requesting him to decide which of them was 
in the wrong. 

The Brahmin, who was as deaf as the other three, replied : 
' Yes, yes, I quite understand you. My wife has sent you all 
to prevent my going away, and to persuade me to return home ; 
but I have quite made up my mind, and you will not succeed in 
your attempt. Now, do you all know my wife ? She is a real 
shrew I It is impossible for me to live any longer with such 
a harridan I Ever since the time I had the misfortune to buy * 
her, she has made me commit more sins than it will be possible 
for me to expiate in a hundred regenerations. I am therefore 
going on a pilgrimage to Kasi (Benares), and on reaching the 
holy city I mean to wash myself in the sacred waters of 
the Ganges, in order that I may purify myself from the innumer- 
able sins which her wickedness has caused me to commit. I have 
furthermore made up my mind to live henceforth by alms in 
a foreign country, and apart from her.' 

' I have previously remarked that synonymous terms among the Hindus. 
* to marry * and ' to buy a woman * are — Dubois. 



CH. xxvii] Four Foolish Brahmins 459 

While they were all four shouting thus at the top of their 
voices, without being able to understand each other, the rider 
perceived at a distance some people rapidly approaching them. 
Fearing lest they might be the owners of the horse which he had 
taken, he immediately dismounted and took to his heels. 

The shepherd, finding suddenly that it was getting late, 
hastened back to his flock, which had strayed away some dis- 
tance, uttering curses as he trudged along against all arbitrators, 
and complaining loudly that there was no more justice on the 
earth. Finally he attributed all the troubles and disappointments 
he had experienced that day to the fact that a snake had crossed 
his path * in the morning. 

The tcdiari turned to his load of grass ; and finding the lame 
sheep there, took it up on his shoulders and carried it away 
home, to punish the shepherd, as he thought, for the unjust 
quarrel he had fastened on him. 

As for the aged Brahmin, he continued his way till he reached 
a neighbouring choultry^ where he stopped to spend the night. 
Quiet rest and sound sleep dispelled the feelings of anger and 
ill-humour which he had cherished against his wife, and the next 
morning several Brahmins, relatives and friends of his, came 
in search of him, and having found him, succeeded at last in 
soothing his temper and persuading him to return home, 
promising to use their best endeavours to render his wife more 
obedient and less quarrelsome in future. 

The Four Foolish Brahmins, 

In a certain district proclamation had been made of a sama- 
radhananif one of those grand feasts given to Brahmins on 
divers occasions. Four individuals of this caste, having each 
set out from a different village to attend the feast, happened to 
meet each other on the road, and having discovered that they 
were all proceeding to the same place, agreed to travel together 
during the remainder of their journey. While thus walking along 
in company, they were met by a soldier going in the opposite 
direction, who, on passing them, greeted them with the saluta- 

^ This, as I have already pointed out, is one of the most evil omens. — 
Dubois. 



460 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

tion generally made to Brahmins ; that is, he joined his hands 
together, put them to his forehead, and said : ' Saranam ayya I ' 
('Respectful greeting to you, my lord!') to which the four 
Brahmins replied at one and the same time : ' Asirvadam \ ' 
{' Our blessing ! '). 

Subsequently they reached a well by the roadside, and there 
they sat down to quench their thirst and to rest for a while 
under the shade of a neighbouring tree. While thus occupied, 
and finding no better subject of conversation, one of them took 
it into his head to break the silence by saying to the others : ' You 
will admit that the soldier whom we have just met was a man of 
exceptional politeness and discernment. Did you not remark 
how he singled me out, and how carefully he saluted me ? * 

' It was not you whom he saluted,* replied the Brahmin 
seated next to him, ' it was to me particularly that he addressed 
his greeting.* 

' You are both mistaken,' exclaimed the third. ' I can assure 
you that the greeting was addressed to me alone ; and the proof 
is that when the soldier said his ** Saranam ayya/* he cast his 
eyes upon me I * 

* Not at all,' replied the fourth. ' It was I only he saluted ; 
otherwise, should I have answered him as I did, by saying 
''Asirvadam*'?' 

The altercation grew so warm that the four travellers 
were at last on the point of coming to blows, when one of 
them, the least stupid of the four, wishing to prevent so silly 
a quarrel proceeding to extremes, cried as follows : — ' What 
fools we are to be thus quarrelling for no purpose ! After 
heaping on each other all the insults we are capable of, and after 
fighting with each other like the Sudra rabble, shall we be any 
nearer to the solution of our differences ? The fittest person to 
settle the controversy, I think, is he who occasioned it. The 
soldier cannot have gone very far. Let us, therefore, run after 
him as quickly as we can, and ascertain from him which of us 
four it was whom he intended to salute.* 

This advice, appearing sound to all of them, was immediately 
followed. Accordingly, the four set off" in pursuit of the soldier, 
and at last, quite out of breath, overtook him about a league 
beyond the place where he had saluted them. No sooner had 
they caught sight of him than they cried out to him to stop ; and 



cH. xxvii] Proofs of Foolishness 461 

y 

before they had quite reached him had put him in full possession 
of the points of their dispute, requesting him to settle it by 
saying to which of them he had directed his salutation. 

The soldier, instantly perceiving the character of the people 
he had to deal with, and wishing to amuse himself a little at 
their expense, coolly replied that he intended his salutation for 
the greatest fool of the four, and then, turning his back on them, 
continued his journey. 

The Brahmins, confounded with this answer, turned back and 
continued their journey for some time in perfect silence. But 
the greeting of the soldier had taken so strong a hold of them 
that at last they could remain silent no longer. The quarrel was 
therefore renewed with greater fury than before. The point at 
issue this time was as to which of the four was entitled to the 
distinction mentioned by the soldier, inasmuch as each claimed 
to be the greatest fool of the party. 

The dispute as to who had the right to claim this extraordinary 
distinction grew so hot and strong that a hand-to-hand scuffle 
seemed inevitable. However, the one who had advised concilia- 
tion once before again wisely interposed with the view of making 
peace, and spoke as follows : — 

* I think myself the greatest fool of us all, and each of you 
thinks the same thing of himself. Now, I ask you, is it by 
screaming at the top of our voices and by dealing each other 
blows that we shall arrive at a decision as to which of the four is 
the greatest fool ? No, certainly not ; let us therefore put an 
end to our quarrel for the time. Here we are within a short 
distance of Dharmapuri ; let us go thither and present ourselves 
at the chouttry (the court of justice), and request the authorities 
to settle our dispute \* As this advice seemed sensible enough, 
they all agreed to adopt it. 

They could not have arrived at the choultry at a more 
opportune moment. The authorities of the village of Dharma- 
puri, consisting of Brahmins and others, were just then all 
assembled there ; and as there was no other important case to 
be settled that day, they at once proceeded with the hearing of 
the cause of the strangers, who were asked to explain the facts 
of their case. 

^ Most Indian villages even to this where the village authorities meet and 
day possess a chavadi or choultry, dispense justice. — £d. 



462 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [ft. m 



One of the four thereupon advanced into the middle of 
assembly and related, without omitting the slightest detail^ ail 
that had happened in connexion with the greeting of the sokiicr 
and his ambiguous reply. 

On hearing the details of the case the whole court burst 
into fits of laughter. The president, who was a man of 
humorous disposition, was delighted at having found so favour- 
able an opportunity of amusing himself. Assuming, therefore^ 
a grave demeanour and ordering every one to keep silent, he 
thus addressed the suitors : ' As you are strangers and quite 
unknown in this town, it is impossible that the point at 
issue, namely, who is the greatest fool, can be proved by the 
evidence of witnesses. There is only one way that I can see 
in which you can enlighten your judges. Let each of you in 
his turn disclose to us some incident of his life on which he 
considers he can best establish his claim to egregious folly. 
After hearing you all in turn, we can then decide as to which of 
the four has a right to superiority in this respect, and which 
of you can in consequence claim for himself exclusively the 
soldier's greeting.' 

All the suitors having agreed to this proposal, one of the 
Brahmins obtained permission to speak, and addressed the 
assembly as follows : — * I am very poorly clad, as you doubtless 
see, and my ragged condition does not date from to-day. I will 
tell you how I came to be so shabbily attired. Many years ago 
a rich merchant of our neighbourhood, who was always very 
charitable towards Brahmins, presented me with two pieces of 
the finest cloth that had ever been seen in our agraharam 
(village). I showed them to all my friends, who never failed to 
admire them greatly. "A beautiful present like that," said they 
to me, "can only be the reward of good deeds performed in 
a previous birth." Before putting them on I washed them, 
according to the usual custom, in order to purify them from the 
defilement of the weaver's and merchant's touch. Now, they 
were hanging up to dry with the ends fastened to two branches 
of a tree, when a dog happening to come that way ran under 
them. I caught sight of the vile animal only after it had got 
some distance away, and I was therefore not quite sure whether 
it had touched my cloths and thus polluted them. I asked my 
children who were close by about it, but they said they had not 



CH. xxvii] The Brahmin and the Cloths 463 

noticed the dog. How, then, was I to make sure about the 
matter? Well, I decided to go down on all-fours till I was 
about the height of the dog; and in this posture I crawled 
under the cloths. " Did I touch them ? " I asked my children, 
who were watching me. They answered, "No," and I leapt with 
joy at the happy result. Nevertheless, a moment later it struck 
me that the dog might possibly have touched them with his tail. 
So to be quite sure of this, I fastened an upturned sickle on my 
back, and then, again crawling along on all-fours, I passed 
a second time under the cloths. My children, whom I had 
asked to watch carefully, told me that this time the- sickle had 
just touched the cloths. Not doubting in the least that the end 
of the dog's tail must have also touched the cloths in the same 
way, I laid hold of them, and, in a fit of thoughtless rage, tore 
them to pieces. The occurrence soon became known to every- 
body in the neighbourhood, and I was everywhere voted to be 
a fool. " Even if the dog really defiled thy cloths," said one, 
"couldst thou not have removed the defilement by washing them 
a second time ? " Another asked why I had not given the cloths 
to some poor Sudra instead of tearing them to pieces. " Who 
would dream of giving you cloths again after such senseless 
folly on your part ? " This last remark, I may add, has proved 
only too true; for ever since then, whenever I ventured to 
apply to anybody for a present of cloths, the usual reply has 
been that I simply wanted them to tear to pieces.* 

When he had finished his story, one of the auditors remarked 
to him : ' You seem to be very clever at crawling about on all- 
fours.' 'Yes, I am indeed very clever at it,' answered the 
Brahmin, 'as you shall see.* And, suiting his action to his 
words, he went down on all-fours, and proceeded to run two or 
three times round the spectators, who were splitting their sides 
with laughter. 

' Enough, enough I ' cried the president. 'All that we have 
heard and seen furnishes evidence very much in your favour, 
but before coming to any decision we must hear what the others 
have to say for themselves.' 

A second Brahmin accordingly spoke as follows ; — 

' One day, in order to present a decent appearance at a sania- 
radhanam (treat to Brahmins>, which had been announced in 
our neighbourhood, I called in the barber to shave my head 



464 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

and chin. When he had finished, I told my wife to give him 
a copper coin for his trouble ; but by mistake she gave him two. 
In vain did I request the barber to return me the other coin. 
He was obstinate, and refused to do so ; and the more I insisted 
on his returning it, the more stubborn did he become. The 
dispute was becoming very serious when the barber, assuming 
a milder tone, observed : " There is only one way of settling the 
difference between us. For the extra coin which you ask me to 
return I will shave your wife's head as well, if that suits you." 
"Certainly," answered I, after a moment's reflection; "your 
proposal will, doubtless, put an end to our quarrel without 
unfairness on either side." 

' My wife, hearing what was about to happen to her, wished 
to run away ; but I laid hold of her and made her sit down, 
while the barber, armed with his razor, completely shaved her 
head: My wife kept crying out most bitterly the whole time, 
abusing and cursing both of us ; but I let her rave, for I pre- 
ferred seeing' her head clean shaven to giving this villain 
of a barber money which he had not rightly earned. My 
wife, deprived thus of her beautiful hair, immediately hid her- 
self through sheer shame, and dared not appear again. The 
barber also decamped, and meeting my mother in the street, 
related to her with infinite gusto what had just taken place. 
She at once hastened to the house to assure herself of the fact, 
and when she saw her daughter-in-law completely shorn, she 
stood motionless and dumbfounded for a moment, and then, 
flying into a fit of anger, overwhelmed me with curses and 
insults, which I bore patiently without uttering a word, for 
I soon began to feel that I richly deserved them. The villain of 
a barber, in his turn, took a mischievous pleasure in telling 
everybody of the incident, until I became the general laughing- 
stock. Slanderous people, improving on his story, were not slow 
in insinuating that the object of my having my wife's head shaved 
was to punish her for her infidelity. Crowds gathered about the 
door of my house, and even an ass was brought to carry the 
supposed adulteress through the streets in the manner usual on 
such occasions. 

'A report of the affair soon reached the ears of my wife's 
relatives, who hastened to inquire what was the matter. You 
can easily imagine the terrible hubbub and trouble they made 



CH. xxvii] A Samaradhanam Incident 465 

at the sight of their unfortunate daughter. They immediately 
took her away with them, travelling at night that she might 
be spared the shame of being exposed to public view in so 
humiliating a condition, and they kept her for four years without 
coming to terms of any kind with me, though at length they 
restored her to me. 

' This unfortunate incident made me miss the samaradhanam^ 
for which I had been preparing by a three days' fast. I was 
all the more chagrined to find afterwards that it was a most 
sumptuous feast, and that ghee, among other good things, 
had been profusely served. A fortnight afterwards another 
samaradhanam was announced, which I had the imprudence to 
attend. I was greeted with howls from more than eight hundred 
Brahmins who had assembled there, and who, seizing me by 
force, insisted on my publishing the name of the accomplice 
of my wife's guilt, in order that he might be prosecuted and 
punished according to the rigid rules of the caste. I solemnly 
asserted that 1 was myself the guilty party, and explained 
to them all the true motive that induced me to act in such 
a manner. My hearers were immensely surprised at what I told 
them, and, looking at each other, at last exclaimed : " Is it 
possible that any married woman who has not violated the laws 
of honour should have her head shaved ? This man must be 
either a downright impostor or the greatest fool on the face of 
the earth." And I hope, gentlemen,' said the narrator in con- 
clusion, 'that you too will think the same, and that you will 
consider my folly to have been far superior to that of the 
Brahmin who tore his cloths to pieces.' 

The assembly agreed that the speaker had put forward a very 
strong case ; but justice required that the other two should also 
be heard. 

The third claimant, who was burning with impatience to 
speak, addressed the court as follows :— 

'My name was originally Anantayya, but I am now known 
everywhere as Betel Anantayya, and here follows the reason 
why this nickname was given me. 

' My wife had been living with me for about a month, after 

having remained for a long time at her father's house on account 

of her youth, when one night on going to bed 1 told her — 

I know not for what reason — that all women were chatterboxes. 

*♦ Hh 



466 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

She at once angrily retorted that she knew some men who were 
as much chatterboxes as women. I saw at once that she was 
alludii^ to myself; and feeling extremely piqued at the sharp- 
ness of her retort, I said : " Now, just let us see which of us 
two will speak the first ! " "Certainly," quoth she : "but what 
shall the loser forfeit?" "A betel-leaf*," answered I ; and the 
wager being thus made, we both went to sleep without uttering 
another word. 

'The next morning, when the sun was already pretty high, 
and there were no signs of our appearing, the other people in 
the house called out to each of us by name, but received no 
answer. They shouted louder still, and still there was silence. 
Then they knocked violently at the door of our room ; but to no 
purpose. Finally, everybody in the house became thoroughly 
alarmed, suspecting that we had both died suddenly during 
the night The carpenter of the village was accordingly sent 
for in hot haste. He was soon on the spot with his tools, and 
promptly broke open the door of our room. 

'Judge of the surprise of all when they found both of us wide 
awake and in the apparent enjoyment of the best of health, but 
deprived of the use of speech. Various means were adopted to 
induce us to speak, but without success. My mother, who was 
greatly alarmed, gave loud vent to her grief, and all the Brah- 
mins of the village, both men and women, flocked to our house 
to learn what all the noise was about. The house was soon 
filled with people, and each drew his own conclusions as to the 
accident which was supposed to have befallen us. The prevail- 
ing opinion was that it all resulted from the curse of some 
secret enemy. Accordingly, my relatives forthwith sent for 
a famous magician living in the neighbourhood to counteract 
the spell. As soon as he arrived he began by fixing his eyes on 
us for some moments. Then he walked round us several times, 
uttering strange words, felt different parts of our bodies, and did 
so many other strange things that the remembrance of them still 
makes me laugh whenever I think of them. At last he declared 
that we were really under the influence of a spell. He even 
named the evil spirit which, according to him, possessed us, and 
described it as very obstinate and uncontrollable. Considering 
the difficulties that he would have in expelling it, he stated that 

' Thirty or forty of these leaves could be had for a farthing.— Dubois. 



CH. xxvii] A Cure for Speechlessness 467 

five pagodas at least would be required to meet the expenses of 
the sacrifices and other ceremonies that must be performed if he 
was to be successful. 

' My relatives, who were by no means well-to-do people, 
were utterly dismayed at the exorbitant sum demanded by the 
magician ; but rather than allow us to remain dumb, they agreed 
to his terms, and promised moreover to give him a suitable 
present if he succeeded in restoring to us the use of our 
tongues. 

* The magician was on the point of beginning- his mystic 
ceremonies, when one of our Brahmin friends who was present 
maintained^ in opposition to everybody else, that what we were 
suffering from was a simple malady enough, such as he had 
often seen before, and he undertook to cure us without any 
expense whatever. For this purpose all that he required was 
a plate of red-hot charcoal and* a small bar of gold. As soon 
as these had been brought he heated the bar of gold almost 
to melting-point ; then taking it up with pincers, he applied 
it red hot to the soles of my feet, below my elbows, on the 
pit of my stomach, and lastly on the top of my head. I endured 
these cruel tortures without showing the smallest symptom of 
pain or uttering the least complaint. Indeed, I would rather 
have died, if necessary, than lose the bet I had made. " Now let 
us try the remedy on the woman," said the shrewd operator, who 
was rather discouraged at my firmness. He then approached 
my wife and applied the red-hot bar of gold to the soles of her 
feet. But no sooner did she feel the effects of the burning than 
she quickly drew away her leg, and cried ouif** A ppah\ AppahV* 
(Enough I Enough !). Then, turning towards me, she said : " I 
have lost the wager ; here is your betel-leaf." *' Did I not tell 
you," said I, taking the leaf, "that you would be the first to 
speak ? You thus prove by your own conduct that I was right 
in saying last night, when we went to bed, that women are 
chatterboxes." 

* The spectators, thoroughly astounded, were gazing at each 
other without understanding anything, until I explained to them 
the wager we had made overnight before going to sleep. "What 
downright folly ! " they all exclaimed together. " What ! " said 
they, "was it for a leaf of betel that you spread this alarm 
in your own house and through the whole village ? Was it 

H h 2 



for a leaf of betel that you showed such courage in allowing 
yourself to be burnt from the feet to the head ? Never in the 
whole world was there seen such stupid folly." And from that 
time I have always gone by the name of Betel Anantayya.' 

This story appeared lo the assembly remarkable enough as 
illustrating extraordinary foolishness ; but it was only fair, they 
said, that they should hear the claims that the fourth suitor had 
to put forward. And he, having been granted permission to 
speak, thus addressed the assembly :— 

' As the girl to whom I was married was too young to cohabit 
with me, she continued to remain for six or seven years in her 
father's house. At last, however, she attained the proper age, 
and I was duly apprised of the fact by her parents. My father- 
in-law's house was six or seven miles away from ours, and my 
mother, being unwell at the time we received this happy intelli- 
gence, was not in a fit slate lo undertake the journey. She 
therefore entrusted to me the duty of fetching my wife home. 
She counselled me so to conduct myself in word and deed that 
the girl's parents might not discover my natural stupidity. 
"Knowing as I do," said my mother as I took leave of her, 
"the shallowness of thy pate, I very much fear that thou wilt 
commit some foolish mistake or other." But I promised to 
conform to her instructions and to be on my best behaviour; 
and so departe*. 

' I was very well received by my father-in-law, who gave 
a grand feast to all the Brahmins of the village in honour of my 
visit. At length, the day appointed for our departure liaving 
arrived, my wife and I were permitted to start. On taking 
leave of us, my father-in-law poured out his blessings upon 
us both, but wept most bitterly, as if he had a presentiment 
of the misfortune that was about to befall his unfortunate 
daughter. 

' It happened to be the hottest part of the year ; and the heat, 
on the day of our departure, was something terrible. Moreover, 
we had to traverse a desert plain several miles across, and the 
sand, heated by the burning sun, soon began to scorch the feet 
of my young wife, who had been brought up in comfort in her 
father's house, and was not accustomed lo such hardships. 
Unable to endure the fatigues of the journey, she burst into tears. 
I led her on by the handj and tried my best to rally her spirits. 



CH. xxvii] Bringing Home a Bride 469 

But it was in vain. She soon became so utterly tired that she 
could not move another step, and lay down on the ground, 
declaring that she was prepared to die on that very spot. My 
distress may easily be imagined. Seated by her side, 1 could 
not think what to do next, when suddenly I spied a merchant 
passing by, leading a number of bullocks laden with various 
kinds of goods. I accosted him at once, and, with tears in 
my eyes, told him the trouble I was in, and entreated him to 
help me with his good advice in my distressing position. 
The merchant approached my wife, and, looking at her atten- 
tively, informed me that, in consequence of the stifling heat 
then prevailing, the poor girl's life would be equally in danger, 
whether she remained where she was or proceeded farther on 
her journey. " Rather than that you should be subjected to the 
pain of seeing her perish before your very eyes, and perhaps 
also be exposed to the suspicion of having yourself killed her, 
I should advise you to give her up to me," he said. " I will 
put her on the back of one of my best bullocks, and will take 
her away with me, thus saving her from certain death. You 
will, it is true, lose her; but it is nevertheless far better that 
you should lose her with the satisfaction of having saved her life 
than that you should incur the suspicion of having killed her. 
As for her jewels, they cannot be worth more than twenty 
pagodas. See, here are twenty-five for them, and you shall 
give me your wife." The arguments of the man seemed to me 
quite unanswerable. I therefore took the money which he 
offered me, while he, lifting nly wife in his arms, placed her on 
one of his bullocks, and made haste to continue his journey. 
I also continued mine, and reached home rather late, my feet all 
blistered by the hot sand over which 1 had to walk the whole 
way. " Where is thy wife ? " my mother asked me, surprised 
to see me return alone. Thereupon I related to her all that 
had happened since I had left home, and finally told her of 
the sad accident that had happened to my youthful spouse, 
and how I had given her away to a passing merchant, rather 
than be a witness of her death, and be suspected moreover 
of having been the cause of it. At the same time I showed 
my mother the twenty-five pagodas that I had received from the 
merchant as compensation. 

'Filled with rage at what I had told her, my mother was 



470 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. u 

utterly speechless for a while as if turned into stone. Then 
her suppressed feelings of indignation got the better of her, and 
she gave vent to the most violent imprecations and curses at 
my conduct. *' Thou fool, thou wretch ! " exclaimed she, " what 
hast thou done 1 Sold thy wife, hast thou ? Delivered her up 
to another man! A Brahmin wife become the concubine of 
a low-caste merchant! What will people think of it? What 
will her relatives and ours say when they learn this disgraceful 
story? Is it possible to imagine a more egregious instance of 
folly and stupidity?" The sad occurrence which had hap- 
pened to my wife soon reached the ears of her relatives, who 
hastened to my village, filled with rage and indignation, and fully 
resolved to beat me to death. And they certainly would have 
murdered both me and my innocent mother had we not been 
forewarned of their coming, and escaped from their furious ven- 
geance by a speedy flight. Being themselves unable to avenge 
the wrong done, they laid the matter before the heads of the 
caste, who unanimously found me guilty, and sentenced me to 
pay a fine of two hundred pagodas as compensation for the 
injury done to the honour of my father-in-law. Moreover, 
a proclamation was issued by which everybody was forbidden, 
under pain of excommunication, ever to give any woman in 
marriage to such an idiot as myself. I was, therefore, con- 
demned to remain a widower for the rest of my life. It was 
lucky for me, indeed, that I was not altogether outcasted, 
a favour which I owed to the great respect and esteem in which 
my father had been held. 

' I must now leave you to judge if this instance of foolish- 
ness on my part is in any way inferior to those with which 
my rivals have been entertaining you, and if the honour of being 
the biggest fool is not justly due to me.' 

The assembly, after mature deliberation, decided that all 
four suitors had given such absolute proofs of folly that each 
was justly entitled to claim superiority in his own way over 
the others; and that each was at liberty to call himself the 
greatest fool of all, and to attribute to himself the greeting of 
the soldier. ' Each of you has gained his suit,' remarked the 
president, ' so you may now continue your journey in peace, if 
that is possible.' 

Delighted with so equitable a judgement, the travellers left 



CH. XXVIl] 



The Story of Appaji 



471 



the court, each shouting louder than the other : ' I have gained 
my suit, I have gained my suit ! ' 



The Story of Appaji^ Prime Minister of King Krishna Roya \ 

Before the invasion of the Mussulmans, at a time when the 
Hindus enjoyed the happiness ofbeing ruled by princes of their 
own nation, one of these princes, named Krishna Roya, was 
holding sway over one of the most fertile provinces of Southern 
India. This benevolent ruler was ever anxious to gain the love 
and respect of his sutyects by doing everything in his power 
to make them happy; and, in order to attain this end more 
readily, he always took the most particular care to employ as 
his ministers and confidential advisers those persons only who 
by their wisdom, experience, and prudence were capable of 
affording him wise counsel. His prime minister, Appaji, 
enjoyed more of his confidence than any other, because he 
possessed the happy knack of letting his master know the truth 
about things by means of the most entertaining and striking 
allegories. One day, when this wise minister was alone with 
his sovereign, the latter, having nothing particular to do at the 
moment, asked him to solve the following problem. 'Appaji,' 
said he, M have oflen heard it said that in their religious and 
social usages men simply follow a beaten track, blindly and 
indiscriminately, however absurd such usages may be. Can 
you prove to me the truth of this assertion and the justice of 
that famous proverb : Jatra marula^ J ana marula * ? ' 

Appaji, with his usual modesty, promised the king to apply 



^ I have included this little stoiy 
in the collection of Hindu fiction, be- 
cause I found it in the same book from 
which I extracted the others. How- 
ever, well-informed Hindus have told 
me that the story has been clothed in 
the form of fiction simply in order to 
make it more popular, and that it is 
really founded on historical fact. The 
memory of the good King Krishna 
Roya, and of his faithful minister 
Appaji, is still cherished by the people 
of India, who speak of him as a prince 
whose sole care was to render his 
people happy, in which good work 



he was most powerfully seconded by 
his minister. The period of his reign 
is said to date a short time before 
the Mahomedan invasion. However, 
whether this litUe story be fact or 
fiction, it is none the less a most ex- 
cellent satire on the credulity of the 
Hindus. — Dubois. 

' The meaning of this is : ' Is it the 
customs that are ridiculous, or is it the 
persons who follow them who are 
ridiculous?* The answer being : 'It 
is the people who follow them who 
are ridiculous.' — Dubois. 



472 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

himself to the solution of the question and to give his answer 
in a few days. Returning home with his mind full of the 
problem, the minister sent in search of his shepherd who was 
taking care of his sheep. This man was a simple country 
boor with a rustic's ordinary intelligence. When the shepherd 
arrived, Appaji addressed him as follows :— ' Hear me, Kuruba * ; 
you* must instantly lay aside your shepherd's garb and put on 
that of a sannyasi or penitent, whom you must represent for 
a few days. You will begin by rubbing your whole body with 
ashes ; you will then take in one hand a bamboo staff with seven 
knots, and in the other the gourd in which a penitent always 
carries water, while under your arm you will carry the antelope's 
skin on which persons of that class must always sit. Thus 
equipped, you must go without delay to the mountain just outside 
the town and enter the cave which is to be found on its slope. 
You must lay your antelope's skin on the floor of the cave, and 
then squat down on it like a sannyasi, your eyes firmly fixed 
on the ground, your nostrils tightly shut with one hand, and the 
other hand resting on the top of your head. Be very careful to 
play your part properly, and take good care not to betray me. 
It is possible that the king, accompanied by his whole court and 
by a great crowd of other people, will come to visit you in the 
cavern ; but whoever presents himself, even though it be I or 
the king himself, remain perfectly motionless in the posture 
which I have described to you, looking at nobody, speaking to 
nobody. And whatever happens, even though they should tear 
out the hairs one by one from your body, show not the smallest 
sign of pain, and do not budge an inch. These, Kuruba, are 
my commands. If by any chance you deviate in the least 
degree from the instructions which I have given you, you will 
answer for it with your life ; but if on the contrary you follow 
them punctiliously, you may count upon a magnificent reward.' 

The poor shepherd, accustomed all his life simply to look 
after his sheep, was very diffident as to his ability to change 
his condition for that of a sannyasi; but the tone of his 
master was so imperative that he judged it prudent to waive all 
objections and to obey him blindly. Furnishing himself with 

^ This is a name common enough of cows or goats form another caste 
among persons belonging to the caste called Golla, — Dubois. 
of shepherds. Those who take care 



CH. xxvii] The False Sannyasi 473 

all the necessary paraphernalia of his new profession, and 
thinking over all that he had been ordered to do, he departed 
for the cave. Meanwhile Appaji returned to the palace, where 
he found the king surrounded by his courtiers. Approaching 
the monarch with a serious air, Appaji addressed him in the 
following terms: — 'Great king, pardon me if at this moment, 
when surrounded by your wise councillors you are considering 
the best means of making your people happy — pardon me, I say, 
if I interrupt you in order to announce to you that the day has 
come when the gods, pleased with your eminent virtues, have 
decided to give you a marked token of their favour and of their 
protection. At the very moment that I am speaking a most 
wonderful thing is happening in your kingdom and not very far 
from your royal residence. On the slope of the mountain that 
lies near to your capital there is a cave in which a holy penitent, 
who has descended without doubt from the very abode of the 
great Vishnu, has deigned to take up his dwelling. In profound 
meditation on the perfections of Parabrahma he is wholly 
insensible to all terrestrial objects; he partakes of no other 
nourishment than the air which he breathes ; not one of the 
objects that affect the five senses make the slightest impression 
on him. In a word, it may with truth be said of him that his 
body alone dwells in this world below, while his soul, his 
thoughts, and all his feelings are already closely united to the 
Divinity. I have no hesitation in saying that the miraculous 
appearance of this holy personage in your kingdom is a mani- 
fest guarantee of the interest which the gods take in you and 
yours.' 

These words of Appaji were listened to with astonishment 
and wonder by the king and his courtiers. The king at once 
decided to go without delay to visit this illustrious penitent, 
whose praises the prime minister had sung so highly. And 
in order that the visit might be made with a dignity worthy 
of the eminent virtues of him who was the object of it, the king 
announced that he would go accompanied by his whole court 
and escorted by his whole army. Furthermore, he caused to be 
proclaimed to all his subjects, by public criers, by the beating 
of drums, and by the blowing of trumpets, his reasons for 
making the visit to the mountain; and everybody was in- 
vited to follow him. The procession was soon on its way. 



474 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

Never before had such a magnificent gathering been wit- 
nessed ; never had such a huge multitude of people assembled 
together. Pleasure was depicted upon every countenance. The 
air rang with cries of joy ; while every one congratulated him- 
self on having lived to enjoy the happiness of looking upon one 
of the greatest personages that had ever appeared on earth. On 
his arrival at the cave the king, filled with awe at the sight of 
so sacred a spot, entered it with all the marks of the most 
profound respect. It was not long before he descried the form 
of the illustrious penitent, crouching in the strange manner 
enjoined upon him by the minister, and apparently as motion- 
less as the rocks which formed his retreat. After gazing upon 
him for some time in silence, the king tremblingly approached, 
and prostrating himself before him, with his hands joined, 
addressed him humbly as follows : — ' Illustrious penitent ! 
happy is the destiny which allowed me to live until this day, 
so that I might enjoy the inestimable happiness of looking upon 
your sacred face. I know not what it is that has procured for 
me such a wonderful blessing. The little that I have done 
during my life cannot possibly have rendered me worthy of 
such a distinction ; probably, therefore, it is to the good works 
of my ancestors or to some good work which I may have 
accomplished in preceding births that I now owe my good 
luck. However this may be, the day on which I have seen your 
sacred feet is certainly the most glorious and happy of my 
life. In future I have nothing more to desire in this world, 
for in seeing these sacred feet of yours I have obtained the 
greatest blessing which could happen to any mortal. The 
sight of your feet alone is sufficient to wash away all the sins 
which I have committed both in this generation and in the 
preceding one. Henceforth I am as pure as the water of the 
Ganges, and all my desires are accomplished \' 

The supposed penitent heard this flattering discourse with- 
out evincing the slightest sign that he had heard it, and without 
change either of countenance or posture. The crowd sur- 
rounding him, astonished at this indifference, became perfectly 
convinced that he was a supernatural being, for in no other 
way could they account for his solemn silence and complete 

^ This is the stereotyped form of describing the respects paid to a holy 
address used in all Hindu books when personage. — Ed. 



cH. xxvii] A Sacred Relic 475 

immovability. 'It is evident,' they said, 'that only the body 
of this holy penitent inhabits this lower world, while his soul 
and his thoughts must be united to the Divinity whose image 
he is/ The king, Krishna Roya, in the ecstasy of his religious 
zeal, and unable to attract a single glance from the holy 
penitent, addressed him in still more flattering terms in the 
hope of winning at any rate one look from him. Vain hope, 
however ! The penitent made not the slightest movement of the 
head, nor relaxed for one moment the imperturbable gravity of 
his demeanour. 

The prince was just about to leave the cave, when Appaji 
addressed him as follows : — ' Great king, having come so far to 
visit this grand personage, who will henceforth become an 
object of public veneration, you must not depart without having 
received his blessing, or at any rate some gift which will bring 
you happiness for the rest of your days. Absorbed in medita- 
tion, and insensible to the material objects which surround him, 
this penitent cannot break his silence ; nevertheless you should 
try to obtain something from ihim, be it only one of the hairs 
of his body.' The king took the advice of his minister, and, 
approaching the sannyasi, he tore out with extreme care one 
of the hairs of his chest, put it to his lips, kissed it devoutly, 
and then, showing it to the spectators, he cried : ' I will preserve 
this all my life. I will cause it to be enclosed in a golden 
locket, which shall always hang about my neck and be the most 
precious of all my ornaments, thoroughly convinced as I am 
that so noble a .relic will prove to be a talisman against all the 
untoward accidents of life.' 

The ministers and courtiers, in imitation of their master and 
wishing to participate in the same blessings, surrounded the 
poor penitent, and each one of them tore a hair from his chest, 
promising at the same time to preserve it as carefully as the king 
had done and to honour it as a holy relic. Moreover, the escort 
of the prince and the huge multitude which had accompanied 
him, learning what the king and his courtiers had done, were 
determined to follow so good an example ; and in a very short 
time the supposed sannyasi found himself deprived of every 
hair he possessed, from his feet to his head; for the more 
devout amongst the multitude did not content themselves with 
a single one of his hairs, but pulled them out by the handful. 



476 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

The poor Kuruba bore this horrible torture without the slightest 
complaint or the smallest change of posture, and without even 
raising his eyes. 

On his return to his palace the king hastened to inform his 
women of the wonderful person whom he had visited, and 
showed them the relic of which he had become the possessor. 
The royal ladies, filled with wonder, one by one took the hair 
between their fingers, kissed it devoutly, pressed it to their 
eyes, and expressed an eager longing to see this illustrious 
personage. But as etiquette forbade persons of their sex and 
rank to show themselves in public, they supplicated the king 
to accord them the favour of having the sannyasi brought to 
the palace, so that they too might enjoy the happiness of 
looking upon him and plucking out his hairs with their own 
hands. The king at first refused to grant their request, but, 
yielding at length to their repeated solicitations, and wishing 
also to show as much honour to the penitent as lay in his 
power, he dispatched his whole court and army on foot and 
on horseback to escort the holy man to the palace. The 
messengers arrived at the cave while the multitude were still 
scrambling for the hairs of the sannyasi. The foremost and 
most distinguished amongst them at once approached the holy 
penitent. After explaining to him most humbly the object of 
their mission, they took him in their arms and placed him in 
a superb palanquin, where he remained in the same posture 
that he had so carefully maintained. Thereupon he was con- 
ducted with the greatest pomp and circumstance through the 
streets of the town, followed by a multitude of spectators who 
filled the air with shouts of joy. The poor Kuruba, who 
had eaten nothing for two days, and who was moreover feeling 
extremely sore from the rough treatment which he had received, 
was very far from enjoying all these honours. However, in the 
hope that the farce would soon come to an end and that he 
would get his reward, and also fearing to incur the wrath of 
his master, he managed to keep up his courage and to restrain 
himself from declaring who he was. 'What have I done,' he 
nevertheless murmured to himself, 'that I should be made to 
play a part which so little suits me and which exposes me 
to so much suffering ? I would a thousand times rather be in 
the midst of my flock listening to the roars of the tigers in the 



CH. xxvii] Disappearance of the Saint 477 

jungle than be deafened by the shouts and acclamations of this 
stupid crowd. If I were only with my sheep at the present 
time I should have had two meals already; but now for two 
days past I have had nothing to eat at all, and I am still quite 
in the dark as to when and how all this will end/ 

The palace was reached while the supposed sannyasi was 
turning over all these things in his head. Carried into a superb 
apartment, he had not long to wait before he was visited by the 
princesses, who came one by one to prostrate themselves at his 
feet Each of them, after gazing at him in wonder and silence 
for some time, was consumed with the desire of possessing one 
of his hairs as a relic to be kept in a locket of gold, and to 
be reckoned as the most precious of their jewels. But in vain 
they searched every visible part of his body. The crowd of 
devotees who had preceded them had not left a single hair 
to be seen. At length, after most careful search, they 
managed to discover here and there, in the wrinkles of his coarse 
skin, a few hairs which had escaped notice. With these they 
were perforce obliged to be content, and having religiously col- 
lected them they retired. Thereupon the king ordered that the 
penitent should be left alone during the night, in order that he 
might enjoy the repose of which he was so much in need, after 
the fatiguing and painful days which he had passed. Appaji, 
however, having slipped quietly into the apartment where the 
poor shepherd was languishing of hunger, fatigue, and anguish, 
addressed him in the following consoling manner : — ' Kuruba, 
the time of thy trial is at an end. Thou hast played thy part 
most excellently, and I am very pleased with thee. I promised 
thee a reward. Rest assured that thou wilt get it. Meanwhile 
lay aside this costume of the penitent and put on thy shepherd's 
garments again. Go and refresh thyself by good food and 
peaceftil slumber, and to-morrow morning thou shalt return to 
thy occupation.' 

The poor fellow did not require to be told twice. He fled 
by a secret passage which his master pointed out to him, 
determined never to allow himself to be entrapped in the same 
way again. 

The next morning the king, accompanied by his principal 
officials, returned to the apartment where the sannyasi had 
been left the night before, in order to offer him anew the 



478 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

homage due to his holiness. But what was their surprise to 
find that he had disappeared ! This circumstance, of course, 
only contributed to strengthen the faith of the public; and 
none doubted that this holy sannyasi was really a divine 
being who under human form had deigned to pay a passing 
visit to their monarch, and during the silence of the night 
had returned to the abode of happiness from which he had 
descended. The appearance of the holy personage, as well as 
his miraculous disappearance, formed for many days afterwards 
the sole topic of conversation at the court, in the town, and 
throughout the entire kingdom, until at length people grew 
tired of always repeating the same story, and nothing more 
was heard of it. 

A short time after the event Appaji was one day at the court 
of the king his master, when the latter reminded him of the 
question which he had asked him to solve, viz. Is it the customs 
which are ridiculous, or only the men who follow those 
customs? Appaji was only waiting for his opportunity of 
answering; and having obtained an assurance from the king 
that nothing he said would of!end his majesty, if his explanation 
were sincere and full, he addressed the king as follows : — ' Great 
king, your own conduct solved the question in a manner quite 
irrefutable, at the time when you visited the cave in the mountain 
to see the penitent. You will no doubt be astonished to hear 
that this famous personage is none other than the shepherd 
who for many years has been looking after my sheep, a stupid 
and uncouth man who is only capable of inspiring you with 
the most sovereign contempt I Yet it is to this very per- 
sonage that you and your whole court rendered divine honours ; 
and that, moreover, on my sole testimony. The multitude 
followed blindly in your steps, and without trying to get to 
the bottom of the matter, or to gain any knowledge of the 
object of their devotion, they gave themselves up in an access 
of religious zeal to honour as a god an unknown and miserable 
shepherd who has hardly sufficient intelligence to distinguish 
him from brute beasts. Does not all this afford a most 
striking proof that men in their religious and civil usages only 
follow a beaten track? Thus you yourself have justified the 
truth of the ancient proverb which says : Jatra marula^ Jana 
marula.' 



CH. xxvii] The Faithful Minister 479 



Krishna Roya, far from being angry with the liberty which 
Appaji had taken with him in order to bring home to him the 
truth on a point of such importance, evinced, on the contrary, 
more affection and confidence than ever towards his minister, 
and continued to regard him as the most faithful and stanch 
of all his adherents. 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

Niti Siokas, or Moral Stanzas. 

The siokas, or moral stanzas, of which I am about to give 
a translation, are familiar to all Hindus who are in any way 
educated. In most Hindu schools children are made to learn 
them by heart as a kind of catechism. They are written in 
Sanskrit verse, but as this classical language is not studied 
or understood by many people, each sloka is accompanied by 
a literal translation in the vulgar tongue. The Hindus take 
great delight in introducing these siokas into their ordinary 
conversations. I have tried in my translation to diverge as 
little as possible from the original text; but the difficulty of 
reproducing in a European language certain terms and ex- 
pressions peculiar to the Indian languages has resulted in 
a few of these sentences being somewhat incoherent. This 
fault, of course, is not observable when they are read in the 
original. In translating them I have followed the order observed 
by the Indian author. The original collection contains a very 
large number of others, but I have restricted myself to repro- 
ducing the principal of them in order not to tire my readers. 

I. He who feeds us is our father; he who helps us is our 
brother ; he who places his confidence in us is our friend ; those 
whose sentiments accord with ours are our kinsmen. 

II. If a margosa seed be dropped into a beverage composed 
of sugar, honey, and ghee, the whole of it becomes so bitter, 
that although milk may rain upon it for a thousand years the 
mixture will lose nothing of its bitterness. This is symbolical 
of the wicked, who, however good people may be to them, never 
lose their natural tendency to do evil. 

III. Beware of becoming attached to any country which is 
not your own, or of serving any master who is a foreigner; 



Niti Slokas 481 



renounce all relatives who are only so nominally ; keep nothing 
which does not belong to you ; and leave a guru who can do 
you no good. 

IV. If you undertake to do anything which you find to be 
be^'ond your powers, give it up at once. If an individual dis- 
honours a whole class, he should be excommunicated ; if a single 
inhabitant causes ruin to a whole village, he should be expelled 
from it ; if a village causes the ruin of a district, it should be 
destroyed ; and if a district causes the ruin of the soul, it must 
be abandoned '. 

V. In the afflictions, misfortunes, and tribulations of life only 
he who actively helps us is our friend. 

VI. Just as a plant of the forest becomes a friend of the body 
when by virtue of its medicinal properties it cures an illness 
which afflicts the body, however different the one may be 
from the other; similarly, he who renders us services should 
be considered our friend, however lowly may be his condition 
and however far he may be separated from us ; whereas he who 
affects to be our friend should, if he attempts to hurt us, be 
regarded as our enemy. 

VII. One may render good service to the wicked, yet what- 
ever good one may do to them resembles characters written in 
water, which are effaced as soon as they are written ; but services 
rendered to good people are like characters engraved on stone, 
which are never effaced. 

VIII. One should keep oneself five yards distant from 
a carriage, ten yards from a horse, one hundred yards from an 
elephant ; but the distance one should keep from a wicked man 
cannot be measured. 

IX. If one ask which is the more dangerous venom, that of 
a wicked man or that of a serpent, the answer is, that however 
subtle the poison of a serpent may be, it can at any rate be 
counteracted by virtue of mantrams ; but it is beyond all power 
to save a person from the venom of a wicked man. 

^ The first sentence appears to form pelled from the village ; if a village 
part of another sloka. The correct dishonours a district, it may be de- 
rendering of this sloka is :— If an indi- stroyed ; if one's country is dangerous 
vidual dishonours a family, he may be to one's personal safety, it may be 
expelled from the family; if a family abandoned.— £o. 
dishonours a village, it may be ex- 

♦" I i 



482 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

» 

X. To attempt to change the character of a wicked man by 
being kind to him is h'ke trying to make a hog clean. It is 
no use to mix water with milk and offer the same to an eagle, 
for the eagle knows the secret of separating the milk from the 
water \ This is symbolical of the wicked. 

XL The venom of a scorpion is to be found in its tail, that of 
a fly in its head, that of a serpent in its fangs ; but the venom 
of a wicked man is to be found in all parts of his body. 

XII. A wise man preserves an equal mind both in adversity 
and in prosperity. He allows himself neither to be crushed by 
the former, nor elated by the latter. 

XIII. An intelligent man is he who knows when to speak 
and when to be silent, whose friendship is natural and sincere, 
and who never undertakes anything beyond his powers. 

XIV. Virtue is the best of friends, vice is the worst of 
enemies, disappointment is the most cruel of illnesses, courage 
is the support of all. 

XV. Just as the crow is the Pariah among birds, and the 
ass the Pariah among quadrupeds, so is an angry sannyasi 
the Pariah among penitents; but the vilest of Pariahs is the 
man who despiaes his fellows. 

XVI. Just as the moon is the light of the night and the sun 
the light of the day, so are good children the light of their 
family. 

XVII. Flies look for ulcers, kings for war, wicked men for 
quarrels ; but good men look only for peace. 

XVIII. The virtuous man may be compared to a large leafy 
tree which, while it is itself exposed to the heat of the sun, 
gives coolness and comfort to others by covering them with its 
shade. 

XIX. When we die the money and jewels which we have 
taken such trouble to amass during our life remain in the 
house. Our relatives and friends accompany us only to the 
funeral pyre where our bodies are burnt ; but our virtues and 
our vices follow us beyond the grave. 

XX. Temporal blessings pass like a dream, beauty fades like 
a flower, the longest life disappears like a flash. Our existence 
maybe likened to the bubble that forms on the surface of water. 

^ In the Hindu proverb it is the power, and not the eagle, as Dubois 
swan which is credited with this states it. — £d. 



CH. xxviii] Popular Aphorisms 483 

XXI. Take heed not to trust yourself to the current of 
a river, to the claws or the horns of an animal, or to the 
promises of kings. 

XXII. Take heed to place no trust in a false friend; only 
disappointment will be experienced from a wicked woman ; 
nothing good can be hoped for from a person who is forced to 
act against his inclinations; nothing but misfortune can be 
looked for in a country where injustice prevails. 

XXIII. A man of courage is recognizable in a moment of 
danger, a good wife when one is reduced to misery, firm friends 
in times of adversity, and faithful relatives at the time of 
a marriage. 

XXIV. A hypocrite who disguises his true character and 
wishes to pass for an honest man is comparable to strong 
vinegar which one tries to make sweet by mixing with it 
camphor, musk, and sandal. The attempt may well be made, 
but the vinegar will never altogether lose its sourness. 

XXV. To show friendship for a man in his presence and to 
libel him in his absence is to mix nectar with poison. 

XXVI. A mirror is of no use to a blind man ; in the same 
way knowledge is of no use to a man without discernment. 

XXVII. Take care to spend nothing without hope of profit ; 
to undertake nothing without reflection ; to begin no quarrel 
without good cause. He who does not follow these golden 
rules courts his own ruin. 

XXVIII. He who works with diligence will never feel 
hunger ; he who devoutly meditates will never commit any 
great sin; he who is vigilant will never feel fear; and he who 
knows when to speak and when to be silent will never be 
drawn into a quarrel. 

XXIX. Truth is our mother, justice our father, pity our 
wife, respect for others our friend, clemency our children. 
Surrounded by such relatives we have nothing to fear. 

XXX. It is easier to snatch a pearl from the jaws of a croco- 
dile or to twist an angry serpent round one's head like 
a garland of flowers without incurring danger, than to make an 
Ignorant and obstinate person change his ideas. 

XXXI. The miser acknowledges neither god nov guru, neither 
parents nor friends. He who suffers from hunger pays no 
heed whether the viands be well or ill seasoned. He who 

I i 2 



484 Hindu Manners f Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 



loves and cultivates knowledge has no taste for idleness. The 
froward person has neither shame nor restraint. 

XXXII. Temporal blessings are like foam upon the water; 
youth passes like a shadow ; riches disappear like clouds before 
the wind. Therefore to virtue alone should we hold fast. 

XXXIII. Let us realize well that death watches like a tiger 
to seize us unawares, sickness pursues us like a relentless enemy, 
earthly joys are like a leaky vessel from which water trickles 
ceaselessly until it is empty. 

XXXIV. Before the existence of earth, water, air, wind, fire, 
Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, sun, stard, and other objects, God One 
and Eternal was in existence. 

XXXV. Pride and arrogance suit no one ; constancy, 
humanity, sweetness, compassion, truth, love for one's neigh- 
bour, conjugal fidelity, goodness, amiability, cleanliness, are all 
qualities that distinguish really virtuous people. He who 
possesses all these ten qualities is a true guru, 

XXXVI. Unhappy is the son whose father contracts debts ; 
unhappy is the father whose son bears a bad character ; unhappy 
is the wife whose husband is unfaithful. 

XXXVII. To show friendship to a man while he is pro- 
sperous and to turn one's back upon him when he is in distress, 
is to imitate the conduct of prostitutes, who evince affection 
for their protectors only so long as they are opulent and 
abandon them as soon as they are ruined. 

XXXVIII. There are six things which almost invariably 
entail unhappy consequences — the service of kings, robbery, 
horsebreaking, the accumulation of wealth, sorcery, and anger. 

XXXIX. Never make known one's condition, one's wealth, 
one's mistress, one's mantrams, one's remedies, the place where 
one has hidden his money, the good works which one does, 
the insults which one has received, or the debts which one has 
contracted. 

XL. Knowledge is the health of the body, poverty is its 
plague, gaiety is its support, sadness makes it grow old. 

XLI. A shameless man fears the maladies engendered by 
luxury, a man of honour fears contempt, a rich person fears the 
rapacity of kings, gentleness fears violence, beauty fears old age, 
the penitent fears the influence of the senses, the body fears Yama, 
the god of death ; but the miser and the envious fear nothing. 



CH. xxviii] Niti Slokas 485 

XLII. Just as milk nourishes the body and intemperance 
causes it to sicken, so does meditation nourish the spirit, while 
dissipation enervates it. 

XLIII. It is prudent to live on good terms with one's cook, 
with ballad-mongers, with doctors, with magicians, with the 
ruler of one's country, with rich people, and with obstinate folk. 

XLI V. Birds do not perch on trees where there is no fruit ; 
wild beasts leave the forests when the leaves of the trees have 
fallen and there is no more shade for them ; insects leave plants 
where there are no longer flowers ; leeches leave springs which 
no longer flow; women leave men who have become old or 
poverty-stricken ; a minister leaves the service of an obstinate 
king ; servants leave a master who has been reduced to poverty. 
Thus it is that self-interest is the motive of everything in this 
world. 

XLV. Only the sea knows the depth of the sea, only the 
firmament knows the expanse of the firmament ; the gods alone 
k low the power of the gods. 

XLVL However learned one may be, there is always some- 
thing more to be learnt ; however much in favour one may be 
with kings, there is always something to fear; however affec- 
tionate women may be, it is always necessary to be wary of 
them. 

XLVII. The meaning of a dream, the effects of clouds in 
autumn, the heart of a woman, and the character of kings are 
beyond the comprehension of anybody. 

XLV 1 1 1. It is more easy to discover flowers on the sacred 
fig-tree, or a white crow, or the imprint of fishes' feet, than to 
know what a woman has in her heart. 

XLIX. The quality of gold is known by means of the touch- 
stone; the strength of a bull is known by the weight that it will 
carry ; the character of a man is known by his sayings ; but 
there is no means by which we can know the thoughts of 
a woman. 

L. Place no confidence in a parasite, or in a miser, or in any 
one who meddles in affairs which do not concern him. Do 
nothing to damage your friend. Avoid all communications with 
your friend's wife when he is away. 

LI. A prudent man will never divulge his thoughts to another 
before he knows that other's thoughts. 



486 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

LI I. Nothing is more seductive and, at the same time, more 
deceitful than wealth. It is extremely troublesome to acquire, 
to keep, to spend, and to lose. 

LI 1 1. Courage is the most splendid quality in an elephant; 
high-spiritedness is the most splendid quality in a horse ; the 
moon is the most beautiful ornament of the night ; the sun is 
the most beautiful ornament of the day ; cleanliness is the most 
beautiful ornament of the house; gentleness in words is the 
most beautiful ornament of speech ; virtuous children are the 
most beautiful ornaments of families ; so too is modesty the most 
beautiful ornament in a woman, and justice the most beautiful 
quality in kings. 

LIV. Just as rain brings an end to famine, the bearing of 
children an end to a woman's beauty, an illicit transaction an 
end to the wealth of him who permits it ; so does the degradation 
into which great people may fall bring an end to their greatness. 

LV. When one sees blades of sahrabi^ grass on white-ant 
heaps one can tell at once that snakes are there ; so when one 
sees anybody frequenting the company of wicked men one may 
feel sure that he is as wicked as the others. 

LVI. Great rivers, shady trees, medicinal plants, and virtuous 
people are not born for themselves, but for the good of mankind 
in general. 

LVI I. The joy of a Brahmin invited to a good feast, of a 
famished cow to which fresh grass is offered, or of a virtuous 
woman' who goes to a feast where she meets her long-absent 
husband is not greater than that of a good soldier who goes to 
the wars. 

LVIII. Only death can cut short the affection of a faithful 
woman for her family, of a tiger and other wild animals for their 
claws, of a miser for his riches, of a warrior for his weapons. 

LIX. Take care not to fix your abode in a place where there 
is no temple, no headman, no school, no river, no astrologer, 
and no doctor. 



* Dubois evidently means darbha by accident, to get up a feast on a very 

grass. — Ed. large scale, and to invite people of all 

' If Hindu stories are to be believed, sorts and conditions to it on the chance 

it was formerly a practice among of coming across their long-lost bus- 

Hindu women, who happened to be- bands.— Ed. 
come separated from their husbands 



CH. xxviii] Moral Aphorisms 487 

LX. We may descend into hell, establish our dwelling in the 
abode of Brahma or in the paradise of Indra, throw ourselves 
into the depths of the sea, ascend to the summit of the highest 
mountain, take up our habitation in the howling desert or in the 
town where Kubera reigns, take refuge with Yama, bury our- 
selves in the bowels of the earth, brave the dangers of battle, 
sojourn in the midst of venomous reptiles, or take up our abode 
in the moon ; yet our destiny will none the less be accomplished. 
All that will happen to us will be such as it is not in our power 
to avoid'. 

LXI. Bad ministers cause the ruin of kings, evil opportunities 
that of young men, worldly communications that of penitents, 
good works done without discernment that of Brahmins. 

LXI I. The vice or virtue which prevails in a kingdom is attri- 
buted to the monarch ; the faults of kings, to their ministers ; the 
defects of women, to their husbands ; those of children, to their 
parents ; and those of disciples, to their gurus, 

LXI 1 1. Just as- intoxicating liquors destroy our sense of taste, 
so does a &on of bad character destroy a whole family. The 
society of wicked men dishonours those whose company they 
frequent. Self-interest destroys friendships that are most firmly 
cemented. 

LXIV. He who boasts of knowing that which he does not 
know and he who affects not to know that which he does know 
are equally blameworthy. 

LXV. There are three kinds of persons who are well received 
everywhere — a gallant warrior, a learned man, and a pretty 
woman. 

LXVI. The favours of a prostitute appear like nectar at first, 
but they soon become poison. The pursuit of knowledge is 
troublesome at first, but knowledge is a source of great delight 
when it is acquired. 

LXVI I. A virtuous man ought to be like the sandal-tree, which 
perfumes the axe that destroys it. 

^ In order to understand clearly assert that the destiny of each man is 

the sense of this stanza, one must irrevocably written on his forehead by 

remember that Hindus admit the doc- the hand of Brahma himself. — Du- 

trine of absolute predestination, and bois. 



CHAPTER XXIX 

The Funeral Ceremonies of Brahmins. 

The closing moments of a Brahmin's life are associated with 
a number of ridiculous ceremonies. One might suppose there- 
from that Brahmins were eager to preserve after their death 
that superiority over their fellows which they boast about so 
much during their lifetime ; and that their desire was to sur- 
p ass everybody else in the foolishness of their practices at the 
period when the scythe of Father Time reduced these gods of 
the earth to the level of the humblest Pariah. For the rest, 
most Hindus observe very many formalities when their near 
relatives die. As soon as the symptoms of death become mani- 
fest in a Brahmin, a spot is chosen on the ground and smeared 
over with cow-dung. On this darbha grass is strewn, and over 
this again is placed a new and ceremonially pure cloth, upon 
which the dying man is then laid. His loins are next girded 
with another ceremonially pure cloth. Then, the dying man 
having given his permission, the ceremony called sarva praya- 
schitta^ or perfect expiation, is performed by the purohita and 
the chief mourner — that is to say, the person who is most 
nearly related to the deceased or who by common usage has 
the right to perform this function. Then a few small coins of 
gold, silver, and copper are carried in on a metal salver, and in 
another akshatas^ sandalwood, and pancha-gavia. The purohita 
pours a few drops oi \h^ pancha-gavia ' into the mouth of the dying 
man, by virtue of which his body becomes perfectly purified. 
Then the general purification ceremonies are proceeded with. 
The purohita and the chief mourner invite the sick Brahmin to 

* See Pai-t I, Chapter XIII. 



Brahmin Funeral Ceremonies 489 

recite in spirit, if he cannot articulate distinctly, certain manirams, 
by virtue of which he is delivered from all his sins. After this 
a cow is brought in along with her calf; her horns are orna- 
mented with rings of gold or brass, her neck with garlands of 
flowers, while her body is covered with a new piece of cloth ; 
and she is also decorated with various other ornaments. The 
cow is led up to the sick person, who takes her by the tail, 
and at the same time the purohita recites a mantram praying 
that the cow may lead the dying Brahmin by a happy road 
into the other world. The latter then makes a present of the 
animal to some other Brahmin, into whose hand he pours a few 
drops of water in token of the gift. This gift of a cow is called 
godana^ and is indispensable if one wishes to arrive without 
mishap in Yama-loka, or the kingdom of Yama, the king of hell. 
Bordering Yama-loka there is a river of fire which all men 
must cross after they have ceased to live. Those who have made 
the godana^ when they come to their last hour, will find on the 
banks of this river a cow which will help them to pass on to 
the opposite bank without being touched by the flame. After the 
godana, the coins placed on the metal salver are distributed to 
the Brahmins, and the sum total ought to equal the price of the 
cow. Afterwards the dasa-dana, or the ten gifts, are prepared. 
These are to be distributed at the obsequies which will subse- 
quently take place. The gifts consist of cows, lands, gingelly 
seeds, gold, liquefied butter, cloth, various kinds of grains, sugar, 
silver, and salt. These ten articles, which are offiered to the 
Brahmins, are supposed to be extremely acceptable to the gods, 
and procure for him who offiers them a blessed sojourn in the 
Abode of Bliss after death. 

A Brahmin must not be allowed to die on a bed or even on 
a mat, and for this reason : the soul in separating itself from the 
body in which it is incorporated enters into another body, which 
leads it to the Abode of Bliss destined for it, and if the dying 
Brahmin were to expire on a bed, he would be obliged to 
carry it with him wherever he went, which, it may easily be 
supposed, would be very inconvenient. Accordingly, it is 
necessary, in order to relieve the dying person of such a burden, 
to offer abundant alms and perform expensive ceremonies. This 
absurd custom has suggested a curse which is very common 
amongst the Brahmins when they quarrel with each other. 



490 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

' Mayst thou/ they will say, ' have no person near thee to place 
thee on the ground in the hour of death ! ' 

As soon as the dying person has breathed his last, it is 
a recognized custom that everybody present must at once burst 
into tears ; and that in a fashion strictly laid down for the 
occasion. The chief mourner then proceeds to bathe without 
taking off his clothes, next has his head and face shaved, and 
lastly goes to bathe a second time in order to purify himself 
from the defilement of the barber's touch. On his return he 
causes to be brought to him pancha-gavta, gingelly oil, darbha 
grass, raw rice, and a few other things. He places on the ring 
finger of the right hand the paviiram \ Then he performs the 
sam-kalpa, and offers homam (sacrifice to fire) in order that the 
deceased may obtain a place in heaven. 

Then the corpse is washed, and the barber shaves off all the 
hair. It is washed a second time, and afler that sandalwood and 
akshatas are placed upon the forehead and garlands of flowers 
round the neck. The mouth is filled with betel-leaves and the 
body is apparelled in rich raiment and jewels. It is then 
placed on a kind of state bed, where it remains exposed to view 
during the time that the preparations for the obsequies are pro- 
ceeding. When these have been finished, the person who is 
presiding at the ceremony brings a new piece of ceremonially 
pure cloth in which he wraps the corpse. A strip of this cloth 
is torn off, and a small piece of iron, on which a few drops of 
gingelly oil are poured, is tied up in it. This cloth is twisted 
into the form of a triple cord, and must be kept for twelve 
days, to be used in the various ceremonies of which I shall speak 
later on. 

The litter on which the body is placed is constructed as 
follows. To two long parallel poles are fastened transversely 
seven pieces of wood with ropes of straw, and on this the 
body is placed. Then they bind the toes and the two thumbs 
together*. The shroud, which until then has been merely 
thrown over the body, is now wrapped around it, and is bound 
strongly with straw ropes. If the dead Brahmin happens to 
leave a wife behind, his face is lefl uncovered. The chief 
mourner then gives the signal to depart, and, carrying fire in 

^ See Part I, Chapter XIII. his last his toes and thumbs are tied 

' As soon as a person breathes with a small piece of cloth. — £d. 



CH. xxix] At the Funeral Pyre ^91 

an earthen vessel, puts himself at the head of the procession. 
After him comes the funeral litter, ornamented with flowers, 
green leaves, coloured cloths, and sometimes costly stuffs. 
Surrounding it are the parents and friends of the deceased, 
all of them without turbans, and having simply a piece of 
cloth thrown over their heads in token of mourning. The 
women are never allowed to attend the funeral ceremonies 
out of doors \ They remain in the house and utter most 
lamentable cries. On the way to the funeral pyre three 
halts are made. Each time the mouth of the dead person is 
opened, and a little raw and soaked rice is placed in it, so 
that hunger and thirst may at the same time be satisfied. 
These halts, however, have a more serious motive. Instances 
have been known, it is said, of persons believed to be dead 
having not been so in reality, or if really dead having come 
to life again ^ Seeing that the spirits of the nether world 
or their emissaries have been known to make mistakes in 
their choice and to take one person for another, these halts 
are made to give plenty of time for the spirits to recognize any 
mistakes they may have made, so that no person may be thrown 
on the funeral pyre who is still destined to live. Each of these 
halts lasts about a quarter of an hour. On arrival at the burning- 
ground a shallow pit is first dug, about six feet in length and 
three in breadth. This is then consecrated by mantrams and 
sprinkled with ceremonial water, while several small pieces of 
money are thrown into it. 

Then the funeral pyre is erected, and the corpse is placed 
upon it. The chief mourner next takes a small ball of dry cow- 
dung, sets fire to it, places it upon the hollow of the deceased's 
stomach, and performs on this lighted bratty the sacrifice of 
homafft. Then follows a most extraordinary ceremony, which 
at the same time is certainly a very disgusting one, the chief 
mourner placing his lips successively to all the apertures of the 

^ This is not true of the Brahmins, by any chance the supposed corpse 

whose women always follow the pro- should revive after reaching the pyre, 

cession to the cremation ground. — dire consequences would result to the 

Ed. village. He is not, under those cir- 

' These halts are made to allow cumstances, allowed to go back to the 

time for recovery, if the man is not village, but is expelled altogether. — 

dead, befoie reaching the cremation £d. 
ground. For it is a firm belief that if 



492 Hindu Manners^ Customs ^ and Ceremonies fpx. n 

deceased's body, addressing to each a mantram appropriate to 
it, kissing it, and dropping on it a little ghee. By this ceremony 
the body is supposed to be completely purified. The chief 
mourner then places a small piece of gold money in the mouth, 
and everybody present in turn deposits in it a few grains of 
soaked rice. The near relatives then approach and deprive the 
corpse of all the jewels with which it is adorned, and even of its 
shroud ; and then it is covered with small splinters of wood 
which are sprinkled with pancha-gavia. The chief mourner 
walks round the funeral pyre three times, and pours upon it 
some water that is allowed to trickle from an earthen vessel 
which he carries on his shoulder, and which he afterwards 
breaks on the head of the deceased. 

This last act and that which follows formally constitute him 
the dead man's heir\ Then a lighted torch is brought to 
him. Before he takes it, however, it is customary for him to 
show his grief by uttering mournful cries. In displaying his 
grief he rolls upon the ground, strikes his breast fiercely with 
his hand, and makes the air resound with his cries. Following 
his example, all present also weep bitterly, or pretend to do 
so, holding themselves clasped one to another as a sign of 
grief. Then, taking hold of the torch, the chief mourner sets 
fire to the four corners of the pile. As soon as the flames 
have caught hold of it everybody retires, with the exception of the 
four Brahmins who have carried the corpse, and who must 
remain on the spot until the whole pyre has been consumed. 
Meanwhile the heir goes to bathe himself without taking off his 



' * The offering to deceased fathers 
at the sraddha is the key to the Hindu 
law of inheritance. It furnishes the 
principal evidence of kinship, on which 
the title to participate in the patrimony 
is founded, no power of making wills 
being recognized in Manu, or any 
other authoritative code of Hindu 
Jurisprudence. . . . The object of such 
sraddhas is two-fold, viz. first, the 
re-embodying of the soul of the de- 
ceased in some kind of form after 
cremation of the corpse, or simply the 
release of the subtile body which is to 
convey the soul away. Secondly, the 



raising him from the regions of the 
atmosphere, where he would have 
otherwise to roam for an indefinite 
period among demons and evil spirits 
to a particular heaven or region of 
bliss. There he is eventually half 
deified among the shades of departed 
kinsmen. Manu, however, is not clear 
as to the precise effect of the sraddha. 
He merely states that its performance 
by a son or the nearest male kinsman 
is necessary to deliver a father from 
a kind of hell called Pm/, and that the 
spirits of the departed {Pitris) feed on 
the offered food.* — Monier- Williams. 



cH. xxix] The 'Bath of the Dead* 493 

clothes ; while soaked in this way, he selects a clear spot on the 
ground and causes rice and pulse to be cooked there in a new 
earthenware vessel, which he must keep carefully for the ten 
days following. Then directing his thoughts to the deceased, 
he pours a libation of oil and water on the ground, strews darbha 
grass over it, which he also sprinkles with the same mixture 
of oil and water, and on this again he places the rice and pulse 
after moulding them in the form of balls. A third libation is 
then offered, mantrams are recited, and the balls are thrown to 
the crows, which, as every one knows, are very common in 
India. The Hindus believe these noisy and rapacious birds 
to be evil spirits, in fact, devils under the form of crows. This 
offering, therefore, is intended to render them kindly disposed 
towards the dead man. If they refuse to accept the food, which 
we are told sometimes happens, it is a very bad omen for 
him, and instead of being admitted into the Abode of Bliss 
he will find himself, despite all the mantrams and purifying 
ceremonies, made captive in the Yama-loka, that is to say, in hell. 

After the corpse has been consumed, the four Brahmins who 
remained near the pyre return to the place where the other 
people present at the ceremonies have gathered together '. 
Three times they walk round the assembly, asking permission 
to take the bath of the Ganges, Then they proceed to perform 
their ablutions in order to purify themselves of the pollution of 
having carried a corpse. The chief mourner invites all present 
to take the bath of the dead, the mn'tika-snana, which is supposed 
to be on behalf of the deceased whose body has just been con- 
sumed by the flames. This bath, it is supposed, will refresh it 
after the fiery ordeal. Then a few small coins and some betel- 
leaves are distributed among those present, and every one who 
has a right to them is presented with the dasa-dana, after which 
all return to the door of the deceased's house, though no 
person enters the house because it is still defiled. Finally, 
everybody washes his feet and returns to his own house. 

Nevertheless, for the heir another ceremony still remains, 
which consists in filling a little chatty with earth and sowing 
nine kinds of grain, namely rice, barley, gingelly seeds, and the 
five kinds of pulse. He waters them so that they may quickly 
sprout and be used for certain ceremonies which follow. 

* These people always meet on the bank of a river or a tank. — £d. 



494 Hindu Manners^ Cusioms, and Ceremonies 

A thing of the very highest importance that he must do that 
day is to place in the habitation of the deceased a small vessel 
full of water, over which he hangs a thread tied at one end to 
the ceiling*. This thread is intended to serve as a ladder to 
the prana, that is to say, to the life-breath which animated the 
body of the deceased, and which by this thread is enabled to 
descend and drink the water during the ten days which follow. 
And in order that the prana may have something to eat as well 
as to drink, a handful of rice is placed each morning by the side 
of the vessel. 

It is not until all these ceremonies and formalities have been 
accomplished that the people of the house are allowed to take 
any food. For they have neither eaten nor drunk an3rthing since 
the moment that the deceased gave up the ghost. All these 
practices and those which I will briefly detail in the following 
chapter are most rigorously observed. The omission of the 
most minute of them would cause no less scandal than the 
omission of the more important. Nevertheless poverty is 
allowed as an excuse for neglecting those which entail large 
expenditure. For instance, most Brahmins would be quite 
unable to make the dasa-dana, or ten gifts. 

It is to be observed that these practices, however superstitious 
they may appear, clearly denote that the Hindus have pre- 
served a most distinct idea of the immortality of the soul ; that 
they recognize the corruption of human nature and the necessity 
of resorting to means of purification for enabling the soul to 
enter the blessed state and enjoy the rights which it has forfeited 
through sin. And the prana, for instance, which is regarded by 
the Hindus sometimes as the soul and sometimes as the breath 
of life, reminds us of the spiraailum vitae of the Holy Scriptures, 
by the aid of which the Creator gave life to the clay out of 
which He formed mankind. 

' This is not done in some parts of South India. — £d. 



CHAPTER XXX 

The Various Ceremonies observed after Burial in honour of the Dead. 

Hindu mourning lasts one year, during which a large number 
of ceremonies have to be observed. The principal are as 
follow : — 

On the day after the funeral the chief mourner, accompanied 
by his relatives and friends, goes to the place consecrated 
to the burning of the dead. There he recommences the cere- 
monies of the previous evening, without forgetting the food for 
the crows, and places on the ground the strip of cloth which 
has been torn from the pall. The Brahmins present take the 
bath of the dead {mritika-snana^f receive betel, and depart. The 
heir, however, keeps back one of them, and gives him two 
measures of rice, peas, and vegetables, wrapped in a new cloth, 
which he presents as well, so that he may make a good meal 
and be well clothed by proxy as it were for the deceased, in 
case the rice, the peas, the oil, and the water which have 
already been offered for the latter may not be sufficient to 
allay his hunger and quench his thirst, and so that he may 
not be without clothes to cover his nakedness in the next 
world. 

On the third day, the heir again summons his relatives and 
friends. He erects a small pandal in a corner of his courtyard, 
and has rice, seven sorts of vegetables, cakes, &c., cooked 
there. When these viands have been prepared, he places them 
on a cloth folded in four, and covers them all with another 
cloth. Then five small earthen pots are brought filled with 
pancha-gavia^ as also a measure of rice, some peas, vegetables, 
sandalwood, akshatas, three small pieces of cloth dyed yellow, 



496 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

some flour, a small stick two cubits in length, some betel, some 
gingelly oil, and the ten gifts (dasa-dana). Provided with all 
these and accompanied by his relatives, he returns to the 
burning-ground. There he performs his ablutions, puts on 
the ring pavitrantf performs the sam-ka/pa, and then fills a new 
earthen pot with water, which he sprinkles over the ashes of the 
deceased. After that he sprinkles them with milk. He squats 
on his heels with his face turned to the east, performs once 
more the sam-kalpa, stirs the ashes with the small stick above 
mentioned, looking for any bones that may have escaped the 
flames, and these he puts into an earthen pot, reciting a 
mantram meanwhile. Gathering up a portion of the ashes, he 
throws them into the water. The remainder he collects into 
a heap, to which he gives the rough semblance of a human 
figure, supposed to represent the deceased. He offers as sacri- 
fice to it a portion of the things he has brought, sprinkles it 
with pancha-gavia, and puts the whole into an earthen pot. 
These sad mementoes of the deceased are destined to be 
thrown subsequently into one of the sacred rivers. 

He then raises a mound of earth twelve inches high on the 
exact spot where the dead body has been burnt, and taking 
three small stones he places one in the middle of the mound, 
which receives the name of the deceased ; the second, which he 
places at the south end, is named Yama; and the third, which 
he places at the north end, is called Rudra. Calling these three 
stones by the names which he has given them, he proceeds to 
rub them over with gingelly oil, bathes them while he con- 
tinues to recite man/rams, and clothes them in the three pieces 
of yellow cloth with which he has provided himself. After- 
wards, putting them back in their places, he offers them puja 
and fieiveddya, and pours a libation of oil and water in honour of 
each particular one. Then all the Brahmins present file in one 
by one, embrace the chief mourner, and weep with him. The 
distribution of dasa-dana follows as on the first day. 

The three stones are next placed in the earthen pot that is 
intended for cooking the rice and the peas, which are mixed 
with a fresh supply of these vegetables, and the heir carries it 
all to the border of the tank. After cooking the viands he offers 
them to the three stones, repeats his libations, and at last 
throws the rice and the peas to the crows. A meal and a cloth 



CH. xxx] The Brahmin Widow 497 

are again bestowed on a Brahmin by proxy as it were for the 
deceased ; and the day ends in pretty much the same manner 
as those preceding it. 

It is considered of great importance to preserve carefully for 
ten days the three little stones, as well as the pot used for the 
cooking of the crows' food. If by misfortune a single one of 
these articles were lost, all the ceremonies would have to be 
begun over again. 

From the fourth to the ninth day inclusive, these foolish 
ceremonies are repeated daily. The objects are (i) to prevent 
the deceased suffering from hunger, thirst, and nakedness; 
(2) to enable him to divest himself as quickly as possible of his 
hideous and ghastly carcase and to assume a beautiful form, so 
that, in a new birth, he may be neither deaf, nor blind, nor 
dumb, nor lame, nor afflicted with any bodily infirmity. 

On the tenth day the chief mourner rises early to make his 
ablutions, constructs a little panda! in his courtyard, causes 
rice, peas, and three sorts of vegetables to be cooked there, 
prepares the drink called parantanna, and some rice cakes 
cooked in water. He places the whole on a large plantain leaf, 
with three pieces of saffron on the top. In short, he prepares 
all the articles indispensable for the sacrifices and offerings 
which he is about to make. 

When all is ready, the widow of the deceased, after per- 
forming her ablutions, paints her eyelids with antimony, her fore- 
head with vermilion, her neck with sandalwood-paste, her arms 
and legs with saffron; she then puts on her richest garments, 
bedecks herself with all her jewels, twines red flowers in her 
hair, and hangs garlands of sweet-smelling flowers round her 
neck. The married women surround her, clasp her by turns 
in their arms, and weep with her. 

The chief mourner, provided with all his sacrificial parapher- 
nalia, and followed by his relatives and friends, as well as by 
the widow and her companions, returns once more to the 
burning - ground, where all the preparatory ceremonies are 
renewed just as those already described. This time he mixes 
some earth with water, and spreads three coats of the mud 
on the three stones, accompanied by fnanirants, adjurations, 
sacrifices, offerings, &c. 

The women present then surround the widow once more, 

♦* Kk 



498 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

beating their heads and breasts in measured time and weeping 
and sobbing as loud as they can. 

The chief mourner makes three little balls of boiled rice and 
peas, places them on the ground on darblia grass, pours a liba- 
tion of oil and water, offers the little balls to the deceased, and 
then throws them to the crows. 

He puts back the three stones into the earthen pot which has 
played so important a part during these ten days, carries them 
to the edge of the tank, performs sam-kalpa, puts the ring 
paviiram on his finger, walks into the water up to his neck, 
turns to the east, and looking towards the sun, sa3's : — 

' Till now, these stones have represented the dead body ; 
may that dead body from this moment leave its hideous form 
and take that of the gods I May it be transported into Swarga 
to enjoy all its pleasures as long as the Ganges shall flow, as 
long as these stones shall last ! ' 

At these words he throws the pot and the stones inside it 
over his head into the water. Then he performs his ablutions, 
returns to the bank, performs the sam-ka/pa, and distributes the 
dasa-dana. Then, with the permission of the Brahmins, he and 
his near relatives are shaved ; for during these ten days of 
mourning shaving is not allowed. Finally, after numberless 
foolish ceremonies, of which I have given only a short epi- 
tome, all repair to the edge of the tank. There a heap of 
earth four fingers high is made, on which is placed a little ball 
also of earth, which receives the name of the deceased. Then 
the widow, surrounded by her companions and showing no 
sign of grief, divests herself of her jewels and rich garments,, 
wipes off the artificial pigments with which she had smeared 
different parts of her body, and finally takes off the tali which 
she wears round her neck. This discarded ornament she 
places near the ball of earth which represents her deceased 
husband, uttering these words the while : * I abandon all these 
to prove to thee my love and my devotion.' Then ensue fresh 
wailings and weepings on the part of her companions. 

The purohiia appears on the scene at this moment to perform 
the puniaha-vachana , that is, the consecration of holy water \ 
He makes all the women who are participating in the mourning 
drink a little of this water, and sprinkles some drops on their 

* See Part I, Chapter XIII. 



CH. xxx] Deliverance of the Bull 499 

heads. By this means they obtain purification from the defile- 
ment which they have contracted by taking part in the funeral 
ceremonies. 

The heir gives to each person present an areca-nut and 
a betel-leaf, and to the widow a white cloth, which she imme- 
diately puts on. 

Finally, all return to the house of the deceased, where, 
after having inspected the lamp, which ought to have been kept 
burning all this time on the spot where the deceased breathed 
his last, each one takes leave and does not enter his own house 
till he has washed his feet at the door. 

Being now left alone, the heir takes the five little earthen pots 
in which he had sown some seeds on the first day, offers them 
puja^ and then throws them into the water. 

On the eleventh day, as soon as his ablutions are over, he goes 
to summon nineteen Brahmins, to whom he first of all offers 
a feast to be eaten by proxy for the deceased. Then he puts 
into a basket a large earthen chatty containing two measures 
of rice, and into another basket several more earthen pots of 
a smaller size. He provides himself with liquefied butter, 
gingelly oil, darbha grass, flowers, &c., and, accompanied by the 
Brahmins invited, goes to the edge of the tank. There he digs 
a small hole, blesses it with mantrams, places therein his little 
earthen pots, and lights a fire. At the four comers of the hole 
he places darbha grass and sprinkles oil all round it. }ie 
spreads some boiled rice on a plantain leaf^ sprinkles it with 
ghee, and makes it into thirty-six little balls, which he throws 
subsequently into the fire one after the other. To this fire he 
makes profound obeisance, beseeching it to grant the deceased 
access into the Abode of Bliss. He then distributes dasa-dana 
and gives the Brahmins some betel. The latter then go to 
bathe themselves, and return to assist in the ceremony of the 
deliverance of the bulL 

For this purpose a bull three years old is chosen. It must 
be all of one colour, either white, red, or black. After washing 
it they smear it with sandalwood-paste and akshatas, decorate it 
with garlands of flowers, and with a red-hot iron brand on the 
right haunch the figure of one of Siva's weapons called sulah. 
The chief mourner implores this god to consent to the deliver- 
ance of the bull, so that, as a reward for this good deed, the 

K k 2 



500 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

deceased may find a place in an Abode of Bliss. They then set 
loose the bull, which is allowed to wander about grazing without 
a keeper wherever it likes, and it is given as a present to some 
Brahmin '. 

The nineteen Brahmin guests seat themselves in a line on 
small stools. The heir spreads darbha grass before them, and 
gives a blade of it to each, while reciting a mantram and utter- 
ing the name of the deceased. He then sprinkles some drops 
of oil on their heads, presents them with sandalwood-paste, 
gives to each a present of two pieces of cloth, offers a libation 
of oil and water, and again serves them with food. 

The repast over, he mixes some boiled rice, peas, and herbs 
together, rolling them all into three balls> which he puts into an 
earthen pot. After sundry libations, offerings, and other formali- 
ties, he throws these three balls to the cattle and dismisses the 
nineteen Brahmins, who, before returning home, take good care 
to bathe. 

On the twelfth day the heir goes to summon eight Brahmins, 
and makes them sit down on as many stools in front of him. 
He chooses one of them to represent the corpse of the dead 
man, and gives him, as well as the seven others, a blade of 
darbha grass with the usual ceremony. He then traces three 
squares on the ground, over which he spreads cow-dung, 
which he blesses with ntantramst and over this again he pours 
oil and spreads darbha grass. In the middle square he places 
the Brahmin whom he has appointed to represent the corpse, 
sprinkles over his feet oil and darbha grass, and then washes 
them with water. 

Two other Brahmins step into the second square, and the five 
others into the third. To each of them he performs the same 
office. Having made them sit down, he approaches the one 
who represents the corpse, sprinkles on his head and hands 
some drops of oil, while repeating a mantram, puts earrings in 
his ears and a gold ring on his finger, makes him a present of 
two pieces of cloth, a white blanket, a brass chembu (drinking 
bowl), and some betel, hangs round his neck one of the rosaries 
called rudrakshas, and smears him with sandalwood - paste. 
Each of the seven others also receives two pieces of cloth, a white 

* These bulls are usually dedicated to a temple, and they are used for 
breeding purposes. — Ed, 



CH. xxx] Other Funeral Ceremonies 501 

blanket, and a chembu. Then they all take part in the repast 
prepared for them. At its conclusion the heir puts some rice 
and oil in a dish, and moulds four balls, which he places on 
the ground after performing the necessary formalities. One of 
these balls is intended for the deceased, a second for the de- 
ceased's father, a third for his grandfather, and the last for his 
great-grandfather. Taking the deceased's ball, he says : — 

'Till now thou hast preserved the hideous appearance of 
a corpse : from this moment thou shalt clothe thyself in the 
divine form of thy ancestors; thou shalt inhabit with them 
the pitri'loka (abode of the ancestors) and there enjoy every 
sort of happiness.' 

He then divides this ball into three portions and mixes 
one portion with each of the remaining three balls. 

In the same way he tears the little strip of cloth which 
represents the triple cord of the deceased into three pieces 
and puts one on each ball. To all of these he makes offerings 
and libations. After this, comes a further distribution of 
dasa-dana. Finally, the halls and offerings are thrown to the 
cattle. 

When all this long and monotonous ceremony is ended, the 
chief mourner anoints his head with oil, takes a bath, and returns 
home well covered up in a cloth. He embraces his relatives and 
friends, addressing words of consolation to each in turn. He 
paints his forehead with sandalwood-paste and aksliatas, resumes 
his turban and ordinary clothes, and distributes presents accord- 
ing to his means. 

The purohtta also recites a great many ntantrams, and sprinkles 
all the corners of the house with holy water, by which means it 
is purified, together with all those who inhabit it \ 

On the thirteenth day the heir performs homam in the accus- 
tomed manner in honour of the nine planets. 

A ceremony something like that of the twelfth day takes 
place on the twenty-seventh ; but only three Brahmins take part 
in this, representing respectively the deceased, his father, and 
his grandfather. One is supposed to call himself Vasudeva, 

* The same kind of ceremony took the only feature of resemblance be- 

place amongst the Romans on the tween the funeral ceremonies of the 

tenth day, named denkcUes feriae. As Romans and those of the Hindus.-^ 

may have been observed, this is not Dubois. 



502 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

the second calls himself Yama, and the third calls himself the 
Sun. The heir makes the usual offerings and libations to these 
personages, gives each of them a piece of cloth, and has a meal 
served up to them, at the end of which he kneads three balls 
composed of rice, peas, and herbs, which are solemnly offered to 
the deceased and his two ancestors. 

The same ceremony is repeated on the 30th, 45th, 60th, 75th, 
90th, I20th, 175th, 190th, 2ioth, 240th, 270th, 300th, and 330th 
day after the death of the deceased. Further, the anniversaries 
of the deaths of his father and mother must be celebrated by 
a Hindu all his life long without fail; and each time most of 
the formalities just mentioned must be observed and liberal 
gifts made to Brahmins. 

At each new moon it is the indispensable duty of a man to 
offer a libation of oil and water to his deceased father, as well 
as to his grandfather and to his great-grandfather \ 

I have mentioned that the pecuniary circumstances of many 
Brahmins do not allow of their fulfilling to the letter the costly 
obligations imposed upon a chief mourner. But there are 
a great many which are obligatory and which entail consider- 
able expense. Conceit and vanity, which are such strong 
incentives in the minds of Brahmins, induce many of them to 
contract debts infinitely beyond their means in order to make 
a show on such occasions. 

The funeral ceremony for a woman is nearly the same as that 
for a man. Rather less attention, however, is paid to a widowed 
mother of a family. And much less still to a widow who dies 
without children ; the flames of the funeral pile have scarcely 
consumed the mortal remains of such a one before she is for- 
gotten. When a Brahmin woman dies, the married women, 
kinswomen, or friends of the family assist at her funeral 
ceremony, and it is they who receive the usual presents and 
distributions. 

The obsequies of the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas are performed 
with nearly the same pomp as those of the Brahmins, the 
ceremonies which are observed lasting twelve days. 

It is always dipurohita who presides at the death-bed, and who 

* And also to their wives. Libations and gi'eat- great-grandfather and their 
are also sometimes offered to the ma- wives.— £d. 
temal grandfather, great-grandfather, 



cH. x:s.'x.] Kshatriya^ VatsyUy and Stidra Funerals 503 

directs the mourning ceremonies in both these castes. The chief 
mourner invites the Brahmins, to whom offerings and presents 
are made. These ceremonies are repeated every month during 
the first year ; and after that it suffices if the /i//, that is the 
anniversary, is celebrated regularly. 

The last services which the Sudras render to their dead are 
accompanied by much less ceremony and formality. They have 
neither niantrams nor sacrifices. However, when a Sudra's last 
hour is come, it is customary to call a Brahmin to go through 
the ceremony oi prayaschitta (expiation) for him. His family is 
also permitted to bestow on the Brahmins ^o^na and dasa-danat 
as well as the other customary gifts and presents. As soon as 
a Sudra dies, they wash his body and have him shaved by the 
barber. Then they pay attention to his toilet, which they strive 
to render as elegant as possible, and afterwards place him sitting 
cross-legged on a sort of bed of state. When all is ready for 
the obsequies, they remove him, still in the same position, to an 
open litter, or shrine, ornamented with flowers, green leaves, 
and valuable cloths, or else to an open palanquin splendidly 
decorated. The body is then carried to the funeral pyre by 
twelve bearers. 

Musical instruments are employed in the funeral processions 
of the Sudras, but never in those of the higher castes. The two 
principal instruments are the long trumpet, called in Tamil iarai, 
and the sankha, or sangu, another no less lugubrious instrument 
made out of a large sea-shell (the conch). As soon as a Sudra 
has breathed his last, two of these tarais are blown to announce 
the sad news to all the neighbours. Their harsh and piercing 
sounds are audible at a great distance, and cannot fail to inspire 
a pious horror wherever they are heard. One trumpet will sound 
a B flat, droning on this note for the space of half a minute ; then 
another trumpet answers in G sharp ; and thus they respond 
by turns. This monotonous and ear-splitting noise continues 
without interruption from the moment of death until the end of 
the obsequies. 

Mourning in the Sudra caste lasts only three days. The third 
day is called the day of milk offering. To perform this ceremony 
the chief mourner provides himself with three young cocoanuts, 
four cocoanut branches, a measure of raw rice, some boiled rice, 
herbs, fruits, &c. He fills an earthen pot with milk, places it in 



504 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [vt. u 

a new basket, and accompanied by the relatives and friends of 
the family, preceded by conch-players, goes to the place where 
the body of the deceased was burnt. On his arrival he draws 
some water in an earthen pot and sprinkles it over the ashes on 
the pyre. Above this he erects a small pandal, covered with 
palm leaves and supported by four pillars, the interior of which 
he drapes with a piece of cloth. He collects the bones which have 
escaped the flames, puts the largest one on a flat cake made of 
dried cow-dung, and gathers up the rest in a heap. He calls 
the deceased by name and pours milk over the bones. During 
this libation the conch-players make the air resound with their 
lugubrious noise. 

The chief mourner then piles up the ashes over the bones. 
At the side he places half a cocoanut, and on the top pieces of 
another cocoanut which he breaks, sprinkling the milk over 
this pyramid of ashes. He places a third cocoanut close by on 
a plantain leaf and invokes HarischandraV 

Finally, he kneads the rice and other eatables which he has 
brought with him into a round mass and throws the whole to 
the crows, calling meanwhile upon the name of the deceased. 

Then the relatives and friends come in turn to embrace the 
chief mourner, holding him in their arms and weeping with him. 
He takes the large bone which was placed in reserve ; and 
all the mourners, to the doleful notes of the conches, go and 
throw this bone into the neighbouring tank. After bathing, 
all accompany the chief mourner to his house. There with 
much ceremony they put a new turban on his head, and each 
hastens to do justice to the repast prepared for the occasion. 
Thus ends the funeral ceremony. 

Wealthy Sudras do not stop here. They proceed on the 
thirtieth day to a new ceremony, on which occasion they strive 
to rival the Brahmins in magnificence. And the Brahmins, 
since they enjoy all the honour and profit of the feast, take care 
not to show any jealousy. 

The funeral ceremonies of the Sudras vary much in different 
districts. In some places Hindus of this caste bury their dead 
instead of burning them. In other places they throw the body 
into the river, deliberately feigning the river to be the Ganges. 
This kind of burial, the most expeditious and least costly of any, 

* "" ' ' -i kings of Ayodhya, who was famous for speaking the truth. — Ed. 



cH. xxx] Unlucky Days for Dying 505 

is common enough among the sects of Siva and the poorer 
classes of Sudras. 

The solemn occasion when man shuffles off his mortal coil 
naturally offers ample matter for speculation to the imaginative 
Hindus. They attribute to the moon a sort of Zodiac composed 
of twenty-seven constellations, each of which presides at one of 
the twenty-seven days of its periodical course. The last five 
are all more or less fatal. Woe to the relatives of him who 
dies in the period when the moon travels through them I The 
body of the deceased, in this case, cannot be removed from 
the house either by the door or the window. It is absolutely 
necessary to make an opening through the wall for this purpose. 
And this is not all. To escape the unfortunate accidents which 
would inevitably follow such an untimely death, the most prudent 
course is to abandon the house for six months, or at least three 
months, according to the degree of the malign influence of the 
constellation which was in the ascendant on the day of death \ 
At the end of this time they remove the bushes with which they 
stuffed up the front door of the ill-fated house where the death 
occurred. The remotest corners of the building are carefully 
purified, a purification which can be completed only by the inter- 
vention of a purohiia^ who has to .be called in, and of course 
paid for. Finally, a meal must 'be given to the Brahmins and 
presents must be made to them ; after that the occupants will 
have nothing else to fear. 

A death happening on Saturday entails almost equally serious 
inconveniences. It is a hundred to one in that case that another 
member of the same household will die before the year is out*. 
The only way to stave it off is to sacrifice a living animal, such 
as a ram, a he-goat, a fowl, &c., as a burnt offering. 

Thus superstition follows the Hindu even to the last days of 
his existence. We have already seen what silly fancies assail 
him from his cradle. The child born under an unlucky star 
is not only himself destined, according to common belief, to all 
sorts of troubles and accidents during the course of his life, 
but he brings bad luck to those with whom he is united by the 
ties of blood ; and it is not uncommon to see parents, convinced 

* Nowadays it is customary simply * It is also believed that a death on 

to shut up the room in which a man a Thursday entails two other deaths 
dies. — Ed. in the same family.- Ed. 



5o6 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies 

of the truth of these so-called malign influences, quietly aban- 
doning on a high-road innocent babes who happened to be born 
on a certain day which the prognostications of the professional 
astrologer have signified to be unlucky, or else handing them 
over to any one who is bold enough to run the risk of assuming 
charge of such an ill-omened burden *. There are even unnatural 
parents of this kind who go the length of cruelly strangling or 
drowning these tiny victims of most stupid and at the same time 
most atrocious superstition *. 

^ Nowadays this is not practised. — such a crime would be tried in the 

Ed. courts and punished with all the 

^ Cases of infanticide were in quite rigour of the law. This measure has 

recent times witnessed daily, especi- had the good effect of diminishing the 

ally on the banks of the Ganges, until evil, but has not rooted it out alto* 

at last the Government of Lord Wei- gether. — Dubois. 
lesley declared that any one guilty of 



CHAPTER XXXI 

The Third Condition of Brahmins, viz. Vanaf*rastha^ or Dweller in the Jungle. 
— The Respect paid to Vanaptasthas, — Conjectures as to their Origin. — 
Comparison between them and the Wise Men of Greece and other Philo- 
sophers. — The Rules of the Vanaprasthcis, — Their Renunciation of the 
World and Pleasures of the Senses. — Their Moral Virtues. 



The third condition of Brahmins is that of Vafiaprasiha, that 
is to say, dweller in the jungle. I doubt if there are any of 
them left in the country watered by the Indus and the Ganges, 
where this sect of philosophers certainly flourished at one time 
in great numbers. The sect has entirely disappeared from the 
Peninsula of India '. In ancient times the desire of sanctifying 
themselves in solitude and of reaching a higher degree of 
spiritual perfection induced numerous Brahmins to abandon 



^ It is indeed wholly improbable 
that all Brahmins conformed to this 
rule, but the second verse of the sixth 
book of the Laws of Manu prescribes 
that when the father of a family per- 
ceives his hair to be turning grey, or 
as soon as his first grandchild is born, 
and after he has paid his three debts, 
he is to retire to a forest, and there to 
practise austerities as a hermit : — 

Having taken up his sacred fire 
{agnihotram) and all the domestic 
utensils for making oblations to it, and 
having gone forth from the town to the 
forest, let him dwell there with all his 
organs of sense well restrained. 

With many kinds of pure food let 
him perform the five maha-yajnas or 
* devotional rites,* 

Let him also offer the vaUanika 
oblations with the (three sacred; fires 
according to rule. 



Let him roll backwards and forwards 
on the ground, or stand all day on 
tiptoe iprapadaih) ; let him move about 
by alternately standing up and sitting 
down, going^to the waters to bathe at 
the three savanas (sunrise, sunset, 
and midday). 

Let him practise the rules of the 
lunar penance. 

In the hot weather let him be a 
panca-tapas. 

Let him offer libations \Jarpayet) to 
the gods and Pitris^ performing ablu- 
tions at the three savanas. 

Having consigned the three sacred 
fires {vaitanan) to his own person 
(by swallowing the ashes) according 
to prescribed rules, let him remain 
without fire, without habitation, feed- 
ing on roots and fruits, practising the 
vow of a muni (i. e. the mauna-vrata 
of perpetual silence).— Ed. 



5o8 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

their residence in towns and their intercourse with mankind, 
and to go and live in the jungle with their wives, whom they 
persuaded to follow them. They were favourably received by 
those who had originally conceived this praiseworthy resolution, 
and from them they learned the rules of their life of seclusion. 
These philosophers brought much distinction to the Brahmin 
caste ; and it even seems likely that the Brahmin caste owed its 
origin to them. They are still revered as the first teachers of 
the human race and the first lawgivers of their country. 

There can be no doubt that it was the fame of these Vana- 
prastha Brahmins that excited so lively a curiosity in Alexander 
the Great. They were in fact none other than those Brachmanes 
and Gymnosophists whose customs, doctrines, and learning have 
been described by several ancient historians. 

Mention is often made of these hermit Brahmins in the 
ancient books of India. They are there represented as living 
in solitary cells, entirely cut off from all intercourse with man- 
kind and from all the distractions of social life, and devoting 
their whole time to spiritual observances. 

The most .famous and ancient of all were the seven great 
Penitents whom J have already several times mentioned. Their 
successors, too, continued to enjoy the highest renown. Kings 
paid them honours which reached the point of worship, and 
attached the greatest value to their benedictions. Princes 
trembled at the mere idea of incurring their wrath, convinced 
that their curse would entail direful consequences. This is how 
the author of the Padma-purana describes the reception of 
some Vanaprasthas by the great King of Dilipa ; — 

' Filled with unutterable joy and re3pect, he bowed himself to 
the ground before them. Then making them sit down, he washed 
their feet, drank some of the water that he used for that purpose, 
and poured the rest over his head. Joining his two hands 
together and putting .them to his forehead, he made a pro- 
found obeisance and addressed them in these words: "The 
happiness which I feel to-day on seeing you can only be the 
reward of the good works which I must have done in previous 
existences ; at the sight of your sacred feet, which are verily 
lotus flowers, I possess all that heart can desire ; my body is 
perfectly pure, now that I have had the honour of seeing 
you. You are the gods whom I worship ; I know no other 



CH. xxxi] Origin of the Vanaprasthas 509 

gods but you. 1 am henceforth as pure as the water of the 
Ganges." ' 

It is not surprising that kings humbled themselves in the 
presence of these sages, seeing that the great gods themselves 
paid respect to them; and considered themselves honoured by 
their visits. Indeed there is no mark of distinction and respect 
which the gods did not bestow upon the Vanaprasthas^ who, 
on their part, treated the gods with scant courtesy and very 
often with insolence. For example, one Vanaprastha, who visited 
the three principal Hindu divinities in turn, began by giving 
each a kick to see how they endured such an affront, and to 
learn their character by their behaviour. In fact, these penitents 
were wont to assume a kind of superiority over the gods, and 
punished them severely when they found them to blame. The 
evil deeds, and especially the lasciviousness, of Brahma, Siva, 
and Devendra, brought upon them the curses of many penitents. 

The mythologies which relate these adventures, however 
absurd they may be, at any rate prove in what high estimation 
these hermits were held, and how ancient is their origin. On 
this last point I wish to add certain considerations to those 
which I have already mentioned, and will then leave the subject 
to my reader's own judgement. 

I start again with the very probable hypothesis that in the seven 
Hindu Penitents who escaped the catastrophe of the Flood, are 
to be recognized the seven sons of Japheth, some of whom at the 
time of the dispersion of mankind must have come by way of 
Tartary and established themselves in India, becoming the first 
founders of Brahminism and the lawgivers of the families whose 
descendants peopled this portion of the globe. As is the case with 
all ancient civilized nations, time wrought changes in the laws 
which they instituted, regulating religious worship, morality, and 
the maintenance of social order: indeed, in all the wise measures 
which they took to preserve the well-being of their fellow-men. 
This is the common fate of all institutions which do not bear 
the impress of God. They either collapse altogether or become 
disfigured under the ever- repeated attacks of prejudice, passion, 
and, above all, personal interest. The simple but wise maxims 
of the first Hindu lawgivers soon degenerated into an abstract 
and subtle system of metaphysics, quite beyond the compre- 
hension of all but a few adepts ; and these latter, moved by 



5IO Hindu Manners^ Customs j and Ceremonies [pt. n 

a common ambition to lord it over their fellows, gradually 
formed an exclusive community isolated from the rest of the 
nation. The privacy of their life, their frugality, their contempt 
of riches, the purity of their morals, could not fail to gain for 
these earliest Brahmins the respect and veneration of the 
common people. 

There can be no doubt that philosophy flourished in India 
before it had been so much as thought of in Greece. Of what 
account, in truth, was the learning of Greece, of what account her 
system of polity, until Pythagoras, Lycurgus, and other famous 
Greek travellers, animated by the desire of educating them- 
selves, studied the manners and customs of Asiatic peoples, 
and borrowed, from the Hindus especially, many precepts and 
doctrines ? 

But though the" philosophy of the Greeks was of later origin 
than that of the Vanaprasthas, it soon surpassed the latter in the 
clearness of its principles and the soundness of its morality. 
Under the guidance of the Greek philosophers an immense 
impulse was given to the cultivation of learning ; and the most 
profound and luminous investigations were made regarding the 
nature of the Deity, until the gods of paganism were shorn of 
all the false glory which had hitherto surrounded them. The 
Vanaprasthas had already, it is true, made great progress in this 
direction ; but yielding to the impulses of an unbridled imagi- 
nation, they soon buried their philosophy beneath a heap of 
false ideas and vain imaginings with regard to the means of 
purifying the soul and to the spiritual side of life generally. 
The ridiculous principles which they enunciated ended by 
becoming, in their eyes, divinely sanctioned obligations; and 
from that time forward the wisest Hindus really became the 
most foolish. 

This chimera of soul-purification which they pursued, so to 
speak, beyond the range of their own reasoning powers, led 
them from error to error, from pitfall to pitfall, until they 
likewise dragged down with them the people whose oracles they 
were. 

The question arises, was there ever any connexion between 
the Hindu Gymnosophists and Zoroaster, or the Magi of Persia ? 
All that I can say in answer to this question is that, though some 
resemblances may be traced between the Ghebres, or descendants 



CH. xxxi] Ancicfit Hindu Philosophy 511 

of the ancient Persian fire-worshippers, and the Hindus in the 
worship which they both render to this element and to the sun, 
their religious doctrines and customs are in every other respect 
entirely different. Indeed, so far as I can see, the Hindu 
religious and political system is sui generis in its very founda- 
tions, and contains special characteristics of which no trace can 
be found in that of any other nation. 

Only minute examination can bring to light certain features of 
resemblance between the moral and religious principles professed 
by Hindus and those of other ancient schools of philosophy in 
other countries. Several of the Brahminical rules of conduct 
correspond closely with those followed by Zeno and the Stoics ; 
their plan of making their pupils learn everything by heart 
resembles that of the Druids; their taste for a solitary life, 
like that of the Vanaprasthas, is also shared by the Rechabites, 
the Therapeutics, the Children of the Prophet, the Magi of 
Persia, the Essenes of Egypt. But what arguments can be 
drawn from these feeble analogies to disprove the antiquity and 
originality of Hindu philosophy? And possibly it was the 
Hindus that furnished the original models, while the others 
only imitated them. 

The life of a Vanaprastha was founded on the rigorous observ- 
ance of certain established rules to which he bound himself on 
initiation. Here are some of the principal, as found in Hindu 
books, together with a few remarks of my own on each : — 

I. 'The Vanaprastha must renounce the society of other men, 
even of his own caste, and must take up his abode in the jungle 
far from towns and all habitations.* 

He did not, however, renounce the world so entirely but that 
he was permitted to appear in it from time to time ; and of this 
there are several instances in Hindu works. Besides, after he 
had passed thirty-seven years in solitude, the penitent might 
resume his place in society without losing any of the considera- 
tion which belonged to him as a Vanaprastha. 

H. ' He must take his wife with him, who will subject herself 
to the same rule of life as himseUV 

It is by this rule especially that the Vanaprastha is dis- 
tinguished from the Sannyasi, who is obliged to live in celibacy 
and renounce his wife, if he is already married. But though 
complete continence is not enjoined on the Vanaprastha, he is 



512 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

directed to use the privileges of marriage with the greatest 
moderation. 

III. 'He must live only in huts covered with leaves, more 
comfortable dwelling-places being forbidden to those who profess 
to renounce the world and all its pleasures.* 

I may remark that houses thatched with palmyra or cocoanut 
leaves are very common in India. 

IV. ' He must not wear cotton cloths ; he must only wear 
materials made of vegetable fibres.' 

This latter kind of cloth is not uncommon in Northern 
India. It is as soil as silk to the touch, and has the advantage, 
inestimable for a Hindu, of not being, like cotton, liable to 
pollution. 

V. * He must observe with the most scrupulous accuracy 
the rules prescribed for Brahmins, especially those regarding 
ablutions and the prayers accompanying them, which must be 
performed three times a day.' 

VI. 'He must pay the greatest attention to the choice of 
his food. His usual diet should be the plants and fruits which 
grow wild in the jungle. He must abstain from all those whose 
root or stem grows in the form of a bulb.' 

I have already remarked that the Brahmins of the present day 
retain this rule of diet. 

VII. 'Meditation and the contemplation of Parabrahma must 
occupy all his leisure. He must strive by this means to attain 
to union with the Supreme Deity.* 

I will detail elsewhere the different steps by which this union 
is achieved. 

VIII. 'Sacrifice, and above all that oi ihe yagnam^ should be 
reckoned one of the principal religious exercises.* 

It will be seen in the following chapter of what this famous 
yagnam sacrifice consists. 

The acquisition of knowledge was another of the principal 
occupations of these hermits. Theology, metaphysics, and 
astronomy were what they cultivated by choice. Many of them 
devoted themselves to the vain study of astrology; and it is 
to them that the Hindus are indebted for the majority of their 
books of magic, from which magicians even at the present day 
learn the tricks which cause them to be so much in request. 

According to these Vanaprastha philosophers, three principal 



CH. xxxi] Land^ Gold, and Women 513 

desires are innate in man, viz. land, gold, and women ; or, in 
other words, ambition, wealth, and luxury \ 

By the desire of land, they understood ancestral estates and 
the landed properties that a man can acquire in the course of 
his life, the possession of a whole kingdom not excepted. 
They had so completely severed themselves from the temporal 
blessings of this world, and had showed themselves so entirely 
disinterested, that their exhortations and example sometimes 
induced even kings to leave their dominions in contempt for 
the pomp and circumstance by which they were surrounded, 
and to join with them in leading an ascetic life in the jungle. 
Hindu books mention with approbation several cases of this 
sort. These anchorite princes sometimes outdid the Vanapra- 
sthas themselves in fervour and austerity; and the latter, far 
from showing themselves jealous, as a reward for such great 
zeal granted the princes the signal favour of allowing them to 
become penitent Brahmins, thus enrolling them in their own 
caste. 

By the desire of gold the Vanaprasthas understood not this 
metal alone, but also all the honours and luxuries of life which 
can be procured with money, such as lucrative employments, 
valuable household goods, fine houses, rich apparel, dainty 
fare, &c. They displayed a complete aversion from all these 
false blessings. The furniture of their huts was confined to 
a few brass and earthenware vessels. They considered them- 
selves passing rich when they possessed a few cows to furnish 
the milk which formed their chief diet ; and it was the gift of 
one of these animals that pleased them most. Hindu books 
relate extravagant stories about the cows of these ascetics. 
For instance, one of them furnished not only the milk but 
all the victuals necessary for an entire army *. A neighbouring 
prince heard of this wonderful beast, and conceived the plan 
of carrying her off" by force from the Vanaprastha, who had 
received her from the gods as a reward for his great piety ; but 
the cow, as brave as she was fruitful, charged the prince's army 
and completely routed it ! 

As these devotees lived very frugally, their expenditure 

* These three great desires are ex- bois. 
pressed by the words loka-vanchana^ '^ This is the cow Kamadhenu men- 

atiha'Vancha9ta,sthre€-vanchana, — Du- tioned in a previous chapter. — Ed. 

♦♦ l1 



514 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

was but small. The offerings brought to them by their 
numerous admirers were not only sufficient to keep them in 
food, but also placed them in a position to make doles to the 
poor, and to entertain other devotees who visited them. They 
ate only one meal a day. The use of intoxicating liquors was 
strictly forbidden, though this deprivation troubled them but 
little. Accustomed from infancy to look on such beverages with 
horror, they regarded drunkenness as the most degrading of 
vices. 

By the desire of women the Vanaprasthas understood all the 
sensual pleasures which are not rendered lavrful by the sacred 
bonds of marriage ; and even in the exercise of the privileges of 
married life they were enjoined to exercise extreme moderation. 
Thus they preserved the tradition of those divine words which 
were spoken to our first ancestors, ' Increase, and multiply, and 
cover the earth.* They recognized no other end or object in 
the union of the sexes than the propagation of the human 
species, and beyond this saw nothing but intemperance and 
fornication. Moreover they were persuaded that a man could 
not acquire wisdom, and the happiness which results from it, 
except by subduing the passions, and especially the one which 
holds the greatest sway over mankind and has the most enervat- 
ing effects on the mental faculties. They believed that a single 
act of incontinence was sufficient to destroy the virtue of many 
years passed in the most austere penance. Hindu books relate 
innumerable examples of the praiseworthy and unceasing efforts 
which they made to bridle the lust of the flesh. But by one of 
those contradictions which abound in Hindu books, side by side 
with the account of the punishments inflicted on a hermit for 
his inability to conquer his sensual passions, we find, related 
with expressions of enthusiasm and admiration, the feats of 
debauchery ascribed to some of their munis — feats that lasted 
without interruption for thousands of years; and (burlesque 
idea !) it is to their pious asceticism that they are said to owe 
this unquenchable virility. 

Be all this as it may, if the moral virtues of the Vanaprasthas 
were neither real nor lasting, seeing that they were based, not 
on humility, but on ostentatious pride, we must nevertheless 
admit that, whatever motives influenced them, they at any rate 
were not inferior to the ancient philosophers of Greece. They 



CH. xxxi] A Vanaprastha's Virtues 515 

practised hospitality and enjoined it on others. The founder of 
their sect directed them to look out of doors before every meal 
to see if there was anybody near who was hungry ; and it was 
their duty to invite such a person to eat with them, whether he 
was a friend or an enemy. It was a- sublime and admirable 
precept ; but I will not commit myself to assert that it was 
strictly observed in practice. They were above ajl enjoined to 
restrain their anger, and greatly prided themselves on their 
patience and moderation under the insults to which they were 
sometimes exposed. Nevertheless, in spite of such admirable 
philosophy, it seems certain that it. took very little to rouse their 
spleen. A wholesome dread of provoking their resentment was 
generally felt ; for they were on such occasions unsparing with 
their curses, which, as we know, had terrible consequences. 

Justice, humanity, honesty, compassion, disinterestedness, in 
fact all the virtues, were recognized by them ; and they taught 
them to others by precept and example. H«nce it is that the 
Hindus profess, at least in theory, almost the same principles of 
morality as ourselves ; and if they do not practise all the obli- 
gations which one man owes to another in civilized society, it is 
not because they are ignorant of themi 



Ll2 



CHAPTER XXXII 

Sacrifices of the Vanaprastha Brahmins. — Sacrifice of the Yagtuim. — The Lesser 
Yagnam. — The Greater Yagnapfu — The Giants, Enemies of the Vana- 
prasthas. 

The most common sacrifice among the Vanaprasthas was that 
of homam. They performed it, as I have already mentioned, by 
kindling a fire, throwing into it some grains of rice soaked in 
ghee, and reciting manirams. Fire seems to have been the 
object worshipped, and it was offered sometimes specially to 
the sun, sometimes to all the planets. These hermits also 
offered other daily sacrifices to the gods, consisting of simple 
products of nature, such as flowers, incense, rice, vegetables, 
and fruits. Their whole time was occupied in such sacrifices, 
repeated several times every day, in ablutions, and in meditation 
on the perfections of Parabrahma. Though it is certain that 
sacrifices of blood have been common in India from the remotest 
ages, we have no evidence that the Brahmins ever participated 
in them in the character of sacrificers. Such functions were 
always entrusted to people of other castes ; and even Rajahs did 
not disdain to perform them. In the present day, the Brahmins 
do not officiate in temples where it is the custom to sacrifice 
living victims. 

There was only one occasion on which the Vanaprasthas 
could, without scruple, deprive a living creature of existence ; it 
was when they made the famous sacrifice of yagnam, which is 
still held in great honour among modern Brahmins. A ram 
is the victim usually offered : but such is the horror with which 
they regard the shedding of blood, that they either beat the 



The Yagnam Sacrifice 



517 



animal to death or strangle it, instead of slaughtering it'. 
Latter-day Brahmins, however, are not all agreed about the 
lawfulness of this sacrifice. The Vaishnavas regard it as an 
abominable practice, in which they obstinately refuse to partici- 
pate. They maintain that it is an innovation of much more 
recent date than their ancient religious laws, and that it is 
contrary to the most sacred and inviolable rule which forbids 
murder under any form and for any reason whatever. This 
doctrine of the Vaishnavas is one of the chief reasons why they 
are accused of heresy by other Brahmins I 

The sacrifice oi yagnam is, in the opinion of its advocates, the 
most meritorious sacrifice of any'. It is considered extremely 
acceptable to the gods ; and the person who offers it, or causes 
it to be offered, may count on abundant temporal blessings and 
on the entire remission of the sins which he has committed for 
a hundred generations. Nothing less than such advantages 
was necessary to determine the Brahmins to overcome the 
horror with which the destruction of a living creature inspired 
them. Furthermore, Brahmins possess the exclusive privilege of 
performing this sacrifice. Other castes may not even be present 
at it, though by a special grace they are authorized to provide 
the means of carrying it out The expenses that it necessitates 
are very considerable, for crowds of Brahmins attend the 
solemnity, and each one must receive a present from the person 
who offers the yagnam — a circumstance which suggests that 
it is not so much devotion as interest that takes them there. 



^ This operation is usually per- 
formed by men of the potter caste. — 
£d. 

• Nevertheless the sacrifice of yag- 
fiam is performed by the Vadakalais 
among the Vishnavitcs in Southern 
India. — Ed. 

^ The Indian Mirror^ the leading 
native newspaper of Calcutta, quite 
recently (1896 remarked : ' What are 
the Hindus doing to mitigate the rigour 
of the water-famine and the cholera 
epidemic ? How many of them have 
even recollected the injunctions of 
the Vedas, so far as the yagncis are 
concerned ? A yagna on a laige scale, 
which not only means the feeding of 



the sacred fire, with ghee, and the 
burning of incense, but also the feed- 
ing of the poor in large numbers daily 
for months together, will cost a hun- 
dred thousand rupees or more. If the 
Vedas are to be relied on, such a. yagna 
does good always both to the rulers 
and the ruled. Vc^izyagnas have not 
been performed in India for many and 
many a year. Is there no true Hindu 
among the millions of India who would 
come forward and support us in our 
proposal ? Are there not among the 
Maharajahs and Rajahs of the land a 
few still who would be found ready 
and willing to bear the expense of 
such B. yagna I ' — £d. 



5i8 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. h 

However, this sacrifice is rarely offered, few people being able 
or willing to bear the great cost which it entails. The following 
are the principal ceremonies which are observed : — 

The person who is going to preside at the yagnam announces 
the day fixed for the sacrifice throughout the whole district, 
and invites all Brahmins to attend. It is necessary that 
Brahmins of each of the four Vedas should be present ; if 
a representative of each of these classes does not appear, the 
solemnity must be put off. Neither Sudras, whatever their 
rank may be, nor Brahmins who are infirm or diseased, or 
blind or lame, &c., nor Brahmins who are widowers, may be 
present at it. 

A ram is chosen after undergoing the most minute inspection. 
It must be perfectly white, about three years of age, in good 
condition and well proportioned in every respect \ A purohita 
proclaims the favourable moment when the ceremony can 
begin, and the assembled Brahmins, who sometimes number 
over two thousand, hasten to the appointed spot. A hole 
is first dug; and after the homam and other ordinary pre- 
liminaries, a large fire is lighted and is kept burning by 
logs of wood cut from the sacred trees aswatta, alai^ icham^ 
porasu, and by a great quantity of darbha grass. The whole 
is drenched with ghee, which causes the flames to rise to 
a great height. In the meanwhile the purohita recites man- 
trams in a loud voice, scraps of which are loudly repeated by 
the spectators. The ram is then brought into the midst of the 
assembly, rubbed with oil, put in a bath, and then stained with 
akshatas. The body and horns are garlanded with flowers, and 
cords made of darbha grass are tied, or rather tightly bound, 
round the animal. All the time the purohita is repeating man- 
tj-amSf the supposed object of which is to kill the victim. This 
obviously inadequate proceeding, however, is supplemented by 
closing the nostrils, ears, and mouth of the animal while the 
Brahmins present deal heavy blows on the beast, and finally 
one of them suffocates it by pressing his knee on its throat. 
The purohita and his attendants meanwhile repeat mantrams 
in a loud voice, and these are supposed to ensure a quick and 
painless death for the victim. It would be a very inauspicious 

' This is incorrect, inasmuch as the is usually presented by the goatherds 
victim must be perfectly black. It as a free gift— Ed. 



cH. xxxii] Details of the Yagnam 519 

omen if the ram uttered the slightest cry while it was enduring 
these tortures \ 

As soon as the animal is dead, the Brahmin who presides at 
the ceremony cuts open the stomach and tears out the entrails 
along with the fat. These he holds suspended over the fire, the 
fat dropping into it as it melts. At the same time liquefied 
butter is poured over the fire as a libation. 

The victim is skinned and hacked in pieces, which are then 
fried in butter. A portion is thrown into the fire as an oblation, 
while the rest is divided between the Brahmin who has presided 
at the sacrifice and the person who bears the expense of it. 
These in their turn distribute their portions to the Brahmins 
present, who scramble wildly for the scraps and devour them as 
something sacred and auspicious. This is particularly remark- 
able, because it is the only occasion on which the Brahmins 
may, without committing sin, eat of that which has had life or 
the germ of life. 

They then offer to the fire, as neiveddya, boiled and raw rice, 
the latter husked and well washed. 

All these ceremonies and a great number of others being 
over, betel, which has previously been placed all round the fire, 
is distributed to the Brahmins. Finally, the person who has 
borne the expense of the sacrifice makes gifts, in money and 
clothes, to all present, according to the rank and dignity of 
each ; a costly munificence, considering the multitude of those 
who take part in the ceremony. 

The Brahmin who has presided at the yagnam is henceforth 
considered an important personage. He has acquired, for 
instance, the right of keeping up a perpetual fire in his house. 
If this fire, by some accident, were to be extinguished, he 
would be forced to rekindle it, not with light procured from 
a flint, but with that produced by rubbing two pieces of dry 
wood together. When a Brahmin honoured in this way dies, 
his funeral pile must be lighted with this fire. After that the 
fire is allowed to die out of itself. 

I have never been able to discover whether this sacrifice has 
any particular divinity for its object. It would appear, however, 
that the Brahmin who offers it is free to dedicate it to any god 

^ If the victim utters any sound it is min who offers the yagnam will gra- 
believed that the family of the Brah- dually become extinct — Ed. 



520 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

that he chooses, provided the deity be one of the first rank. 
Be this as it may, the fire of the yagnam bears the name of 
agm'-iswara, which means the god o//ire, as if it were offered to 
this element alone. 

Hindu books testify that this sacrifice was much more frequent 
in the time of the old Vanaprasthas ; but then it was performed 
in a much simpler manner, and was not accompanied with the 
foolish ostentation that was afterwards associated with it. 

Yet, after all, this sacrifice is a mere nothing compared with 
the grand yagnam, the enormous cost of which has now caused 
it to fall into disuse. Trustworthy persons have assured me, 
however, that at the beginning of the last century the King of 
Amber (Jeypore), in Upper India, had it performed with the 
utmost magnificence. The gift which he made to his high priest 
alone is said to have cost a lakh of rupees, while the Brahmins 
who attended it, to the number of several thousands, all received 
presents proportionate to their rank K 

The mythical stories of the Hindus make frequent mention 
of this splendid sacrifice, and the blessings which it procured 
for those who caused it to be performed. The gods themselves, 
and also the giants, during the wars which they waged against 
each other, seldom failed to perform this religious ceremony, of 
which one of the least remarkable results was to procure a certain 
victory over the enemy. It was usual, when the solemnities of the 
yagnam were over, for the prince on whose behalf it had been 
celebrated to seat himself on a high throne for the space of 
forty-eight minutes, and during that time the Brahmins present 
were permitted to ask him for anything they pleased. And the 
prince, on his part, was bound to satisfy their demands, however 
extravagant, even had they extended to demanding his kingdom, 
his wife, and everything he most highly esteemed. If he failed 
to satisfy a single one of these numerous requests, the sacrifice 
would have been of no avail. 

A king of the olden times, says a Hindu chronicler, having 
caused the grand yagnam to be performed before setting out for 
a war which he was planning against a neighbouring potentate, 
presented a bushel of pearls to each of the Brahmins present, 
who were thirty thousand in number. 

* Yagnam sacrifices on a smaller scale are performed nowadays in 
Southern India.— £0. 



CH. xxxii] Sacrifice of the Horse 521 

Four kinds of victims might be offered in sacrifice, namely, 
a horse, a cow, an elephant, -or a man. The first was called 
asvamedhaf the second gomedha, the third rajasuya, and the 
fourth naramedha. But they commonly sacrificed a horse ; 
and hence the sacrifice is generally designated by the name of 
asvamedha < sacrifice of a horse). 

The victim was chosen before its birth ; and when the mare, 
its mother, had foaled, her offspring was reared for three years 
with extraordinary care and trouble. Continual sacrifices were 
made to Indra, that he might watch over the young animal ; 
to Yama, that he might preserve it from death and every 
accident ; to Varuna, the god of water, and also to the clouds, 
that they might cause a fertilizing rain to fall and plenty of 
grass to grow for its nourishment. Similar requests were also 
made to a number of other gods. 

The victim was afterwards let loose and allowed to roam 
freely over a wide stretch of country, though it was followed 
everywhere by numerous attendants to prevent its being stolen. 
The gods, or the giants, or the princes against whom the sacri- 
fice was to be directed would come with all their armies in 
search of this valuable animal, and try to seize it by force or 
stratagem. If they succeeded, the sacrifice was averted, and 
they were thereby delivered from the disasters which its accom- 
plishment would have brought upon them. Indeed, the wonders 
wrought by this grand sacrifice were so mighty as to render the 
prince who had it performed invulnerable and certain of victory, 
for amongst other things it furnished him with enchanted 
weapons, a single one of which was sufficient to overthrow 
a whole army. 

I will spare the reader long and wearisome details of the 
innumerable ceremonies which took place during the celebration 
of the asvamedha, and will content myself with giving a short 
extract from a story which refers to this famous sacrifice, and 
which at the same time describes one of the ten Avatars of 
Vishnu : — 

'The giant-emperor Bali caused to be performed the grand 
sacrifice of the horse, the irresistible effect of which was to 
secure for him the overthrow of all other sovereigns and the 
conquest of the whole world. To counteract such fatal con- 
sequences, Vishnu the Preserver presented himself in the 



522 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

form of a Brahmin dwarf before the tyrant, and supplicated 
him humbly for the grant of a plot of ground only three soles 
of his own feet in area to enable him to offer sacrifices. The 
Brahmin's request appeared comical to the giant, and was 
granted without hesitation. Then Vishnu changed his shape, 
and with one of his feet he covered the whole earth, and with 
the other occupied all the space between earth and heaven. 
Then addressing the giant, he said : *' Where shall I find room 
for the third sole ? " " On my head," answered the enemy of the 
gods, who then recognized, but too late, with whom he had to 
deal. The giant thought he might save his life by thus placing 
himself at the mercy of Vishnu the Preserver. But it happened 
otherwise. Vishnu placed his foot on the head of the giant and 
precipitated the monster into Patalam (hell), and delivered the 
world of that great scourge.' 

But let us return to the Vanaprastha Brahmins. It appears, 
according to the Hindu books, that they experienced great 
difficulties in the accomplishment of their sacrifices. Their 
declared enemies, the giants, and the gods themselves, were 
continually playing evil pranks with them. For instance, their 
enemies made themselves invisible, and, flying in the air, 
defiled the offerings by letting fall upon them pieces of meat 
or other impure substances, so that these pious acts were of no 
avail. 

I should have written at less length about these famous 
giants, if they had not seemed to me to be grotesque repre- 
sentations of those of Holy Scripture \ whose crimes in a great 
measure caused the Flood. This race of men again flourished 
after that great catastrophe, and were not entirely destroyed 
until the time of Joshua^ 

The Hindu giants are represented as being of such colossal 
stature that on one occasion, in order to wake one of them, it was 
necessary for several elephants to walk over his body. Even 
then the giant hardly felt the discomfort of this enormous 
weight ; but, by dint of stamping on him, the huge animals at 
last produced a slight sensation, resembling the tickling which 
an ordinary man feels when an ant or a fly crawls over him. 
It was this tickling, rather than the weight of the elephants, 
which roused the giant, the hairs of whose body were like the 

' Genesis vi. 4. ' Numbers xiii. ; Joshua xi. 



CH. xxxii] Hindu Giants 523 

trunks of full-grown forest trees. During one of his wars with 
certain gods, this same giant fastened a huge rock to each of 
his hairs, and thus equipped, he advanced into the middle of 
the enemy's army, gave himself a good shake, and thus hurled 
off the rocks, which falling right and left crushed his enemies 
to the last man. 

The giant Ravana, who carried off Seeta, Rama's wife, had 
ten heads. His palace in the Island of Ceylon, of which he was 
king, was of such an enormous height that at midday the sun 
passed under one of its arcades. 

These giants were all of an extremely mischievous disposition, 
especially the Brahmin giants. A great number of this caste 
had, by the way, been turned into giants as a punishment for 
former crimes. In fact, there were whole armies of them, and 
sometimes there was civil war between them, though more 
often they joined forces in fighting against the gods. Occa- 
sionally they adopted a hermit's life, without thereby changing 
their character, or becoming better disposed. The penance per- 
formed by the giant Bhasmasura was so long and severe, that 
he thereby induced Siva to grant him the power of reducing 
to ashes all those on whose heads he placed his hands. The 
favour thus obtained, the ungrateful wretch decided to let Siva 
himself, his benefactor, have some experience of the power 
newly conferred upon him. Siva was at his wits' end to know 
how to escape from his enemy, when fortunately he was saved 
by a stratagem of Vishnu. The latter persuaded the giant to 
put his hand on his own head, which he did without thinking, 
and reduced himself to ashes. 

The above is a sample of Hindu mythology. 

It may be presumed that these giant enemies of the Vana- 
prasthas were merely the chiefs of the countries in which the 
hermits had taken up their abode. These chiefs, frightened 
by the continual sacrifices and mystic rites of the formidable 
strangers, tried to get rid of them by stirring up quarrels among 
them and otherwise interfering with their religious practices. 
Except the first of these hermit Vanaprasthas, most of those 
who embraced this kind of life gave themselves up entirely to 
the cultivation of magic and astrology, and, impotent though 
their mysterious practices were in reality, they were easily able, 
with the help of their false prestige, to spread terror in feeble and 



524 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies 

credulous minds. Some enthusiastic poet, in relating the history 
of the quarrels between these hermit Brahmins and the mighty 
princes who hated them, no doubt turned the latter into giants. 
Certainly no more than this was required to make the legend 
credible among a people so addicted to the marvellous. Be 
this as it may, it appears certain that the attacks made on the 
Vanapraslhas finally sapped their power to its very foundations, 
for the sect no longer exists in India. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

Penance as a Means of purifying the Soul. — The Penance of the Vanaprasthas. 
— Modern Gymnosophists, or Naked Penitents. — Purification by Fire 

The ancient hermit-philosophers of India maintained that 
it was necessary to perform divers acts of penance in order to 
disperse the phantoms of illusion, or Maya, by which men are 
seduced and led astray. It was only by penances, they con- 
tended, that man could break through the trammels of his 
personal passions and everyday surroundings, which held the 
soul enthralled. The right degree of excellence and spirituality 
necessary for the emancipation of the soul, they urged, could 
only be obtained, little by little, by the exercise of continuous 
penances. By these means alone could the soul be reunited for 
ever to the Supreme Divinity, to Parabrahma ; and it was only 
when he had achieved this state of perfection that the penitent 
had the right to cry : 'Ahant Brahma ! ' 1 am Brahma ! I am 
the Supreme Being ! 

Is it to be wondered at that men who, in this pursuit of 
spiritual perfection, were actuated only by motives of pride and 
self-conceit, when once they attained, according to their ow^n 
vain presumption, the state of perfection at which they aimed 
— is it to be wondered at, I say, that these men looked down 
upon all the rest of their fellow-men with ineffable disdain, 
whatever their social rank might be, and considered them as 
degraded beings still wallowing in the mire of vice, slaves to 
their own passions ' ? 

* The Abb^ is hardlyjust in placing loving. The ignorant and narrow- 
such a low value on this pride of minded Brahmin priests, however, 
righteousness. The sacred Hindu cannot be said to have ever realized 
books are unanimous in describ'ng this high state of spiritual perfection, 
these saintly men as gentle, quiet, and — £d. 



526 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

This spiritual pride was still further encouraged by the 
tokens of respect, and even adoration, which the very greatest 
princes showered upon them. The apparent coldness with 
which they received such homage was certainly not the outcome 
of humility; it was rather caused by the firm conviction that 
they were only receiving what was their just due. Alexander 
the Great, who bent every one to his will, tried in vain to per- 
suade one of the most celebrated of these Vanaprasthas^ called 
Dindime or Dandamis, to visit him. HoWever, the Hindu 
philosopher condescended to write to the conqueror, though 
the letter attributed to him by the Greek historians is evidently 
apocryphal, or at any rate interpolated with many embellish- 
ments and ideas which would never have occurred to a 
Gymnosophist. Be that as it may, some report that the Mace- 
donian hero saw in it nothing but impious pride, while others 
maintain that he admired the ^\Titer's noble and philosophic 
courage. 

And how, it may be asked, did these recluses obtain, through 
penance, perfect wisdom and perfect purity ? The answer is, by 
three means : by the repression of their animal passions, by 
meditation, and by the mortification of the flesh and of all the 
senses ; in fact, by complete self-abnegation. 

By the first of these means they strove to destroy the three 
strongest passions to which man is subject, namely, wealth, 
land, and women ; and to free themselves completely from all 
prejudices in respect of caste, rank, and honours. They 
further aimed at the repression of the most ordinary and natural 
impulses, even that of self-preser\ation. They insisted on their 
disciples being insensible to cold or heat, wind or rain, pain or 
sickness. They called this mokslta-sadhaka, or the practice of 
deliverance. It may, therefore, be said that in many respects 
they were greater stoics than Zeno himself and greater cynics 
than Diogenes. At the same time it is more than probable 
that the majority of these Vanaprasihas, while applauding 
these strict doctrines, left the practice of them to the more 
enthusiastic. 

There are penitents professing the principles of moksha- 
sadhaka even at the present day. Some of them go about 
quite naked, the object of this indecent practice being to 
convince the admiring public that they are no longer susceptible 



CH. xxxiii] Ascetic Practices 527 

to the temptations of lust. There is also a dass of religious 
mendicants, called Batragis, to be met ivith everywhere, who 
show themselves in public in a state of nature \ 

The people evince the greatest admiration for these un- 
clothed devotees, and express the utmost wonder as to how they 
succeed in controlling a passion which is generally regarded 
as beyond control. Some say that the Batragis owe this 
impotence to extreme sobriety in eating and drinking, while 
others assert that it is the result of the use of certain drugs. 
As to their alleged sobriety it is a mere fable. Generally 
speaking, they eat all kinds of meat and drink all kinds of 
intoxicating liquors without any shame, the practice of moksha- 
sadhaka and their status as Sannyasi acquitting them of all blame 
in this respect \ According to other authorities, the Batragis 
attain this condition by purely mechanical means, that is, they 
attach to their generative organs a heavy weight which they 
drag about until the power of muscles and nerves is completely 
destroyed. 

Some o^ these fanatics profess to conquer every feeling of 
disgust thjlt is innate in a human being. They will even go 
so far as to eat human ordure without evincing any dislike. 
Instead of treating these degraded practices with the horror 
and contempt that they merit, the Hindus regard them with 
respect and honour, true to their custom of admiring everything 
that astonishes them. 

Meditation, the second means of achieving spiritual perfection, 
accomplishes what the repression of the passions has only begun. 
It fills the soul with the thought of God and identifies it with 
the Divine Being, of which it is an emanation. This union with 
God is not brought about instantaneously, but gradually, as will 
be explained elsewhere. It was with the object of accomplishing, 
little by little, this blessed union with God that the Vanaprastha 
devoted a considerable portion of each day to meditation, 
combining this devout exercise with the ordinary sacrifices, 
particularly the sacrifice to fire, called homam. 

The third means of arriving at spiritual perfection — mor- 
tification of the flesh — consists in leading a hard and austere life 
in rigorous and almost continuous fasting, and in voluntary 

* This would now be punishable by • This is only true of the lower 

law. — Ed. types of Batragis, — Ed. 



528 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. ii 

and self-inflicted punishments, and above all in never omitting 
the indispensable duty of frequent ablutions. 

These Vanaprastha recluses were fully persuaded that the 
defilements of the soul were communicated to the body, and 
those of the body to the soul. They held that ablutions, while 
cleansing the body, also possessed the virtue of purifying the 
soul, especially if they were performed in the Ganges or in some 
other waters bearing an equal reputation for sanctity. 

The purification of the soul was completed by fire ; and that 
is the reason why the bodies of these penitents were burned 
after death. 

Only their fellow Brahmin Vanaprasthas assisted at their 
funeral ceremonies, which, though fundamentally the same as 
those of the modem Brahmins, were much simpler and less 
elaborate. It was thought that the extreme care which the 
deceased had paid to the purification of himself during life ren- 
dered excessive care after death unnecessary and superfluous. 

There was one sure and certain way by which the Vanapra- 
sthas might attain to extreme perfection and gain inestimable 
happiness, and that was in cutting short their lives by throwing 
themselves into the fire. I do not mean to say that there 
have been many instances of this violation of the laws of nature 
amongst the Vanaprasthas, Only a single one has come to my 
own personal knowledge. I have read in a Hindu book that 
one of these recluses and his wife, having lived in retirement for 
a long time, and arrived at a very advanced age, and both of them 
being equally tired of this world, arranged their own funeral 
pile, quietly lay down upon it," then set fire to it with their 
own hands, and were thus consumed together. Having by 
this act of devotion arrived at the highest state of perfection, 
their souls were instantly united to the Divinity, and were 
exempted from reappearing on earth to undergo the successive 
transmigrations from one body to another which would have 
been their fate in the ordinary course of events. 

There are still fanatics to be found who solemnly bind them- 
selves to commit suicide, under the conviction that by the 
performance of this mad act they will ensure for themselves the 
immediate enjo3nnent of supreme blessedness. 

The temple of Jagannath (Puri), and other places which 
superstition has rendered equally famous, have often been the 



CH. xxxiii] Sacrificial Suicides 529 

scenes of self-inflicted death. From time to time, too, one 
comes across lunatics travelling through the country, loudly 
proclaiming their intention of destroying themselves, and at the 
same time collecting the money with which to defray the ex- 
penses attendant on the solemn execution of their wicked vow. 
I knew one of these wretches to be the recipient of very con- 
siderable sums. He was received with the greatest enthusiasm 
and respect wherever he went. He was nicknamed ' Sava \* 
or ' the corpse,' and he always carried upraised in his hand the 
dagger with which he was going to kill himself; on the point 
of it was stuck a small lemon. Everything was in readiness 
for the horrible sacrifice, the victim himself having fixed the 
day on which it was to be consummated. Immense crowds had 
assembled out of curiosity, greatly pleased to think they were 
to witness a horrid sight ; but the magistrate of the district, 
who was a humane and sensible man, caused the hero of the 
tragedy to be brought before him, took away his dagger, and 
ordered him to be conducted out of the district, absolutely for- 
bidding him to re-enter the country. A few months afterwards, 
I learned that the maniac had carried out his dreadful vow 
on the banks of the Tungabudra, to the delight of an enormous 
crowd which had collected to enjoy the revolting spectacle. 
There is nothing improbable, therefore, in the story told by 
Diodorus Siculus of the Brahmin Calanus, who terminated his 
life by allowing himself to be burnt alive in the presence of 
Alexander's army. 

The above are a few examples of the deplorable and fatal 
eflFects of Hindu superstition. Such are the natural results 
of the foolish theories of ancient philosophers, the most en- 
lightened men of their times, as to the best means of purifying 
the soul and ensuring certain and everlasting happiness. 

* A corrupt form of the Sanskrit word sapam. — Ed. 



** M m 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

The Fourth State of the Brahmins, that of the Sannyasi, — Preparation for this 
Holy State. — Ceremonies of Initiation. — Rules to be followed by the 
SoHMyasi, 

The fourth state to which a Brahmin can attain is that of 
a sannyasi, a state so sublime, according to the Hindu authors, 
that it ensures, even during the short space of a single lifetime, 
more spiritual blessedness than an ordinary man could attain in 
ten millions of regenerations *. 

The sannyasi is superior to the vanaprasiha, inasmuch as 
the latter does not wholly renounce the world, being still con- 
nected with it to a certain extent by family ties ; whilst the 
sannyasi imposes upon himself the painful sacrifice of leaving 
his wife and children. Like the vanaprasiha he submits to 
severe privations, and furthermore takes a vow of poverty 
and resigns himself to living entirely on alms. Every Brahmin, 
before becoming a sannyasi, must have been a grahastha ; that 



^ Book VI of the Laws of Manu 
directs him for the fourth period of 
his life to wander about as a Bhikshu 
or Parwm/akaj ' religious mendicant.' 
Here are a few rules for the regulation 
of this final stage of his existence, 
when he is sometimes called a sann- 
yasi, *one who has given up the 
world ' ; sometimes a yafi, ' one who 
has suppressed his passions * : — 

Let him remain without fire, with- 
out habitation ; let him resort once 
a day to the town for food, regardless 
of hardships, resolute, keeping a vow 



of silence, fixing his mind in medita- 
tion. 

With hair, nails, and beard well 
clipped, carrying a bowl, a staff, and 
a pitcher, let him wander about con- 
tinually, intent on meditation and 
avoiding injury to any being. 

In this manner, having little by little 
abandoned all worldly attachments, 
and freed himself from all concern 
about pairs of opposites, he obtains 
absorption into the universal Spirit. — 
Ed. 



Initiating a Sannyasi 531 



is to say, he must have been married and have acquitted himself 
of 'the great debt to his ancestors/ the first and most indis- 
pensable of duties in the eyes of a Hindu, that of perpetuating 
his species. 

There are, however, a few. examples of Brahmins who have 
become sannyasis while still young and unmarried. There are 
also, it is true, many penitents who have always been celibates ; 
but they do not belong to the Brahmin caste. 

A Brahmin is not allowed to become a sannyasi in a moment 
of remorse or from a sudden feeling of enthusiasm*. His decision 
must be the result of calm and deliberate- self-examination 
and reflection, and must be based on a sense of disgust for 
the world and its pleasures, and on an ardent desire to attain 
spiritual perfection. He must feel himself capable of com- 
plete severance from all earthly affairs. If he experiences the 
slightest inclination or longing for those things which the rest 
of mankind struggle for, he will thereby lose all the benefits of 
his life of penance. 

When a Brahmin who aspires to the state of sannyasi has 
duly reflected on the step he is about to take, he calls together 
all the leading Brahmins of the neighbourhood, announces his 
intention, and begs them to be ready to receive his solemn vows 
with all the customary formalities and ceremonies. 

On the day appointed for this important act, the candidate first 
purifies himself by bathing. He procures ten pieces of cotton 
cloth such as are worn on the shoulders; four of them, dyed 
a dark yellow (kavi), being destined for his own use, the other 
six being given as presents to men of his own caste. He also 
provides himself with a bamboo staff" that has seven knots or 
joints, some small silver and copper coins, flowers, akshafas, 
sandalwood, and, above all, some pancha-gavia. He drinks 
a little of the last-named beverage, and then repairs to the spot 
where the ceremony is to take place. 

The officiating guru performs the ordinary homam and puja, 
and then proceeds to whisper into the candidate's ear such 
tnantrams and instructions as are prescribed for the state he is 
about to enter. He next commands him, first, to don one of the 
yellow cloths that he has brought, and then, in token of his 
renunciation of his caste as well as of the pomps and vanities 
of this world, to break his triple cord and to allow the tuft of hair 

M m 2 



532 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

which grows on every Brahmin's head to be shaved off. All 
this is accompanied by tnantrams and other' absurdities which 
it is unnecessary to describe in detail. 

The ceremony ended, the candidate takes his seven-knotted 
bamboo in one hand * and a gourd full of water in the other, 
while under his arm he carries an antelope's skin. These 
three things are all that he is now allowed to call his own. Then 
he thrice drinks a little pancha-gavia^ and also some of the water 
in his gourd ; he repeats the mantrams which his guru has taught 
him ; and he is then a sannyasi for life. All that remains for 
him to do is to present to the attendant Brahmins the cloths and 
money which he has brought with him. 

The newly initiated must conform strictly to the instructions 
that he has received from his gurUy and must follow minutely all 
the rules laid down for persons of his profession. The following 



* One cannot fail to recognize in 
the Hindu sannyasis a class of men 
similar to those of the Jews who were 
imbued with Rabbinical doctrines in 
connexion with cabala and numbers, 
and to the Greeks who held the 
wild theories of Pythagoras — idiotic 
dreamers who crammed the minds of 
their fellow-countrymen with foolish 
notions. We know that the cabala 
believes the world to be full of spirits, 
which one can in the course of time 
resemble, by practising purity of life 
and meditation. The sannyasfs staff 
with its seven knots is not merely 
intended to aid him in walking. It is, 
like Aaron's rod, an instrument of 
divination. The seven knots are also 
not without a mysterious significance. 
Who has not heard W the perfection 
of the number seven ? The high 
esteem in which it is held by the 
Hindus is clearly proved by the nu- 
merous sacred places and objects 
which are always spoken of in groups 
of seven, such as the Seven Penitents 
{sapta rtshis)y the Seven Holy Cities 
{sapta pura)y the Seven Sacred Islands 
{snpia dwipa)^ the Seven Seas (sapta 
samudra), the Seven Sacred Rivers 



{sapta nadi), the Seven Sacred Moun- 
tains {sapta parvata\ the Seven Sacred 
Jungles {sapta arania\ the Seven 
Sacred Trees {sapta vmksha\ the 
Seven Castes {sapta kula)y the Seven 
Inferior and Superior Worlds (sapta 
ioka)t &c. Seven too is an uneven 
number, and all the uneven numbers 
are considered lucky. For example, 
take the famous Trimurti (Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Siva). Virgil also 
says: — 
' Terna tibi haec primum triplici di- 

versa colore 
Licia circumdo, terque haec altaria 

circum 
Effigiem duco : numero Deus impare 

gaudet . . . 
Necte tribus nodis ternos, Amarylli, 

colores.' 
While on the subject of the sami- 
yasVs staff I might refer to the rods 
of Moses, of Elisha, and of all the pro- 
phets ; the augur*s staff, the pastoral 
staffs of the Fauns and sylvan deities, 
and those of the Cynics; but I will 
leave to the intelligent reader the task 
of making what comparisons he thinks 
proper. — Dubois. 



CH. xxxivj Rules for Sannyasis 



533 



are the chief of these, to which 1 have added a few remarks 
of my own : — 

I. 'Every morning, after he has performed his ablutions, 
a sannyasi must smear ashes on his body '.' 

The majority of Hindus only smear them over their fore- 
heads. 

II. 'He must take only one meal every day.' 

This rule of fasting is followed not only by the Brahmin 
sannyasis, but by many others who by severe abstinence seek to 
attract public attention and respect. 

HI. ' They must forgo thq use of betel leaves.' 
These are the leaves of a plant of the convolvulus species, which 
grows in the maritime districts of India. They have a slightly 
bitter taste, are mixed with calcined shells or lime, and are eaten 
with areca-nut and other spices according to taste. The Hindus 
are perpetually chewing this preparation. To give it up, when 
one is accustomed to it, would be a greater privation than it 
would be for any one among us to give up tobacco. 

IV. 'Not only must he avoid all female society, but he must 
not even look at a woman.* 

V. ' Once a month his head and face must be shaved.' 

To save this trouble many sannyasis cause their disciples to 
pull out the hairs of their head and beard one by one. Some 
sannyasis neither cut their hair nor shave their beards, but plait 
them up in some ridiculous way. These, however, do not belong 
to the Brahmin caste. 

VI. 'He may only wear wooden sandals on his feet.* 

This is a most uncomfortable style of foot-gear ; it is held to 
the foot by a wooden peg, which comes between the big and 
second toes. The sannyasis use these clogs to avoid defilement, 
which could not be avoided if they went barefoot, or if they wore 
leather shoes. 



* In times of great tribulation the 
Jews used to cover themselves with 
sackcloth and ashes in token of their 
sorrow and deep repentance for their 
sins. This was the way in which the 
Ninevites showed their repentance. 
In France, in several religious houses, 
it was a duty to lie on ashes when at 
the point of death. The Council of 



Ben even to in 1091 ordained that the 
faithful should put ashes on their heads 
on the first day of Lent to promote 
a spirit of humiliation and penance 
during that holy season, b^* bringing 
to their recollection the words of Holy 
Scripture: * Metnett to, homo, quia puhis 
(Sy etin pulvenm ttvetieris,* — Dubois. 



534 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

VII. 'When a sannyasi travels, he must carry his seven- 
knotted staff in one hand, his gourd in the other, and an 
antelope's skin under his arm/ 

Provided with these three articles the sannyasi can say, 
Omnia mecum porta. The staff must be exactly his own height. 
The antelope's skin serves both for a seat and for a bed. 

VIII. ' He must live entirely by alms, which he has the right 
to ask wherever he goes.' 

Many collect considerable sums by this means ; but they are 
obliged to spend any surplus in charity or other good works. 
Some spend it in the erection of rest-houses, pagodas, &c., or in 
digging wells and constructing reservoirs for water for the use 
of the public. They also dispense hospitality to persons who pass 
near their huts, or who come to visit them. 

IX. 'Though a sannyasi has the right to ask for alms, it 
is more proper for him to receive them without asking. For 
instance, if he feel hungry, he should go to some house where 
people are living, but he must not say anything to them or even 
hint at his wants. If they give him anything voluntarily, he 
must take it as if it were of no consequence to him, and without 
expressing any thanks. If he receives nothing, he must go 
away without either feeling or showing any annoyance. Neither 
must he complain if he does not like the taste of what is 
given him.' 

X. ' He must not sit down to eat' 

XI. ' He must build his hut near a river or a tank.' 

The reason of this is that he may be able to make frequent 
ablutions, one of the first duties of a sannyasi. 

XII. 'When travelling he must make no stay anywhere, and 
he must only pass through inhabited districts.' 

XIII. 'He must regard all men as equals. He must not 
be influenced by anything that happens, and must be able to 
view with perfect equanimity even revolutions which overthrow 
empires.' 

XIV. ' His one object in life must be to acquire that measure 
of wisdom and degree of spirituality which shall finally reunite 
him to the Supreme Divinity, from whom we are separated 
by our passions and material surroundings. To achieve this 
end he must keep his senses under perfect control, and entirely 
subdue any tendency to anger, envy, avarice, sensuality: in fact, 



cH. xxxiv] Btkshukas 535 

to any unholy impulses. Otherwise his penance will bear no 
fruit.' 

There are no doubt other general rules which these devotees 
are bound to follow ; but I have only been able to ascertain the 
above. 

Of all the sannyasis, those called Btkshukas are considered 
the most perfect of all. They are under no restrictions in regard 
to food ; nothing that they eat or drink, no matter how impure 
it may be, has power to defile them. 



CHAPTER XXXV 

A Sannyast^s Principal Duties. — Meditation. — Its Various Stages.— What it 
consists of, and how Hindu Devotees practise it. — General Remarks. — 
Comparisons between the Hindu Sannyasis and those who lead Similar 
Lives among Christians. 

A SANNVASJ'S first and most important duty is to destroy, 
root and branch, any feeling of attachment that may still linger 
in his heart for the world and its vain pleasures. Wife, children, 
parents, friends, caste privileges, cattle, lands, jewels and other 
temporal possessions, animal passions, sensual pleasures — all 
these are but so many obstacles standing in the way of his 
soul's perfection. In Hindu books they are likened variously 
to thick clouds which, until they are dispersed, obscure the light 
of the sun, or to violent winds that disturb the surface of the 
water and prevent the reflection of this luminary in all its 
splendour; to the coils which caterpillars and other insects 
form, and of which they cannot rid themselves; or again to 
the kernels of certain fruits in which grubs and maggots are 
imprisoned. 

Such are the similes which Hindu authors make use of when 
trying to give some idea of the hindrances which earthly 
passions oppose to spirituality, and which must be overcome 
before perfection can be attained and the soul reunited to the 
Divine Being. Nevertheless, these same authors add, the tene- 
ments in which caterpillars and grubs confine themselves do 
not hold them captive for ever. Neither do the insects cease 
to exist. After remaining for some time in a state of torpor 
and quiescence, the feeble spark of life which they still retain 
rekindles and gradually increases in strength till the insects 
are able to destroy the covering in which they are enclosed, 
and, by dint of persevering labour, at last open out a passage 



spiritual Perfection 537 



to the region of light and liberty. So it is with the soul. 
The body in which it is imprisoned, and which is a prey to 
worldly cares and tumultuous passions, will not hold it for ever. 
After many re-incarnations the spark of perfect wisdom, which is 
latent in every man, will burn more brightly, until the soul at 
last succeeds, after a long course of penance and meditation, in 
breaking asunder, little by little, all the ties which bind it to the 
world, and will so grow in virtue and strength that it will finally 
attain that degree of spiritual perfection which will render 
it fit to be incorporated with the Divinity. Then, leaving the 
body which has so long held it captive, it will soar upwards and 
be united for ever with the Supreme Soul from which it originally 
sprang. 

The course which a sannyasi should pursue to arrive at this 
point of perfection differs somewhat according to the sect to 
which he belongs. His period of emancipation begins from the 
day on which he entered the holy state of sannyasi. By this 
single act he is supposed to have freed himself from those ties 
which bind other men to the world and its pleasures. All that 
he has to do to attain perfection is to make frequent ablutions, 
to drink pancha-gavia constantly, to offier daily sacrifices, and to 
live a life of asceticism and. penance, but above all of meditation, 
to which he must devote all his leisure time. 

This duty of meditation, to which Hindus attach so much 
importance, appears to me to be so remarkable a practice 
for idolaters, that I have thought it incumbent on me to call 
special attention to it. The details that I am about to relate 
will show to what extremes superstition and fanaticism will 
pervert men's minds, especially when they are connected with 
self-conceit and a longing for. notoriety. 

The doctrine of meditation is called yogant,^ni, from it the 
vjord yogi \s derived, which is the name usually given to a tribe 
of vagabonds who are erroneously supposed to devote themselves 
entirely to this practice '. 

According to the Hindu doctrine the practice oi yogam has 
a peculiarly spiritualizing and purifying effect on a sannyasi^ 
for he thereby passes through four different stages, each one 
more perfect than the last. 

The first is called salokyam, or unity of place. In this state 

' This is too sweeping an assertion. All yogis are not vagabonds. — £o. 



538 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [ft. n 

the soul inhabits, as it were, the same place as the Divinity ; it 
is as though it were in the presence of God. After practising 
for a long time the duties of salokyatn, the soul passes on to the 
second stage, called samipyam (proximity). In this stage, by 
practising meditation and keeping all earthly objects out of the 
mental pale, the knowledge and perception of God become more 
and more acute, and the soul seems to be drawn nearer and 
nearer to Him. 

After having spent many generations in this stage, the soul 
passes on to the third, the sarupyam (resemblance). Once 
arrived at this point, the soul gradually acquires a perfect re- 
semblance to the Divinity, and shares to a certain extent in His 
attributes. Finally, this stage leads on to the fourth, the sayu- 
jyam (identity), and then the perfect and inseparable union of 
the soul with the Deity becomes complete. 

But the soul requires long periods of time Xo pass through 
these four stages of perfection ; it must undergo a great number 
of re-incarnations, during which it gradually acquires the d^ree 
of perfection which is essential to its incorporation with the 
Godhead. In order to explain all these indispensable trans- 
migrations of the soul, the Hindu books make use of various 
analogies, such as the following : — If one wished to extract gold 
from a mass composed of the five metals*, one could not do so 
by melting it once for all. Only by putting it through the fire 
several times could one separate the different alloys of which it 
was composed and extract the gold in alL its purity. 

They illustrate the same truth by various other similes ; for 
instance, that which may be drawn from the process of making 
clarified butter, an article of food which, as we already know, 
the Brahmins are particularly fond of, and which they consider 
the purest of all manufactured substances. 

The majority of these analogies, and the principles deduced 
from them, might, if looked at from a non-controversial point of 
view, be not altogether repugnant to our learned metaphysicians, 
or at any rate to those among us who have given themselves 
up to a life of meditation. We may at any rate conclude that 
these ancient Hindu penitents spent more time and thought on 
spiritual matters than we might have expected. Originally, no 
doubt, this spiritual side of their religion was much purer and 

^ We Europeans recognize a greater number of metals than five. — Dubois. 



CH. xxxv] Sannyast Penances 539 

less fanciful than it is now, when it has become corrupted by 
gross idolatry. Now it merely tends to increase the pride of 
the recluses who practise it. The latter indeed set up a claim 
to unity and equality with the Supreme Being himself; while 
they look down upon their fellow-creatures as objects of 
supreme contempt, as beings who are still wallowing in the 
mire of materialism and passion. 

And how did these so-called penitents carry out their doctrine 
of meditation, concerning which they made such proud boasting ? 
Before idolatry had gained a hold on the country, and while 
the tradition of the outward forms as well as of the inward 
meaning of the religion with which men worshipped the Deity 
after the Flood still lingered, this doctrine of meditation, 
prompted as it was by lofty motives, was doubtless capable of 
maintaining the soul in a constant state of fervent piety towards 
God ; but at the present time this religious exercise is undertaken 
with an object very different and much less estimable. 

I cannot better explain wherein .this practice of meditation 
consists for a modern sannyast than hy repeating what I was 
told by two Hindus who had passed a long novitiate under the 
direction of two celebrated recluses. 

' I was a novice for four months,' said one of them, ' under 
a sannyast who had built himself a hermitage in a lonely 
spot not very far from the town of Bellapuram. Following his 
instructions, I spent the greater part of each night awake, 
occupied in keeping my mind an absolute blank and thinking 
of nothing. I made superhuman efforts to hold my breath as 
long as possible, and only breathed when I was on the point of 
fainting. This suffocating exercise made me perspire profusely. 
One day, at high noon, 1 thought 1 saw a bright moon, which 
seemed to move and sway from side to side. Another time 
I imagined myself enveloped in thick darkness at midday. My 
director, the sannyast, who had warned me that while going 
through this course of penance I should see many marvels, was 
greatly pleased when I mentioned these visions to him. He con- 
gratulated me on the progress that I was making, and prescribed 
fresh exercises which were even more severe than the first. 
The time was not far distant, he assured me, when I should 
experience much more surprising results from my penance. 
At last, worn out by these foolish and fatiguing practices, and 



540 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. n 

fearing lest my brain might really be turned, I left the sannyasi 
and his meditative penances, and returned to my former state 
of life.' 

The second, an old man of a very cheerful disposition, 
told me the following story of his novitiate : — 

'The sannyasi under whose direction I placed myself had 
built his hermitage at some distance from the fort of Namakal, 
in a desert spot. Amongst other exercises which he laid down 
for me, he obliged me to stare at the sky every day without 
blinking my eyes or changing my position. This prolonged 
effort inflamed my eyes terribly and often gave me dreadful 
headaches. Sometimes I thought I saw sparks of fire in the 
air ; at others I seemed to see fiery globes and other meteors. 
My teacher was much pleased with the success of my efforts 
and with the progress L was making. He had only one eye, 
and 1 knew that he had lost the other in following out this 
practice, which he assured me was indispensable if I wished to 
attain to perfect spirituality. But at last I could bear it no 
longer, and fearing that 1 might lose the sight of both eyes, 
1 bade farewell to meditation and the celestial firmament. I 
also tried another kind of exercise for a time. My master told 
me that an infallible means for making rapid progress towards 
spirituality was to keep all the apertures of my body completely 
closed, so that none of the five pranams (winds) which are in it 
could escape. To do this I had to place a thumb in each ear, 
close my lips with the fourth and little fingers of each hand, my 
eyes with the two forefingers, and my nostrils with the two 
middle fingers ; and to close the lower orifice I had to cross my 
legs and sit very tightly on one of my heels. While in this 
attitude 1 had to keep one nostril tightly shut, and leaving the 
other open I had to draw in a long deep breath ; then, immedi- 
ately closing that nostril, I had to open the other and thoroughly 
exhale the air that I had just inhaled. It was of the greatest 
importance that the inhalation and exhalation should not be per- 
formed through the same nostril. I continued this exercise 
until I lost consciousness and fainted away.' 

In order to make his description more intelligible the 
renegade sannyasi insisted on going through the performance 
in my presence. It is impossible to imagine a more ridiculous 
scene. But he took care to change his exhausting position as 



CH. xxxv] The Sacred Word ^Aum * 541 

soon as po<isible, bursting into shouts of laughter at the recol- 
lection of the absurd things that he had been compelled to do. 

I will now give some other examples of meditative exercises 
gathered from Hindu books, which will show how they were 
practised in former days. One of the most famous and 
edifying of the yogams is that called sabda-brahma (the word of 
Brahma) or pranava ; that is to say, meditation on the sacred 
and mysterious word aunt— aunt being Brahma himself. 

As this word aum is composed of three letters, which in 
writing form only one, we may consider that the a is Brahma, 
the u Vishnu, and the m Siva. The sign representing these 
three letters, which in combination form the sabda-brahma^ ends 
with a semicircle with a dot in the centre, which is called bindu, 
and is the emblem of the purely spiritual being. 

Those who desire to obtain salvation must be always medi- 
tating on this word and constantly repeating it. 

But to make this meditation effectual one must begin by 
obtaining complete mastery over oneself and by entirely sub- 
duing all bodily senses and passions. One must, therefore, 
gradually withdraw one's thoughts and affections from all 
material objects and fix them on the dot, or bindu, mentioned 
above. This point once reached, a single moment of medita- 
tion is sufficient to ensure the most perfect happiness. 

Vishnu always looks favourably on such meditations, and from 
the moment that one is able to bring oneself to believe firmly 
that the pranava, or the word aum, is the Divine Being, one 
sees Vishnu in everything. In fact, one sees, hears, and thinks 
of nothing but him ; and, finally, one believes that there is 
nothing existing except him. 

Just as there is nothing wortK knowing that is not to be 
found in the Vedas, so no meditation is equal in merit to that of 
the pranava, or the word aum. 

Another kind of meditation, which is quite as efficacious as 
that which I have just described, is the ashta-yoga (the eight 
yogas\ The following is a short analysis of it, compiled from 
the Saka of the Rig- Veda :— 

The ashta-yoga is peculiarly efficacious. By its means Siva 
himself obtained forgiveness for his sins'^ and the kingdom of 

* It would be more correct to say Ed. 
Br^man —the Supreme Spirit itself. — ' See Part I, Chapter VII. 



542 Hindu Manners, Cusioms, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

Kailasa. There are no sins that it will not wipe out I To kill 
a Brahmin or a cow, to steal gold, to drink intoxicating liquors, 
to violate the wife of one's guru, to bring about abortion, are all 
most heinous crimes. To slander or deceive a Brahmin, or 
break a promise made to a Brahmin ; to look upon a poor 
man or a stranger when one is eating and not to have pity 
on him, but to repulse him and send him away hungry; to 
prevent cows from drinking when they are thirsty ; to try to 
pass oneself off as learned when one knows nothing; to attempt 
to dogmatize on the practice of meditation while ignorant of the 
subject; to give medicines without being a doctor; to predict 
the future when one is no astrologer; for a Brahmin to offer 
sacrifices to the lingam or to an* image of Vishnu after a 
Sudra has previously sacrificed to them : — all these are indeed 
terrible sins. But the ashta-yoga will wipe them all out. 
It is thus described : — First of all, one must fast for three 
consecutive days; after which one must repair to a temple 
dedicated to Siva, or to a cemetery, or to a bilva tree. There 
one must perform the achamania and paint the little circular 
mark called tilaka on one's forehead. Having prepared a clean 
spot on the ground, the devotee must stand upon it on his head 
with his feet in the air. In this position he must six times 
perform the pranayama, which consists in inhaling through one 
nostril and forcibly expelling the air through the other ^ By 
this means the Man of Sin will be destroyed, for this Man of 
Sin resides in the nerve which is found on the left side of the 
head. While expelling the air from the body by the pranayama, 
one must say : * Nerve, you are a goddess ! In you resides the 
Man of Sin. I am about to wash you to rid you of him. So 
begone ! ' A violent exhalation through the left nostril having 
expelled this nerve where the Man of Sin dwelt, the devotee 
must then wash it in warm water and offer puja to it. Then it 
must be made to return to its proper place. To effect this 
a long inhalation must be made through the right nostril, 
accompanied by the following words : — ' Behold, great goddess, 
freed from sin, you are the mother of the world ! A sacrifice 
has been offered in your honour. Return now to the place that 
you occupied before.' 

This is the exercise of the ashta-yoga. It was by practising 

' Pranayama literally means suppression of breath. — £d. 



CH. xxxv] Corporal Penances 543 

this, the author asserts, that Siva became the ruler of the world ; 
Indra, the lord of the Swarga ; Durga, the mother of all living 
creatures ; and Vishnu, the preserver of all things. 

There are many other yogams. In the chapter on the 
sandhya^ 1 gave a description of the sanii-yoga, which serves as 
a kind of preparation to the Brahmin's daily sacrifice. But 
enough has perhaps^ been said to show how puerile are the 
religious exercises of the Hindu ascetics. 

They have, by way of supererogation, eighteen kinds of 
tapasas or corporal penances, of increasing d^rees of severity. 
A recluse selects the one for which he feels most inclination. 
Among the most painful may be mentioned that which consists 
in being exposed, stark naked, to the sun for the whole day in 
the hottest weather, and surrounded on all sides by huge fires ; 
and that in which the- devotee remains for a whole day immersed 
up to the neck in cold water, with a wet cloth round the head, 
during the coldest season of the year. These are called pancha* 
tapasas (the five penances). 

One often sees devotees holding their arms folded above 
their heads, in which position they remain till the nerves 
become so strained and benumbed by the prolonged tension 
that they cannot regain their normal position. 

Others, again, stand on one foot, holding the other foot in the air 
until the leg swells and inflames and breaks out all over into sores. 

Hindu books are full of the merits of these y ogams and 
tapasas. Amongst other self-inflicted tortures they give an 
honourable place to one which is in fact the ne plus ultra of its 
kind. It consists in holding the breath for such a length of 
time that the soul, forced to depart from the body, makes 
a passage for itself through the top of the head and flies off 
to reunite itself to Parabrahma. 

But let no one carry away the idea that the majority of 
modem recluses feel any inclination to subject their bodies to 
such rough usage. Most of them rest content with sitting 
motionless, their eyes closed and their heads bent, spending their 
whole time and energy in thinking of nothing, and keeping their 
minds an utter blank. Others remain squatting imperturbably 
in the attitude which the minister Appaji recommended to his 
shepherd, as already described*. 

^ See Part II, Chapter XXVII. 



544 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

One of these meditative devotees, who lived near me, had 
a mania for imagining that he saw an im^e of Vishnu always 
before him, to which he oflFered, still in imagination, garments, 
jewels, and all sorts of food, the god in exchange giving him 
all that he asked for. He used to spend two hours every day 
in this occupation, but at the end of it all he invariably found 
himself, as before, with empty hands and an equally empty 
stomach. 

No doubt there were men after the Flood who still retained 
the precious gift of a knowledge of the true God, and gave them- 
selves up to the contemplation of His infinite perfections as 
a means of keeping alive in their hearts a proper sense of the 
worship that it was their duty to pay Him. Isaac most probably 
was only continuing the custom of his father Abraham in going 
out, at the close of the day, to meditate in the fields (Genesis 
xxiv. 63). Moses also commanded the children of Israel to 
meditate continually on the duty of loving God with all their 
hearts ; and he enjoined them to meditate on this when in their 
houses, or when travelling, so that God might be always present 
to their minds. David, who had himself experienced the benefit 
of meditation, recommends the practice in almost all his Psalms ; 
and this advice his son Solomon repeats. The pious habit has 
thus descended from generation to generation from the time of 
the Flood to the establishment of Christianity, and the religion 
of Christ likewise regards meditation on the precepts of God as 
an indispensable duty. 

The first Hindu lawgivers, who, though separating them- 
selves from the rest of mankind, preserved their knowledge 
of the true God, were fully impressed with the necessity of 
frequent meditation on His greatness, fearing that other- 
wise they might insensibly allow the recollection of the Deity 
to fade from their minds ; but these just ideas were soon 
warped by human passions and corrupted by the spirit of 
idolatry, so that they quickly degenerated into ridiculous and 
meaningless practices. The pious men who in early ages 
gave up a few moments in each day to serious thought 
and meditation were succeeded by fanatics, who, retaining 
only the mere outward forms of their predecessors' inward 
piety, gave themselves up in their mad enthusiasm to the wildest 
extravagance, and in fact to any folly that they thought likely 



CH. xxxv] The Ascetic Life 545 

to attract the fancy of a people so devoted to exaggerations 
of all kinds as the Hindus. Modem authors, confusing 
religious practices which originate in sincere love for and 
devotion to God with those emanating from vainglory, h3qx)crisy, 
and superstition, have tried to throw discredit on the life of 
asceticism and contemplation which was advocated both by 
the old and the new dispensation, and have presumed to trace 
a similarity between it and the absurd yogams of- the Hindu 
sannyasis. But it seems to me that a small amount of honest 
thought would have shown them what an immense difference 
there was both in the objects aimed at and in the means 
used to attain those objects. Let them compare the; tenets and 
practices of the two great founders of the ascetic and contem- 
plative life in Holy Writ with those of the so-called sannyasi 
philosophers amongst the Hindus. Can Elijah and John the 
Baptist be compared for one moment .with the sannyasis 
Vasishta and Narada? Is there any sort of resemblance 
between the teachings and maxims of the former and of the 
latter ? The Padmapurana and the Vishnu-puranay supposed 
to have been dictated by these two sannyasis, are a mass of 
exaggerations and absurdities. Could the same charge be 
brought against the doctrines of the holy prophet of Israel 
and those of the forerunner of the Messiah ? 

The penances of John the Baptist, for example, have cer- 
tainly nothing in common with the exaggerations and hypocriti- 
cal follies of the Hindu sannyasis, whose sole aim and object 
is to attract public attention to themselves '. The actuating 
motive of John the Baptist was the deepest humility. He hid 
himself from the world. He shunned, despised, and rejected 
its honours, and wished to be considered the least and humblest 
among men. Nevertheless, in his solitude he did not forget the 
duties laid upon him of instructing and preparing the world for 
the great event which was about to be accomplished. Attracted 
by the fame of his virtues, men of all ages and all classes flocked 
to hear the pure and holy doctrine which he taught. Labourers, 
soldiers, publicans, masters, servants— all desired to hear his 
preaching, and all received wise advice and counsel for the 
regulation of their conduct according to their various conditions. 

^ This can hardly be called an impartial and correct picture of the 
sannyasu — Ed. 

♦* N n 



546 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies 

If he left his desert home for a moment, it was only, like his 
predecessor Elijah, to extend yet further the word of God and 
to reprove with dauntless courage the criminal conduct of an 
incestuous king. 

It was not by such unmeaning and ridiculous practices as 
the moksha-sadhakaf the pranava, the santi-yoga, the homam, the 
panchagavia, or the disgusting sacrifices to the lingam, that 
these saintly hermits and their disciples sought to arrive at 
perfection. They never aimed at gaining popular applause by 
excessive and unnatural penances. Their actions, on the con- 
trary, were based on profound humility and on a sincere desire 
to live unhonoured by the world, with only their God as 
a witness to the purity of their lives and motives. 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

The Funeral Ceremonies of Brahmin Sannyasis. 

The ceremonies which accompany the funerals of sannyasis 
differ in many respects from those of ordinary Brahmins. Vana- 
prastkas, like ordinary Brahmins, are burned after death ; but 
sannyasis are invariably buried, no matter what their rank or 
sect may be. 

The son of a sannyasi (should the deceased have had one 
bom to him before he embraced this state) must preside at the 
funeral. In default of a son, there is always some pious Brahmin 
who will take on himself the duty and bear the cost. There is 
often, indeed, much rivalry as to who shall have the honour of 
filling this office, as it is considered a most meritorious one. 
After the corpse has been washed in the usual manner, it is 
wrapped in two cloths dyed yellow with kavi. It is then rubbed 
all over with ashes, and a chaplet of large seeds called rudrak- 
shas^ is fastened round the neck. While all this is going on 
the other Brahmins play on bronze castanets, which make an 
ear-splitting noise. 

Everything being in readiness for the obsequies, the body is 
placed, with its legs crossed, in a large bamboo basket, which 
is hung from a strong bamboo pole by ropes of straw. This 
basket is borne by four Brahmins. The grave must be dug 
near a river or a tank, and must be about six feet deep and 
circular in form. When they reach the spot the Brahmins deposit 
at the bottom of the grave a thick layer of salt, on which they 
place the deceased, with the legs still crossed. They then fill the 
hole with salt till it reaches the sannyasfs neck, pressing it well 
down so that the head may remain immovable. On the head, 
thus left exposed, they break innumerable cocoanuts until the 

^ This word rudraksha means the according to Hindu legend, formed by 
eye of Siva, because these seeds are, his tears. — Dubois. 

N n 2 



548 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. n 

skull is completely fractured'. They then, for the third time, 
throw in salt in sufficient quantities to entirely cover the remains 
of the head. Over the grave they erect a kind of platform, or 
mound, three feet in height, on the top of which they place aZ/Wg^ai// 
of earth about two feet high. This obscene object is immediately 
consecrated by the Brahmins, who oflFer to it a sacrifice of lighted 
lamps, flowers, and incense, and for neiveddya, bananas and 
paramannam, a dish to which the Brahmins are particularly 
partial, and which is composed of rice, cocoanut, and sugar. 
While these offerings are being made, hymns are sung in 
honour of Vishnu, all present screaming at the top of their 
voices. 

This discordant music over, the presiding Brahmin walks 
round the Imgam three times, makes a profound obeisance to 
it, expresses the hope that by virtue of the sacrifice offered 
to the im^e the deceased may be fully satisfied, that Siva may 
look favourably on him, that Brahma may receive him into his 
abode, and that thus he may escape another re-incarnation in 
this world. He then pours a little rice and a few drops of 
water on the ground, picks up all the fragments of the cocoanut 
shells that have been broken on the head of the deceased, 
and distributes them to those present, who scramble for the 
pieces, so eager are they to possess these relics, which are 
supposed to bring good luck. The paramannam is then divided 
among those who have no children, for when acquired under 
these circumstances it possesses the power of making barren 
women fruitful. The ceremonies of the day end with ablutions : 
not that the mourners need to purify themselves from any defile- 
ment, because none is contracted in attending the funeral of 
SLsannyasi; but these ablutions serve instead of the bath which 
all Brahmins must take three times a day. 

For ten successive days after the funeral the person who has 
presided thereat, and several other Brahmins in his company, 
meet every morning at the grave of the deceased to renew the 
offerings to the littgam. A similar ceremony takes place on the 
anniversary of his death. 

On the conclusion of the ceremonies, the presiding Brahmin 
contents himself with giving a very frugal repast to all those 

* The object of this is to free the prana (life), which is believed to be 
imprisoned in the skull. — £d. 



CH. xxxvi] A Sannyast^s Funeral 549 

who have attended the function, after which he walks thrice 
round the assembly, bows to them, and dismisses them without 
giving them any presents. They, in their turn, before their 
departure, congratulate him on the good deed that he has per- 
formed and on the reward that he has earned thereby. 

The tombs of these sannyasis sometimes become famous, 
and crowds of devotees flock to them, bringing offerings and 
sacrifices as if to divine beings. The strange custom of breaking 
the heads of these dead hermits with cocoanuts at their burial 
has no doubt some connexion with the similar practice in regard 
to the lingam stones which may often be seen on the high-roads 
or in much-frequented places, the passers-by being in the habit 
of breaking on the top of these lingams the cocoanuts which 
they are about to offer as sacrifices. 

All the prayers, oblations, and ceremonies which are offered 
up for the sannyasis after their death would seem to indicate an 
opinion that these hermits still have some sins to expiate, and 
that their perfect happiness remains doubtful '. This is not the 
only point on which Hindu beliefs contradict each other. 

I have already said that it is a mistake to confuse Brahmin 
sannyasis with those Sudra penitents belonging to the sects of 
Siva and Vishnu, who live apart in solitary hermitages. These 
latter are not obliged to fulfil the condition of having previously 
been fathers of families. They are supposed to have always 
been absolutely continent, but I should be very sorry to be 
compelled to guarantee the fact. 

A Brahmin can become a sannyasi at any age. Many are to 
be met with who, tormented by remorseful consciences, devote 
the last days of their lives to this profession, and even embrace 
it on their death-beds, convinced as they are that to have merely 
become a penitent is a sure safe-conduct to the other world. The 
same formalities as those which I have already described are 
used for the admission of these hoary old sinners to a tardy 
penitence; and be their repentance sincere or not, they can 
safely count on receiving after death all the advantages and all 
the happiness that the most persevering sannyasis have a right 
to expect who have grown old in the exercise of the most 
rigorous austerities. 

^ These ceremonies would i^>pear to be observed more as a matter of ritual 
than of expiation. — £d. 



PART III 



RELIGION 



>-»«- 



CHAPTER I 

Origin of the TrimuftitLtid the Primitive Idolatry of the Hindus. — Comparison 
between the Greek and Indian Divinities. — Peculiar Idolatry of the 
Hindus. — Worship of the Elements represented by the Tnmurti. 

The Hindus understand by the word Trimurti the three 
principal divinities whom they acknowledge. These are Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Siva. The word properly signifies *the three powers,* 
viz. Creation^ the special attribute of Brahma ; Preservation^ the 
attribute of Vishnu; and Destruction^ the attribute of Siva*. 

These three divinities are represented sometimes singly with 
their special emblems, and sometimes joined together in a single 
body with three heads. It is under the latter form that they 
obtain the name of Trimurti^ which means, at once, both the 
three bodies and the three powers. This union of persons is 
the allegorical symbol of the existence of things created, which 
can neither be produced nor preserved without the agreement 
and the sanction of these three powers. 

^ The first is the religion of activity highest, because it aims at entire ces- 

and works ; the second, that of faith sation of action and total eflfacement 

and love ; the third, that of austerity, of all personal entity and identity by 

contemplation, and spiritual know- absorption into simple Soul. — Monier- 

ledge. This last is regarded as the Williams. 



The Trimurti 551 



The Trimurti is recognized and worshipped generally by all 
Hindus except the Jains. Although many Hindus are specially 
devoted, some to Siva and others to Vishnu, nevertheless when 
these two divinities are united with Brahma in a single body 
with three heads they all pay equal worship to the three without 
regard to the particular points of doctrine which otherwise 
separate them. 

It is very difficult to trace the origin of the Trimurti^ inas- 
much as the accounts of it do not agree. In some Puranas 
it is related that the Trimurti sprang from a female source 
called Adi'Sakti (the original power), who gave birth to these 
three divinities united in a single body; and it is added that 
after having brought them into the world she fell so desperately 
in love with them that she married them. 

In some other Puranas we read that ^rf/'-Sa^// produced a seed 
from which was born Siva, the father of Vishnu. 

Elsewhere we are told that a flower of the tamarasa plant 
(water-lily) sprang from the navel of Vishnu, and that from this 
flower Brahma was born. 

In short, we find in the Hindu books a mere tissue of con- 
tradictions relating to the Trimurti, and the absurd details which 
are related in connexion with each are even more inconsistent. 
The point on which they agree to a certain extent is that which 
relates to the excesses and abominable amours of the three 
divinities composing it. 

In spite of the great power which these divinities enjoyed, 
they were nevertheless often compelled to feel the terrible 
vengeance of virtuous persons, who, shocked at the sight of their 
infamous proceedings, found means of reducing them to sub- 
jection and inflicting on them severe punishment. Thus, for 
example, there was a certain virgin, named Anusooya, who was 
as much renowned for her inviolable chastity as for her devotion 
to the gods and for her tender compassion for the unfortunate. 
The divinities of the Trimurti, having heard of her, became so 
greatly enamoured that they resolved upon robbing her of her 
virginity, which she had till then treasured with so much care. 
To attain their object the three seducers disguised themselves as 
religious mendicants, and under this guise went to ask alms of 
her. The virgin came to them, and with her wonted kindness 
showered gifts upon them. The sham beggars, after being 



552 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

loaded with her gifts, told her that they expected from her 
another favour, which was to strip herself naked before them 
and to satisfy their impure desires. Surprised and frightened 
by this shameful proposal, she repulsed them by pronouncing 
against them certain mantrams. These, together with some holy 
water which she poured upon them, had the effect of converting 
them into a calf. After they had been thus transformed, 
Anusooya took upon herself to bring up this calf by feeding it 
with her own milk. The Trimurti remained in this humiliating 
position till all the female deities combined together and, fearing 
lest some great misfortune might befall them in the absence of 
their three principal gods, after consulting one another, went in 
a body to Anusooya and begged her most humbly to give up 
the Trimurti and to restore them to their former state. It was 
with great difficulty that Anusooya was persuaded to yield to 
their prayers, and even then she imposed a condition that they 
should first 6f all be ravished (by whom the fable does not say). 
The female deities, convinced that they could not otherwise 
rescue the Trimurti, consented to undergo the penalty required 
of them, choosing rather to lose their honour than their gods. 
The conditions being fulfilled, Anusooya restored the Trimurh 
to their former state, and they returned to the place whence they 
came \ 

This scandalous adventure of the mighty divinities of the 
Trimurti is one of the least indecent of the kind related in 
the Hindu books. 

But whatever may be the confusion pervading the contra- 
dictory accounts of the diflferent Puranas, I am inclined to 
believe that all that is said about the three divinities of the 
Trimurti, and of the follies which are ascribed to them, is 
a mere mass of disgusting allegory. 

At the commencement of their idolatry the Hindus confined 
their worship to visible objects, such as the sun, the moon, the 
stars, and the elements. In those early times they felt no need of 
making idols of stone, wood, or metal. But as paganism extended 
its dominion, and when, in imitation of other idolatrous nations, 
the Hindus went so far as to deify simple mortals, they had 

* Hindus would say that these affirm that a chaste woman is proof 
stories were not intended to illustrate even against divine temptation.— £d. 
the immorality of their gods, but to 



cH. i] Origin of Hindu Idols 553 

recourse to statues and images in order to perpetuate the memory 
of their celebrated men and to transmit their virtues to posterity. 
By degrees, with the same object in view, they gave a bodily 
form to all the objects of their worship. The origin of the 
Trimurti dates, I believe, from a period long after the establish- 
ment of idolatry in India. 

It may justly be presumed that this symbolic representation of 
the three divinities united in a single body denotes merely the 
three elements which are most perceptible to all, viz. earth, 
water, and fire. In course of time the original notion vanished, 
and an ignorant people, guided solely by the impression of the 
senses, gradually converted what was at first a simple allegory 
into three distinct and real divinities. 

Before pushing my inquiries further upon this subject, I would 
make a few remarks on the origin which many modern writers 
have assigned to this triple divinity of India. They have 
asserted that these three gods are nothing else but the three 
principal deities of the Greeks and the Romans under different 
names. Brahma, according to them, is Jupiter, Vishnu is 
Neptune, and Siva is Pluto. In fact, according to the mythology 
of the Greeks, Jupiter is the author and the creator of all things ; 
he is the father, the master, and the king of gods and men. 
Now, all these attributes belong equally to Brahma. The 
Hindus say that the universe is the egg of Brahma, and that 
after laying it, he hatched it. He also particularly resembles 
Jupiter in his incestuous alliances. Jupiter had for his wife 
Juno, his sister ; Brahma is, at the same time, the father and 
the husband of Sarasvati : and it would be easy to enume- 
rate many more points of resemblance between these two 
divinities. 

The resemblance between Neptune and Vishnu is no less 
striking. Neptune makes the waters his abode ; the sea is his 
empire ; there he reigns, mounted on his chariot in the form of 
a shell drawn by sea-horses, and armed with his formidable 
trident. He is attended by Tritons, who make the whole sea 
re-echo with the sound of their conches. One of the most 
common names for Vishnu is Narayana, which signifies one that 
sojourns in the waters. He is represented as quietly sleeping on 
the surface of the ocean. It is true he has neither trident in his 
hand nor Tritons around him ; but his devotees bear on their 



554 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

forehead a symbolic figure which closely resembles a trident, 
and in imitation of the companions of Neptune they are always 
provided with a conch, or sartgu, from which they blow ear- 
splitting blasts, and the figure of which is also stamped on their 
shoulders with hot iron. 

Siva, again, is a perfect prototype of Pluto, the gloomy god 
of hell, the lord of the shades and of night. To Siva belongs 
the power of destruction. He it is who reduces everything 
to dust ; he takes delight in giving vent to his sobs and 
groans in places of burial, whence he derives the name of 
Rudra commonly given him. It signifies one who causes 
lamentation. 

Pluto, unable to find a woman willing to dwell with him in his 
dismal abode, carried off Proserpine, and concealed her so well 
that for a long while she escaped the search of her mother Ceres. 
In like manner, Siva found a wife in a remote quarter. Unable 
to get one elsewhere, he obtained one at last from the mountain 
Mandra, who gave him in marriage his daughter Parvati, 
in consideration of a long and severe penance which Siva 
endured for her sake in the deserts. For fear lest she should 
escape from him, he carries her always on his head, concealed 
in his enormously thick hair \ 

But though some features of resemblance lead us to believe 
in the identity of the fabulous deities of India with those of 
Greece and Rome, we find ourselves disconcerted at every step. 
As a matter of fact both Vishnu and Siva, as well as Brahma, 
possess many traits of likeness to the Olympian king. It was 
Vishnu who cleared the earth of a multitude of giants that over- 
ran it — giants who far exceeded in stature Enceladus, Briareus, 
and the other Titans who were destroyed by Jupiter. Jupiter 
is borne by an eagle; Vishnu likewise rides a pretty eagle 
called Garuda, which, though the smallest of the birds of its 
own species, became enormously large when it carried the god 
under the designation oi Jagannatha^ i. e. Master of the World, 
an attribute which he shares with the most powerful of the sons 
of Saturn. 

Juno is the goddess of wealth. The name of Lakshmi, the 

^ The Abb^ is evidently confusing is always carried on Siva's head. 
Parvati with Ganga (the Ganges , Parvati is always said to be carried 
who according to Hindu m3rthoIogy on Siva*s left hip. — £d. 



CH. i] Greek and Hindu Deities 555 

wife of Vishnu, also signifies one who gives riches. Jealous like 
Juno, Lakshmi had a good deal to suffer, as well as her prototype, 
on account of the numberless infidelities of her husband, the con- 
sequences of which were the same, namely, perpetual domestic 
quarrels. The Romans, in the feasts which they celebrated in 
honour of their gods, always represented Jupiter in company 
with his wife; and the Hindus do the same in the case of Vishnu 
and Lakshmi. 

There are other divinities, such as Devendra, Varuna, and 
Yama, who display still greater resemblances to the three 
most powerful deities of Greek mythology. Devendra, whose 
name is equivalent to that of master of the deities^ is the ' monarch 
of the sky.' He exercises his sovereignty over the deities of 
the second rank, who inhabit with him a place called Swarga, 
where they enjoy all kinds of carnal pleasures. He distributes 
among them the amrita, which has the virtue of rendering them 
immortal \ Like Jupiter, he is armed with lightning and 
launches it against the giants. 

Varuna is really the Hindu Neptune. He is the god of 
water, the lord of the ocean, and is worshipped as such over 
the whole Peninsula. 

We recognize Pluto in Yama. Yama exercises his sovereignty 
in Naraka (hell), as Pluto does in Tartarus. He presides at 
men's death-beds, and determines their subsequent destiny 
according to the deeds, good or bad, which they have done 
during their lifetime. I might prolong this comparison, with- 
out however drawing the conclusion that the Hindus ever 
borrowed their system of theogony from the Greeks, or the 
Greeks from the Hindus. 

But if it is not from other ancient peoples that the Hindus 
derived their three principal divinities, whence have they derived 
them ? I shall attempt some reflections on this point with all 
the reserve imposed upon me by a subject so diflScult of 
explanation. Let us first observe that Hindu idolatry differs 
in one essential point from that which prevailed formerly in 
Athens and in Rome. In Greece and Rome it was not the sea 
that was worshipped, but its monarch, the god Neptune. All 
his attendants, the Nereids and the Tritons, had a share in the 

^ Mrita signifies death, and amrita appear to differ from the ambrosia of 
immortality. The amrita does not the Greeks.— Dubois. 



556 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

worship oflFered to him. It was not to the forests, to the rivers, 
or to the fountains that prayers were offered, but to the Fauns 
and to the Naiads who presided over them. 

The idolatry of India, which is of a much grosser kind, has 
for the object of its worship the material substance itself It is 
to water, to fire, to the most common household implements ; in 
a word, to everything which they understand to be useful or 
hurtful, that the Hindus pay direct worship. 

It is true that they admit another kind of idolatry which is 
a little more refined. There are images of deities of the first 
rank which are exposed to public veneration only after a Brahmin 
has invoked and incorporated in them these actual divinities. In 
these cases, it is really the divinity that resides in the idol, and 
not the idol itself, that is worshipped. 

But the one kind of worship does not exclude the other ; and 
that which has for its object the actual substance itself is the 
most common. 

The Hindus hold, as an invariable principle, that every object, 
animate or inanimate, which has the power of doing good or 
evil, should be worshipped. 

' My god,* a respectable Hindu said to me one day, ' is the 
headman amongst my field labourers ; for as they work under 
his orders, he can, by using his influence, do me much good or 
much evil.* 

I have somewhere read a conversation between the wives of 
the seven famous Rishis, in which they agreed in the principle 
that the chief god of a woman is her husband, by reason of the 
good or evil he can do her; and we have already seen that 
the rules of conduct drawn up for Hindu ladies continually 
remind us of this idea. It is this same notion which makes 
the Hindus attach so much importance to the blessing or the 
curse of persons reputed to be saints ; it is on the same principle 
also that they are so easily persuaded to give the name of god 
to princes and great personages, and, in short, to every one 
from whom they have something to hope or to fear. 

There is one phrase which among the civilized nations of 
Europe has at all times been a metaphorical exaggeration, but 
which is taken literally in India. To make a god of one*s 
belly bears quite a different meaning for a Brahmin and for 
a European. 



CH. i] Earth, Water, and Fire 557 

The rage for deifying everything has spread even to the 
mountains and to the forests. The savage tribes who inhabit 
these places do not worship any of the gods of the country ; they 
have one special deity of their own : it is a big root, a sort of 
potato, which grows abundantly in the forests, and forms their 
principal staple of food. Knowing nothing more useful than 
this vegetable, they make it the object of their worship. In 
its presence they celebrate their marriages, and in its name they 
take their oaths. 

Probably the 7nw«r/i* owed its origin to this mode of viewing 
objects. Earth, water, and fire were the types of the three 
divinities which compose it. The earth is the common mother 
of all things, animate and inanimate. Either they spring from 
her bosom, or they live upon her productions. It is through 
her that everything subsists in nature. She has, therefore, 
been regarded as the divine creator, and holds the first rank 
in the opinion of the Hindus, who have made her their 
Brahma. 

But what could the earth do without the help of water? 
Without the dews and the rains which develop the seeds of her 
fertility she would remain barren, and would soon find herself 
berefl of every living creature. It is water which gives life, 
preserves, and causes to grow everything that has life or vege- 
tates. It was, therefore, regarded as the divine preserver, that 
is to say, Vishnu. 

Fire, in penetrating the other two elements, communicates to 
them a portion of its energy, develops their properties, and 
brings everything in nature to that state of growth, maturity, and 
perfection which would never be arrived at without it. But, 
should it cease to act upon created things, every one of them 
perishes. When it is in its free and visible state, this active 
agent of reproduction destroys by its irresistible power the 
bodies to whose composition it had before contributed ; and it is 
to this formidable power that it owed its title of god-destroyer, 
that is to say, Siva. 

By uniting the three elements in a single body with three 
heads the founders of the Hindu theogony wished it to be under- 
stood that the harmony of these three primal elements was 
indispensable to the production and reproduction of all secondary 
bodies. 



558 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

This is not a theory of my own invented merely for the 
purpose of explaining the original idolatry of the Hindus ; it is 
their own peculiar doctrine, observed by them in daily practice. 
It is even one of the fundamental tenets of the religion of the 
Brahmins. To convince themselves of this, let my readers 
reperuse the chapter about sandhya, which so formally enjoins 
the special and direct worship of the three elements, while the 
two others, air and ether, are almost forgotten. 

The Brahmins offer worship and address mystical prayers 
to the seven inferior worlds, of which the first and the most 
important is the earth. ' Glory to thee, O earth, mother most 
great,* are the words of the Yajur- Veda ; and immediately after 
is added, 'Glory to thee, O fire, who art god.* 

There is no surer proof that they attach to fire itself the idea 
of divine essence than their perpetual sacrifices ofhomam and of 
yagnam, in which no other object of worship than this element 
is observable. 

The divinity of water is also incontestably recognized as an 
article of their belief. The Brahmins worship it and offer prayers 
to it when they make their daily ablutions. It is then that 
they invoke the holy rivers, among others the Ganges, and all 
its sacred branches. Often too they offer oblations to water 
by casting into the rivers and tanks, especially at the places 
where they bathe, small pieces of gold and silver, and sometimes 
pearls and other valuable jewels. 

Furthermore, sailors, fishermen, and all who frequent the 
sea, visit the shore from time to time to pay their worship and 
to offer up their sacrifices to it. 

When, afler a long drought, an abundant rain brings hope 
to the despairing husbandman by filling the great reservoirs 
for the irrigation of the rice-fields, the inhabitants at once 
flock to them and with signs of joy exclaim, 'The lady is 
arrived * ; and they bow with their hands clasped towards the 
water which fills the reservoirs, while he-goats or rams are 
sacrificed in its honour. 

At the season of the year when the Cauvery inundates the 

barren and scorched fields on its banks and spreads freshness 

nd fertility far and wide— which generally takes place in the 

Idle of July — the inhabitants of that part of the Peninsula 

'^ ■*»% baiik% many of them coming from a great distance. 



cH. i] Worship of the Elements 559 

in order to congratulate the lady (the water) on her arrival and 
to offer her sacrifices of all sorts, such as pieces of money, 
which they throw to her that she may have something to 
defray her expenses ; pieces of linen to clothe herself; jewels 
to adorn herself; rice, cakes, fruits, and other eatables, lest she 
should suffer from hunger ; household utensils such as baskets, 
earthen vessels, &c., in order that she may conveniently cook 
and store her provisions and have everything which may procure 
her an easy subsistence. 

The homage which the Brahmins in the sandhya ceremonies 
pay to the water contained in the copper vessel, the frequent 
performance of achamania * or purification by water, and many 
other similar acts, attest the reality of the special worship which 
they pay to water. Hence no doubt arises the great veneration 
which they have for Vishnu, who represents this element in the 
Trimurii; a veneration far superior to that which they show 
to Siva, the representative of fire. 

As far as one can see, in ancient times the elements had 
temples specially dedicated to their worship; but I confess that 
I have not been able to discover any vestiges of such buildings 
still remaining. Nevertheless, if we may believe the evidence 
of a Brahmin who was consulted on the subject by Abraham 
Rogers, there was, when this traveller visited India, in a district 
not far from the Coromandel Coast, a temple dedicated to the 
five elements. Be this as it may, however, one may not un- 
frequently see upon the door or in the interior of the temples 
existing at the present day the symbols of these elements 
represented either by five lingams arranged in a line, or by 
only three which are symbols of the material TVi'wwr/i— earth, 
water, and fire. 

It may be remarked, perhaps, that the Hindus are not the only 
ancient nation which has adored the elements without attaching 
to the worship the idea of the divinities who subsequently 
became identified with it. Most idolatrous nations have, I am 
quite aware, made the elements the actual objects of their 
worship. But this confirms rather than contradicts the opinion 
that the Hindus gave themselves up to this absurd material 
idolatry, and that they invented their Trimurti in order to 
perpetuate it by symbols. For I persist in my belief that the 

^ Described in the chapter on sandhya. 



560 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

three great divinities, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, were originally 
nothing else but the three elements personified. 

The Trimurii, as we have seen, signifies at the same time 
the three bodies and the three powers. These three bodies, 
symbolical of the three great agents of Nature, were at 
first simply allegorical, just as are most of the religious 
and political institutions of India. This decided taste for 
allegory, which is characteristic of the founders of the Hindu 
religion and polity, has proved the source of many errors 
in the case of a people who are invariably guided simply 
by the impression of their senses, and who, accustomed to 
judge things only by their outward appearance, have taken 
literally that which was represented to them under symbols, 
and have thus come to adore the actual image itself instead of 
the reality. 

This system of explanatory symbolism has always been, and 
is even now, so familiar to Hindu writers, that they often 
describe their three great divinities by the allegorical desig- 
nations peculiar to each. We have seen, too, that they 
recognize in men three sorts of dispositions or qualities which 
they call satva, rajas, tamas. Satva is the gentle and insinuating 
disposition ; rajas, the irascible, furious, passionate ; tamas, 
the dull, heavy, and lethargic. 

They attribute one of these qualities to each of the divinities 
which compose the Trimurti, Thus Vishnu is endowed with 
satva, Siva with rajas, and Brahma with tamas. Again, these 
same qualities are also applied to the three elements. The 
earth, like Brahma, is heavy and indifferent by nature ; the 
water, like Vishnu, is insinuating and penetrating; the fire, 
like Siva, is capable of destroying everything by its violence. 

The quality tamas is so inherent in the earth that Hindu 
astronomers often confound the two. Thus in a lunar eclipse, 
when the darkness of the earth intercepts the rays of the sun, 
they say that the tamas-btmbam, or the disk tamas, obscures by 
its shadow the disk of the moon. 

The quality rajas, characteristic of fire and represented under 
the form of Siva, is ascribed in a special manner to that deity by 
the Hindu poets ; and although the name of Siva, which is most 
commonly used, signifies joy, the deity bears many other names 
which seem to show that he is no other than fire personified. 



CH. i] The Elements personified 561 

Such, for instance, is the name Jwala (the inflamed), under 
which he is well known. 

I shall here relate a strange practice which seems to me to 
support the opinion I hold regarding the origin of the Trimurti, 
Sometimes during the periods of excessive heat the Hindus 
suppose that Siva, from whom it emanates, is more than usually 
inflamed. Consequently, fearing lest he should set everything on 
fire, they place over the head of his idol a vessel filled with 
water. In this vessel a little hole is pierced, so that the water 
ni^y» by falling on him drop by drop, refresh him and abate the 
burning heat that consumes him. 

The quality satva^ ascribed to Vishnu, applies also to water, 
which penetrates and insinuates itself into the earth, rendering 
it fertile ; for the name of Vishnu signifies one who penetrates 
everywhere. Appu (water) is a common enough name for this 
deity ; but the commonest of all is Narayana, that is to say, one 
who moves upon the waters. 

Furthermore, the idea that the three principal divinities of 
India are the elements personified is admitted by a great 
number of Vishnavite Brahmins, and I am indebted to some 
of these for a portion of the arguments on which I have based 
my own view. They have at the same time told me that they 
themselves regard all that is commonly related of the Trimurti 
as mere fables; but as the disclosure of such a sentiment, 
which tends to nothing less than the undermining of one of the 
principal foundations of the popular religion, would stop the 
sources of their emoluments, and would at the same time expose 
them to public indignation, they are careful never to publish 
their private opinion on the matter. 

This theory once admitted, it will be easy to find a very clear 
and natural meaning for certain expressions contained in the 
Hindu books — expressions which have led many authors to 
believe that the people of India possessed from the earliest times 
some knowledge of the Trinity. . ' These three gods,' say those 
books, 'are but one; Siva is the heart of Vishnu, and Vishnu 
the heart of Brahma ; it is one lamp with three lighted wicks.' 
At first sight these expressions would appear to indicate one god 
in three persons. But, even granted it were true that the primi- 
tive Hindus intended to transmit to their posterity the idea of 
the Trinity under the form and attributes of the Trimurti^ it 

00 



562 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

must be confessed that the result has been a sadly distorted 
presentation of this great mystery. On the other hand, I believe 
there is another explanation which is more simple and more 
reasonable. I cannot indeed doubt that the Hindu writers, in 
using the expressions just quoted, and many others of the same 
kind, wished them to be understood to mean that the co-opera- 
tion of the three elements in question was indispensable for the 
production and reproduction of everything that exists in nature, 
a co-operation so necessary that the absence of one would reduce 
the others to a state of complete inertness and impotence. 

The early Fathers of the Christian Church, such as St. Justin, 
St. Clement, Theodoret, St. Augustine, and others, proved the 
truth of the mystery of the Trinity to the heathens of their 
time by the authority of the ancient Greek philosophers, and 
particularly by that of Plato and his principal disciples, such 
as Plotinus and Porphyry. They gained at that time consider- 
able advantage by laying stress on those authorities in whose 
works were to be found the words Father^ Son, IVord, Spirit; 
the Father comprehending perfection, the Son perfectly resem- 
bling the Father, and the Word by whom all things were created ; 
these three Persons being but one God. Such expressions 
were not the chance creations of those philosophers; they 
formed the foundation of the vsystem of Plato, who did not, 
however, venture to teach their meaning to a people steeped in 
the follies of polytheism, lest he should be treated in the same 
manner as his master Socrates. 

Nevertheless, I doubt whether the illustrious Fathers of the 
Christian Church would have laid so much stress upon such 
authorities had they not found in the writings of these Platonic 
philosophers expressions more precise, less inconsistent, and 
less tainted with materialism than those to be found in the 
Hindu books relating to Trimurti, 

My readers have, no doubt, been astonished to find that air, 
the element which some ancient Greek philosophers considered 
to be the beginning and ending of everything created, has so far 
not figured in this discussion. As a matter of fact, the Hindus 
go farther than the Greeks. They recognize five elements, 
and the air is divided by them into ether and wind, or, properly 
speaking, air, which is personified under the name of Indra, the 
chief of the inferior deities and the king of the ethereal regions, 



cH. i] Religious Allegory 563 

where he dwells. The word Indra signifies the air) in his 
domains the winds blow according to his commands. In 
the Indra-purana we find these words : ' Indra is nothing else 
than the wind, and the wind is nothing else than Indra.' The 
wind by condensing the clouds produces lightning, which is the 
weapon of this deity. He launches it against the giants, with 
whom he is oflen at war ; and he is sometimes victorious, 
sometimes vanquished. The clouds, whose various forms repre- 
sent the giants, sometimes stop the wind ; sometimes, on the 
other hand, the latter disperses the clouds and rids the air of 
them. 

This taste for allegory, which is inherent amongst all people 
in rudimentary stages of civilization, has become in the case 
of the Hindus an inexhaustible source of errors in matters of 
religion. In the earlier ages would-be commentators, by inter- 
preting in their own way ideas Whose original meaning had 
become obscured by lapse of time, confused everything instead 
of making everything clear ; and later their successors, wearied 
by attempts to explain what seemed to them i»explicable, 
stuck to the literal meaning, and thus revived the extravagant 
and barbarous idolatry which forms the religious system of- the 
modern Hindus. 



o o:^ 



chapte:r II 

Metempsychosis. — Explanation of this Religious Doctrine. — Penalties for 
Different Sins. — The Hindus as Authore of the Doctrine of Metempsy- 
chosis. — Difference between them and the Greeks in this Respect. — 
Namka, or Hell ; Punishments endured there. — Abodes of Bliss. 

There are few Hindu books in which the doctrine of metem- 
psychosis is not explained and expounded. This doctrine is, as 
is generally known, one of the fundamental principles of the 
Hindu religion. The following is an extract from the Bhaga- 
vata: — 'Vishnu, the Supreme Being, before creating anything 
which now exists, began by creating souls ', which at first ani- 
mated bodies of fantastic shapes. During their union with these 
bodies they either committed sin or practised virtue. After a long 
abode in these provisional dwelling-places, they were withdrawn 
and summoned before the tribunal of Yama, who judges the 
dead. This divinity admitted into Swarga (paradise) those souls 
which had led virtuous lives; and he shut up in Naraka (hell) 
those souls which had given themselves up to sin. Souls 
which had been partly virtuous and partly sinful were sent to 
earth to animate other bodies, and so to endure proportionately 
the pain due for their sins and to receive the reward of their 
virtues. Thus every new birth, whether happy or unhappy, 
is the result of deeds practised in previous generations, and is 
either the reward or punishment for them. We may thus judge 

^ The philosophers of the School of things might become immortal. Nor 

Pythagoras held that these souls were can the soul be reborn of anything: 

not only immortal but eternal ; that is immortal, because that which is im- 

to say, they existed before they en- mortal cannot be reproduced. They 

tered the bodies of living creatures. held, therefore, that the soul is part of 

The soul, they said, cannot be born God Himself.— Dubois. 
of anything mortal ; otherwise all 



Transmigration of Souls 565 

by the condition of a person in an existing generation what he 
has been in the previous one. 

' Nevertheless, those who die in holiness are no longer 
exposed to new births ; they go straight to Swarga, 

* The souls of men, after death, go to animate other bodies. 
Sometimes it is the body of an insect, of a reptile, of a bird, or 
of a quadruped, and sometimes it is the body of another man. 
Nevertheless, the most perfect are admitted into Swarga, and the 
most guilty are plunged into Naraka, It is solely according to 
their good or bad deeds that their transmigration, advantageous 
or otherwise, is determined ; and the good or evil they will have 
to experience in the various states through which they pass is 
determined in the same manner. 

'The distinctions and differences which are to be observed 
amongst mankind must be attributed to the same causes. Some 
are rich, and others poor ; some are weakly, others enjoy good 
health ; some are handsome, others ugly ; some are of low 
birth, others highly born ; some are happy, others unhappy. 
These differences are not the result of mere chance, but of 
goodness or wickedness, as the case may be, in preceding 
existences. 

'Man is the highest form of all the creatures on earth. To 
be bom a man, in whatever caste it may be, always presupposes 
a certain degree of merit. 

'Among men the Brahmins hold the first rank. The honour 
of giving a soul to a Brahmin is the reward only of the accumu- 
lated merits of many previous generations. 

'To practise virtue in the hope of some reward is always 
a good thing ; but to practise it with entire disinterestedness and 
without expecting any return or recompense, this is the most 
perfect. Those who thus practise it are certain of the happiness 
of Sivarga, and are no more subject to change. 

' This then is the fruit of our deeds. This is the reason why 
the same soul lives sometimes in the body of a man, at other 
times in that of an animal. This is why it is at one time happy, 
at another time unhappy, in this world and in the other.' 

I will not follow the author in his detailed enumeration of the 
penalties which are reserved for various sins. I shall confine 
myself to the most important of them. 

* He who kills the cow of a Brahmin will go after death to 



566 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

hell, where he will for ever be the prey of serpents, and tor- 
mented by hunger and thirst. After thousands of years of 
horrible sufferings he will return to the world to animate the 
body of a cow, and will remain in this state as many years 
as the cow has hairs on its body. At length he will be born 
a Pariah, and will be afflicted with leprosy for a period of ten 
thousand years. 

'The murder of a Brahmin, for any cause whatsoever, is 
a sin four times more heinous than the former. Whoever is 
guilty of it will be condemned at his death to take the form of 
one of those insects which feed on filth. Being reborn long 
afterwards a Pariah, he will belong to this caste, and will be 
blind for more than four times as many years as there are hairs 
on the body of a cow. He can, nevertheless, expiate his crime 
by feeding forty thousand Brahmins. 

' If a Brahmin kills a Sudra, it will suffice to efface the sin 
altogether if he recites the gayatri a hundred times. 

* He who kills an insect will himself become an insect after 
death. Then he will be reborn a Sudra, but he will be subject 
to all sorts of infirmities. 

'Every Brahmin who cooks for a Sudra or who travels 
mounted on an ox will go to hell after death. He will be 
plunged there into boiling oil and be bitten continuously by 
venomous snakes. He will be reborn afterwards under the 
form of one of those birds of prey which devour corpses, and will 
remain a thousand years under this form, and also a hundred 
years under the form of a dog.- 

* Whoever fells a sacred fig-tree commits a crime four times 
greater than the murder of a Brahmin, and will be exposed after 
his death to penalties proportionate to a sin so heinous.' 

Several modern philosophers have maintained that Pythagoras 
attached only an allegorical sense to the doctrine of metempsy- 
chosis. The most general opinion is that he taught it merely as 
an abstract religious doctrine. He is said to have borrowed 
it from the Egyptians, who, if we are to believe Herodotus, were 
its inventors. But the communications between Pythagoras and 
the Brahmins and Gymnosophists of India lead one to suppose 
with quite as much reason that he borrowed it from these Indian 
philosophers, for we know that the Hindus have never copied 
anything from contemporaneous nations. If it be true that at the 



CH. ii] The Doctrine of Metempsychosis 567 

time of the travels of Pythagoras the doctrine of metempsychosis 
was professed by the Egyptians, they had probably taken their 
ideas from the same sources as the people of India, if indeed they 
had not actually borrowed them from the latter. It is certain, 
furthermore, that it is not in this alone that the metaphysics of 
Pythagoras present some features of resemblance to those 
of the Gymnosophists. Again, we know that Pythagoras 
travelled for his own instruction, and it has never been con- 
tended that he taught anything to the peoples of Asia whom 
he visited. Besides, various Hindu books, which undoubtedly 
existed before the time of Pythagoras, are filled with this 
doctrine of metempsychosis and treat of it as an article of their 
primitive faith, which had been well established before his time. 
Anyhow, whoever the originator of it may be, it is none the less 
wonderful that such a chimerical system was not only acknow- 
ledged in almost the whole of Asia, but has even found credence 
in various other parts of the world. It is well known that 
Caesar found it in full force amongst the Gauls * ; and one is 
astonished to find that enlightened men like Socrates and Plato 
made these fantastic theories the object of their serious specula- 
tions. Have we not seen modern writers, too, contending that 
the doctrine of metempsychosis is a masterpiece of genius? 
They have indeed maintained that Aristotle admitted the trans- 
migration of the soul of one man into another, though it is 
proved that he rejected as absurd the idea of the transmigration 
of human souls into the bodies of beasts. 

In consequence of his belief Pythagoras deprecated the 
eating of the flesh of any living creature, lest perchance a son 
might feed on the body of his father and thus repeat the horrible 
feast of Thyestes. The most zealous of his disciples ate only 
vegetables; and they even excluded beans from their meals. 
In the same way the Brahmins still refuse to eat onions, mush- 
rooms, and certain other vegetables. Still, the example of these 
more rigorous disciples of Pythagoras found few imitators among 
the rest. 

* ' Druides in primis hoc volunt per- Bdlo Gallico, vi. 14). Most heretics of 

suadere, non interire animas sed ab the primitive Church, to say nothing 

aliis post mortem transire ad alios ; of the Jews of later times, believed in 

atque hoc maxime ad virtutem excitari this monstrous superstition, which was 

putant, metu mortis neglecto ' {De recognized also by Origen. — Dubois. 



568 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 



Either Pythagoras conceived a false impression of the motives 
of the abstinence which he had seen practised by the Hindus, 
or else he wished to excel them and to exaggerate their system 
according to his own manner. 

As a matter of fact, everything induces us to believe that the 
Hindus, though foolish enough in many respects, are not so 
foolish as to believe, when they show repugnance to feeding on 
anything which has had life, that they might be swallowing the 
limbs of their ancestors. In proof of this I may remark that 
the Lingayats, that is to say, the followers of Siva, reject in 
toto the doctrine of metempsychosis, yet they abstain from 
all animal food more religiously perhaps than the Brahmins 
themselves. 

The fear of pollution and the horror of murder are in fact 
the principal causes of the antipathy of Hindus to this kind 
of food. Their primitive teachers, as I have already remarked, 
simply had in view, when counselling such abstinence, the pre- 
servation of useful animals, and also the preservation of health. 
It was superstition, impetuous as a flood, that always tended to 
overflow the banks of reason. 

We have already seen how susceptible and fastidious a respect-, 
able Hindu is in the matter of pollution. How then could 
a meat diet agree with his principles in this respect? The 
putrefaction of animals, which in a hot country manifests itself 
so quickly and in so disagreeable a manner ; the compara- 
tive facility, on the other hand, with which products of the 
earth and other inorganic substances can be kept from the 
putrefying influence of the sun ; the horror, so strongly felt, 
of feeding on the remains of a dead body ; and a number of 
other prejudices which the leaders of the Hindu religion have 
been interested in fostering, are reasons sufficiently powerful to 
act upon minds prepared for them by custom and education. 
Let us add to these considerations the horror inspired by 
murder among Hindus in general — a horror which is so great 
in the case of many that it induces them to spare even the 
lives of filthy and troublesome insects; for the Brahmins are 
persuaded that there is no difference between the souls of men 
and those of the vilest of living things. Hence they hold that 
there is, morally speaking, as much crime in crushing an ant 
as in committing a murder. 



CH. ii] The Origin of Metempsychosis 569 

The majority of the Sudras feel no scruples, it is true, in 
killing animals and eating their flesh, the cow alone excepted. 
They even include in their ranks butchers and professional 
hunters, such as the Boyas or Baiders who inhabit the jungles 
and mountains and live on the products of the chase. But it is 
also proper to remark that it is this violation of a respected usage 
which in a great measure brings upon them the contempt of the 
higher castes. 

At first the doctrine of metempsychosis appears to have been 
limited to the successive transmigrations of souls into various 
human bodies. Later on, however, it received a new expansion, 
viz. that the souls could migrate to the bodies of beasts and to 
all material objects. The Platonic philosophers, who were 
ridiculed for assuming that the soul of a king might enter the 
body of a monkey, or that of a queen the body of a grass- 
hopper, tried to evade the difficulty by reducing the doctrine 
to its primitive simplicity, that is to say, by limiting the trans- 
migration of the souls of men to human bodies and those of 
beasts to their own species. Plotinus and Porphyr}"^ even ven- 
tured to assert that it was thus that their master had intended 
it to be understood. But their retractation was too late. It is 
always a mistake to endeavour to restore a building which is 
not solid in its foundations. The Hindus, who are more per- 
severing and less exposed to the contradictions of enlightened 
men, have religiously preser\'ed their own doctrine of metempsy- 
chosis in all its entirety. 

After all, the doctrine seems to have been invented merely 
to justify, under a gross allegory, the ways of the Supreme 
Being in the dispensation of rewards and punishments. The 
first doctrinal article admitted by the Hindus is common 
to the Pythagoreans; namely, that sin ought to be punished 
and virtue rewarded. This of course does not usually take 
place in the present life, since very often vice is triumphant and 
virtue crushed. In order to remedy this the gods, who hold 
the destinies of men in their hands, have decreed that he who 
during his lifetime has been an unbeliever, a thief, a murderer, 
&c., shall be born again a creeping insect, a wild animal, an 
outcaste, blind, poor, &c. 

Their notions of pollution pervade everything; so the Hindus 
believe that a soul after death retains some of the stains and 



570 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

impurities contracted in preceding generations, just as an 
earthen vessel retains for a long time the odour of any strong 
liquor which it has contained. This article of belief is illustrated 
by the example of a woman who had been a fish in an earlier 
generation, and who, though really a woman in the present, 
still retained, it is said, an odour which betrayed her first origin. 
It is necessary therefore that a long succession of generations 
should cleanse the soul from all the impurities which have 
polluted it in generations preceding — impurities which will 
increase indefinitely if people continue to lead dissolute lives. 

When the Hindus are asked what is the limit of these trans- 
migrations, they are unable to give any positive answer. Never- 
theless their sacred books affirm that a soul only succeeds 
in getting rid of continual transformations when by long 
penance and contemplation it has raised itself to that high 
degree of wisdom and perfection which identifies it with the 
Supreme Being, that is, with Parabrahma. Before reaching such 
sublime heights, it must pass through all the trials and tempta- 
tions to which human weakness has been condemned, and must 
acquire by its own experience a complete knowledge of good 
and evil. It begins its transmigrations under the form of the 
vilest insects, and rises little by little to the condition of man, 
in which state the spark of wisdom concealed in it, after having 
remained stationary for millions of years, is at length developed 
and imperceptibly leads to that state of perfection and purity 
which puts an end to changeful existence. In not assigning 
definite periods to each transmigration of the soul the Hindu 
philosophers seem to be wiser than the followers of Plato, 
who, with absurd presumption, have seen fit to assign fixed 
and definite periods — in some cases three thousand, and in 
others ten thousand years. Further, according to the latter, 
the transmigration is not left to chance ; each soul has its choice 
of abode according to the inclinations of the man in whose body 
it has sojourned. Thus the soul of Agamemnon passed into the 
body of an eagle ; that of Orpheus animated a swan ; that of 
Ajax, a lion ; that of Thersites, an ape, &c. 

All this is simply ridiculous. But the stumbling-block of 
the system is recollection of the past. Since the body is only 
a prison, a shell, how is it that the soul, as soon as it has quitted 
its abode, loses all remembrance of what has befallen it? Pytha- 



CH. ii] Naraka, or Hell 571 

goras, it is true, used to relate to his disciples what he had 
successively been since the siege of Troy '. But the merest 
caviller among them might have offered the following objection : 
' Since you so well remember what you have been before your 
present actual existence, why do I not remember in the same 
manner?' Pythagoras would no doubt have answered just as 
the Hindus answer, namely, that the gift of remembrance is 
granted only to certain privileged souls, and that they obtain it 
by reciting certain appropriate mantrams. Unfortunately, these 
mantrams are not unlike the waters of the Fountain of Youth, of 
which every one boasts to be the owner, but the whereabouts 
of which nobody knows. Plato, who was too enlightened not to 
recognize this weak side of the system, invented the river Lethe. 
The souls were obliged to drink its waters before returning to 
the world, and thereby entirely forgot the past. The invention 
of this fiction required neither ingenuity nor wit. The Hindus 
cut the knot more freely. They say that the act of regeneration 
suffices to make one forget all that has been seen or done 
before. A child under two or three years of age does not 
remember one day what he did the day before ; still more 
therefore will he forget what he was and what he did before 
his new birth. 

This explanation is at least more simple than that of Plato, 
if it is not equally ingenious. 

Naraka, or Hell. 

Through the tissue of vain fancies which the Hindus have 
woven over their system of metempsychosis, ostensibly to 
explain it but in practice to obscure it, we may catch a few faint 
gleams of the true religion, the principles of which were incul- 
cated by the patriarchs of old. Apart from the rewards and 
punishments which they regard as the due retribution in this 
world of the good or evil which a man has done in a pre- 
ceding generation, it is certain that they acknowledge a future 
life, and a Supreme Being, who is the rewarder of the good and 
the terror of the wicked. In a word, they recognize a paradise 
and a hell. 

But how grievously have these sacred truths been distorted in 

* See Ovid's Milam, xv. 3. 



572 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [^t. m 

the mouths of these ministers of idolatry and falsehood I It is 
difficult to discover a single trace of such fundamental truths 
amid the mass of extravagant fables under which superstition 
has concealed them. 

The Hindus agree that a place of punishment is set apart 
for those souls which have given themselves up entirely to sin 
during their life on earth. This they call Naraka or Paiala, It 
is divided into seven principal sections, destined to contain the 
different kinds of sinful souls ; and here they undergo torments 
more or less severe, according to the gravity of their crimes. 

Yama, the judge of the dead, is the king of hell. He has 
servants to carry out his decrees, who are charged with 
tormenting the inhabitants of Naraka, His emissaries are 
constantly on the watch throughout the world. They await the 
moment of death, and then arrest the dead and bring them 
before Yama's tribunal. Yama consults his records, kept by 
many scribes working under his orders, and containing an exact 
account of all the good and evil which is done on earth. Ac- 
cording to the report submitted to him, this sovereign judge 
pronounces the fate of the souls which appear before him for 
judgement, and awards punishments proportionate to their 
guilt. 

Yama, however, is not the only deity possessing agents on 
earth for seizing upon the souls of the dead. Vishnu and Siva 
have also their agents, who know perfectly well the devotees 
of their respective patrons. When such souls die the emis- 
saries of the two gods contend for them with Yama, and the 
result is a keen conflict and often a bloody battle. The special 
devotion to Siva or to Vishnu, however lukewarm it may have 
been, possesses so much merit that the emissaries of the two 
gods usually gain the victory over those of Yama. 

As for the torments of Naraka, the punishments which the 
wicked have to endure there are truly terrible. I will here give 
an abstract of what the Padma-purana says of it : — 

They are buried there in eternal darkness : only groans and 
frightful lamentations are heard; the sharpest pains that steel 
and fire can cause are inflicted without respite. There are 
punishments fitted to each kind of sin, to each sense, to each 
member of the body. Fire, steel, serpents, venomous insects, 
savage beasts, birds of prey, gall, poison, stenches ; in a word. 



cH. ii] Abodes of Bliss 573 

everything possible is employed to torment the damned. Some 
have a cord run through their nostrils, by which they are for 
ever dragged over the edges of extremely sharp knives ; others 
are condemned to pass through the eye of a needle; others 
are placed between two flat rocks, which meet, and crush 
without killing them ; others have their eyes pecked incessantly 
by famished vultures ; while millions of them continually swim 
and paddle in a pool filled with the urine of dogs or with the 
mucus from men's nostrils, &c. 

The damned do not succumb under these terrible penalties, 
but rend the air continually with their screams and groans, 
which echo throughout the whole abyss of hell and add still 
greater horror to this frightful dwelling-place. 

The pains of hell do not endure for ever ; they last propor- 
tionately to the gravity of the crimes committed. The Hindu 
sacred writers say nothing of eternal punishment. At the end 
of every yuga, they say, there takes place a universal revolution 
— a total change in nature. When the Kaii-yuga, in which we 
now live, has filled its allotted span, all souls will return to the 
divine essence from which they were originally separated, and, 
the world having come to an end, the sufferings of the damned 
will cease also. I have before mentioned how many years of 
the Kaii-yuga have already elapsed, and how many millions of 
years it has still to run. 

When the souls in hell have expiated their sins, they are sent 
back to the earth in order to undergo new transmigrations. 
Their return to the world always takes place under the form of 
some vile animal ; and proceeding from one metamorphosis to 
another, after millions of years they are able to acquire the 
degree of virtue and perfection necessary to admit of their 
being again united inseparably with the Supreme Being, the 
Universal Soul of the world. 

The Abodes of Bliss. 

The Hindus recognize several Abodes of Bliss for the souls 
of those who have expiated their sins by repeated transmigra- 
tions and by the practice of virtue. There are four principal 
abodes : The first is Swarga, where Indra the divinity presides, 
and where all virtuous souls, without distinction of caste or 
sex, are to be found. 



574 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies 

The second is Vaikuniha, the paradise of Vishnu, where 
dwell his particular followers, Brahmins and others. 

The third is Kailasa, the paradise of Siva, which is reserved 
for the devout worshippers of the iingam. 

The fourth is Sattya-loka (the Place of Truth), the paradise 
of Brahma, where only virtuous Brahmins have the right to 
enter. 

The pleasures enjoyed in these several abodes are all corporal 
and sensual. 

The souls sojourning in them, having been indulged for 
periods of time more or less considerable according to their 
respective merits, are obliged to return to the earth, there to 
begin their transmigrations anew. This takes place until the 
soul is perfectly purified — a consummation, as we have seen, 
which is not the affair of a few days. However, with per- 
severance they eventually attain it. When a soul, by virtue 
and penances, has become as pure as gold and has freed itself 
entirely from the allurements of this world, it is re-united 
with Parabrahma, with God, with the Universal Soul, just as 
a drop of water returns to the sea from whence it came. This is 
the Supreme Happiness, to which the Hindus give the names 
oi Moksham (Deliverance) and Mukti {the Last End). 

Thus idolatry, whatever tendency it may have to corrupt 
all things, has at least respected some of the fundamental 
truths graven on the hearts of men, the knowledge of which 
is indispensable to the stability of all civilized society. The 
people of India, sunk from time immemorial in the darkness of 
error by reason of the avarice and ambition of their religious 
teachers, still preserve some positive ideas of a Supreme Being, 
and foresee rightly enough the immortality of the soul, and the 
necessity and existence of another life in which the good shall 
be rewarded and the wicked punished. 

What other conclusion can we draw from this than that such 
sacred truths will never perish from off the earth ? The atheist 
and the materialist may heap up sophistry on sophistry in order to 
obscure these truths and conceal them from the eyes of nations ; 
but their efforts are in vain. Graven on the hearts of men in 
indelible characters by the hand of the Almighty Himself, these 
truths must continue to grow and to bear fruit so long as there 
are reasonable creatures and civilized peoples in the world. 



CHAPTER III 

Hindu Feasts. — The New- Year Feast. — The Feast of the Household Gods. — 
Commemoration of the Dead. — Feast of the Schools. — Feasts in Honour 
of Serpents. — Military Feasts. — The Feast of Lamps. — Sacrifices to Plants. 
— The Feast of the Linga3'ats. — The Pottgal Ceremonies. — General 
Remarks. 

Each district and each temple of the least importance has its 
own particular feasts, recurring at intervals during the course of 
the year ; and besides these local feasts there are many others 
that are generally observed everywhere, taking place at fixed 
periods. Feast-days are given up to rejoicings and diversions 
of all kinds ; work is entirely suspended ; relatives and friends 
meet together and feast each other in turn ; the houses are 
decorated, the best jewels and apparel are worn, and the time is 
spent in games, which for the most part are very artless and 
innocent. Family feasts, however, have not the smallest resem- 
blance to those celebrated in temples, to which the people 
flock from every side, and which often give rise to the most 
scandalous scenes. 

There are in all eighteen obligatory Hindu feasts in the year, 
but I will mention only the principal ones. First, there is the 
feast which is celebrated on the first day of the year, called 
Uga(ii\ and which falls on the day of the new moon in the month 
of March. On this occasion Hindus are expected to pay each 
other visits of ceremony. The feast lasts for three days, during 
which they give themselves up to enjoyment. Fireworks are let 
off, and cannon, rockets, and guns are heard on every side. It 
is about this time, also, that the officers of Government prepare 
their revenue accounts for the year, and that the cultivators 
renew the leases of the lands which they farm, 

^ This is the name given to the Telugu New Year's Day. — Ed. 



576 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

At the time of the new moon in the month of February the 
Lingayats, or followers of Siva, celebrate with great pomp 
their feast Siva-ratri (Night of Siva). This lasts three days, 
and during the course of it the Lingayats wash and purify their 
lingam, cover it with a new cloth, and offer to it sacrifices of 
a special character. They also visit their jangamas or gt4rus, 
and present them with gifts'. 

The festival of Gauri takes place at the time of the new moon 
in the month of September, and lasts many days. Gauri is 
another name for Parvati, the wife of Siva, who is the object 
of peculiar worship on this occasion. On the last day of the 
feast they mould a figure of the goddess in rice dough ; this is 
placed in a shrine beautifully adorned, and is then carried with 
great pomp through the streets. The Gauri feast, however, is 
also specially dedicated to the household gods, which are repre- 
sented by the implements, tools, and utensils in common use 
amongst the people. Thus, the farmer collects his ploughs, his 
spades, and his sickles, and places them in a heap on a spot 
carefully purified by a layer of cow-dung. He prostrates himself 
at full length before the various implements of husbandry, and 
offers them puja and neiveddya according to the usual manner. 
He then puts them back in their places. The mason offers 
similar homage to his trowel, his square, &c. ; the carpenter 
to his axe, his saw, and his plane ; the barber to his razor ; the 
vvTiter to his pen or stilus) the tailor to his scissors and 
needles ; the huntsman to his gun ; the fisherman to his nets ; 
the weaver to his loom ; the butcher to his cleaver ; and so 
on in the case of all artisans. The women, too, collect their 
baskets, winnows, rice-mills — in short, all their household im- 
plements, and prostrate themselves before them, offering them 
homage in like manner. In a word, there is not a person 
who, during this solemn • time, does not regard as so many 
deities the instruments with which he gains his livelihood. The 
prayers which are addressed and*^he honours which are paid 
to them are intended to persuade them to continue to be useful 
to their possessors. In fact, the whole ceremony is based on 
the Hindu principle, that it is necessary to pay honour to 
everything which may be either useful or hurtful. 

A month later, at the new moon of October, comes the 

^ Vide Appendix III. 



CH. Ill] The Dasara Feast 577 

feast of Maha-navamt] known also under the name of Dasara, 
specially dedicated to the memory of ancestors. This feast is 
considered to be so obligatory that it has become a proverb 
that anybody who has not the means of celebrating it should 
sell one of his children in order to do so. Each family offers 
the usual sacrifices to its deceased ancestors, and also presents 
them with new cloths such as are usually worn by men and 
women, in order that they may be properly clothed. The 
feast lasts nine days. This is also the special festival of 
universities and schools. The students, dressed in gay apparel, 
parade through the streets every day, singing verses com- 
posed by their professors, who march at their head. They 
also recite these verses before the doors of: their relatives and 
the principal inhabitants of the place. At the same time they 
dance and play in a simple fashion, marking time by striking 
sticks together. At the end of it all the professors receive 
small presents of money from the people before whom their 
students have performed. A portion of the sum collected is 
given to the students for a feast on the last day of the cere- 
monies, and the remainder the professors keep for themselves. 

The Dasara is likewise the soldiers' feast. Princes and 
soldiers offer the most solemn sacrifices to the arms which are 
made use of in battle. Collecting all their weapons together, 
they call a Brahmin purohita, who sprinkles them with tirtham 
(holy water) and converts them into so many divinities by virtue 
of his tnantrams. He then makes puja to them and retires. 
Thereupon, amidst the beat of drums, the blare of trumpets 
and other instruments, a ram is brought in with much pomp 
and sacrificed in honour of the various weapons of destruction. 
This ceremony is observed with the greatest solemnity through- 
out the whole Peninsula, not only by the Hindu princes and 
soldiers, but also by the Mahomedans, who have unreservedly 
adopted this idolatrous practice of the Hindus. It b known 
by the special name of ayuda-puja (sacrifice to arms), and is 
entirely military ; no native belonging to the profession of arms, 
be he Pagan, Mahomedan, or Christian, makes any scruple 
of joining in it. 

In order to increase the solemnity of the feast, the princes are 

in the habit of giving public entertainments, to which immense 

crowds of people resort. These entertainments resemble very 
»♦ p p 



578 Hindu Manners^ Ctistoms^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

much the gladiatorial combats of the ancient Romans, consisting 
as they do of contests between animals, or between animals 
and men, and above all between men. Athletes sometimes 
come from long distances to contend for the prizes. They 
belong mostly to a caste called Jetti^ and are trained from their 
youth in contests of the kind. Their profession is to injure 
one another in the presence of persons who are able to pay 
them for the satisfaction to be derived from this horrible 
sport, in which both princes and people take infinite delight. 
Ordinary blows with the fist, however vigorously applied, 
would not cause sufficient bloodshed, so before entering the lists 
the champions put on gloves studded with sharp pieces of horn. 
They fight almost naked, and before coming to close quarters 
dance about in threatening attitudes. Then they close furiously, 
and deal heavy blows on each other's heads with their murder- 
ous gloves. Needless to say, blood flows freely. When they 
have had enough of this, they seize each other round the body 
and fall struggling to the ground, where they tear at each other 
like wild beasts. At intervals they cease fighting to regain 
breath ; but they soon begin again, and the combat does not 
end until the umpires separate them and one of the two is 
declared victor. Covered with wounds and literally bathed in 
blood, they retire and make room for new combatants, who fight 
with the same ferocity. This disgusting spectacle sometimes 
lasts for hours together, to the great satisfaction of the specta- 
tors, who mark their enthusiasm by constant applause. When 
all is over, the prince distributes among the champions prizes 
proportionate to the skill and strength which each of them has 
displayed. The wounds and dislocations of the injured are 
attended to by men of their own caste, the Jettis being generally 
very clever in surgery. 

At the end of November or the beginning of December the 
Deepavali (feast of lamps) is celebrated. It occupies several 
days. Every evening while it lasts the Hindus place lighted 
lamps at the doors of their houses or hang paper lanterns on 
long poles in the street. This feast appears to be specially 
dedicated to fire. But as it is held at a time when most of the 
cereal crops are ready for harvesting, the cultivators in many 
places are then in the habit of going together in procession to their 
fields, and there offering up to their crops prayers and sacrifices 



CH. Ill] The Pongul Feast 579 

of rams or goats, in order, as it were, to give thanks to their crops 
for having ripened and become fit for the food of man. Every 
husbandman also, on three days in succession, proceeds to the 
dungheap which he has collected for manuring his fields and 
prostrates himself before it, presenting to it offerings of flowers, 
lighted tapers, boiled rice and fruits, and begging it humbly to 
fertilize his lands and to procure him abundant harvests. This 
worship, it may be remarked, very much resembles that which 
the Romans used to pay to their god Sterculius. 

The Nagara-panchami is another great feast. It is celebrated 
in the beginning of February in honour of snakes, and especi- 
ally of the most venomous species^ such as the cobra, called naga 
or nagara by the Hindus. This reptile, which is very common 
and the most dangerous of all, is honoured in a very special 
manner on this occasion. The people pay visits to the holes 
where snakes of this sort are generally known to remain 
concealed, and make offerings to them of milk, plantains, &c. 
I shall have something more to say about this strange cult 
later on. 

But the most solemn of all feasts, at any rate in the south of 
India, is the Pongul^ which i» also known in some places as the 
Maha-sankranti \ This feast is the occasion of great rejoicing ; 
and the Hindus have two good reasons for regarding it with 
joy. One is because the month preceding the Pongul, which 
is entirely made up of unlucky days, has at last passed ; the 
other is because the month which follows it must invariably 
consist of lucky days. 

During the inauspicious month which preceded the Pongul, 
sannyasis, or mendicants', go from door to door about four 
o'clock in the morning, waking all sleepers by beating their 
gongs, warning them to be on their guard and to take every 
precaution against the evil influences of this unlucky period, by 
appeasing, by means of prayers and sacrifices, the god Siva, who 
presides over it. With this purpose in view, the women of the 

^ Sankranii is the name given to which the ancients celebrated as that 

the first day of the solar month ; that of the rebirth of this bright luminary, 

is to say, to the day on which the sun — Dubois. 

passes from one sign of the Zodiac to ^ These are pandaraftts, not sompi- 

another. It refers here to its entrance yasis. — Ed. 
into the sign of Capricorn, a period 

P p 2 



58o Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

house every morning prepare a small patch about a yard square 
outside the door, smearing it with cow-dung, and tracing several 
white lines upon it with rice-flour. They then place within this 
square several pellets of cow-dung, each adorned with a pump- 
kin flower. I believe these pellets are supposed to represent 
Vigneshwara, the god of obstacles, whom they seek to appease 
by offering him a bouquet. But I do not know why it is that the 
pumpkin flower is chosen in this case. Every evening these 
little balls of cow-dung, together with their flowers, are carefully 
collected, to be kept till the last day of the month. When this 
day arrives the women, who alone are charged with this cere- 
mony, put them into a new basket, and accompanied by musical 
instruments and clapping of hands, they solemnly carry them 
away beyond the precincts of their dwellings and throw them 
into a tank or some other retired but clean spot. 

T\iQ Pongtd, or Maha-sankranti, always takes place during the 
winter solstice, the period when the sun, having finished its 
course towards the southern hemisphere, turns to the north 
again and comes back to visit the people of India. The feast 
lasts three days ; the first is called Bhoghi-pongul {Pongiil of 
joy). On this day visits are exchanged between relatives and 
friends, who make presents and give entertainments to each 
other; the day passes in diversions and amusements of all 
sorts. 

The second day is called Surya-pongid iPongul of the sun). 
In fact the feast appears to be specially dedicated to the sun. 
The married women first of all bathe with their clothes on, and 
while still dripping wet put rice to boil in milk on a fire in 
the open air. As soon as it begins to simmer, they all cry 
out together, Pongul, Pongul ! Pongu/, Pongul ! Almost imme- 
diately afterwards they remove the vessel from the fire and 
place it before the idol of Vigneshwara, to whom they offer 
a portion of the rice ; another portion is given to the cows, and 
the rest is eaten by the people of the house. 

On this day Hindus again exchange visits. On meeting each 
other the first words they say are: 'Has the rice boiled?' 
to which the answer is : 'It has boiled.' It is for this reason 
that the feast is called Pongul in the south of India, the word 
being derived from pongcdi in Telugu, and pongaradu in Tamil, 
both signifying to boil. 



cH. Ill] The Last Day of Pongul 581 

The third day is called the Pongul of the cows. On this day 
they put into a big vessel filled with water some saffron powder, 
some seeds of the tree called parati, and some leaves of the mar- 
gosa-tree. After mixing the ingredients well together, they 
sprinkle the cows and the oxen with the liquid, walking round 
them three times. All the men of the house (for the women 
are excluded from this ceremony) then turn successively towards 
the four points of the compass and perform the sashtanga^ or 
prostration of the six members, four times before the animals \ 

The horns of the cows are painted in various colours, and 
round their necks are hung garlands . of green leaves interlaced 
with flowers. On these garlands are hung cakes, cocoanuts, 
and fruits, which, as they are shaken off by the animals, are 
eagerly scrambled for and devoured, as though they were sacred 
things, by the crowd following. 

The cows are then driven together outside the town or village, 
and are then made to scatter in all directions by the aid of drums 
and noisy instruments. On this day cattle are allowed to graze 
everywhere without restraint ; and no matter what damage they 
may do in the fields, they are never driven away. 

The idols are afterwards taken from the temples and carried 
in procession, to the sound of music, to the place where the 
cattle have again been collected. The temple dancing-girls, who 
are to be found at all feasts and public ceremonies, are not 
absent on this occasion ; they march at the head of the large 
concourse of people, and from time to time pause to delight the 
spectators with their lascivious dances and obscene songs. 

The feast terminates with a performance which, I believe, has 
no other object than simple amusement. The crowd forms 
itself into a big circle, in the middle of which a hare is let loose, 
which in its efforts to escape runs round and round, from side to 
side, exciting much laughter amongst the spectators, till at last 
it is caught. 

The idols are then carried back to the temples, the cows are 
led back to the sheds, and thus ends the most popular of all 
Hindu feasts. 

The Pongul, as I have said, is intended to celebrate the period 
when the sun is about to recommence its course. There would 
have been nothing blameworthy, nothing astonishing in the 

' As already explained, it is prostration of the eight, not six members. — £d. 



582 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

people hailing with joy the appearance of this great fertilizing 
luminary in their hemisphere, and rendering praise and thanks 
to the Almighty as the Creator of it ; but when we see a nation 
which professes to occupy the first place amongst the civilized 
races of the world treating this as an occasion for the most 
idle ceremonies, surely we ought not to attribute it simply to 
the weakness of the human mind. Ought we not rather to 
recognize in it the prompting of some evil spirit seeking to seduce 
men by the empty pomp that accompanies these insane prac- 
tices? We should not hesitate to regard them as folly in 
a single individual ; are they therefore less unreasonable or 
more excusable when an entire nation practises them ? Our 
astonishment ceases when we carefully consider the causes that 
keep the Hindus enchained to degraded forms of worship like 
these. The fact is, the laws and customs, both religious and 
civil, of the Hindu people are so closely bound together, that 
it is impossible to attack the one without equally injuring 
the other. Custom, prejudice, and national predilection have 
all served to establish their belief that religion and polity are 
inseparable ; and they are thoroughly convinced that neither the 
one nor the other can be changed without exposing the nation 
to the danger of sinking into a state of barbarism and anarchy. 
This rigorous observance of their religious rites on the part of 
the Hindus is rendered yet more inviolable by reason of the 
pride, sensuality, and moral laxity which constitute the national 
character. Everything presented to them by their religion con- 
tributes to the encouragement of the national vices. Passion, 
predilection, and self-interest all combine in fostering the forms 
of idolatry to which they are enslaved. Even their games, 
dances, and entertainments are all conducted with a licence 
which derives force from the fact that it is sanctioned by 
religion. How, it may well be asked, can a people so credu- 
lous, so easily influenced by sensual impressions and all the 
pleasures resulting from them — how can they help being 
devoted to a religious cult which accords so well with their 
natural inclinations? 

Self-interest, again, that powerful motive of human actions, is 
not the feeblest support of Hindu idolatry. The priests of the 
Hindu religion, although too enlightened to be blinded by the 
follies which they instil into the minds of their weak fellow- 



CH. Ill] Hindu Superstitions and Ceremonies 583 

countrymen, are none the less zealous in maintaining and 
encouraging the absurd errors which procure their livelihood, 
and which keep them in that high estimation which they have 
wrongfully usurped. 

Their deceitful tactics are specially noticeable in connexion 
with the feasts that are celebrated at the more important 
temples. The Brahmins who have charge of these enrich them- 
selves by the offerings which the credulous and stupid wor- 
shippers periodically bring ; therefore they take infinite pains 
to foster superstition and curry favour with the votaries. The 
triumphal cars, splendidly ornamented, on which the idols 
are exposed to public veneration in all the brilliant finery 
peculiar to India ; the unceasing round of songs, dances, games, 
entertainments, and fireworks ; the limitless crowd of devotees, 
the more wealthy among whom vie with each other in luxurious 
display and extravagant profusion ; above all, the extreme 
licence which prevails on such occasions, and the facility with 
which every one can satisfy his depraved desires ; — all these give 
infinite pleasure to a people who know nothing higher than 
such material enjoyments. Thus it is that crowds gather at 
these feasts from all parts ; and the poor husbandman, whose 
whole harvest hardly affords subsistence for himself and family 
for six months during the year, will sell a part of it in order to 
contribute to the expenses incurred at the feasts, and to enrich 
the clever impostors who manage them \ But apart from the 
pomp and ceremony displayed for the purpose of dazzling the 
eyes of the people, the Hindu priests have recourse to another 
kind of deception. According to them nothing can equal the 
miracles which are daily wrought by the god of their particular 
temple in favour of those persons who put their trust in him 
and make him presents. Sometimes it is a barren woman who 
has ceased to be so, a blind man to whom the faculty of sight 
has been restored, a leper who has been cured, a cripple who 
has recovered the use of his legs, &c. There is not a single 

' ^ Une religion/ says Montesquieu, cilit6 qu*ont de changer de religion les 

' charg^e de beaucoup de pratiques peuples barbares et sauvages qui, uni- 

attache plus a elle qu'une autre qui quement occupy de la chasseou de la 

Test moins. On tient beaucoup des guerre, ne se chargent gudre de pra- 

choses dont on est continuellement tiques relig^euses.' — Esprit des LoiSj 

occupy ; t^moin Tobstination tenace xxv. a. 
des mahom^tans et des juifs et la &- 



584 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies 

Hindu who would dare to raise the shadow of a doubt con- 
cerning such miracles. 

As depositaries of a religion to which they assign an origin 
that is lost in the darkness of ages, the Brahmins know very 
well how to make use of the fables and traditions which are at 
the bottom of it all, such as the wonderful adventures of the 
gods, giantS) and ancient kings, the miraculous proceedings of 
the ancient Hindu sages, and the spiritual seclusion and sanctity 
of the ancient Hindu hermits. The austerity, however extrava- 
gant it may seem^ of Brahmin penitents ; the rigorous abstinence 
which ordinary Brahmins impose upon themselves; their fre- 
quent fasts; their daily ablutions; their excessive carefulness 
r^arding external and internal cleanliness; their prayers; their 
long periods of meditation and absorption ; the impenetrable 
secrecy and air of mystery which accompany their sandhya, their 
sacrifices, and the majority of their ceremonies; the sacred 
books, of which they are the sole interpreters ; — all these con- 
tribute to support the influence which they have gained over 
minds that apparently will recognize as true only what dazzles 
the imagination, or what is contrary to common sense. So true 
it is, that mere reason is totally unable to raise mankind to 
a knowledge of God; in* fact, no real reh'gious cult can spring 
from man's reason alone. The more one reflects upon the 
gross absurdities pertaining to the idolatry of the Hindus, 
the more con\dnced one becomes of the inestimable benefit of 
Revelation, whereby the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, in 
Himself incomprehensible, reveals Himself to His creatures. 



CHAPTER IV 

Hindu Temples. — Ceremonies performed in them. — Temples built on Moun- 
tains. — Pyramids. — The Architecture of Pagodas.^ The Shape and Orna- 
ments of the Idols. — Their Consecration. — Sacred Pillars. — Temple Priests 
and Servants. — Sacrificers.— Dancing-girls. — Musicians. — Hindu Music. 
— Brahmin Tricks and Artifices for attracting Worshippers. — The Hindu 
Desire for Children. — The Revolting Practices to which they submit to 
obtain them. — Remarkable Ceremonies and Vovvs. — Prostitution in 
Certain Temples. — Religious Tortures. — The Rape of Women. — Famous 
Temples. — Tirupati. — Jagannath. — Public Processions. — General Remarks. 

Buildings dedicated to religious worship are extremely 
numerous in India. There are few villages or hamlets which 
have not at least, one. It is even a generally received opinion 
that no place should be inhabited where there is no temple, for 
otherwise the inhabitants would run grave risks of misfortune. 

Among the good works expected of the rich, one of the most 
honourable and most meritorious consists in spending a part of 
their fortune in the construction and endowment of these sacred 
buildings. Such munificence, it is argued, is an infallible means 
of obtaining the protection of the gods, remission of one's sins, 
and admission into an Abode of Bliss after death. But vanity, 
ostentation, and desire to attract attention are much more 
powerful factors, if indeed they are not the only ones that excite 
beneficence on the part of the wealthy. 

Besides the temples with which all villages are provided, 
one finds many erected in isolated spots, in woods, on the 
highways, in the middle of rivers, on the borders of tanks and 
other large reservoirs, and especially on the summits of steep 
rocks, mountains, and hills. This practice of constructing 
buildings consecrated to religious worship upon elevated sites 
must have struck all persons who have travelled in India. In 



586 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

fact there are few mountains, where a well or a spring is to be 
found, that are not surmounted by a building of this sort. The 
choice of sites like these does not appear to be a matter of 
caprice. We know that the same practice exists among the 
majority of Asiatic nations. Not only the ancient heathen 
peoples, but even the children of Israel, always chose elevated 
sites for purposes of religious worship. When God ordered 
the Israelites to take possession of the land of Canaan, He 
commanded them above all things to destroy the heathen temples 
erected on mountains and other lofty spots, to break in pieces 
the idols, and to destroy the sacred groves with which those 
buildings were surrounded, as are those of the Hindus to 
this day. Holy Scripture refers often to these high places and 
sacred groves. 

One can only offer conjectures regarding this custom of 
placing on elevated sites the temples dedicated to the sacrifices 
and vows which the people addressed to their gods. Some 
authors have remarked that the worship of the stars having 
always been more or less a part of pagan ritual, the heathen 
constructed their temples so as to face the east at a certain 
elevation, in order that the rising sun might flood the interior 
of the temples with its light and cast its rays upon the religious 
ceremonies which take place at that time of day \ No doubt, 
too, they thought they were thereby approaching as near as 
possible to the heavenly powers whom they invoked. Further- 
more, the duties of the soothsayers often necessitated such 
elevated positions, in order that they might see the heavens 
clearly. 

Besides the temples of idols which one meets with at every 
step in India, statues of stone, of baked earth, and especially 
of granite, representing objects of popular worship, maybe seen 
on the high-roads, at the entrances of villages, near the choul' 
irtes, on the borders of tanks, near rivers, in the market-places, 
and elsewhere. The Hindus also delight in placing these idols 
of stone under the shade of leafy trees, especially of those 
reputed sacred, such as the aswaiia, the a/at, the vepu, &c.' 

* The ceremonies performed in divinities faced towards the west — 

honour of the infernal deities took Dubois. 

place at sunset ; and it is believed that * The Fictis religiosa^ the Ficus in^ 

the entrances of the temples of these dica, and the Melia Asadirachta, — Ed. 



CH. iv] Hindu Temples 587 

Some of these idols are placed in shrines, and others in the 
open air. 

Most Hindu temples present a very wretched appearance, 
being more like barns or stables than buildings consecrated to 
the gods. Some of them are used as places of public assembly, 
courts of justice, or rest-houses for travellers. There are many, 
however, which as seen from a distance have an imposing effect 
and excite the admiration of the traveller. They recall to mind 
those ancient times when architects had an eye for posterity as 
well as for their contemporaries, and were much more intent on 
making their works durable than on securing elegance at the 
cost of solidity. 

The structure of the large temples, both ancient and modern, 
is everywhere the same. The Hindus, devoted as they are to 
ancestral customs, have never introduced innovations in the con- 
struction of their public edifices. Their architectural monuments, 
such as they exist to-day, are probably better examples of building 
as practised by ancient civilized nations than the ruins of 
Egyptians and Greeks, concerning which European scholars 
have so much to say. 

The entrance gate of the great pagodas opens through a high, 
massive pyramidal tower, the summit of which is ordinarily 
topped by a crescent or half-moon. This gate faces the east, 
a position which is observed in all their temples, great and 
small. The pyramid or tower is called the gopuram. 

Beyond the tower is a large court, at the farther end of which 
is another gate, opening like the first through a pyramid of the 
same form, but smaller. Through this you pass to a second and 
smaller court, which is in front of the shrine containing the 
principal idol. 

In the middle of this second court and facing the entrance to 
the shrine, you generally see upon a large pedestal, or within 
a kind of pavilion open on all sides and supported by four 
pillars, a coarsely sculptured stone figure, either of a bull lying 
flat on its belly, or of a h'ngam, if the temple is dedicated to 
Siva ; or of the monkey Hanuman, or of the serpent Capella, 
if it is a temple of Vishnu; or of the god Vigneshwara; or 
maybe of some other symbol of Hindu worship. This is the 
first object which the natives worship before entering the shrine 
itself. 



588 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

The door of the shrine is generally low and narrow, and it 
is the only opening which allows a free passage of air and light 
from outside, for the use of windows is entirely unknown in the 
Peninsula. The interior of the shrine is habitually shrouded 
in darkness, or is lighted only by the feeble flicker of a lamp 
which burns day and night by the side of the idol. One 
experiences a sort of involuntary shock on entering one of these 
dark recesses. The interior of the shrine is generally divided 
into two parts, sometimes into three. The first, which may be 
called the nave, is the largest, and it is here that the worshippers 
assemble. The second is called the adytum^ or sanctuary, where 
the idol to whom the shrine is consecrated is placed. This 
chamber is smaller and much darker than the first. It is 
generally kept shut, and the door can be opened only by the 
officiating priest, who, with some of his acolytes, has alone a 
right to enter its mysterious precincts for the purpose of washing 
and dressing the idol and presenting the offerings of the faithful, 
such as flowers, incense of sandalwood, lighted -lamps, fruit, 
butter-milk, rich apparel, and jewels. 

Some of the modern Hindu temples are vaulted, but most of 
them have flat roofs supported by several rows of massive stone 
pillars, the capitals of which are composed of two heavy stones 
crossed, on which are placed the beams, also of stone, which 
extend through the length and breadth of the building. The 
beams again are covered horizontally with slabs of stone 
strongly cemented to prevent leakage. Whether the object be 
to make these buildings more imposing and solid, or to preserve 
them from the danger of fire, wood is never employed except 
for the doors. 

The adytum, or sanctuary, is often constructed with a dome, 
but the building as a whole is generally very low, and this 
destroys the effect of its proportions in a striking degree. The 
low elevation ; the difficulty with which the air finds a way 
through a single narrow and habitually closed passage; the 
unhealthy odours rising from the mass of fresh and decaying 
flowers ; the burning lamps ; the oil and butter spilt in liba- 
tions ; the excrements of the bats that take up their abode in 
these dark places ; finally, and above all, the fetid perspiration of 
a multitude of unclean and malodorous people ;— all contribute 
to render these sacred shrines excessively unhealthy. Only 



CH. iv] Hindu Idols 589 

a Hindu could remain for any length of time in their heated 
and pestilential precincts without suffocation \ 

The principal idol is generally placed in a niche. It is 
clothed with garments more or less magnificent, and on great 
festivals is sometimes adorned with rare vestments and rich 
jewels. A crown of gold set with precious stones often adorns 
its head. For the most part, however, the idols of stone wear 
a cap like a sugar-loaf, which imparts to the whole figure the 
appearance of a pyramid. The Hindus, by the way, appear 
to have a special fancy for the form of a pyramid, which 
perhaps is due to some symbolical notion. We know that 
various nations of antiquity, among others the Egyptians, re- 
garded the pyramid as the symbol of immortality and of life, 
the beginning of which was represented by the base and the 
end or death by the summit. The pyramid was also the emblem 
of fire. 

In vain are Hindu idols decked with rich ornaments ; they 
are not rendered thereby less disagreeable in appearance. Their 
physiognomy is generally of frightful ugliness, which is care- 
fully enhanced by daubing the images from time to time with 
a coating of dark paint. Some of the idols, thanks to the 
generous piety of rich votaries, have their eyes, mouth, and ears 
of gold or silver ; but this makes them, if possible, yet more 
hideous. The attitudes in which they are represented are either 
ridiculous, grotesque, or obscene. In short, everything is done 
to make them objects of disgust to any one not familiar with the 
sight of these strange monsters. 

The idols exposed to public veneration in the temples are 
of stone, while those carried in procession through the streets 
are of metal, as are also the domestic gods which every 
Brahmin keeps and worships in his house. It is forbidden to 
make idols of wood or other easily destructible material. I know 
only one, that of the goddess Mari-amma, which is of wood. 
For this image the wood of a certain tree is employed, the 
trunk of which is red inside, and which, when cut, exudes a sap 
the colour of blood, a characteristic which accords well with the 
merciless nature of this cruel divinity. It is true, one also often 

* The Abb^ nowhere remarks on ship, and which acts at the same time 
the burning of camphor, which plays so as a disinfectant. — Ed. 
conspicuous a part in all Hindu wor- 



590 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

sees statues of clay or of masonry, but these are not of much 
account, and inspire very little veneration. 

No idol can become an object of worship until it has been 
duly consecrated by a number of ceremonies. It is necessary 
first of all that the deity should be invoked, in order that it may 
fix its abode in the idol, and be incorporated with it ; and this 
must be done by a Brahmin purohita. New temples are also 
subjected to a solemn inauguration, and all objects destined for 
their service must be formally consecrated. Both temples and 
idols are liable to be desecrated on many occasions. If, for 
example, a European, a Mahomedan, or a Pariah unfortunately 
entered a sanctuary or touched an idol, that very instant the 
divinity would take its departure. And in order to induce it 
to return, all the ceremonies would have to be begun over 
again, and performed more elaborately and at greater cost than 
before. 

Besides the idols which are to be found inside every temple, 
the walls and four sides of the supporting pillars are covered 
with various figures. On the facade of the building niches are 
arranged, to contain symbolical figures representing men and 
animals, for the most part in indecent attitudes. Further- 
more, the walls of the temple enclosure, which are no less 
thick and solid than the actual buildings, are also sometimes 
covered with these obscene or grotesque images. Outside the 
shrine, opposite and close to the entrance door, and some- 
times in the middle of one of the courts, there is commonly 
seen a granite pillar, from forty to fifty feet high, octagonal in 
shape, and square at the base of the shaft ; on each side of the 
lower part figures are sculptured. The pedestal is a solid 
mass of hewn stone. The capital of the column ends in 
a square cornice, at the four angles of which small bells are 
usually suspended. Above this, again, is a chafing dish in 
which incense is burned at certain times, or else lighted lamps 
are placed there. 

The traveller often sees on the roads, and even in remote 
spots, lofty columns of this kind, on which certain devotees place 
lamps from time to time. During the feast of Deepavali^ of 
which mention has been made above, and which is apparently 
held in honour of fire, lamps are to be seen burning every 
evening on such columns. Sometimes the pillars are wreathed 



CH. iv] Temple Officials 591 

with pieces of new cloth, which are finally set on fire. These 
details favour the view that the pillars, constructed as they 
always are in places exposed to the east, are consecrated to the 
sun or to the element of fire. 

Temple offices are held by persons of various castes. Never- 
theless all posts of any importance, and especially those which 
confer profit and dignity, are always held by Brahmins. 

Among the numerous officials in Hindu worship the sacri- 
ficers occupy first rank; then come the consultative com- 
mittees, the directors of ceremonies, the collectors of temple 
revenues, and the treasurers. Besides these, there are hosts 
of subordinates who assist in the administration of the temple 
funds, and in the supervision and direction of religious obser- 
vances. 

Sometimes, but not frequently, the high functions of sacri- 
ficers are performed by common Sudras and even Pariahs. At 
one of the most famous temples of Mysore, called Melkota, 
during the great festival which is there celebrated annually, the 
Pariahs are the first to enter the sanctuary and to offer sacrifices 
to the idol, and it is only after they have finished that the 
Brahmin3 begin their sacrifices. I have already remarked that 
the Sudras are the only persons holding this office in temples 
where it is usual to immolate living victims. 

A fact worthy of remark is that the officiating priests wear no 
special costume in the exercise of their sacerdotal functions ; 
they are dressed in their ordinary clothes, which are, however, 
newly washed for the purpose. 

In most of the temples the oblations and sacrifices are con- 
fined to the simple products of nature. The offering of lamps 
is also specially in vogue. Sometimes thousands may be seen 
burning around the idol and in the enclosure of the temple ; they 
are filled with butter, which is a much more acceptable offering 
to the gods than oil. 

Hindu priests offer up sacrifices regularly twice a day, 
morning and evening. The idol to which the sacrifice is offered 
is first thoroughly washed, and the water used for this purpose 
is brought from the river with much pomp and ceremony. In 
some of the great pagodas it is brought on the backs of elephants, 
preceded by dancing-girls and musicians, and escorted by 
a great number of Brahmins and various attendants. In other 



592 Hindu Manners j Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

temples the Brahmins themselves go with a similar show of 
ceremony to fetch the water morning and evening, bringing 
it on their heads in large brass vessels. The water that 
remains after the idol has been washed is called tirtham (holy 
water). 

As soon as the task of washing the idol is over, the priest 
performs its toilet, which consists in putting on its clothes and 
tracing on its forehead one of the signs which the Hindus are 
accustomed to wear on their own foreheads. Puja is then 
offered to it. During these ceremonies the officiating priest 
tinkles a little bell, which is held in his left hand, the object 
no doubt being to call the attention of the worshippers to each 
stage in the ceremonial which is taking place inside the shrine 
and out of sight. 

After completing his mysterious duties, which must be con- 
cealed from profane eyes *, the :priest appears and distributes to 
the people who are assembled in .the hall of the temple fragments 
of the offerings made to the idol. This prasadam (sacred gift) is 
received with eagerness. If it is fruit or some other nutritious 
substance, it is eaten ; if it is flowers, the men stick them in their 
turbans, while the women entwine them in their hair. Last of 
all, the priest pours into the hollow of each person's hand 
a little tirtitatn, which is drunk immediately. After this all the 
worshippers retire. 

The courtesans or dancing-girls attached to each temple take 
their place in the second rank; they are called deva-dasts 
(servants or slaves of the gods), but the public call them by the 
more vulgar name of prostitutes. And in fact they are bound 
by their profession to grant their favours, if such they be, to any- 
body demanding them in return for ready money. It appears 
that at first they were reserved exclusively for the enjoyment 
of the Brahmins. And these lewd women, who make a public 
traffic of their charms, are consecrated in a special manner to 
the worship of the divinities of India. Every temple of any 
importance has in its service a band of eight, twelve, or more. 
Their official duties consist in dancing and singing within the 
temple twice a day, morning and evening, and also at all public 
ceremonies. The first they execute with sufficient grace, 

* In Vishnu temples these *myste- curtain drawn between the worship- 
rious duties ' are performed behind a pers and the idol. — £d. 



CH. iv] Dancing-girls 593 

although their attitudes are lascivious and their gestures inde- 
corous. As regards their singing, it is almost always confined to 
obscene verses describing some licentious episode in the history 
of their gods. Their duties, however, are not confined to reli- 
gious ceremonies. Ordinary politeness (and this is one of the 
characteristic features of Hindu morality) requires that when 
persons of any distinction make formal visits to each other they 
must be accompanied by a certain number of these courtesans. 
To dispense with them would show a want of respect towards 
the persons visited, whether the visit was one of duty or 
of politeness \ 

These women are also present at marriages and other solemn 
family meetings. All the time which they have Jto spare in 
the intervals of the various ceremonies is devoted to infinitely 
more shameful practices ; and it is not an uncommon thing to 
see even sacred temples converted into mere brothels. They 
are brought up in this shameful licentiousness from infancy, 
and are recruited from various castes, some among them bdong- 
ing to respectable families. It is not unusual for pregnant 
women, with the object of obtaining a safe delivery, to make 
a vow, with the consent of their husbands, to devote the child 
that they carry in their womb, if it should. turn out a girl, to the 
temple service. They are far from thinking that this infamous 
vow offends in any way the laws of decency, or is contrary to the 
duties of motherhood. In fact no shame whatever is attached 
to parents whose daughters adopt this career. 

The courtesans are the only women in India who enjoy the 
privilege of learning to read, to dance, and to sing. A well-bred 
and respectable woman would for this reason blush to acquire 
any one of these accomplishments ^ 

The deva-dasis receive a fixed salary for the religious duties 
which they perform ; but as the amount is small they supple- 
ment it by selling their favours in as profitable a manner as 
possible. In the attainment of this object they are probably 
more skilful than similar women in other countries. They 

* This custom is certainly not ob- no longer applies to women learning 

served at the present day.— Ed. to read and sing, though dancing is 

^ In these days female education is still restricted to the professional 

slowly extending to all classes, and dancing-girls, and is not considered 

the prejudice which formerly existed respectable.— £d. 



594 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

employ all the resources and artifices of coquetry. Perfumes, 
elegant costumes, coiffures best suited to set off the beauty 
of their hair, which they entwine with sweet-scented flowers ; 
a profusion of jewels worn with much taste on different parts 
of the body ; graceful and voluptuous attitudes : such are the 
snares with which these sirens allure the Hindus, who, it must 
be confessed, rarely display in such cases the prudence and 
constancy of a Ulysses. 

Nevertheless, to the discredit of Europeans it must be con- 
fessed that the quiet seductions which Hindu prostitutes know 
how to exercise with so much skill resemble in no way the 
disgraceful methods of the wretched beings who give themselves 
up to a similar profession in Europe, and whose indecent beha- 
viour, cynical impudence, obscene and filthy words of invitation 
are enough to make any sensible man who is not utterly depraved 
shrink from them with horror. Of all the women in India it is 
the courtesans, and especially those attached to the temples, 
who are the most decently clothed. Indeed they are particularly 
careful not to expose any part of the body. I do not deny, 
however, that this is merely a refinement of seduction. Experi- 
ence has no doubt taught them that for a woman to display her 
charms damps sensual ardour instead of exciting it, and that the 
imagination is more easily captivated than the eye. 

God forbid, however, that any one should believe me to wish 
to say a word in defence of the comparative modesty and 
reserve of the dancing-girls of India ! Actions can only be 
judged by their motives ; and certainly, if these Indian women 
are more reserved in public than their sisters in other coun- 
tries which call themselves more civilized, the credit is due not 
to their innate modesty but to national prejudice. In fact, 
however loose the Hindus may be in their morals, they strictly 
maintain an outward appearance of decency, and attach great 
importance to the observance of strict decorum in public. The 
most shameless prostitute would never dare to stop a man in the 
streets ; and she in her turn would indignantly repulse any man 
who ventured to take any indecent liberty with her. The man 
who behaved familiarly with one of these women in public would 
be censured and despised by everybody who witnessed the 
scandal. Is it the same among ourselves ? 

After the dancing-girls come the players of musical instru- 



CH. ivj Temple Musicians 595 

ments attached to the service of the temples. Every pagoda of 
any importance always has a more or less numerous band of 
them. They, as well as the dancing-girls, are obliged to attend 
the temple twice a day, and to fill it with discordant sounds. 
Their presence at all feasts and ceremonies is likewise obliga- 
tory. Moreover, they cannot be dispensed with during the great 
family feasts and ceremonies. The Hindu taste for music is so 
marked that there is not a single gathering, however small, 
which has not some musicians at its head. 

Those who are regularly attached to a pagoda receive a fixed 
salary. The instruments on which they play are for the most 
part clarionets and trumpets ; they have also cymbals and 
several kinds of small drums. The sounds produced by these 
instruments are far from pleasing, and may even appear hideous 
to European ears. The Hindus recognize a kind of harmony, 
however, in two parts : they have always a bass and a high 
counter-tenor or alto. The latter is produced by a wind instru- 
ment in the form of a tube widened at its base, the sounds of 
which have some resemblance to those of the bagpipe. 

The vocal part is executed by a second band of musicians, 
who take turns with the dancing-girls in singing hymns in honour 
of the gods. Sometimes the Brahmins and other worshippers 
form the chorus, or sing separately sacred poems of their own 
composition. 

The nattuva^ or conductor, is the most remarkable of all the 
musicians. In beating time he taps with his fingers on a narrow 
drum. As he beats, his head, shoulders, arms, thighs, and in 
fact all the parts of his body perform successive movements ; 
and simultaneously he utters inarticulate cries, thus animating 
the musicians both by voice and gesture. At times one would 
think he was agitated by violent convulsions. 

The dancing-women, the chorus, and the orchestra take turn 
and turn about during a religious ceremony, which often termi- 
nates with a procession round the temple. 

Morning and evening the courtesans befofe leaving never 
fail to perform for the idol, singing the while, the ceremony 
of the arattif for the purpose of averting the fatal influence 
caused by the looks of evil-minded persons, an influence from 
which the gods themselves, as I have already said, are not 
exempt. 



^(^ Hindu MannerSy Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

The whole musical repertoire of the Hindus is reduced to 
thirty-six airs, which are called ragas ; but most of the musicians 
hardly know half of them. 

Hindu music, whether vocal or instrumental, may be pleasing 
to the natives, but I do not think it can give the slightest 
pleasure to any one else, however little sensitive be his ear. 
Hindu musicians learn to play and sing methodically; they 
keep excellent time ; and they have, as we have, a variety of 
keys. In spite of all this, however, their songs have always 
appeared to me uninspiring and monotonous, while from their 
instruments J have never heard anything but harsh, high, and 
ear-splitting sounds. 

However, J admit that the chief reason why a European 
forms an unfavourable opinion of Hindu music is because he 
judges it by comparison with his own. To appreciate it rightly, 
we must go back two or:three thousand years and imagine our- 
selves in those ancient times when the Druids and other priests 
used in their civil and religious ceremonies no other music but 
dismal cries and noisy sounds, produced by striking two metal 
plates together, by beating tightly-stretched skins, or by blowing 
horns of different kinds. 

We must remember that Hindu music at the present day is the 
same as it has always been ; and that, as in the case of their other 
arts, it has undergone no alteration and has not been improved 
in any way. We shall then feel obliged to be more indulgent ; 
indeed, we may even feel astonished that Hindu music attained 
such perfection at the very beginning. For it is almost certain 
that the scale used at present by the Hindus has existed from 
the earliest times. It bears moreover a striking resemblance 
to ours, being composed of the same number of notes, arranged 
in the same way, as follows : — 

Sa ri ga nta pa da ni sa 
Do re mi fa sol la si do. 

Are we then to deny the merit of this invention to Guy of 
Arezzo ? And is John de Meurs, or whoever it was that perfected 
the system of the learned Benedictine, to have no other credit 
than that of having borrowed with discernment from the same 
source ? We know that Vossius maintained that the Egyptians 
had a musical scale similar to ours many centuries before Guy 



cH. iv] Temple Revenues 597 

of Arezzo published his own. This question I must leave for 
others to solve. 

There is nothing, as I have already shown, into which the 
Hindus do not introduce some superstitious notions, and it would 
have been a miracle if music — a diversion of the gods themselves 
— had not furnished them with means of satisfying their taste 
in this direction. Every note of the Hindu scale has a mark 
characteristic of some divinity, and includes several hidden 
meanings deduced from its particular sound or from something 
similar to it. There are also notes expressing joy, sadness, 
sweetness, anger, &c. And Hindu musicians take great care 
not to confound notes intended to express these varying passions 
of the human soul. 

All the musicians who play wind instruments are taken, as 
I have already remarked, from the low barber caste, the pro- 
fession being handed down from father to son. 

Heathen worship being very expensive, the priests and 
servants of the temples have, necessarily, various sources of 
unfailing revenue. In some districts a kind of tithe is collected 
out of the whole produce of the harvest ; in others, every temple 
has in its absolute possession extensive lands which are exempt 
from all taxation, and the produce of which is^ exclusively 
assigned to the maintenance of the temple and of its numerous 
staff. I have mentioned that in the case of these persons 
perquisites are of no small importance. The offerings of rich 
devotees, which are divided among them in proportion to their 
rank and dignity, are sometimes so considerable, in the principal 
temples, that they have aroused the cupidity of the princes 
of the country, particularly of Mahomedans. These latter, 
as a sort of compensation for tolerating a religion which they 
abhorred, thought fit to take possession of more than half of 
these offerings. 

There is no trick which the Brahmins will not employ in 
order to excite the fervour of the worshippers, and thus to 
enrich themselves by their offerings. The most obvious means 
generally produce the best results. In the foremost rank we 
must place the oracles, a rich mine of wealth which pagan 
priests of other countries worked long ago with great success, 
and which the lapse of ages has not yet exhausted for the 
heathen priests of India. Here it is the idol itself which 



598 Hindu Manners J Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

addresses the dull and profoundly attentive crowd of wor- 
shippers, who are unable to understand that some cunning 
rogue, concealed inside or close by the god of stone, is speak- 
ing through the mouth of the idol. The idol, or its inter- 
preter, also undertakes to foretell the future ; but these oracles, 
like those of ancient Greece, contain some ambiguous or 
double meaning. Consequently, whatever the issue may be, the 
Brahmins always find some way of making it agree with their 
predictions '. 

If the flow of offerings by any chance decreases, the idol will 
inveigh vehemently against the indifference and meanness of 
the inhabitants of the district, proclaiming once for all that if 
this state of things continues, it will withdraw its protection 
from them, and will even resort to the expedient of decamping 
in search of other more grateful, and especially more generous 
worshippers '. 

Or perhaps the devout mob will some day find the hands 
and feet of their cherished idol bound with chains. Cruel 
creditors, it is announced, have brought it to this humiliating 
condition because it could not pay certain sums of money which 
it had borrowed in times of need ; and they have sworn not to 
restore it to liberty until the whole sum, capital and interest, 
which is due to them shall have been repaid. Touched with 
compassion, the devotees will hasten to consult together and 
exact contributions from all possible sources until the sum 
necessary to liquidate the liabilities of their deity has been fur- 
nished to the Brahmins. As soon as the money is secured, the 
chains of the idol fall off, to the great satisfaction of everybody. 
In some famous temples, such as that of Tirupati, they use 
silver instead of iron chains to bind the sacred limbs of 
the idol. 

There is another expedient to which the Brahmins frequently 
have recourse. All of a sudden it is proclaimed abroad that the 
idol has been attacked by a dangerous disease caused by the 
grief it experiences on seeing the devotion of the people abating 
from day to day. The idol is taken down from its pedestal and 
carried to the entrance of the temple, where it is exposed to the 

^ These false oracles arc confined ^ Tin's remark also applies only to 

to temples dedicated to the inferior the temples dedicated to the inferior 
deities. — Ed. deities. — Ed. 



cH. iv] Angry Deities 599 

public gaze. Its head and temples are rubbed with sundry 
lotions ; drugs and medicines are placed before it ; the priests 
from time to time feel its pulse with a display of the gravest 
uneasiness. Still the symptoms of the disease develop from 
day to day, and the priests begin to despair of the recovery 
of the idol. This alarming intelligence is bruited abroad, 
and presents and offerings soon arrive from all sides. At 
sight of these the idol's strength begins to return little by 
little ; then it becomes convalescent ; and finally it is cured and 
restored to its place. 

Fear and awe are also means which the Brahmins turn to 
good account in order to renew the wavering faith of the people. 
They engage certain confederates, into whose bodies they affirm 
the angry god has sent a pisacha, or demon, in order to avenge 
some outrage which it has received from wicked men. One fre- 
quently meets with charlatans who fall into dreadful convulsions 
and make contortions and grimaces calculated to frighten the 
stoutest heart. In their calmer moments they give a piteous and 
detailed account of their misfortunes, which they attribute to the 
just resentment of the god, who is punishing them for their 
indifference towards himself and his ministers. They gabble 
phrases in many dialects, asserting that it is the demon who 
inspires them, and who has imparted to them the gift of lan- 
guages. They eat all sorts of meat, drink intoxicating liquors, 
and observe none of the rules of caste. 

But this is not imputed to them as a crime ; it is all laid to the 
charge of the devil that possesses them. The multitude are 
filled with fear at the sight of one of these impostors, and pro- 
strate themselves before him, worshipping the demon who has 
taken up its abode in him, and offering him oblations and sacri- 
fices, in order to propitiate him and prevent him from injuring 
them. The demoniac is given his fill of meat and drink ; and 
when he departs he is accompanied with much pomp and music 
to the next village, where he plays the same trick and finds just 
as many dupes. When he is pleased to come to his senses 
again, he exhorts his sympathetic audience to profit by the 
terrible example which he affords them, to show more faith in 
their god than he did, and to ensure the god's favour and 
protection by numerous gifts and offerings. 

Miracles, again, are a most profitable branch of business for 



6oo Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

Brahmins. They have all kinds, and suitable for every disease. 
The blind recover their sight, the lame walk, the dead come 
to life again. But the most popular miracle is that which 
gives fecundity to women. One continually hears of women 
whose pious devotion has obtained for them the signal favour 
of bearing children. I have already remarked that barrenness 
is the greatest possible curse to a woman in India, and the 
most dreaded of all the misfortunes that can befall a Hindu 
family. 

Other nations which are very proud of their enlightenment 
and morality suppress the natural desire of seeing oneself born 
again in one's numerous progeny from considerations of personal 
interest and ambition, and regard the fruitfulness of their women 
with aversion. They are moreover not ashamed of resorting to 
wicked and disgusting means of reducing or destroying it 
altogether, thus outraging the most holy instincts of nature in 
order that they may not deprive themselves of the means of 
satisfying their ambition or of procuring the luxuries of life, 
as if the love of a father for his children were not the greatest 
of all pleasures. Animated in this respect by the noblest and 
purest sentiments, the Hindus consider a man happy in propor- 
tion to the number of children he possesses. Among them, 
indeed, children are considered to be the blessing of a house. 
However numerous a* man's family may be, he never ceases to 
offer prayers for its increase. 

The children, it is true, soon become useful to their parents. 
At five or six years old they begin to tend the calves, while 
those a little older take care of the cows and oxen. And 
as soon as they are strong enough they assist their fathers 
in tilling the fields or help in some other way to maintain the 
family. 

There is a superstition, admirable enough in its way, which 
is a powerful factor in keeping up in the mind of a Hindu this 
ardent desire of seeing his race prolonged. In his eyes there 
is no misfortune equal to that of not leaving a son or a grand- 
son behind to perform the last duties in connexion with his 
funeral. Such a deprivation is regarded as capable of preventing 
all access to an Abode of Bliss after death. 

Hence it is that we see women who are slower in conceiving 
children than they would wish, hastening from temple to temple. 



cH. iv] Barren Women 6oi 

and sometimes ruining themselves in the extravagant gifts which 
they offer in order to obtain from the gods the inestimable 
favour of becoming mothers. Expert at reaping profit from 
the virtues as well as the vices of their countrymen, the 
Brahmins see in these touching impulses of nature merely 
a means of gaining wealth, and also at the same time an oppor- 
tunity of satisfying their carnal lusts with impunity. There 
are few temples where the presiding deity does not claim the 
power of curing barrenness in women. And there are some 
whose renown in this respect is unrivalled, such, for example, 
as that of Tirupati in the Carnatic, to which women flock in 
crowds to obtain children from the god Venkateswara \ On 
their arrival, the women hasten to disclose the object of their 
pilgrimage to the Brahmins, the managers of the temple. The 
latter advise them to pass the night in the temple, where, they 
say, the great Venkateswara, touched by their devotion, will 
perhaps visit them in the spirit and accomplish that which until 
then has been denied to them through human power. I must 
draw a curtain over the sequel of this deceitful suggestion. 
The reader already guesses at it. The following morning 
these detestable hypocrites, pretending complete ignorance of 
what has passed, make due inquiries into all the details ; 
and after having congratulated the women upon the recep- 
tion they met with, from the god, receive the gifts with which 
they have provided themselves and take leave of them, after 
flattering them with the hope that they have not taken their 
journey in vain. Fully convinced that the god has deigned 
to have intercourse with them, the poor creatures return home 
enchanted, flattering themselves that they will soon procure for 
their husbands the honour of paternity. 

People who have not sufficiently reflected upon the extremes 
to which the superstitious and fanatical credulity of a people may 
be carried, have regarded as untrue the stories which Father 
Gerbillon, Tavernier, and other travellers have told of the Dalai- 
Lama. His excrements are carefully preserved, dried, and 
distributed as relics to pious Tibetans, who, when they fall 
ill, make use of them as an internal medicine, which is con- 
sidered to be a sovereign remedy for all diseases. The fact 
I am about to relate, which, although even more revolting, is 

' One of the names of Vishnu. 



6o2 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

nevertheless quite true, will render any similar stories credible 
enough. It is not without shame that I enter upon an account 
of the disgusting incidents which I am here to describe. 
I would have passed them over in silence if the very nature of 
this work had not imposed upon me the painful duty of telling 
everything. 

At Nanjangud, a village situated about ten leagues south of 
Seringapatam, there is a temple famous throughout Mysore. 
Among the numerous votaries who flock to it are many women, 
who go to implore the help of the idol in curing their sterility. 
Offerings and prayers are not the only ceremonies which have to 
be gone through. On leaving the temple the woman, accom- 
panied by her husband, has to go to a place where all the 
pilgrims are accustomed to resort to answer the calls of nature. 
There the husband and the wife collect with their hands 
a certain quantity of ordure and form it into a small pyramid, 
which they are careful to mark with a sign that will enable them 
to recognize it. Then they go to the neighbouring tank and 
mix in the hollow of their hands the filth' which has soiled their 
fingers. (But I will spare my readers the rest.) Afler having 
performed their ablutions they retire. Two or three days 
afterwards they visit their pyramid, and, still using their hands, 
turn the filthy mass over and over and examine it as carefully 
and as seriously as the Roman augurs scrutinized the entrails 
of sacrificed animals, in order to see if any insects have been 
engendered in it. In this case it would be a very good omen, 
showing that the woman would soon be pregnant. But if, after 
careful search, not even the smallest insect is visible, the poor 
couple, sad and discouraged, return home in the full conviction 
that the expenses they have been put to and the pains they 
have taken have been of no avail '. 

At Mogur, another village situated a short distance from the 
former (Nanjangud), there is a small temple dedicated to 
Tipamma, a female divinity, in whose honour a great festival 
is celebrated every year. The goddess, placed in a beautifully 
ornamented palanquin, is carried in procession through the 
streets. In front of her there is another divinity, a male. 
These two idols, which are entirely nude, are placed in 

* We believe that no such disgusting practice exists nowadays. - Ed. 



cH. iv] Lihertinage in Temples 603 

immodest postures, and by help of a piece of mechanism a dis- 
gusting movement is imparted to them as long as the procession 
continues. This disgusting spectacle, which is worthy of the 
depraved persons who look upon it, excites transports of mirth, 
manifested by shouts and bursts of laughter. Nor is this all. 
A Pariah, who has made a special study of all the obscene and 
filthy expressions to be found in the Hindu language, is chosen ; 
the goddess Tipamma is then evoked and takes up her abode in 
his person. Then any one who wishes to hear foul expressions 
stands before the man, and he is certain to be satisfied. As it 
is supposed to be Tipamma who speaks through the mouth 
of the Pariah, the devotees, far from being offended with him, 
are quite pleased with the goddess for having deigned to over- 
whelm them with insults. Even high-caste Hindus are to be 
seen at this festival seeking to obtain the coveted honour. 

The goddess Tipamma of Mogur is not the only member of 
her family. She has six sisters, who are not in any way inferior 
to her in point of decency and politeness. Each one of them 
has her own temple, in which like ceremonies are performed. 
In the whole of Southern Mysore, from Alambadi as far as 
Wynaad, for a distance of more than thirty leagues, these 
abominable revels are held in the highest esteem. 

There are temples in certain isolated places, too, where the 
most disgusting debauchery is the only service agreeable to 
the presiding deity. There children are promised to women 
who, laying aside all shame, grant their favours to all persons 
indiscriminately. At such places a feast is celebrated every 
year in the month of January, at which both sexes, the scum of 
the country-side, meet. Barren women, in the hope that they 
will cease to be so, visit them after binding themselves by 
a vow to grant their favours to a fixed number of libertines. 
Others, who have entirely lost all sense of decency, go there in 
order to testify their reverence for the deity of the place by 
prostituting themselves, openly and without shame, even at the 
very gates of the temple. 

There is one of these sinks of iniquity five or six leagues 
from the village where I am writing these pages, on the banks 
of the Cauvery, in a lonely place called Junginagatta The 
temple is not striking to look at ; but the January feast is cele- 
brated there with the utmost refinements of vice. 



6o4 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies f pt. m 

People have also pointed out to me a temple of the same 
description near Kara-madai, in the district of Coimbatore, and 
another not far from Mudu-dorai, in Eastern Mysore. I have 
before remarked that these dens of debauchery are always 
situated in places far removed from all habitations. 

According to Herodotus and Strabo, every woman among 
the Assyrians and Babylonians was obliged to prostitute herself 
once in her life in the temple of the goddess Mylitta, the Aphrodite 
of the Greeks. This tradition so flagrantly defied the principles 
of modesty with which nature seems to have endowed even the 
majority of brute beasts that many modern writers^ and among 
them Voltaire, have called its truth in question. What would 
they say of the infamous festivals of which I have just drawn 
a sketch ? The authority of husbands in India is moreover such 
that it is impossible for debauchery of this kind to be carried 
on without their consent. But does superstition know any 
bounds? Many Hindu religious practices afford irrefutable 
proofs of the truth of similar incredible details which ancient 
historians have handed down to us. 

Here the scene changes. It is no longer a question of licen- 
tious libertines profiting by the vicious tendencies or the stupid 
credulity of women in order to satisfy their passions. It is con- 
cerning the silly fanatics who make it their task to torture 
themselves and to mutilate their bodies in a hundred different 
ways. It is not uncommon to hear of Hindus, in case of 
a serious illness or of some imminent danger, making a vow 
to mortify some important part of their bodies, on condition 
of recovery. The most common penance of this sort consists 
in stamping upon the shoulders, chest, and other parts of the 
body, with a red-hot iron, the marks symbolical of their gods — 
brandings which are never efi*aced, and which they display with 
as much ostentation as a warrior does the wounds he has received 
in battle. 

Devotees are often seen stretched at full length on the ground 
and rolling in that posture all round the temples, or, during 
solemn processions, before the cars which carry the idols. It 
is a remarkable sight to see a crowd of fanatics rolling in this 
manner, quite regardless of stones, thorns, and other obstacles. 
Others, inspired by extreme fanaticism, voluntarily throw them- 
selves down to be crushed under the wheels of the car on which 



CH. iv] Hook-swinging 605 

the idol is borne \ And the crowds that witness these acts of 
madness, far from preventing them, applaud them heartily and 
regard them as the very acme of devotion. 

Chidi-mari is another torture to which devotees submit them- 
selves in honour of the goddess Mari-amma, one of the most 
evil-minded and bloodthirsty of all the deities of India. At 
many of the temples consecrated to this cruel goddess there is 
a sort of gibbet erected opposite the door. At the extremity of 
the crosspiece, or arm, a pulley is suspended, through which 
a cord passes with a hook at the end. The man who has made 
a vow to undergo this cruel penance places himself under the 
gibbet, and a priest then beats the fleshy part of the back 
until it is quite benumbed. After that the hook is fixed into 
the flesh thus prepared, and in this way the unhappy wretch 
is raised in the air. While suspended he is careful not to 
show any sign of pain ; indeed he continues to laugh, jest, 
and gesticulate like a buffoon in order to amuse the spectators, 
who applaud and shout with laughter. After swinging in the 
air for the prescribed time the victim is let down again, and, 
as soon as his wounds are dressed, he returns home in 
triumph ■. 

Some votaries, again, are to be met with who make a vow to 
walk with bare feet on burning coals. For this purpose they 
kindle a large pile of wood ; and when the flames are extin- 
guished and all the wood consumed, they place the glowing 
embers in a space about twenty feet in length. The victim 
stands at one extremity with his feet in a puddle expressly 
prepared for the purpose, takes a spring, and runs quickly over 
the burning embers till he reaches another puddle on the other 
side. In spite of these precautions very few, as one can 
imagine, escape from the ordeal with their feet uninjured. 
Others, whose weak limbs do not permit of their running 
over the hot embers, cover the upper part of the body with 
a wet cloth, and holding a chafing-dish filled with burning 

^ This has now been prohibited by vent it, by dissuading men from offer- 
law. — Ed. ing themselves as victims, still, as it is 

' * Hook-swinging/ as this is called, not under ordinary circumstances a 

is still practised in the Madura district criminal offence, it cannot be prevented 

(Madras). Though the magistracy by legal process. — Ed. 
have orders to do all they can to pre- 



6d6 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

coals, pour the contents over their heads. This feat of devotion 
is called the Fire-bath, 

Another kind of torture consists in piercing both cheeks 
and passing a wire of silver or some other metal through the 
two jaws between the teeth. Thus bridled, the mouth cannot 
be opened without acute pain. Many fanatics have been 
known to travel a distance of twenty miles with their jaws thus 
maimed, and remain several days in this state, taking only liquid 
nourishment, or some clear broth poured into the mouth. I 
have seen whole companies of them, men and women, con- 
demned by their self-inflicted torture to enforced silence, going 
on a pilgrimage to some temple where this form of penance is 
especially recommended. There are others, again, who pierce 
their nostrils or the skin of their throats in the same way. 

I could not help shuddering one day at seeing one of these 
imbeciles with his lips pierced by two long nails, which crossed 
each other so that the point of one reached to the right eye 
and the point of the other to the left. I saw him thus dis- 
figured at the gate of a temple consecrated to the cruel goddess 
Mari-amma. The blood was still trickling down his chin; yet 
the pain he must have been enduring did not prevent him 
from dancing and performing every kind of buffoonery before 
a crowd of spectators, who showed their admiration by giving 
him abundant alms. 

There are a great many ordinary forms of penance, which 
elsewhere would appear more than sufficiently painful ; but 
devout Hindus do not rest satisfied with these; they try un- 
ceasingly to invent new methods of self-torture. Thus, for 
example, a fanatic self-torturer makes a vow to cut half his 
tongue off, executes it coolly with his own hands, puts the 
amputated portion in an open cocoanut shell, and offers it on 
his knees to the divinity. 

Then, again, there are others who, apparently having nothing 
better to do, bind themselves to go on a pilgrimage to some 
distant shrine by measuring their length along the ground 
throughout the whole distance. Beginning at their very 
doors, pilgrims of this description stretch themselves on 
the ground, rise again, advance two steps, again lie down, 
again rise, and continue thus till they reach their destination. 
Considering the length of their journeys and the fatigue of 



CH. iv] Curious Offerings 607 

such exercise, it is easy to imagine that the pilgrims do 
not go far off the route to sleep at the end of the day. 
Persons have been seen attempting to measure their length 
in this way along the entire road which runs between the 
sacred town of Benares and the temple of Jagannath (Puri), 
a distance of more than two hundred leagues. I should not 
like to swear, however, that they really accomplished such 
a feat. 

This tendency of Hindus to submit their bodies to severe 
and often cruel tortures, or to spend their means in costly 
offerings, is manifested whenever they find themselves in critical 
circumstances, and particularly in times of sickness. 

There is not a single Hindu who does not in such cases make 
a vow to perform something more or less onerous on condition 
that he is delivered safe and sound from his unfortunate pre- 
dicament. The rich make vows either to celebrate solemn 
festivals at certain temples, or to present to the pagoda some 
gift, such as a cow, a buffalo, pieces of cloth or other stuffs, 
gold or silver ornaments, &c. If the eye, nose, ear, or any 
other organ be afflicted, they offer to the idols an image of it in 
gold or silver. 

Among the numerous offerings which this superstitious 
mania causes to flow into the temples of the Hindu gods, there 
is one common enough, but which, without the perquisites which 
accompany it, would contribute very little to increase the wealth 
of the Brahmin priests. It consists in offering one's nails and 
hair to some divinity. It is well known that men in India are 
in the habit of shaving the head and leaving only a single 
small tuft of hair to grow on the crown. Those who make the 
particular vow referred to refrain, for many years together, 
from cutting their nails and hair. Then, at a certain fixed 
time, they proceed in state to the temple, and there, with great 
ceremony, get rid of the superfluous growth of hair and nails, 
which they lay at the feet of the divinity whom they wish to 
honour. This custom is practised only by men; it is chiefly 
recommended to those who believe themselves to be possessed 
with a devil \ 

We must do justice to the Brahmins by remarking that they 
are never so silly as to impose on themselves vows of self- 
^ This custom is also practised among Sudra women. — £d. 



6o8 Hindu MannerSy Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

torture. They leave these pious pastimes to the stupid Sudras. 
And even the Sudras who practise such penances are for the 
most part men of low birth who do so to gain their livelihood ; 
or else fanatical sectaries of Siva or Vishnu, actuated by 
religious mania, or more often by an inordinate desire of 
securing the applause and admiration of the public. 

Apart from ordinary superstitious practices which flourish 
everywhere, there are certain temples which, in this respect, 
enjoy special privileges ; such, for example, as that of Tirupati 
in the south of the Peninsula. This temple, which is in the 
Carnatic, is dedicated to Vishnu under the name of Venkate- 
swara. Immense multitudes of pilgrims flock to it from all parts 
of India, bringing offerings of all sorts, in food, stuffs, gold, 
silver, jewels, costly cloths, horses, cows, &c., which are so 
considerable that they suffice to maintain several thousands of 
persons employed in the various offices of worship, which is 
there conducted with extraordinary magnificence. 

Among the noticeable peculiarities which distinguish the 
great feasts of this temple there is one which I must not pass 
over in silence. At a certain time of the year a grand pro- 
cession is formed, which attracts an immense crowd of persons 
of both sexes. While the image of Venkateswara is borne 
through the streets on a magnificent car, the Brahmins who 
preside at the ceremony go about among the crowd and select 
the most beautiful women they can find, demanding them of 
their husbands or parents in the name of Venkateswara, for 
whose service, it is asserted, they are destined. Those husbands 
who have not lost all common sense, understanding, or at least 
suspecting, that a god of stone has no need of wives, indignantly 
refuse to deliver up theirs, and bluntly speak their mind to 
the hypocritical rogues. The latter, far from being discon- 
certed, proceed to apply to others who are better disposed, for 
some of the men are delighted at the honour conferred upon 
them by so great a god in condescending to ally himself with 
their family, and do not hesitate to deliver their wives and 
even their daughters into the hands of his priests '. 

It is thus that the seraglio of Tirupati is recruited. When 
the god takes it into his head that some of his wives are begin- 
ning to grow old or are no longer pleasing to him, he signifies 

* Such proceedings would hardly be tolerated in the present day. — Ed. 



CH. iv] The Temple of Jagannath 609 

through the priests his intention of divorcing them. A mark is 
branded on their thighs or breasts with a red-hot iron, repre- 
senting the god Venkateswara, and they receive a certificate 
showing that they have faithfully served a certain number of 
years as legitimate wives of the god, and are therefore recom- 
mended to the charitable public. Then they are dismissed, 
and provided with their certificate of good conduct they go 
about the country under the name of Kali-yuga-Lakshmis the 
Lakshmis ^ of Kali-yuga). Wherever they go their wants are 
abundantly supplied. 

This system of procuring wives for their idols is not a pecu- 
liarity of the temple of Tirupati. The priests of many other 
temples have found it convenient to have recourse to it, as 
for instance those in charge of the temple of Jagannath, 
which is even more famous than the temple of Tirupati. 
Religious ceremonies are conducted in this temple with the 
greatest magnificence. It is situated near the sea on the coast 
of Orissa. The principal divinity worshipped there is repre- 
sented under a monstrous shape without arms or head. What 
particularly distinguishes this pagoda is that it is a centre of 
union among the Hindus. Although it is specially consecrated 
to Vishnu, there are no distinctions between sects and castes. 
Everybody is admitted, and may offer worship in his own way 
to the presiding deity. Accordingly pilgrims resort thither 
from all parts of India; the disciples of Vishnu and of Siva 
frequenting it with equal zeal. The Bairagis and the Goshats 
from the North, the Dasarus and the Jangamas from the South, 
lay aside their mutual animosities when they approach this 
sacred place, and it is perhaps the only spot in India where 
they do so^ While sojourning there they seem to form but 
one brotherhood. It is at this temple especially that one sees 
the religious fanatics, of whom I have already spoken above, 
throwing themselves before the car of the idol and allowing 
themselves to be crushed beneath its wheels. 

Several thousands of persons, chiefly Brahmins, are employed 
in the performance of the religious ceremonies of the temple. 
The crowd of pilgrims never abates. Those from the South 
who go on a pilgrimage to Kasi, or Benares, always take the 

' Lakshmi is the name of the wife ' Tirupati is the same in this respect, 

of Vishnu. — Dubois. — Ed. 

** R r 



6io Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

Jagannath (Puri) road up the coast in order to offer en route 
their respectful homage to its presiding deity. Those from the 
North who go to the temple of Rameswaram, which is situated 
on a small island near Cape Comorin, also take this road \ 

I have made mention elsewhere of a tank or reservoir of 
sacred water which is found at Kumbak6nam in Tanjore, and 
which possesses the virtue once in every twelve years of purify- 
ing all those who bathe in it from all spiritual and corporal 
infirmities and from all sins committed during many genera- 
tions. When the time for this easy means of absolution 
draws nigh, an almost incredible number of pilgrims flock to 
the spot from all parts of India. 

At Palni, in Madura, there is a famous temple consecrated 
to the god Velayuda, whose devotees bring offerings of a peculiar 
kind, namely large sandals, beautifully ornamented and similar 
in shape to those worn by the Hindus on their feet. The 
god is addicted to hunting, and these shoes are intended for his 
use when he traverses the jungles and deserts in pursuit of 
his favourite sport. Such shabby gifts, one might think, would 
go very little way towards filling the coffers of the priests of 
Velayuda. Nothing of the sort : Brahmins always know how 
to reap profit from anything. Accordingly the new sandals 
are rubbed on the ground and rolled a little in the dust, and 
are then exposed to the eyes of the pilgrims who visit the 
temple. It is clear enough that the sandals must have been 
worn on the divine feet of Velayuda ; and they become the 
property of whosoever pays the highest price for such holy 
relics. 

It does not enter into my calculations to offer a complete 
account of all the extravagant absurdities which abound in 
the idolatrous worship of the Hindus, or of all the tricks and 
subterfuges, more or less clumsy, by means of which the 
hjrpocritical and crafty priests foster the faith of the people 
while they increase their own comfort. A subject of this nature 
would be inexhaustible, and in order to treat it fully I should 
require many volumes. I believe I have said enough, how- 
ever, to give a fairly good idea of the rest. But I must add 

^ The temple of Jagannath being tails about the myths and traditions 
one of the most celebrated in India, I relating to its origin.— Dubois. 
have given in Appendix VI some de- 



cH. iv] Car Festivals 6ii 



a few words concerning the religious processions of the Hindus, 
which in their eyes are a matter of no small importance. 

There is not a single temple of any note which has not 
one or two processions every year. On such occasions the 
idols are placed on huge massive cars supported on four large 
solid wheels, not made, like our wheels, with spokes and felloes. 
A big beam serves as the axle, and supports the car proper, 
which is sometimes fifty feet in height. The thick blocks which 
form the base are carved with images of men and women in 
the most indecent attitudes. Several stages of carved planking 
are raised upon this basement, gradually diminishing in width 
until the whole fabric has the form of a pyramid. 

On the days of procession the car is adorned with coloured 
calicoes, costly cloths, green foliage, garlands of flowers, &c. 
The idol, clothed in the richest apparel and adorned with its 
most precious jewels, is placed in the middl'e of the car, beneath 
an elegant canopy. Thick cables^ are attached to the car, and 
sometimes more than a thousand persons are harnessed to it. 
A party of dancing-girls are seated on the car and surround the 
idol. Some of them fan the idol with fans made of peacocks* 
feathers ; others wave yik tails gracefully from side to side. 
Many other persons are also mounted on the car for the purpose 
of directing its movements and inciting the multitude that drags 
it to continued efforts. All this is done in the midst of tremendous 
tumult and confusion. In the crowd following the procession 
men and women are indiscriminately mixed up, and liberties 
may be taken without entailing any consequences. Decency 
and modesty are at a discount during car festivals. I have been 
told that it is common enough for clandestine lovers, who at 
other times are subject to vexatious suspicion, to choose the day 
of procession for their rendezvous in order to gratify their desires 
without restraint. 

The procession advances slowly. From time to time a halt 
is made, during which a most frightful uproar of shouts and 
cries and whistlings is kept up. The courtesans, who are 
present in great numbers on these solemn occasions, perform 
obscene dances ; while, as long as the procession continues, the 
drums, trumpets, and all sorts of musical instruments give forth 
their discordant sounds. On one side sham combatants armed 
with naked sabres are to be seen fencing with one another; 

R r 2 



6i2 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 



on another side, one sees men dancing in groups and 
beating time with small sticks ; and somewhere else people 
are seen wrestling. Finally, a great number of devotees 
crawl slowly before the car on hands and knees. Those who 
have nothing else to do shriek and shout so that even the 
thunder of the great Indra striking the giants would not be 
heard by them. But in order to form a proper idea of the 
terrible uproar and confusion that reigns among this crowd 
of demoniacs one must witness such a scene. As for myself, 
I never see a Hindu procession without being reminded of 
a picture of hell. 

The above is only a slight sketch of the religious ceremonies 
of the Hindus. Such is the spirit of piety which animates 
them ! Whatever may have been the shameful mysteries, the 
revolting extravagances of paganism, could any religion be 
filled with more insane, ignoble, obscene, and even cruel 
practices ? 

It is true that human sacrifices are no longer openly tolerated 
in India. But what matters it? If the female victim does not 
fall under the sword of the sacrificer, she is so misled by the 
perfidious suggestions of the priests that she perishes of her 
own free will and accord on the funeral pyre, or, what is 
more horrible, by the very hands of those who have given her 
existence I Are not they also human victims, those unhappy 
widows on whom superstition has imposed the obligation of 
burning themselves alive? And what name shall we apply to 
the destruction of a number of innocent girls condemned 
to death at their very birth ? 

These self-same Brahmins, who are afraid of breaking an ^^'g 
for fear of destroying the germ of a chicken, have they ever 
expressed the slightest indignation when they have seen parents, 
more ferocious than tigers, sacrificing all their daughters and 
preserving only their sons * ? 



* This execrable custom is prevalent 
among certain castes of Rajputs and 
Jats in the North of India. Happily, 
the efforts made by the Government 
nowadays to extirpate it have suc- 
ceeded in making these infanticides 
less frequent. — Dubois. 

The Census Report for 1891 states : 



' It is pretty certain that the dcUberate 
putting to death of female infants is 
a practice that in the present day. at 
all events, is confined to exceedingly 
narrow limits. . . . On the whole, even 
in Rajputana, the Census returns 
show that the practice must be ver>' 
restricted in its operation. . . . But 



CH. iv] Brahmin Influence in Hinduism 613 

Others, again, with feelings no less unnatural, either drown 
or expose to wild beasts children who happen to be born under 
unlucky stars. Furthermore, have they ever, these Brahmins, 
represented to the people over whom they exercise such para- 
mount influence, how shamelessly they violate nature by placing 
the sick, whose recovery is despaired of, on the banks of the 
Ganges, or of some other so-called holy river, so that they 
may be drowned by the floods or devoured by crocodiles ? Have 
they ever attempted to restrain the frenzy of those fanatics who, 
in their mistaken devotion, foolishly allow themselves to be 
crushed under the wheels of the cars of their idols, or throw 
themselves headlong into the stream at the junction of the 
Ganges and the Jumna ' ? 

What a consoling contrast does the sublime religion of 
Jesus Christ offer to him who knows how to appreciate its 
blessings ! How inestimable do its holy precepts, its sweet 
and pure morality, appear in comparison with the hideous and 
degraded doctrines which I have here so reluctantly sketched ! 
Of a truth, it is God Himself who has not permitted His Divine 
attributes to be attached to a false religion. 

But some will say that the iniquities which have roused my 
indignation are due far more to vicious conditions of civiliza- 
tion than to perversity of religious principle. But I may reply, 
what is then the object of true religion, if it is not to correct 
such vices? The priests of a religion who advise, encourage, 
or permit crimes to be committed which they could prevent, 
take upon themselves the whole responsibility for the evil. And 
in this the modern Brahmins are so much the more to blame 
because they have done their best to distort and render un- 
recognizable the primitive religion of which they constituted 
themselves the guardians, and which, however imperfect it may 
have been, was far from possessing the monstrous character 
which it acquired later in the hands of its avaricious and 
hypocritical interpreters. The Hindu system of religion is 
nothing more than a lever of which the Brahmins make use 
habitually for influencing the passions of a credulous people, 
and turning them to their own advantage. Instead of bending 

many a girl is allowed to die un- attacked/ — Ed. 

attended where medical aid would * Attempts at suicide are now pun- 

be at once called in if the son were ishab!e by law.— * Ed. 



6r4 Hindu Manners. Customs^ and Cermumies [ft. m 

the iDoral Axncua of the nadoo under the joke of the primitive 
crtJtdj they have invented a sham reiigioo soited to the natoral 
propensmcs of the people. Quick to recognize the special 
predilections of their teOov-coontrrmen. they knoir that eveiy- 
thing which is strange and extnordinarj, evenrtfaing wliicfa 
*:xcteds the bounds of reason, is calculated to please tfaem ; and 
they have omitted no oppoitunity of using this knowkdlge to 
their own profit- 
It must be confessed that the imagination of the Hindus is 
.^uch that it cannot be excited except by what is monstrous and 
extravagant. Ordinary objects produce not die sl^test 
impression u[>on their blunted intellects; it needs giants or 
pygmies to attract their attention. However litde one may 
be acquainted with them, it is easy to convince oneself of this 
truifmi. If you attempt to amuse or instruct them, they will 
listen to you tn-ith distracted indifference unless you inter- 
mingle with your discourse some extravagant story, some 
absurd fable, or some fiction that would overturn the whole 
^'conomy of the universe. During the conversations which 
I have frequently held with Brahmins on the subject of religion, 
if I spoke to them of miracles wrought by the power of God, 
they saw nothing extraordinary in them. If I related to them 
the exploits of Joshua and his army and the wonders they 
performed through the intervention of God in the conquest of 
the land of Canaan, they would reply with an air of triumph 
by citing the prowess of their Rama, and the wonders, mar- 
vf^llous in quite another fashion, which attended his conquest 
of the island of Ceylon. According to them, Samson had no 
more strength than a child as compared with Bali, Ravana, and 
other giants. The resurrection of Lazarus was, in their opinion, 
quite unworthy of remark ; for, they said, the Vishnavites daily 
perform similar miracles during the ceremony offiavadam. 

What conclusion must be drawn from all this? It is that 
a wific and reasonable religious belief cannot be evolved by 
human agency alone. God alone is the Supreme Lawgiver. 
God alone can interpret His mysterious will to His Prophets and 
His Church. Without His grace reason is at fault, and is lost 
in the uncertainty of idle imaginings. False teachers of idolatry 
may invent dogmas and systems, but they can never reconcile 
tiicm or build upon them any stable structure of religion. 



CH. iv] Hinduism and Christianity 



615 



If, for inscrutable reasons, which it is not given to us to know, 
God has not been pleased to reveal Himself till now to a people 
whose civilization dates back to the darkest ages, we at any rate 
should congratulate ourselves on having been chosen as the 
objects of His favour. 

Many Europeans who visit India are struck by the inco- 
herency of ideas that prevails in the religion professed by its 
inhabitants, and by the variety of its doctrines and ceremonies ; 
and being far from robust in their own faith, they end by 
endorsing one of the favourite axioms of modern philosophy, 
namely, that 'all religions are equally agreeable to God and 
lead to the same good end.' But lo me the strange and dis- 
quieting picture of Hindu religion has always presented itself 
in quite a different aspect. The sight of such an extraordinary 
religious cult, far from shaking my faith, has on the contrary 
greatly contributed to confirm it *. 

Certainly, every time that I compare the grand simplicity of 
our Holy Scriptures, the sublime teachings of our Gospel, the 
solemn splendour of our religious services, with the inconsistent 
and disgusting myths contained in the Hindu Puranas and with 
the extravagant, barbarous, and often terrible religious cere- 
monies to which the Hindus are addicted, I cannot help feeling 
that the Christian religion shines with new splendour. I can- 
not help experiencing an irresistible feeling of gratitude for 
the blessing of having been born in a part of the globe to which 
God's divine light has penetrated. It is then that I echo the 
words of the holy Lawgiver of the Hebrews contained in Deu- 
teronomy iv. 8. Some so-called philosophers of modern times 
have maintained that the mind of man alone is able to conceive 



' A Tartar king, recently conv rted, 
having communicated to Louis IX his 
intention of prostrating himself at the 
feet of the Pope, who was then at 
Lyons, the saintly monarch dissuaded 
him, for fear that the dissolute manners 
of the Christians might weaken the 
belief of this stranger in the sanctity 
of the Catholic religion. This pre- 
caution was no doubt wise. Never- 
theless, another traveller, who was 
a witness of the immorality of the 
Roman people, felt his faith strength- 



ened, and came to the conclusion that 
there could be only one true religion 
that could be upheld by God's omni- 
potence amidst such terrible corrup- 
tion. For my pai*t, I cannot conceive 
how any Christian can consistently 
ignore his religious duties when he 
becomes closely acquainted with an 
idolatrous people and with the per- 
verse infatuation and extravagant 
unreasonableness which distinguish 
an idolatrous cult. — Dubois. 



6i6 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

a just notion of the divinity. They have dared to attribute that 
which they themselves have conceived it to be to the efforts of 
their own critical faculties, as if this power itself had not been 
imprinted on their minds in the first instance by the Christian 
education which they received in early youth. 

Where, indeed, are there to be found any philosophers, 
ancient or modern, who have arrived without the assistance of 
Revelation at. trustworthy notions of God and of the worship 
due to Him? Socrates, the most renowned of all, spoke of the 
Supreme Being in a manner worthy of Him. Yet even he 
was unable to shake off entirely the fetters of pagan super- 
stition. After drinking the cup of hemlock and addressing 
to his friends a sublime discourse upon the immortality of 
the soul, he again returned to the vain imaginings of pagan 
worship, and addressing Crito, told him he had vowed the sacri- 
fice of a cock to Aesculapius and begged him to accomplish 
this vow on his behalf. 

The Hindus, like all idolatrous nations, originally possessed 
a conception, imperfect though it was, of the true God ; but this 
knowledge, deprived of the light of Revelation, grew more and 
more dim, until at last it became extinguished in the darkness of 
error, of ignorance, and of corruption. Confounding the Creator 
with His creatures, they set up gods who were merely myths 
and monstrosities, and to them they addressed their prayers 
and directed their worship, both of which. were as false as the 
attributes which they assigned to these divinities. 

Nevertheless, such is the moral obliquity of this people that 
nothing even to this day has been capable of shaking their 
faith in their idols, or of persuading them to believe in the more 
reasonable religion of their conquerors. The Christians have 
vainly endeavoured to introduce their creed by persuasion. 
And if the Mahomedans have succeeded in making a fairly 
large number of proselytes, it is only by employing here as 
elsewhere bribery or violence. But in spite of the honours and 
dignities offered by the latter to those who, renouncing their 
national religion, embraced the Moslem faith, Mahomedan 
missionaries have obtained only partial success and Mahome- 
danism has not become predominant in any single province of 
India. 

The Christian religion, to which Europe owes its civilization — 



cH. iv] Christian Example in India 617 

that blessed and humane religion, so well adapted to alleviate 
and improve the condition of a wretched people crushed under 
the yoke of oppression : that religion whose manifest truths 
have softened the hard hearts of so many barbarous nations — 
has been preached without success to the Hindus for more than 
three hundred years. It is even losing day by day the little 
ground which it had once gained, against a thousand obstacles, 
through the zeal and persevering efforts of many virtuous and 
zealous missionaries. The seed sown by them has, in fact, 
fallen on stony ground. It must be acknowledged that the 
conduct of the Europeans who have been brought up in the 
profession of Christianity, and who are now to be found all 
over India, is too often unworthy of the faith which they are 
supposed to profess; and this scandalous state of affairs, which 
the natives of India can in no way explain, is a powerful factor 
in increasing the dislike of the latter for a religion which 
apparently its own followers do not themselves respect. 

As a matter of course, the taint of corruption which char- 
acterizes all the religious institutions of the Hindus has duly 
left its mark on their social morality. How, indeed, could 
virtue prevail in a country where all the vices of mankind are 
justified by those of their gods? It naturally follows that 
their religion and their morality are equally corrupt, and this 
confirms in a certain sense the reflection of Montesquieu, that, 
'in a country which has the misfortune to possess a religion 
that does not proceed from God, it necessarily follows that the 
religion is identical with the system of morality which prevails 
there, because religion, even when it is false, is the best 
guarantee that men can have of the honesty of other men.* 

Some few articles of the Hindu faith, if freed from the 
absurd trammels with which Brahmin deceit has surrounded 
them, would be capable of offering successful resistance to 
the inroads of corrupt influences. For instance, the fear of the 
punishments reserved for the wicked in hell, the hope of 
the reward apportioned to the blessed in the Abodes of Bliss, 
and even the strange doctrine of metempsychosis which grants 
to the man who is neither altogether virtuous nor altogether 
vicious the prospect of a new birth more or less advantageous 
and proportionate to his deeds, would be so many incentives, 
which, if inculcated in the minds of the people by disinterested 



6i8 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies 



teachers and men of good faith, would contribute powerfully 
towards bringing them back into the paths of righteousness. 
But how different is this way of looking at things from that of 
the Brahmins! The punishments of hell, exclusion from the 
Abodes of Bliss, and regenerations in vile bodies are reserved 
only for those who have done some injury to these hypocritical 
and selfish persons, or who have not helped to enrich them. 
Robbers, liars, murderers — indeed the greatest criminals — 
are sure of immunity after death, provided they give presents 
to the Brahmins, or contribute in some way to their worldly 
comfort. 

The only real good which the Hindu religion does is to unite 
in one body under its banner the various castes and tribes of 
India, the differences between which are such as would other- 
wise constitute them, so to speak, different nations. Without 
this common tie it may reasonably be presumed that only 
disorder and anarchy would prevail. 

It is quite true, therefore, that a religion, however bad and 
absurd it may be, is still preferable to the absence of any 
religion at all. Unquestionably. In my opinion, the worshipper 
of the Trimurti is much less contemptible than the free-thinker 
who presumes to deny the existence of God'. A Hindu who 
professes the doctrine of metempsychosis proves that he has 
infinitely more common sense than those vain philosophers 
who utilize all their logic in proving that they are merely brute 
beasts, and that ' death is merely an eternal sleep ' for the 
reasoning man as well as for the animal which cannot reason. 
But whatever I might say on this subject could in no way excel 
the logical conclusions which 1 might quote from Montesquieu, 
who refutes a paradox expressed by a man moi-e celebrated 
for his genius than for the purity of his religious principles'. 

And I may fitly terminate these remarlis by drawing attention 
to the testimony of Voltaire, a man whom nobody can accuse of 
too much partiality in the matter of religion '. 



' I any 'who presHmts,' becaiiso 
there cannot be an atheist by convic- 
tion. This would mean a man who, 
by making use of the reason which 
he can obtain only from God, con- 
cludes that there is no God ; a coti- 



duBLon which is evidently contradic- 
tory. Only ■ fool, then, can be an 
Blheist. ' Tilt Jhol halh said in his Ittart, 
Thtniatto God.' — Dubois. 

" Espril dts Lois, uiv. a. 

' Traili dt la Tolrranit, luc. 



CHAPTER V 

The Principal Gods of the Hindus.— Brahma.— Vishnu.— Rama.— Krishna. — 
Siva.— The Lingam, — Vigneshwara.— Indra. — The Abodes of Bliss of 
these Different Gods. — Swarga. — Kailasa. — Vmkuntha.— Sattya-hka, 

Surely no one will expect me to relate here the histories 
of all the inferior deities which swarm in Hindu mythology ; 
a mere catalogue of them would fill a large volume; and 
much more numerous still are the strange stories that Hindu 
legends contain about them. Only the gods of the first order, 
di majorum gentium^ can find a place here. Among those of 
the highest rank are first of all Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. 
Sometimes, under the name of the Trimurti^ these three gods 
receive the homage of their devotees in common ; at other times 
each one is the object of particular worship. From these again 
have sprung a multitude of others, whom the Hindus, faithful 
to their practice of exaggeration, reckon up to the astounding 
total of three hundred and thirty millions. I will only refer 
to the most renowned of these, and I believe that my readers 
will thank me for sparing them the greater part of the foolish 
and disgusting details which the people of India attach to these 
gods, and which amount with them to articles of faith. Let us 
begin with the deity occupying the first rank in this extensive 
hierarchy. 

Brahma^ 
According to tradition, Brahma issued originally from a tama- 

* < The more common name for the the universally expanding essence or 

one Spirit is Atman or Paramatman, universally diffused substance of the 

and in the later system, Brahman^ universe. It was thus that the later 

neut. (nom. Brahmfl), derived from creed became not so much monotheis- 

root brih^ ** to expand," and denoting tic (by which I mean the belief in one 



620 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies f pt. m 



rasa^ flower. He was born with five heads; but he outraged 
Parvati, the wife of Siva, and Siva avenged himself by 
striking off one of the heads of the adulterous god in single 
combat. Consequently, Brahma is now represented with only 
four heads, and he is often called tht four-faced god. 

He rides on a swan, and his emblem is a water-lily. His 
own daughter, Sarasvati, is his wife. Having conceived for her 
an incestuous passion, and not daring to satisfy it under the 
human form, he assumed that of a stag, and changed his daughter 
into a hind. It is for having thus violated the laws of nature 
that he has, so they say, neither temple nor worship nor sacri- 
fice. Some Pundits maintain, however, that the feeling of 
indifference evinced towards Brahma is caused by the male- 
diction cast upon him by a certain penitent named Bunumi, 
who, on presenting himself for admission to the Abode of Bliss, 
was received with irreverence by the god. But whatever may 
be the motive, it is an accepted fact that Brahma does not 
anywhere receive public worship. 

They allow him, however, three attributes of high impor- 
tance : for he is (i) the author and creator of all things ; (2) the 
dispenser of all gifts and favours ; (3) the sovereign disposer of 
the destiny of man. 

At the creation of mankind the Brahmins, the most noble 
of all men, sprang from his head, as I have stated elsewhere ; 
the Kshatriyas issued from his shoulders, the Vaisyas from his 
stomach, the Sudras from his feet. This, at any rate, is the 
version most commonly recognized ; but it is denied by some 
authors, who say that Brahma created a first man, who was the 
father of all the rest. Brahma made him first of all with only 



God, regarded as a Personal Being 
external to the universe, though creat- 
ing and governing it) as pantheistic; 
Brahman in the neuter being ** simple 
infinite being '* — the only real eternal 
essence— which, when it passes into 
universal manifested existtncc^ is called 
Brahma, when it manifests itself on 
the earth, is called Vishnu, and when 
it again dissolves itself into simple 
being, is called Siva ; all the other 
innumerable gods and demigods being 
also mere manifestations of the neuter 



Brahman, who alone is eternal. This, 
at any rate, appears to be the genuine 
pantheistic creed of India at the 
present day.'— Monier- Williams. 

* A species of lotus, or water-lily, 
Nymphaea lottis. It is well known 
how greatly this plant, which grows 
extensively in Egypt, in the canals 
that serve to conduct the waters of 
the Nile for watering and fertilizing 
the land, was held in veneration by 
the ancient Egyptians.— Dubois. 



CH. v] Brahma 621 



one foot ; but seeing that he had difficulty in moving about in 
this form, Brahma destroyed his work, and made another with 
three feet : at last, perceiving that this third foot was like a fifth 
wheel to a coach, Brahma began his labour over again, and 
made man with two feet. 

It is through Brahma in his quality of supreme disposer 
that the other gods, the giants, and certain other privileged 
creatures, have obtained the privileges and prerogatives which 
they enjoy. Brahma can even confer immortality, as he has 
done in the case of some famous personages, such as the giants 
Ravana, Hirannya, and several others. 

By reason of the sovereignty which Brahma exercises over 
the destinies of mankind, all men are born with their fates 
written on their foreheads by the hand of the god himself. This 
destiny is absolute and irrevocable. It embraces five principal 
objects, namely, length of life, disposition, intelligence, worldly 
condition, and virtuous or vicious inclination. What Brahma 
has predestined in all these is inevitable and must be strictly 
fulfilled. The Hindus are so fully convinced of this that in all 
adversities and troubles of life they are heard to exclaim : Thus 
was it written on my forehead \ If they are called upon to 
sympathize in the troubles of relative or friend, they never 
omit to utter this consolatory saying : No being can escape that 
which is written on his forehead \ Thus, in all cases where 
a Christian would exclaim with humble resignation, God's will 
be donCy they say with an equal resignation, What is written on 
the forehead must be fulfilled. It is also upon this irrevocable 
and irresistible destiny that Hindus lay the faults and crimes 
committed by them. Instances of this are constantly occurring 
in the European courts of justice now established in the country. 
Thus, when judges ask criminals what has brought them to 
commit the crimes for which they are convicted, they invariably 
respond. Thus it was written on my forehead^ and it was not 
in my power to avoid it \ 

Each man is also endowed with one of the three qualities of 
which mention has been made before, namely, goodness or truth 
{satva\ passion (rajas), ignorance (tamas). Whichever of these 

* This was the excuse offered by tress at the Mazagon Police Court, 
a Hindu who was recently (1896) Bombay, for the sake of her jewels, 
charged with the murder of his mis- — £d. 



622 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 



qualities has fallen to a man's lot is inherent in his being, and 
is in conformity with his deeds in previous existences; it 
influences him in all the actions of his life. 

This doctrine of fate or destiny was recognized in heathen 
antiquity from the earliest times. It was the subject of specu- 
lation among Greek and Roman philosophers ; and, as we all 
know, there are philosophers of modem times who have felt 
no shame in adopting it. However, the wisest of the Greek 
and Roman philosophers correctly gauged the consequences 
of attributing such an influence to destiny, an influence which, 
by depriving men of all liberty, destroys both virtue and 
vice, and constitutes God the Author of all crime. In other 
terms, that is to say, it disturbs the basis of all morality and 
of all religion. 

Vishnu. 

One of the commonest names of Vishnu in the southern 
part of the Peninsula is Perumal. His devotees are fond of 
invoking him under the name of Narayana ; and he has a 
thousand other names, of which the Brahmins have composed 
a species of litany which they call Hart-sntarana. 

1 have said elsewhere, concerning the worship rendered to 
Vishnu, that the sign of the namam, which his followers trace 
on their forehead, is the distinctive symbol of that worship. 
His cult is more general than that of Siva, especially among the 
Brahmins, whose favourite god appears to be Vishnu. 

He is represented with four arms, and hence is sometimes 
named ih^ four-armed god. The bird ^ar^^a is his vehicle. He 
bears the title of redeemer and preserver of all that exists. The 
other gods, not excepting Brahma himself, have often had need 
of his help in escaping from perils which threatened them. In 
his quality of preserver he has found himself obliged to take 
different forms, which the Hindus designate under the name of 
Avatars (incarnations). Of these they count ten principal 
ones, the nomenclature of which is contained in the following 
verses : — 

Adau matsyas tatah kurma Varahascha param tatak 
Narasintha maha saktir vantanascha purant tatah 
Ramascha Bataramascha parasttstadanantarafn 
KalkirupasLha baudhascho hyavatara dasa sntitah. 



CH. v] Vishnu's Avatars 623 

1. Matsya-avatar^ in the form of a fish ; 

2. Varahaavatar, in the form of a pig ; 

3. Kurma-avaiar, in the form of a tortoise ; 

4. Narasimha-avaiar, in the form of a monster, half man and 
half lion. 

5. Vamana-avatarf in the form of a Brahmin dwarf, named 
Vamana ; 

.6. Parasurama-avatar, in the form of Parasurama ; 

7. Rama-avatar, in the form of the famous hero known as 
Rama ; 

8. In the form of Bala-rama ; 

9. Bouddha-avatar, in the form of Buddha ; 

10. Ka/ki-avaiar, in the form of a horse. 

There is yet another famous incarnation, which is that of 
Vishnu in the person of Krishna, without counting many 
others ; and all these, if 1 am not mistaken, originally possessed 
an allegorical meaning, the object being to prove the all- 
pervading presence of the divinity. For instance, one reads 
in the Bhagavata : 

One day, the penitent Arjuna having invoked Vishnu with 
fervour and devotion, and having prayed him to reveal him- 
self to him, this powerful god, who has deigned to manifest 
himself to man under all kinds of forms, answered him thus : 
* These, Arjuna, are the forms in which thou must above all 
invoke me, acknowledging them as part of my divine essence : — 

' In prayer, I am the Gayatri, 

* In speech, I am the word Aunt, 
'Among the gods, I am Indra, 

* Among the stars, I am the Sun. 
'Among the hills, I am Mount Meru, 
' Among the Rudras, I am Sankara. 

* Among the rich, I am Kubhera. 
' Among the elements, I am Fire. 

* Among the purohitas, I am Bruhaspati, 
'Among the generals of armies, I am Kartika. 
' Among the penitents, I am Bhrigu. 
'Among the sages, 1 am Kapila-Munu 

' Among the Gandharvas, 1 am Chitrarata. 
' Among the weapons, I am the Thunderbolt. 
' Among the birds, I am the Garuda. 



624 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. nr 



'Among the elephants, I am Airavata, 

* Among the cows, I am Surabhi, 

* Among the monkeys, I am Hanuman, 

* Among the serpents, I am Ananta, 

* Among the waters, I am the Sea. 

* Among the rivers, 1 am the Ganges, 
' Among the trees, I am the Aswatta, 

* Among the shrubs, I am the Tulast, 
'Among the grasses, I am the Darbha. 

' Among the stones, I am the Salagranta, 

' Among the giants, I am Prahlada. 

' Among the months, I am Margastrsha, 

* Among the learned books, I am the Santa- Veda, 

*In short, I am the spirit of all that exists ; I permeate the 
universe/ 

The Kalki-avataTy or horse incarnation, has not yet occurred, 
but it is expected, although the time and place where it will 
happen are not known. It will put an end to the kingdom of sin, 
which began with the Kali-yuga, 

Vishnu will then appear in the form of a horse ; he will be 
of gigantic stature ; he will be armed with a huge axe; his voice 
will resemble the rolling of thunder, the noise of which will 
spread terror everywhere. First he will destroy all kings, then 
all other men. Finally, seeing that his father and mother are 
but sinners like the rest of mankind, he will sacrifice them also 
to appease his anger. After this a New Age will begin, when 
virtue and happiness will reign on the earth. 

If one may believe certain learned Brahmins whom I have 
had an opportunity of consulting on this subject, it would appear 
that the incarnation of Buddha has also not yet taken place. 
It ought to have occurred at the beginning of the Kali-yuga 
in the country called Kitoki. This Buddha will preach pure 
atheism to mankind : he will lead even the gods themselves into 
sin and error. In these unhappy times Sudras will be seen 
wearing red cloths, a colour which is only meet for Brahmins, 
and acquiring knowledge, the Vedas not excepted. So little 
virtue will then be practised on the earth that what there is will 
not suffice to render man happy in this world or the next. The 
Brahmins will no longer fulfil the duties of their calling, will hold 
in no esteem the rules concerning defilement and cleanliness. 



CH. v] Rama 625 

Children will no longer obey their parents ; there will be no 
more caste distinctions ; even kings will practise all that is most 
vile and contemptible among men. Earth itself and the other 
elements will feel the effects of the universal disorder which will 
then prevail in nature ; the former will lose, at any rate partially, 
its fertility ; little rain will fall from the clouds ; the cows will 
yield but little milk, and that, moreover, will not be fit for 
making butter. 

In the opinion of most Brahmins, however, the Avatar in 
question has already taken place. They cannot exactly fix its 
date, but they maintain that it is this Avatar which put an end 
to the bloody sacrifices formerly in vogue. 

It is probable the same epoch witnessed the establishment of 
Buddhism, which prevails throughout the greater part of Asia, 
but has been almost entirely destroyed by the Brahmins in India. 
Be this as it may, it is certain that under this Avatar the 
Brahmins render no homage to Buddha or to Vishnu. 

I must mention in conclusion the famous incarnation of 
Vishnu in the person of Rama, which forms the subject of the 
celebrated epic poem known as the Ramayana, the most famous 
of all Indian books, and read by persons of all castes. 

Rama. 

Rama, or the incarnation of Vishnu under this name, was the 
son of Dasaradha, King of Ayodhya or Ayodhi * ; his mother 
was Kousalya. He spent the first years of his life in the jungles 
under the guidance of the penitent Gautama*. It was there 
that, touching with his feet Ahalya, who had previously been 
turned into stone by a penitent's curse •, he restored her to life 
and to her original form. 

Subsequently he went to the court of Janaka, King of Mithila. 
This prince, having witnessed several of his deeds of prowess, 
proposed to him that he should break the bow of Siva, which 
until then none of the kings of the earth had been able to 
do. Rama accomplished this task with ease, and won Sita, 

^ Ayodhya literally means 'uncon- ' It was Gautama, the husband oi 

querable.' — Ed. Ahalya, who was the penitent in this 

" The name of the penitent is not case. — Ed. 
Gautama, but Viswamitra.— Ed. 

** S S 



626 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

daughter of the King of Mithila, as the reward of his strength 
and valour. Hardly had the marriage been celebrated when 
Rama's father recalled him, and entrusted him with the reins of 
government. After returning to his paternal home he was one 
day practising with his bow, and shot an arrow with such force 
that its twang as it left the bow caused an abortion in a Brah- 
min woman who was present. The husband, in a transport 
of rage, uttered this curse : — ' May Rama henceforth possess 
no more knowledge than the rest of men ! ' The curse had its 
effect, and from that time Rama was deprived of the divine 
knowledge inherent in him. Shortly after this event, Kaikeyi, 
the fourth wife of Dasaradha, earnestly desiring to obtain the 
crown for her own son, visited Rama and implored him with 
the most urgent entreaties to forgo his claims. This Rama 
consented to do, and after abdicating he retired once more into 
the jungles, accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and his 
wife Sita. 

One day, while Rama was afar off in the forests, Lakshmana 
cut off the ears of Surpanakha, sister of the ten- headed giant 
Ravana, King of Lankah (Ceylon), who, indignant at the insult 
offered to his sister, avenged himself by carrying off Sita. Rama, 
learning on his return of the misfortune which had befallen him 
in his absence, was prostrated with grief, and could think of 
nothing but the means of rescuing his beloved Sita from the 
clutches of her ravisher. In order to succeed in his design, he 
began by making an alliance with Sugriva*, king of the monkeys, 
to whom he rendered great service by killing Vali, his brother, 
who had long contested the empire with him and was then in 
possession of it. 

Impatient for news of his wife, Rama determined to send 
some one to Lankah without further delay, to obtain information. 
The undertaking was not easy, as there was an arm of the sea to 
cross. But Hanuman, son of the Wind and commander-in- 
chief of the army of monkeys, whom Sugriva had sent to help 
his ally Rama, was endowed with extraordinary agility, which 
seemed to render him the most appropriate person for such an 
embassy. He was therefore appointed to the task. He started, 
crossed the straits, walking dry-shod over the surface of the 
waters, and arrived at Lankah. After a long and unsuccessful 

^ Sugriva literally means ' beautiful necked/ — £d. 



cH. v] The Story of Rama 627 

search, Hanuman at last discovered Sita sitting in a solitary 
spot under a shady tree, plunged in the deepest grief, and 
watering the ground with her tears, while her sobs alternated 
with curses at her sad fate. At one time she would load Ravana 
with maledictions, at another she would utter the most poignant 
regrets at the separation from her beloved Rama, to whom 
she swore inviolable fidelity, whatever efforts her treacherous 
ravisher might employ to seduce her. 

Hanuman hurried back and told Rama all he had seen and 
heard. Rama at once conceived the idea of constructing a dam 
across the straits to make a passage for his army. The monkey 
Hanuman, entrusted with this great undertaking, set to work to 
uproot mountains and rocks. At each journey to the straits he 
carried as many stones as he had hairs on his body, and piling 
them up on one another, had soon achieved his task of joining 
the island of Lankah to the continent. 

Rama, however, thinking himself hardly strong enough to 
attack his formidable enemy with the army of monkeys, formed 
a second army of bears, and with this reinforcement he prepared 
to cross the straits. Before setting out he placed a lingam on 
the dam, and offered a solemn sacrifice to it. Then, turning 
towards his armies of bears and monkeys, he addressed them as 
follows : — 

' Brave soldiers, do not let yourselves be frightened by the 
giants against whom you are to wage war; their strength is 
useless, since the gods are not on their side. Let us advance, 
then, without fear and without delay. We march to certain 
victory, since we go to fight the enemies of the gods.* 

At these words the whole force moved forward, crossed the 
straits, invaded Lankah, engaged in several battles with 
the giant Ravana, and after many vicissitudes of victory and 
defeat at last gained the upper hand for Rama. Ravana was 
vanquished and killed; and Sita, the cause of this terrible war, 
was rescued and carried off in triumph to her own country of 
Ayodhya. 

On leaving Lankah, Rama placed on the vacant throne 
Vibhishana, Ravana's eldest brother \ in recognition of the great 
services which he had rendered during the war, and before 

^ Vibhishana was a younger brother of Ravana. He was a noble-minded 
rakshasa, or giant, unlike the other giants. — £d. 

S S 2 




departirig promised he should wear the crown as long as the 
world lasted, that is, as long as the name of Rama should 

exist. 

Some time after his return to Ayodhya, Rama, having one 
night left his palace in disguise to find out what was doing in 
the city, overheard at a street corner some words uttered by 
a washerman quarrelling with his wife, of whose faithfulness he 
seemed to have conceived strong suspicions. In his anger the 
washerman declared that he would drive her from his house, 
telling her that he was not the man to keep a wife— as Rama did 
— who had been in the power of another. These words fell like 
a thunderbolt on Rama, who, full of rage and grief, hastened 
back to his palace. He at once sent for his brother Lakshmana. 
told him what he had heard, and ordered him to seize Sita, take 
her far away into the Jungles, and put her to death. 

Lakshmana immediately set about execudng his brother's 
orders. However, as Sita was far advanced in pregnancy, he 
had scruples about killing her in this condition, and resolved 
to save her life. The difficulty was to invent some stratagem in 
order to persuade Rama that he had executed the task entrusted 
to him. Now it happened that in the jungles to which Sita 
had been taken there were several trees which, as soon as an 
incision was made in the bark, emitted a juice the colour of 
blood. Lakshmana accordingly bent his bow, and taking the 
arrow which had been destined to pierce Sita's heart, shot it 
into one of these trees, staining it with the juice, and then 
abandoned Sita to her unhappy fate. He at once returned 
and announced to Rama that his vengeance had been satisfied, 
and for proof of it showed him the arrow stained with Sita's 
blood ■. 

Alone and abandoned in this deserted place, poor Sita pro- 
claimed her despair in mournful cries and torrents of tears. It 
happened that Vasishta the penitent had made his dwelling- 
place not far off'. Attracted by the weeping and wailing which 
struck his ear, he approached Sita, and asked her who she was 
and what was the cause of her trouble. The unfortunate woman 

' In memory of this evenl it is cus- country and there shoot otT arrows.— 

lomary on the last day of the military Dubois. 

feast of the Dasara for princes to go * It was riot Vasishta, but Valmiki, 

with great ceremony into the open the author of the Ramayana. — Ee 



cH. v] The Story of Rama 629 

thereupon stopped her sobs, and, assuming an air of dignity 
which filled the penitent with respectful fear, answered him 
thus : ' I am Sita ! The king Janaka is my father, the Earth 
is my mother, and Rama is my husband.' 

At these words the penitent, filled with the most profound 
feelings of veneration, prostrated himself before the goddess ; 
then, rising and clasping his hands, he said to her — 

' Illustrious goddess, why give yourself up thus to grief and 
despair? Have you forgotten that you are the queen and 
mistress of the world, and that on you the salvation of all 
creatures depends?' 

He spoke a few more words of consolation, and then led her 
to his hermitage, where he offered sacrifices to her. 

A few days afterwards Sita brought forth twins, which the 
penitent Vasishta * reared with as much care as if they had been 
his own children. 

Now it came to pass subsequently that Rama resolved to 
perform the great sacrifice of yagnatn^ and let loose the horse 
which was intended for the victim. The animal, after passing 
through many countries, came to the place where the two sons 
of Sita dwelt ; and they, full of strength and courage, though at 
that time only five years of age, intercepted and stopped him. 

The monkey Hanuman, general of Rama's armies, was 
accordingly sent with a considerable force to fight against the 
sons of Sita and to recover the horse; but Hanuman was 
vanquished by them, and compelled to seek safety in flight. 

Rama, at the news of this disaster, placed himself at the 
head of his whole forces, and went in person to attack his new 
enemies. But he in his turn was defeated by the sons of Sita, 
and he and his soldiers were cut to pieces, not one escaping. 
Vasishta ' was informed of this occurrence, and proceeded to 
the field of battle, which he found literally strewn with the dead. 
Touched with compassion for Rama and his troops, he pro- 
nounced over them the maniram which restores life, and raised 
them all from the dead. 

Rama returned home, and determined to perform once more 
the great sacrifice of the yagnam, to which he invited all the 
neighbouring kings and all the illustrious Brahmins of the 
country. But the latter, on being consulted as to the best 

^ See note a on p. 6a8. 



630 Hindu Manners, Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

means of making the sacrifice complete, answered that it could 
not be so unless Rama's wife was beside him. After raising 
many difficulties, Rama at last consented to recall her, and to 
all appearances gave her a hearty welcome. Consequently 
the sacrifice of the horse was a complete success. But Rama 
thereupon wished to repudiate his wife anew, and to send her 
back to the jungles. All the kings present interceded in her 
behalf. Still Rama would not yield to their entreaties, except 
on the condition that she proved, by subjecting herself to the 
ordeal of fire, that her virtue had not suffered any taint. 

Sita, conscious of her innocence, issued from the ordeal with 
honour and glory, and from many others not less searching; 
yet, in spite of all, she could not cure her husband of his odious 
suspicions and unjust jealousy. 

Overwhelmed at last with confusion and shame, she burst 
into a flood of tears, and in the extremity of her despair she 
addressed the following prayer to her mother : — 

* O Earth ! thou to whom I owe my existence, justify me this 
day in the sight of the universe ; and if it is true that I have 
never ceased to be a virtuous woman, accord me an indisputable 
proof of my chastity by opening thyself under my feet and 
swallowing me up I ' 

No sooner had she uttered these words than the Earth, in 
response to her prayer, opened and swallowed her up alive 
within her bosom. 

Rama did not tarry long before following his spouse. Having 
divided his kingdom between his two sons, he retired to the 
banks of the Ganges, where he lived for some time in retire- 
ment and penance, and then closed his mortal career. 

Krishna. 

The history of Krishna, or of Vishnu under this name, is 
told in many Puranas. The eighteenth, the Bhagavata, deals 
with him almost exclusively. I will give a very short analysis 
of this. 

In the Jambu-Dwipa is a country called Bharata-Varsha. In 
this country is Brinda- Fana, or paradise of Krishna, which is 
the supreme paradise, where untold delights are to be enjoyed. 
It is larger than Swarga, and the beauty of it is beyond all 
description. 



CH. v] The Story of Krishna 631 

It is inhabited by an infinite number of shepherds, the chief 
of whom is Nanda, Krishna's foster-father. On the north of 
Brinda- Vana is the town of Mathura *, where Ugrasena reigned. 
He was expelled from his kingdom by his son Kamsa, who 
seized the throne and indulged for a long while in innumerable 
acts of injustice and unheard-of cruelty. 

The Earth, unable to bear this tyrant's violence any longer, 
took the form of a cow, went in search of the four-faced 
Brahma, and having done him homage, spoke as follows : — 

' O Creator of all things, it is to you that I owe my being ; it 
is your duty therefore to protect me. The king Kamsa, who 
has given himself up altogether to sin, holds me in the most 
cruel oppression. I can bear his tyranny no longer. This 
wicked man is your creature. Therefore issue orders to him 
and forbid his injuring me further.* 

Brahma, angered at this report, went with the supplicant to 
Siva, and told him what he had learnt. All these next went 
together to Vishnu, the Supreme Being; and after they had 
offered their respectful salutations, the cow — that is, the Earth 
still in this form — spoke thus : — 

'Great god, you always listen graciously to the prayers 
addressed to you. I come, then, in my unhappiness to implore 
your protection. Kamsa, the cruel Kamsa, is committing the 
most unheard-of cruelties against me. I prostrate myself at 
your feet, and beg of you to put an end to them by slaying 
this evildoer.' 

After listening to these complaints, Vishnu asked Brahma 
whether he had not formerly granted some special favour to 
this Kamsa, and what was its nature. 

' The favour which I granted him,' answered Brahma, ' is that 
he can only be deprived of life by his own nephew. Enter, 
therefore, into the womb of Devaki, his sister ; for there is no 
other way of getting rid of this tyrant.' 

So Vishnu followed Brahma's advice, and became incarnate 
in the womb of Devaki, sister of Kamsa and wife of Vassu- 
Deva, one of the most celebrated merchants of the country. 

Kamsa, on learning all that was going on, placed guards and 
spies everywhere, thrust Vassu-Deva and his wife into close 
confinement, and loaded them with fetters. However, Devaki 

' The modern Muttra. — £o. 



632 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [?■ 

was not long in giving birth to Krishna, and the day of his birth 
was the eighth of the moon of the month Badra 'September) '. 
Being informed that Kamsa had resolved to kill the child, 
Devaki managed to escape the vigilance of the guards and had 
him secretly carried away into the town of Gokulam. 

At the same time Yasoda, wife of the shepherd Nanda, had 
given birth to a daughter. To prevent this cruel design of 
Kamsa, the two children were interchanged. Yasoda, who had 
sunk into a deep slumber during the birth of her child, had 
been unable to ascertain whether she had given birth to a boy 
or a girl ; she did not therefore detect the substitution, and 
always looked upon Krishna as her own son. 

As soon as the tyrant Kamsa had learnt of his sister's safe 
delivery, he ordered the child to be brought to him that it 
might be put to death. But the child, an incarnation of the 
Supreme Being, was already in safety at Gokulam, in the house 
of the shepherd Nanda. Kamsa wished, but in vain, to vent 
his rage on the little girl, who was no less than the Supreme 
Being himself, under the name of Badra-Kali, whose adventures 
are to be found written in the history of the goddesses. 

Little Krishna spent his earlier years in games and amuse- 
ments suitable to his age. His ordinary pastime was to steal 
railk and butter, which he divided afterwards with his friends 
the shepherdesses. His youth was thus spent in the midst of 
a pastoral life, and he is often represented playing on a flute, 
the favourite instrument of shepherds. 

On reaching manhood he gave himself up entirely to a life of 
dissipation and most unbridled debauchery. He did not even 
respect the virtue of his sisters or of his own mother. He 
carried them all off by force, and treated them as if they had 
been his legitimate wives. 

In the meanwhile he declared war against the tyrant Kamsa, 
his uncle, routed and slew him, and gave back the crown to 
Ugrasena. 

Having resolved to marry, he carried off the maiden Rukmani 
and very many other virtuous girls. The number of his wives 
iimounted to sixteen thousand, and they bore him a prodigious 
number of children. 

' It was the pionth ai Srmmaa (eighth day after full moon), not the month 
dI Badra, — Ed. 



CH. v] The Story of Krishna 633 

He waged several wars against Vacharada, against the king 
Banasura, and even against Siva himself, who had sided with 
the latter monarch. It was Aniruddha, Krishna's son, who 
caused the dispute between his father and Banasura, whose 
daughter Balaramma^ he (Aniruddha) had attempted to carry 
off. The ravisher was kept prisoner for a long time, and was 
only given back to his father after several long and bloody 
battles. Krishna, after rescuing his son, began to build in the 
middle of the sea the town called Dwaraka, and took his 
innumerable family thither. 

At length, having seen all his children die before his eyes, 
he himself paid tribute to nature. The victim of a curse, which 
a penitent in his wrath had pronounced against him, he fell 
pierced by a huntsman's arrow. 

The following are some of the principal blessings which the 
world gained from this incarnation of Vishnu in the person of 
Krishna:— 

He put to death Poothana, a woman celebrated for her 
extraordinary size, strength, and ferocity. 

He effaced from the earth a great number of giants. 

He uprooted two trees of such tremendous size that they 
covered one-half of the earth with their shade. 

He chastised the serpent Kaliya. 

He suspended a mountain in the air to serve as an umbrella 
for forty thousand shepherds who had been overtaken by a 
storm '. 

Besides all this, he cut to pieces Kamsa and all his followers. 

However, this is enough about the incarnations of Vishnu. 
Others before me have spoken at great length about him. I will 
merely repeat that, judging by the outward worship paid to him, 
this god must be considered as disputing the highest rank with 
Brahma; and in fact many Hindu pundits look upon Brahma 
merely as the chief of the inferior gods. 

To Vishnu are attributed five weapons called by the common 
name of panchayuda. But the two principal ones are the 
sankha, which he holds in his left hand, and the chakra, which 
he holds in his right. 

' The daughter*s name was Usha. — £o. 

^ The mountain on that account was called * Govardhanagiri.*— £o. 



634 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

Siva. 

This god is also called Ishwara, Rudra, Sadasiva, Mahadeva, 
Parameswara, and a host of other names. He is represented 
under a horrible form, in allusion no doubt to the power which 
he possesses of destroying everything. He is made to appear 
still more frightful by having his body covered with ashes. His 
long hair is plaited in a strange manner ; his eyes of huge size 
make him appear to be in a constant state of fury. Instead of 
jewels his ears are adorned with snakes, which are likewise 
twined round his body. There are some colossal idols repre- 
senting Siva which are calculated to inspire genuine terror. 

The principal attitude of this god, as I have already mentioned 
more than once, is the power of destruction. Some Hindu 
authors attribute to him also the power of creation. 

His vehicle is a bull, and his principal weapon is the trident 
or trisula. 

The history of Siva, like that of the other Hindu deities, is 
a tissue of the most extravagant fables. It consists of endless 
wars waged by him against the giants, of his hatred and 
jealousy towards the other gods, and, above all, of his shameless 
intrigues. 

In one of his wars, wishing by an unexpected attack to accom- 
plish the ruin of all his enemies, the giants, and to take posses- 
sion of the tripuram in which they had entrenched themselves, 
he split the earth into two equal parts, and took one-half as 
a weapon. He made Brahma the general of his army ; the four 
Vedas served him for horses. Vishnu was used as an arrow, 
while Mandra Parvata served as a bow. In place of a bow-string 
he tied to his bow a monstrous serpent. With this formidable 
equipment Siva led his army against the enemies of the gods, 
took from them the three fortresses which they had constructed, 
and exterminated them all without sparing a single one. 

Siva had much trouble in finding a wife; but having done 
a long and austere penance in the deserts bordering on Mandra 
Parvata, Parvata was so touched that he finally consented to 
give him in marriage his daughter Parvati. 

The Lingam. 

The tingam, an object of deep veneration throughout India, is 
the symbol of Siva, and it is under this obscene form that the 



cH. v] The Lingam 635 

god is principally honoured. I have described elsewhere what 
this infamous figure represents. One finds in several Puranas 
details of the origin of the superstitious worship of which it is 
the object. However much these details may vary, as to the 
main point the story is everjnvhere the same. Here, in abridged 
form, is what the Linga-purana says: — Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Vasishta, accompanied by a numerous following of illustrious 
penitents, went one day to Kailasa (the paradise of Siva) to 
pay a visit to the god, and surprised him in the act of inter- 
course with his wife. He was not in the least disconcerted by 
the presence of the illustrious visitors, and so far from showing 
any shame at being discovered in such a position, continued to 
indulge in the gratification of his sensual desires. 

The fact was that the shameless god was greatly excited by 
the intoxicating liquors which he had drunk, and with his 
reason obscured by passion and drunkenness, he was no longer 
in a state to appreciate the indecency of his conduct. 

At sight of him some of the gods, and especially Vishnu, 
began to laugh; while the rest displayed great indignation and 
anger, and loaded the shameless Siva with insults and curses. 

They said to him, ' Behold, thou art but a devil, thou art 
worse even than a devil I thou hast the form of one, and dost 
possess all the wickedness I We came here in a spirit of friend- 
liness to pay thee a visit, and thou dost not blush to make us 
spectators of thy brutal sensuality 1 Be accursed I Let no 
virtuous person from henceforth have any dealings with thee I 
Let all those who approach thee be regarded as brutes, and be 
banished from the society of honest folk I ' 

After pronouncing these curses, the gods and the penitents 
retired, covered with shame. 

When Siva had recovered his senses a little, he asked his 
guards who it was that had come to visit him. They told him 
everything that had taken place, and described to him the angry 
attitude that his illustrious friends had assumed. 

The words of the guards fell on Siva and his wife Durga like 
a clap of thunder, and they both died of grief in the same 
position in which the gods and the penitents had surprised 
them. Siva desired that the act which had covered him with 
shame, and which had been the cause of his death, should be 
celebrated among mankind. 



636 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

* My shame/ said he, 'has killed me ; but it has also given me 
new life, and a new shape, which is that of the lingatn! You, 
evil spirits, my subjects, regard it as my double self I Yes, the 
lingam is I myself, and I ordain that men shall offer to it hence- 
forth their sacrifices and worship. Those who honour me under 
the symbol of the lingam shall obtain, without fail, the object 
of all their desires, and a place in Kailasa. I am the Supreme 
Being, and so is my lingam. To render to it the honours 
due to a god is an action of the highest merit. The margosa- 
tree is, of all trees, the one I love the best. If any one 
wish to obtain my favours, he must offer me the leaves, the 
flowers, and the fruit thereof. Hear once more, evil spirits, 
my subjects. Those who fast on the fourteenth day of the 
moon of the month Makha (February) in honour of my lingam^ 
and those who, on the following night, do puja, and present 
to me leaves of the margosa-tree, shall be certain of a place 
in Kailasa^, 

' Hear yet again, evil spirits, my subjects. If you desire to 
become virtuous, learn what are the benefits to be derived from 
honour rendered to my lingam. Those who make images of it 
with earth or cow-dung, or do puja to it under this form, shall 
be rewarded ; those who make it in stone shall receive seven 
times more reward, and shall never behold the Prince of Dark- 
ness ; those who make it in silver shall receive seven times more 
reward than the last named; and those who make it in gold 
shall be seven times more meritorious still. 

' Let my priests go and teach these truths to men, and compel 
them to embrace the worship of my lingam I The lingam is 
Siva himself; it is white; it has three eyes and five faces; it is 
arrayed in a tiger's skin. It existed before the world, and it is 
the origin and the beginning of all beings. It disperses our 
terrors and our fears, and grants us the object of all our desires.' 

It is incredible, it is impossible to believe, that in inventing 
this vile superstition the religious teachers of India intended 
that the people should render direct worship to objects the very 
names of which, among civilized nations, are an insult to 
decency. Without any doubt the obscene symbol contained an 
allegorical meaning, and was a type, in the first instance, of the 

' It is the bilva {Aeglt Marmelos), not the margosay which is sacred to Siva. 
— Ed. 



cH. v] Vigneshwara 637 

reproductive forces of nature, the generative source of all living 
beings. For the rest, the lingam offers an incontestable analogy 
to the priapus of the Romans and the phallus of the Egyptians. 
The fact is, all the founders of false religions had need to appeal 
to the baser senses, and to flatter the passions of their proselytes 
in order to attract them to their foolish doctrines and blind 
them to their impostures. 

What I have just said about the lingam applies also to the 
namam \ another emblematic and not less abominable symbol, 
which is not unlike the Baal-peor or Belphegor of the Moabites. 

One sees figures of the lingam, not only in the temples dedi- 
cated to Siva, but also on the high-roads, in public places, and 
other frequented spots. 

Vigneshwara. 

This divinity bears also the names of Ganesa, Pillayar, 
Vinayaka, &c. He is venerated by Hindus of all sects, and 
his cult is universal. One comes across his idol everywhere — 
in temples, schools, chuttrams, public places, forts, on the high- 
roads, near wells, fountains, tanks ; in short, in all frequented 
places. It is taken into houses, and in all public ceremonies 
Ganesa is always the first god to be worshipped. He is, as I 
have said before, and as his name implies, the god of obstacles, 
and by reason of this a Hindu begins every serious undertaking 
by seeking to propitiate him. 

He is represented under a hideous form, with an elephant's 
head, an enormous stomach, and disproportioned limbs, and 
with a rat at his feet. Siva was his father, and Badra-Kali, or 
Durga, his mother. He is said to have given himself up entirely 
to a life of meditation, and to have never married. 

The first time that his mother Badra-Kali saw him, she 
reduced his head to ashes by the brilliancy of her look. Siva, 
on learning this misfortune, and being sorely grieved at having 
a son without a head, considered earnestly how he might pro- 
vide him with this eminently useful member. With this intent 
he sent his servants with orders to cut off* the head of the first 
living creature they met sleeping with the face turned towards 
the north, and to bring it to him. An elephant happened to be 
the first creature they perceived in this position, and following 

1 Part I, Chapter IX. 



638 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 



Siva's instructions they cut off the animal's head, and hurried 
back with it to their master. Siva took it and fitted it on his 
son's neck, and since then Ganesa has preserved the shape 
under which he is still represented. 

The elephant's head, and also the rat, are probably emblems 
of the prudence, sagacity, and forethought which the Hindus 
attribute to this divinity. 

Indra, or Devendra. 

Indra is the king of the gods of the second rank, who live 
with him in Swarga, He is the son of Kasyapa and Aditi. The 
inferior gods and the virtuous persons who inhabit his happy 
domains are without number. 

To make them happy Indra distributes antrita (nectar) to 
them, and allows them to enjoy all the pleasures of the senses, 
to which he also gives himself up without restraint ; there is no 
kind of sensual enjoyment that cannot be indulged in, without 
satiety, in Swarga. 

Indra's vehicle is an elephant, and his weapon the vajra, 
a kind of sharp knife. Lightning is also his weapon in his 
wars against the giants. 

The Ashta-Dik-Palakas. 

Indra occupies the first rank among the eight Dik-Palakas, 
who preside over and guard the eight principal divisions of the 
world. The following table will explain all that is interesting 
about these divinities, who are placed by the Hindus after the 
gods of the first rank : — 





Position of 




•iheir 
weapons >. 


Colour of 


Names. 


their 
kingdoms. 


Their chargers. 


their 
garments. 


Indra . . . 


East . . . 


An elephant . 


The vajra . . 


Red 


Agni . . . 


South-east . 


A ram . , . 


The sakH , . 


Violet 


Yama . . 


South . . . 


A buffalo . . 


The dauda . . 


Orange 


Neiruta . . 


South-west . 


A man . . . 


The kunia , . 


Dark yellow 


Varuna . . 


VSTest . . . 


A crocodile 


The pcisa , . 


White 


Vayu . . . 


North-west . 


An antelope . 


The dwaja . . 


Blue 


Kubera . . 


North . . . 


A horse . . . 


The khadga . 


Pink 


Isana . . . 


North-east . 


Ahull . . . 


The insula 


Grey 



' The names of these weapons can- particular shape, and in no way re* 
not be translated into any European sembles any of ours. — Dubois. 
language ; each one of them has a 



CH. v] Abodes of Bliss 639 

Those who seek for analogies between the gods of India and 
those of Greece may remark certain striking similarities. Like 
the Greek gods, each Hindu god has a particular weapon, and 
also a particular animal sacred to him. 

Abodes of Bliss. 

There are four Abodes of Bliss : Swarga, Kailasa, Vaikuniha, 
and Sattya4oka. The first is Indra's paradise, the second Siva's, 
the third Vishnu's, and the fourth Brahma's. 

In describing these pleasant retreats, the Hindu books repre- 
sent Mount Maha-Meru, on the slopes of which they are 
situated, as being in the form of a cone, convoluted like a snail's 
shell and divided into stages. On the first, on the north side, 
is Swarga, Indra's paradise ; to the left, on the east side and 
at the next stage, is Kailasa, Siva's paradise ; at a still higher 
stage, on the south side, is Vaikuntha, Vishnu's paradise ; 
and, finally, on the summit of the mountain is Sattya-loka, 
Brahma's paradise. 

SWARGA. 

Indra's paradise is inhabited by the gods of the second rank, 
who are all children of Kasyapa, and of his first wife Aditi. 
The palace of Indra, their eldest son, and king of this realm of 
delight, is in the centre, sparkling with gold and precious stones. 
There is also another palace of equal splendour for Sati, his 
wife, Puloma's daughter. Their son is Jayanta. In this para- 
dise grows the famous kalpa-tree, the golden fruit of which 
has an exquisite flavour; and there also is the cow Kama- 
dhenu, which gives delicious milk. This fruit and milk form 
the nourishment of the gods. 

The kalpa-irte^ and Katnadhenu the cow are held in high 
esteem by the Hindus, and are referred to on almost every page 
of their books. This tree of life of the Hindus, and their Swarga 
itself, may well be but a gross imitation of the arbor vitae and of 
the earthly paradise of Genesis. Be this as it may, however, 
the kalpa tree, which grows to the height of ten yojanas, has the 
power of satisfying all the desires of men who put their trust in 
it. As for Katnadhenu the cow, she is not less prodigal of her 
bounties, and can, among other things, grant milk and butter 
in abundance to anybody who invokes her with sincere faith 



640 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

and devotion. Many other trees are to be found in Swarga, 
while the limpid waters of many rivers meander there in all 
directions, the principal one being the Mandakini% The eyes of 
the inhabitants of this happy abode are refreshed by the rhyth- 
mical and voluptuous movements of throngs of dancing-girls ; 
while the sweet notes of the vtna and kanohra\ which the 
Gandharvas, famous musicians, play in accompaniment to their 
melodious songs, charm the ear without ceasing. Innumerable 
courtesans, too, are always ready to satisfy the passions which 
they excite. Bruhaspati performs the office of guru to the gods 
in Swarga, and explains the Vedas to them. Finally, strangely 
enough, two duly appointed physicians are to be found there, 
Chonata and Kumara*. The Ashta-Dik-Palakas, mentioned 
above, hold the first rank, as is natural, among the inhabitants 
of this Abode of Bliss. The nine planets also have their abode 
there, and it is from thence that they shine upon us. The seven 
famous penitents, or munis, and an infinite number of other 
saints are the habitual guests of Indra. 

Entrance to Swarga is granted to all virtuous persons, without 
exception, of whatever rank or caste, provided they have attained 
on earth the required degree of sanctity. 

Kailasa. 

Above Swarga is a city constructed on a triangular plan. It 
is called Kailasa, and sometimes Parvata (mountain). It is a 
charming place. Siva rules over it, and it is here that he resides 
with his wife Parvati. They are both depicted as giving them- 
selves up continually to carnal pleasures. Ganesa and Kartika 
are their sons, both of whom are endowed with extraordinary 
strength. Ganesa, the elder, devotes himself exclusively to 
meditation ; Kartika cares for nothing but weapons, and thinks 
of nothing but war. 

Siva's courtiers are a band of evil spirits, of whom Nandi is 
the chief. His lieutenants are Bringi, Bhima, and Kadurgita, 
all of whom have terrible countenances. 

* We cannot trace this word. The here. Apparently he refers to the 

Abbe probably means the Tamil Kin^ twins Asvini Kumaras, divine phy- 

naram. — Ed. sicians. — Ed. 

^ The Abb^ has made a mistake 



CH. v] Vaikuntha 641 

Bhairava, Bhima, and Darshana are charged with the care 
of the city, which is peopled with various kinds of evil spirits, 
horrible to behold, which spread terror everywhere. They 
go about naked, and are continually drinking, quarrelling, and 
fighting. 

Siva, who consumes intoxicating liquors only, is always 
drunk. He abandons himself to unlimited and shameless 
excesses of sensuality. He is clothed in a tiger's skin covered 
with ashes, and his body is entwined with serpents. Seated on 
his ox, he rides occasionally on the neighbouring mountains with 
his wife Parvati. The demons who form their escort utter 
piercing cries, terminating with a shriek like kill kill and it is 
from this that Kailasa takes its name. The paradise of Kailasa 
is reserved for the followers of Siva, the worshippers of the 
disgusting lingam, 

Vaikuntha. 

Vaikuntha is the paradise of Vishnu, reserved for those who 
are specially devoted to the worship of this god. It is above 
Kailasa^ and occupies a most charming site; hence the name 
Vaikuntha^ signifying ' Pleasant.' Gold and precious objects 
of all sorts sparkle on every side. In the midst of this en- 
chanting abode rises a superb palace inhabited by Vishnu 
and his wife Lakshmi ; close to them are Pradyumna, their 
eldest son, and a host of other children, their grandson Ani- 
ruddha, son of Pradyumna, Usha, his wife, and their daughter 
Bana. In this abode, as in the rest, there are flowers, trees, 
quadrupeds, birds, and especially peacocks in great numbers. 

The river Karona flows below the royal residence \ Many 
penitents live on its banks and there spend happy, peaceful 
days ; their food consists of fruits and vegetables, which grow 
without cultivation; their leisure is divided between reading 
the Vedas and meditating. 

Sattya-loka. 

The name of Sattya-loka signifies ' The Place of Truth,* or 
'The Abode of Virtue.' Sattya-loka is the highest of the Abodes 
of Bliss. It is the paradise of Brahma, where he lives with his 

' The name of the river is Viraja and not Karona.— £d. 
♦ ♦ Tt 



642 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies 



wife Sarasvati. The Ganges waters this divine retreat, and it 
is hence that some of its purifying waters have reached the 
earth. It is reserved for those Brahmins only who, by the 
practice of virtue on earth, have arrived at the degree of sanctity 
necessary to gain admittance thereto. Persons of any other 
caste, however edifying and pure their lives may have been, 
are irrevocably excluded from it. 



CHAPTER VI 

The Worship of Animals. — The Worship of Monkeys. — Of Bulls. — Of the 
Garuda Bird. — Of Snakes. — Of Fishes. — The Worship of BhootamSf or 
Evil Spirits. — Human Sacrifices. 

Of all the different kinds of idolatry the worship of animals 
is certainly one of the lowest forms, and the one which most un- 
mistakably reveals the weakness of human nature ; for man thus 
shows himself incapable of recognizing in His works the great 
Creator of the universe. What a sad spectacle it is when man, 
created in God's own image, with a countenance so formed that 
he might always be looking heavenwards \ so forgets his sublime 
origin as to dare to bow the knee to animals ! It is almost 
incredible that human beings should so debase themselves. 
But we must not lament over facts without inquiring into their 
causes. The worship of animals becomes more comprehensible 
when one considers the foundations on which all idolatrous 
religions are based ; namely, self-interest and fear. In the 
eyes of a heathen anything that can be useful to him seems 
worthy of being worshipped ; and this feeling is much stronger 
in regard to anything that can harm him. Thus the Egyptians, 
though they were so highly cultivated in the arts and sciences, 
worshipped the bull Apis, the ibis, the crocodile, beetles, snakes, 
&c., on account either of the good they hoped for or of the 
harm they feared from them. As for the Hindus, they appear 
to be firmly convinced that as all living creatures are either 
useful or hurtful to man, it is better to worship them all, 
paying them more or less attention in proportion to the 
advantages they offer or the fear which their qualities inspire. 

' ' Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque tueri 
Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollcre vultus.' 

Ovid, MeiamorphoseSf i. 85 sq. — Dubois. 

Tta 



644 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

First on their list of sacred creatures are the monkey, the bull, 
the bird called garuda, and snakes. 

The Monkey, or Hanuman. 

The great reverence in which the monkey is held by Hindus 
is no doubt due to its likeness to man, both in its outward 
appearance and in many of its habits. Perhaps also its thievish 
and destructive propensities may be partly accountable for the 
consideration which it enjoys. At any rate Hindu books are 
full of marvellous tales of monkeys. In my remarks in the pre- 
ceding chapter on Rama I have already described some of the 
deeds of valour wrought by this hero at the head of his army 
of monkeys. Indeed, the greater part of the Ramayana, the 
favourite epic of the Hindus, is devoted to the achievements of 
these valiant monkey soldiers and their illustrious general. 

The cult of the monkey Hanuman extends over the whole 
of India. The followers of Vishnu are specially devoted to this 
deity, but all are ready to give him a share of their homage. 
Images of Hanuman are to be seen in most temples and in 
many public places. They are also to be found in forests and 
desert spots. Indeed, in those provinces where there are many 
followers of Vishnu, you can scarcely move a yard without 
coming across an image of this beloved god. The offerings 
made to him consist solely of natural products, never of a sacri- 
fice of blood. Wherever monkeys are to be found in a wild 
state, their devotees daily bring them offerings of boiled rice, 
fruit, and various other kinds of food to which they are partial. 
This is considered a most meritorious act. 

Basava, or the Bull. 

This is the favourite deity of the Sivaites, or followers of 
Siva. Many conjectures have been offered as to the origin of 
bull-worship among so many idolatrous peoples. It seems to 
me, however, that the reason is simple enough. Was it not 
most natural that those who worshipped so many different 
objects should offer homage to animals which were so pre-emi- 
nently valuable to them, which were their companions in labour, 
on which they relied to carry on all their agricultural work, 
which in primitive times constituted their one source of wealth, 



CH. vi] Cattle-worship 645 

and which even at the present day form the basis of material 
wealth all over the world ? The nations which did not actually 
worship them as gods were always careful to show the high 
value they set upon them. For instance, amongst the Romans 
to kill a bull was accounted a no less crime than to kill a fellow- 
citizen ^ ; and it was a long time before the Athenians could 
bring themselves to offer up one of these animals in their 
sacrifices. There is every reason therefore why the Hindus 
should regard their cattle with extraordinary veneration, for as 
a matter of fact oxen and cows are so absolutely necessary to 
them that one may safely say it would be quite impossible for 
them to exist without their help. For this reason, therefore, 
these animals are reckoned among the most sacred objects of 
their religion. Their images are to be foUnd in almost every 
temple, particularly in those dedicated to Siva, and are to be 
seen in great numbers in those distridts where the sect of the 
Lingayats predominates. The sacred bull is usually representefd 
as lying down on a pedestal, with three of his legs doubled 
under him, and the right forefoot extended straight out beyond 
his head *. 

Live bulls are also regarded as objects of public worship by 
Hindu devotees. By way of investing them with an appearance^ 
of sanctity these sacred beasts are branded on the right hind 
quarter with a design representing Siva's special weapon; 
They are allowed perfect liberty, are never tied up in a shedj 
and may graze wherever they please. They are often to be 
seen in the streets, where their devotees worship them publicly 
and at the same time bring them rice and different kinds of 
grain to eat. They are all under the safeguard of superstition^ 
and though they wander hither and thither night and day, 
I have never heard of one being stolen. When they die, even 
the Pariahs dare not eat their flesh, the bodies being buried 
with much pomp and ceremony. 

Priests of Siva sometimes travel from district to district with 
these sacred bulls, whose horns and bodies are decorated with 
much taste. Large crowds accompany them, carrying flags of 
various colours and headed by bands of music. The real object 

* ' Bovis tanta fuit apud antiques Book VI. 
veneratio, ut tarn capitale esset bovem ' There is an enormous specimen 

occidere quam civem.' — Columella, in the Tanjore temple. — Ed. 



646 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

of all this display is to collect alms from the faithful, an object 
which is invariably attained ; for multitudes flock to worship 
the venerated animal, prostrating themselves before it with 
every absurd demonstration of devotion that superstition can 
suggest, and one and all never forget to recompense the leader 
of the procession, who, when he thinks that he has collected 
sufficient contributions, sets the sacred beast at liberty again. 

The Bird Garuda. 

The kite garuda is held in great honour, especially by the 
followers of Vishnu. Brahmins, after finishing their morning 
ablutions, will wait till they have seen one of these birds 
before returning to their homes. They call this a lucky meetings 
and go back fully convinced that it will bring them good 
luck for the rest of the day. It is a common bird enough. 
Naturalists classify it among the eagles (the Malabar eagle\ 
but it is the smallest of the species. It measures barely a foot 
from its beak to the tip of its tail, and about two feet and a half 
across its outspread wings. Its body is covered with glossy 
feathers of a bright chestnut colour; its head, neck, and breast 
are whitish ; the ends of its wings are a glossy black ; its feet 
are yellow, with black claws. It is a pretty and graceful bird to 
look at; but its offensive odour renders a near acquaintance 
unpleasant. It utters a harsh, shrill, quavering cry like kra ! 
kra\ the last note of which is prolonged into a mournful wail. 
Though apparently strong and vigorous, it never attacks any 
bird larger than itself that would be likely to offer resistance. 
Indeed its timid and cowardly nature makes one doubt whether 
it really does belong to the same species as the king of the 
feathered tribe. It wages perpetual war upon lizards, rats, 
and especially snakes. When it espies one of the last-named, 
it swoops down upon it, seizes it in its talons, carries it up 
an enormous height, and then lets it drop. Following swiflly, 
it picks it up again, killed of course by its fall, and flies 
off with it to some neighbouring tree where it may be 
devoured at leisure. Probably out of gratitude for the 
services rendered by this bird in ridding the country of 
reptiles, the Hindus have erected shrines in its honour, just 
as the Egyptians, from a similar motive, placed the ibis 
amongst their tutelary deities. 



CH. vi] Snake-worship 647 

The garuda also feeds on frogs and any small fish that it 
can seize in shallow water. Moreover, it does not show much 
consideration for the poultry-yards of its worshippers, on which 
it often makes a raid. But its cowardice is such that an angry 
hen defending her chickens can easily put it to flight, and 
only the chickens which have imprudently wandered from their 
mother's side are likely to fall into its clutches. Protected by 
superstition, the bird has no fear of man ; it may often be seen 
on the roof of a house, or in some frequented place. Sunday 
is the day specially devoted to ^arw^fa-worship. I have often 
seen Vishnavites assembled together on that day for the express 
purpose of paying it homage. They call the birds around 
them by throwing pieces of meat into the air, which the birds 
catch very cleverly with their claws. 

To kill one of these birds would be considered as heinous 
a crime as homicide, especially in the eyes of the followers of 
Vishnu. If they come across one that has been accidentally 
killed, they give it a splendid funeral. And they pay the same 
respect to the dead remains of a monkey or a snake, perform- 
ing in each case various ridiculous ceremonies, in order to 
expiate the wickedness of the unknown author of this dreadful 
crime. 

Snaked, 

Among the many dangerous animals which infest India snakes 
are certainly the most to be dreaded. Though tigers are 
no doubt very formidable enemies, they are not answerable 
for nearly so many deaths as snakes. During my stay in 
India hardly a month passed without my hearing that some 
person had been killed, close to where I happened to be living, 
by the bite of a poisonous snake. One of the commonest 
snakes, and at the same time the most venomous, is the cobra, 
the bite of which causes almost immediate death. It is accord- 
ingly held in peculiar veneration. 

Snake-worship, which is a common form of idolatry among 
almost every heathen nation, no doubt owes its origin to 
men's natural fear of these reptiles. They try to propitiate 
the poisonous species with offerings and sacrifices, and they 
treat those which do not possess deadly fangs with the same 
amount of respect, because in their ignorance they attribute 



648 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

to a benevolent instinct what is really only due to want of 
power. 

As if the actual presence of these dangerous reptiles were not 
sufficient to terrify the native mind, Hindu books are filled with 
stories and fables about them, and pictures or images of them 
meet you at every turn. 

Snake-Worshippers Search for the holes where they are 
likely to be found, 'and which more often than not are in the 
little mounds raised by the kariahs, or white ants. When they 
have found one, they visit it from time to time, placing before 
it milk, bananas, and other food which the snake is likely 
to fancy. If a snake happens to get into a house, far from 
turning out the inconvenient guest and killing it on the spot, 
they feed it plentifully and offer sacrifices to it daily. Hindus 
have been known to keep deadly snakes for years in their 
houses, feeding and petting them. Even if a whole family were 
in danger of losing their lives, no one member of it would 
be bold enough to lay sacrilegious hand^ on such an honoured 
inmate^ 

Temples have alfio been erected in their special honour. 
There is a particularly famous one in Eastern Mysore, at a 
place called Subramaniah, which is also the name of the great 
snake so often mentioned in Hindu fables \ Every year in the 
month of December a solemn feast is held in this temple. 
Innumerable devotees flock to the sacred spot from all parts, 
to worship and offer sacrifices to the snakes. An enormous 
number of the reptiles have taken up their abode inside the 
building, where they are fed and looked after by the officiating 
Brahmins. The special protection thus afforded has allowed 
them to increase to such an extent that they may be met with at 
every turn all over the neighbourhood. Many of their wor- 
shippers take the trouble to bring them food. And woe to him 
who should have the audacity to kill one of these gruesome 
deities. He would get himself into terrible trouble *. 

The denizens of water also come in for their share of Hindu 
worship. It is quite a common thing to see Brahmins throwing 

^ It is also called Anania and Maha- ' There are many temples of this 

sesha. It is on this snake that Vishnu description still existing, to which pil- 

reclines while sleeping on the sea. — grimages are made. — Ld, 
Dubois. 



CH. Vl] 



Fish-worship 



649 



rice or other food to the fishes in rivers and tanks. Where 
the Brahmins exercise undisputed authority, fishing is strictly 
prohibited, as, for instance, near the large agraharaSy or 
Brahmin villages; and in those parts of the rivers where 
they are in the habit of bathing I have often seen huge 
shoals of large fish swimming about near the surface, waiting 
for their food. At the slightest sound they will rush in hundreds 
towards the bank, and they are so tame that they will actually 
feed out of a man's hand \ 

What I have said so far gives but a feeble notion of the 
superstitious feelings with which Hindus regard animals. 
Ought these feelings, as some writers think, to be attributed 
to their extreme tender-heartedness, to their gentle and com- 
passionate natures ? I should say decidedly not. Such childish, 
yet shameful, forgetfulness of the superiority of man over all 
other created beings cannot surely arise from any noble senti- 
ments. I only see in it the foolish errors of a cowardly and 
weak-minded people, who are slaves to the idle fancies of their 
own imaginations, and whose reason has become so obscured 
that they are incapable of recognizing the just and natural laws 
governing the safety of mankind*. The most irreconcilable 
superstitions^ and the most ill-conceived considerations of 
self-interest are the only motives which actuate Hindus in 
this absurd idolatry of birds and beasts. Any one who has 
made a careful study of the character of Brahmins, who display 
so much care and tenderness for monkeys, snakes, and birds 
of prey, will soon perceive that these same men show the most 
utter callousness and indifference for the misfortunes and wants 
of their fellow-men. Food that they bestow so lavishly on all 
sorts of animals would be pitilessly withheld from an unfortunate 



' Fish-worship is connected with 
the fish Avatar or Matsya-avatar of 
Vishnu. — Ed. 

''' In India we see the grossest forms 
of superstition side by side with the 
most wonderfully refined systems of 
philosophy. The philosophic Brah- 
min contends that it is ridiculous to 
try to inculcate into the common and 
uneducated herd the subtler forms 
of doctrine. Hence the various forms 
of idolatrous worship. — Ed. 



' People have been surprised that 
the crocodile was worshipped in one 
part of Egypt, while the ichneumon, 
the mortal enemy of its young, was 
worshipped in another. What would 
they say to the Hindus who might be 
found worshipping the deity garuda 
at the very moment that the latter was 
in the act of tearing to pieces and de- 
vouring their other deity, the snake ? 
— Dubois. 



650 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

man who was not of their own caste, though he were dying 
of hunger at their very doors. Instead of the kindly precept 
of Christian charity, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy- 
self,' a precept which should draw together the whole human 
race in the bonds of brotherhood, the Brahmins have substituted, 
' Thou shalt love all animals as thyself.' I will not go so far as 
to say that Hindus are unacquainted with those moral precepts 
which are more or less common to all civilized nations; but 
prejudice and superstition have so perverted their judgement 
that they are incapable of regulating their conduct with due 
regard to what is right and proper from a human point of 
view. More than this : in cases where these precepts are 
practised with a praiseworthy object, all the merit is spoilt by 
the evidently self-interested motives which influence them. To 
perform a virtuous action simply for the sake of enjoying the 
feeling of having done right, is a sentiment entirely beyond 
their comprehension. If you were to ask a rich Hindu why 
he spent part of his fortune in erecting buildings consecrated 
to religious worship, in establishing rest-houses for the accommo- 
dation of travellers, or in planting trees along the high-road to 
shelter wayfarers from the burning sun, he would frankly tell 
you that such munificence was calculated to raise him in public 
esteem during his lifetime, and to transmit his name to posterity 
after his death. 

Bhootams, or Evil Spirits. 

Almost all ancient philosophers, among them Pythagoras 
and the followers of Plato, have agreed in saying that each 
human being is under the influence of a good spirit or an evil 
spirit ; some even go so far as to allow him both a good and 
a bad spirit. Our own revealed religion can suggest more 
reasonable ideas on this subject ; but superstition, the creature 
of ignorance and fear, was obliged to fall back on the imagination 
to find plausible reasons for the alternations of good and evil 
to which mankind is subject. Incapable of a just appreciation 
of the workings of Providence, and unable to fathom that which 
is inscrutable, these heathen people imagine that the sorrows 
and troubles which befall them are all the work of invisible and 
malicious spirits, to whom they must offer prayers and sacrifices 
by way of propitiation. Hindus carry their credulity on this 



CH. vi] Worship of Evil Spirits 651 

point to a ridiculous excess. The worship of evil spirits is in 
fact firmly established and very generally practised among them\ 
These spirits are called by the generic name of bhootants, which 
also means elements, as if the elements were nothing else 
but evil spirits materialized and were the primary cause of all 
natural disturbances and troubles. Such demons'are also called 
pisachas, dehtas, &c. 

There are temples specially dedicated to the worship of evil 
spirits ; and there are some districts where this particular form 
of idolatry holds almost exclusive sway. Most of the inhabi- 
tants of the long range of hills which bounds Mysore on the 
west acknowledge no other deity than the devil. Each family 
has its own bhootam, to which it offers daily prayers and sacri- 
fices in order that he may preserve its members from the ills 
which the bhootams of their enemies might bring upon them. 
Bhootam images are to be found all over these hills. Sometimes 
they are idols with hideous faces, but more often they are 
merely shapeless blackened stones. Every bhootam has his own 
particular name. Some are thought to be more powerful and 
more spiteful than others, and these are naturally most widely 
worshipped. 

All these evil spirits delight in sacrifices of blood. Buffaloes, 
pigs, goats, cocks, and other living animals are frequently slain 
in their honour ; and when rice is offered to them it must be 
dyed with blood. They do not disdain to accept offerings of 
intoxicating liquors and drugs, or even flowers, provided they 
are red. 

I have noticed that the worship of evil spirits is most prevalent 
in mountainous regions and in sparsely populated rural tracts. 
The inhabitants of these out-of-the-way districts have little com- 
munication with more civilized parts, and are more ignorant, 
more cowardly, and consequently more superstitious even than 
their more civilized fellow-countrymen. All the troubles and 
misfortunes that happen to them are put down to their bhootams, 

^ Thcsystemof dcmon-worshipseems and represent them as attendants of 

to have been that of the tribes whom Siva {Bhutesa « lord of demons), 

the Hindus supplanted and drove into The method of worship, the cere- 

the mountains or into the extreme monies and observances of this ancient 

south. The Brahmins have given a system, are foreign to the genius of 

place to those demons in their system, Hinduism. — Pope. 



652 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

whose anger they think they have somehow incurred ; and it is 
for the purpose of disarming this malevolence that they are so 
prodigal in their worship of them. 

The wild tribes scattered through the forests of Malabar, on 
the Camatic Hills, and elsewhere, where they are known as 
Kadu'Kurumbars, Sho/igars, Irulers, &c., worship no other gods 
but these bhootams. 

Human Sacrifices. 

In vain has the attempt been made, for the credit of humanity, 
to throw doubt upon the many evidences of human sacrifices ; 
but unfortunately the proofs are too strong : they are written in 
blood in the history of many nations, and can be only too clearly 
proved. Man, overwhelmed with infirmities and misfortunes, 
and fully convinced that they were the punishment of his sins, 
imagined that he would appease and propitiate the gods by offer- 
ing them the noblest and most perfect sacrifice that he could find. 
Firmly imbued with this horrible idea, he considered himself 
justified in shedding the blood of human victims as well as that 
of animals. If such an atrocious custom needed confirmation, 
recent instances of it could be quoted among the Hindus, who, 
in common with other heathen nations, have not scrupled to 
drench the altars of their gods with the blood of their fellow-men. 

I will say nothing of the abominable teachings of their 
magicians in this respect. Criminal abuses committed by a few 
are no proof of the absence of religion and morality in a nation 
as a whole. If an infamous charlatan ventures to assure power- 
ful patrons who are so weak as to have recourse to his arts, that 
it is necessary to shed human blood in order to ensure success 
in his mysterious operations, and if it is only too certain that 
unfortunate virgins have been sacrificed at the saikt's of these 
magicians, the disgrace of it all must rest on the heads of those 
who are responsible for the maintenance of social order. 

A similar sacrifice, however, is recommended when the grand 
yagnant is performed ; and though a horse is most often offered, 
still the nara-medha, or sacrifice of a human victim, is held to be 
infinitely more pleasing to the deity who is the object of the 
ceremony, and is consequently to be preferred. There is, 
furthermore, not a single province in India where the inhabitants 
do not still point out to the traveller places where their Rajahs 



cH. vi] Human Sacrifices 653 

used to offer up to their idols unfortunate prisoners captured in 
war. These horrible sacrifices were performed with a view to 
securing success to their campaigns through the intervention of 
the gods. I'have visited several places where these scenes of 
carnage used to be enacted. They are generally situated on the 
top of a mountain or in some isolated spot ; and there you find 
a mean-looking temple, or sometimes only a little shrine con- 
taining the idol in whose honour all this human blood was spilt. 
The victims were beheaded, and their heads were then hung up 
as trophies before the bloodthirsty deity. Sometimes the sacri- 
ficers contented themselves with cutting off the nose and ears 
of a prisoner, a very common form of punishment in India, and 
then sent him away thus mutilated. A little pagoda still exists, 
perched on the mountain at the foot of which lies the town of 
Mysore, not far from Seringapatam, which enjoyed a wide 
notoriety owing to the number of executions which took place 
there when heathen princes still ruled the country. 

Old men have told me that this horrible custom was still 
practised when they were young. There was nothing in it, 
according to their views, contrary to law or to the rights of the 
people as understood by the then reigning princes. It was 
based on the principle that reprisals were fair and legitimate 
in war ; and it was accepted by the people without any feelings 
of horror. In fact, the old men spoke of it with the utmost 
indifference, as if it were the most natural thing in the world. 
However, the advent of Mahomedans and Europeans, and the 
just indignation manifested by both at these abominable sacrifices, 
at last resulted in their abolition. But if the general opinion is 
to be believed, there are still several small independent princes 
who, if they had their own way, would still sanction these 
horrible massacres. 

It is, I fear, indisputable that human sacrifices have been 
offered, both in ancient and modern times, on the altars of 
Hindu divinities. If any additional proof be needed it may be 
found in the Kali-purana. Abominable rites of this kind are 
there expressly enjoined. The ceremonies which should accom- 
pany them are described in the minutest detail, as also the results 
which will ensue. The same book contains rules of procedure 
in sacrificing animals, and mentions the kinds and qualities of 
those which are suitable as victims. Lastly, it specifies those 



654 Hindu Manners f Customs, and Ceremonies 

deities to whom these bloody offerings are acceptable. Among^ 
them are Bahirava, Yama, Nandi, and, above all, the bloodthirsty 
goddess Kali. 

To offer human sacrifices is regarded as the exclusive right 
of princes, and they are even enjoined to offer them. Neither 
a Brahmin nor a Kshatriya may ever be sacrificed. Every 
human victim must be free from all bodily blemish, and must 
not have been guilty of any serious crime. All animals that 
are offered as sacrifices must be at least three years old, and 
must be healthy and free from all defects. Under no circum- 
stances can Brahmins preside or assist in any way at a sacrifice 
of blood. 



CHAPTER VII 

Inanimate Objects of Worship. — The Salagrama Stone. — The Tnlasi, — Darbha 

Grass. — The Sacred Fig-Tree. 

Voltaire thought it incredible that the Egyptians could ever 
have worshipped onions and other products of their gardens. 
He always jeered at this tradition, and looked upon it as 
a mere fable. But the fact is, in matters of superstition truth is 
sometimes stranger than fiction. What I have already said and 
what I am now about to say respecting the Hindus will show 
incontestably that there are absolutely no limits to the follies 
of idolatry. The Brahmins, indeed, must needs borrow objects 
from all three kingdoms of nature in order to arrive at the 
magnificent total of three hundred and thirty millions of deities 
which they recognized Amongst the inanimate substances 
which they worship, there are four which they consider especially 
sacred, namely, the salagrama stone, darbha grass, the plant 
iulasi, and the aswatta or sacred fig-tree. 

The Salagrama*. 

This little stone is held in great honour throughout India. 
Brahmins consider it to be a metamorphosis of Vishnu, and for 
this reason they offer daily sacrifices to it. It is a sort of fossil- 
ized shell, ammonite or nautilus, oval, striated, umbilicated, 
and ornamented with 'arborizations' or tree-like markings on 
the outside. The more there are of these tree-like markings, 
the more highly they are revered. 

^ These are properly speaking </«uis through Nepal is said to be a form 

or divine beings, not deities in the of Vishnu. The account of its origin 

strict sense of the term. — £o. given in the Skanda'purana is most 

' The salagram or ammonite found monstrously and incredibly abomi- 

in the Gundick and other rivers flowing nable. — Pope, 



656 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

It is obligatory for every Brahmin to have one of these 
stones in his possession. They are handed down from father 
to son, and are regarded as precious heirlooms which must 
never pass out of the family. It is written in the Atharva- Veda 
that any Brahmin's house in which there is no salagrama is to 
be considered as impure as a cemetery, and the food which is 
prepared in it as unclean as a dog's vomit. 

Though the salagrama is looked upon as one of the meta- 
morphoses of Vishnu, it partakes at the same time of the 
essence of all the other deities, and through it ptija can be 
offered to all of them. There is nothing more efficacious for 
the remission of sins, no matter how grievous they may be, 
than to possess some water in which the salagrama has been 
washed. Forgiveness of sins may even be obtained by simply 
touching the water which has been thus sanctified. He who 
always keeps such water in his house ensures thereby perpetual 
wealth ; and if he goes further and drinks it, he will not only 
obtain forgiveness of his sins, but he will also secure his happi- 
ness in this world, will always do what is right, and afler death 
will at once enjoy the delights oi Swarga, But before drinking 
this marvellous water he must not forget to address the following 
prayer to Vishnu : — ' Narayana, you are the ruler of the world ; 
it is your pleasure to confer blessings on all created beings. 
I drink this water in which your sacred feet have been washed ; 
I drink it that I may be cleansed from my sins ; vouchsafe to 
pardon me, who am the greatest of sinners.' 

The Tulasi. 

The tulasi {Orymum sanctum) plant is to be found everywhere 
in sandy and uncultivated places. It is a species resembling 
the basil that grows in Europe. Brahmins consider it to 
be the wife of Vishnu, and revere it accordingly. ' Nothing 
on earth can equal the virtues of the tulasi* say they : Tulasi- 
tulana-uasty, atae'va tulasi. Puja must be offered daily to it. 
When a Brahmin is dying one of these plants is fetched and 
placed on a pedestal. After puja has there been offered to it, 
a bit of its root is placed in the mouth of the dying man, and 
the leaves are placed on his face, eyes, ears, and chest ; he is 
then sprinkled from head to foot with a tulasi twig which has 
been dipped in water. While this ceremony is being performed 



CH. VI i] The Tulasi Plant 657 

his friends cry several times aloud, Tulasi \ Tulasi \ Tulasi \ 
The man can then die in the happy certainty that he will go 
straight to Swarga \ 

To obtain pardon of all one's sins it is sufficient to look at 
this sacred plant. By touching it a man is purified from all 
defilement, and if he perform the namaskara to it, any illness 
from which he may be suffering will be cured. 

Salvation is assured to any one who waters and attends to it 
every day. If a branch of it is offered to Vishnu in the month 
oi Kartika (November), it will be more pleasing to the god than 
a thousand cows. Whoever offers to Vishnu, at any time 
whatsoever, a spray of tulasi that has been dipped in saffron, 
is assured of becoming like Vishnu himself, and of enjoying 
a share in Vishnu's happiness. To give a twig of tulasi to any 
one who is in any danger, or who is suffering from anxieties 
and cares, is a certain means of securing for him a satisfactory 
ending to his difficulties. 

These are only a few of the many virtues possessed by the 
tulasi. 

Most Brahmins cultivate the plant in their houses, and offer 
it daily prayers and sacrifices. They also take care that it 
shall grow near the places where they perform their ablutions, 
and in their meeting-places, such as the chuttrams. The tulasi 
is usually planted on a little mound of sand, which they call 
brinda-vanam % or on a square pillar, three or four feet in 
height, hollow at the top, with its four sides facing the four 
points of the compass. Brahmins consider it a peculiarly 
meritorious act to carefully water and cultivate the plant'. 

Its leaves have a sweet aromatic scent and act as a cough 
elixir and cordial ; indeed Hindus think that they possess 
many medicinal properties. Brahmins always swallow one or 
two after their meals, as an aid to digestion. They also eat 
some both before and after performing their ablutions in cold 
water, in order to keep up the proper temperature in the 
stomach and to prevent colds and chills and other maladies 
which might attack them without this preventative. It was 

^ This formality is observed only ' The plant is grown in the court- 
by the Vishnavites. — Ed. yard of almost every Brahmin house, 

^ This name is also given to the and the women offer worship to it 

place inhabited by Krishna. — Dubois. daily. — £d. 



** 



u u 



658 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

probably in consequence of its medicinal properties that the 
Hindus deified the plant in the first instance. 

Darbha Grass ^ 

This plant belongs to the genus borage. It is found every- 
where, especially in damp marshy ground. Brahmins always 
keep some in their houses, and it is used in all their cere- 
monies. It grows to the height of about two feet and is 
finely pointed at the top. It is extremely rough to the touch, 
and if rubbed the wrong way it cuts through the skin and draws 
blood. 

Hindu legends differ as to the origin of this sacred grass. 
Some say that it was produced at the time when the gods and 
the giants were all busy churning, with the mountain Mandara, 
the sea of milk in order to extract from it amrita or nectar, 
which would render them all immortal. The story is that the 
mountain, while rolling about on Vishnu's back (who, under the 
form of a turtle, was supporting it), rubbed off a great many of 
the god's hairs, and that these hairs, cast ashore by the waves, 
took root there and became darbha grass. Others say that 
the gods, while greedily drinking the amriia which they had 
with infinite pains extracted from the sea of milk, let fall a few 
drops of the nectar on this grass, which thus became sacred. 
Then, again, others assert that it was produced at the time when 
Mohini — that is to say, Vishnu metamorphosed into a courtesan 
of that name — was distributing amrita to the gods. The vessel 
containing the nectar was supported on Mohini's hip, from 
which some fleshy filaments fell, and taking root in the ground, 
developed under the form of darbha grass. Be this as it 
may, darbha grass is looked upon as part of Vishnu himself. 
On the strength of this the Brahmins worship it and offer 
sacrifices to it, and, as may be remembered, make use of it in 
all their ceremonies, in the belief that it possesses the virtue 
of purifying everything. An annual feast instituted in honour 
of the sacred darbha grass is celebrated on the eighth day of 
the moon in the month of Badra (September , and is called the 
Darbha-ashtami, By offering the grass as a sacrifice on that day 
immortality and blessedness for ten ancestors may be secured ; 

* This sacred grass {Jt^oa cyttosuroides) is essential in all sacrifices. — Ed. 



cH. vii] The Sacred Fig-tree 659 

and another result is that one's posterity increases and multi- 
pHes like the darbha grass itself, which is one of the most 
prolific members of the vegetable kingdom. I have no idea 
why this plant should have been selected as worthy of special 
honour. I have never heard of its beirtg endowed with any 
peculiar properties, either medicinal, culinary, or other, which 
would account for its high position. 

The Sacred Fig-tree. 

There are seven different species of trees which the Brah- 
mins consider sacred and accordingly worship; but, strange 
to say, they are not those which produce the best fruits. It 
is true, however, that their thick foliage makes a splendid 
shade — a priceless boon in the hot climate of India. The 
aswatta^ comes first on the list. It is one of the most 
beautiful trees in the country, and grows to a huge size. It 
is to be found everywhere, but especially where the Brahmins 
perform their ablutions. Its large leaves, very soft to the 
touch, in colour bright green, are so light and thin that the 
slightest breeze sets them in motion; and as they produce 
an impression of most refreshing coolness, the tree is con- 
sidered to possess health-giving properties. When stirred 
by a breeze the leaves make a pleasant rustle, which Hindu 
authors have sometimes likened to the melodious sounds of 
the vina. When to all these attractive natural characteristics 
is added the tradition that under this tree Vishnu was born, 
it is no wonder that the aswatta is regarded with great 
respect and veneration. No one is allowed to cut it down, lop 
off its branches, or even pull off its leaves unless they are to 
be used for acts of worship. To fell one of these trees would 
be an awful sacrilege, and quite unpardonable. It is consecrated 
to Vishnu, or rather it is Vishnu himself under the form 
of a tree'. Sometimes a solemn inaugural ceremony is 

^ It is called amsn-mamm in Tamil; tree springing from an unperceived 

ravimanu in Telugu ; aruli-niara in root is emblematical of the body, which 

Canarese. It is the pagoda fig-tree really springs from and is one with the 

{Ficus religiosa)t the tree of God. — Godhead. In the Bhagavat-gita it is 

Dubois. said to typify the universe. It is said 

^ The astvaiia or pipal, having roots to be the male of the vata or banian 

hanging from above and branches {Ficus indica). — Ed. 
bent downwards,- is allegorical. Each 

U U 2 



66o Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies 

gone through, called Aswatta praiishta^ or the consecration of 
the aswatta tree. This ceremony, which is an elaborate and 
costly one, possesses the virtue of transforming the tree into 
a divinity by inducting Vishnu into it. The Brahmins assert 
that untold blessings will be showered upon any one who is 
willing to bear the expense. 

I have already described, in the chapters on the Sandhya and 
on Marriage, the manner in which this tree is worshipped, and 
the honours that are paid to it. Sometimes it is invested, 
like a Brahmin, with the triple cord, the very same ceremonies 
being performed. And sometimes it is solemnly married. 
Generally a vepu or margosa tree* is selected for its spouse, 
and occasionally a plantain or banana tree. Almost the same 
formalities are observed for this curious marriage as in the case 
of a marriage between Brahmins. Here and there, on the high- 
roads and elsewhere, the aswatta and vepu trees may be seen 
planted side by side on little mounds. This union is not an 
accidental one, but the result of an actual marriage ceremony. 
Not thirty yards from the modest hut where I wrote these pages 
were two of these trees, under whose shade I have often 
reclined. Their trunks were so closely entwined that they 
had become incorporated one with another. The inhabitants 
of the village could remember to have seen them planted 
together some fifty years before, and said that they had been 
present at the wedding festivities, which lasted several days, 
and were celebrated at the expense of a wealthy person of the 
neighbourhood at a cost of more than 1,500 rupees. 

Such, then, are the kind of good works which Hindus per- 
form in order to obtain the pardon of their sins in this world 
and to ensure their happiness in the next ; and such is the 
state of degradation to which the Brahmins, so haughty, 
presumptuous, and infatuated with their own ideas and 
opinions, have reduced a nation which is really worthy of 
better things ^ 

* This is another sacred tree, which - See Racine's La Religion^ cap. v. — 

is dedicated to Siva, the Melia Azaiiir- Dubois. 
achta, — Dubois. 



CHAPTER VIII 

The Administration of Civil and Criminal Justice. — Customs connected with 
Usury. — Various Kinds of Punishment. — Trial by Ordeal. — The Prevalence 
of Perjury. — Remarks on the European Courts of Justice. 

Governed from time immemorial by despotic princes, who 
recognized no law but their own free will and pleasure, India 
has been accustomed to a form of judicial administration peculiar 
to herself. There has been no legal code, neither has there 
been any record of legal usage. There are, it is true, a few 
works containing general legal principles, and a few wise legal 
maxims which have helped to guide the judges in their 
decisions; yet nowhere have there been properly organized 
courts of justice. Ordinary cases have generally been settled, 
without any right of appeal, by the collectors of public revenue, 
assisted by assessors selected from the principal inhabitants 
and by the military officer commanding the district. 

The Hindus have neither barristers nor solicitors; neither 
are they compelled to submit to those long proceedings and 
interminable delays, the cost of which often equals the value 
of the matter under dispute. When it is a question of dividing 
property or of other business of any importance, it is generally 
submitted to the arbitration of relatives or of the headmen of 
the caste ; and if the nature of the suit or the high rank of the 
litigants render it advisable, all the principal inhabitants of the 
district assemble to decide the point at issue *. 

When a case is brought before the revenue officer of the 
district and his assessors, no difficulty is experienced in getting 
them to settle the dispute if they think that they are likely to 

' Since the Abba's day English neys and Native vakils practising in 
courts of justice have been established these courts. In the villages, how- 
all over the country, and there are ever, arbitration is still resorted to in 
hosts of English barristers and attor- petty cases. — Ed. 



662 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [ 



PT. Ill 



make any money out of it. Otherwise they will easily invent 
some pretext for putting off the matter till some future time when 
they may have more leisure to attend to it. In any important 
case they try their best to bring the parties to an amicable under- 
standing ; and if that is impossible, they leave the decision to 
a panchayaty or 'tribunal of five arbitrators/ which may be com- 
posed of a larger, but never of a smaller, number than five. If 
caste customs are the subject of dispute, the settlement devolves 
upon the heads of the castes. 

The procedure generally followed is that dictated by common 
sense, by ordinary intelligence, and by such principles of equity 
as one always expects to find established, in theory at any rate, 
in all civilized countries. Besides, almost every member of 
a caste is well acquainted with its different customs, which 
are handed down by tradition from father to son, and thus are 
never lost. In short, the form of judicial procedure in India is 
less complicated than that of Europe, and would leave little to 
be desired if the scales of Themis were not much more easily 
put off their balance there than in other countries. Impartiality 
and disinterestedness are virtues with which Hindu judges have 
but a very slight acquaintance \ Too weak to be able to resist 
the bribes that are offered them, to be independent of the 
prejudices and predilections of their own circle, or to be above 
all considerations of personal interest, their judgements are 
rarely conspicuous for unswerving uprightness and integrity. 
Almost invariably it is the richer suitor who gains the day ; and 
even the most guilty generally find some means of blunting the 
sword of justice. 

If the parties to a suit have an equally good case or an equally 
bad one, the party which makes the most noise and is loudest in 
its abuse of its adversary usually gains the day, for eloquence at 
the Indian Bar consists in shouting with all the strength of one's 
lungs, and in pouring such a flood of invective on one's adversary 
that he has not an answer left. 

There are two or three Hindu works which contain rules and 
directions concerning the administration of justice, both civil and 
criminal. The best known is the Dharma-Sastras^ which con- 
tains, amongst other things, a treatise on Hindu polytheism. 
There are also the N iti-SastraSy and the ManU'Sastras, which 

* Circumstances have now altered for the better in this respect — Ed. 



CH. viii] Usury in India 663 

have been partly translated into English '. Many legal precepts 
and decisions, which would be most useful helps to a judge, 
might be gathered from these works ; but, as usual, they are 
immersed in a farrago of nonsense, religious and otherwise. 
For instance, one may find there numbers of decisions in hypo- 
thetical cases that are either perfectly ridiculous or morally 
impossible, and also numbers of idiotic theses propounded 
ex cathedra. Furthermore, whatever valuable information may 
be found here and there in these books is quite beyond 
the comprehension of the majority of Hindus, who do not 
in the least understand the learned terms in which they 
abound. 

The Hindus, it may be remarked, recognize no prescriptive 
rights. A person in actual possession of any property, who 
happens to have no legal and authentic document stating that 
it belongs to him, is liable to be proceeded against judicially 
and evicted by the representatives of a soi-disant legitimate 
proprietor, even though the actual possessor could prove 
that he and his ancestors had enjoyed the property without 
question and in good faith for a century or more. The same 
principle holds in the case of debts. It is not at all an un- 
common thing for creditors to sue the great-grandson of the 
original debtor for a debt contracted more than a hundred 
years before, and to force him to pay it even though he himself 
might be totally unaware of its existence. 

Usury is a recognized institution everywhere ; and there is 
no limit to the rate of interest. In the parts of the country 
where I lived the lowest rate was twelve per cent., and that they 
call the dhartna-vaddi or fair interest, a rate that would not shock 
the most sensitive conscience ^ 

Indeed to lend money at that interest is considered a meri- 
torious action. Eighteen to twenty-five per cent, is the usual 
rate, and money-lenders have been known to exact the ex- 
tortionate rate of fifty and even a hundred per cent. Happily 
the cupidity of these money-lenders often ends in their over- 

^ These and other Hindu classics in this direction since the days of the 

have now been published in English Abb^, and various proposals have 

form in The Sacred Books of the East been made to legislate in the matter, 

series.— Ed. — Ed. 

' There has been no improvement 



664 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. jii 

reaching themselves, for only people who are ruined and 
absolutely penniless will consent to pay such interest, and 
consequently the greedy creditor runs the risk of losing both 
interest and capital. Borrowers of this class do not, as 
a rule, offer any security which the creditor can pounce upon in 
case of default of payment. A Hindu's whole property gener- 
ally consists of a few head of cattle ; but such property is inviol- 
able. If a creditor tried to seize a debtor's cattle, the magistrates 
would interfere to prevent it; not altogether in the interests 
of the agriculturist, but because by thus taking away the means 
of cultivating his fields, the creditors would, at the same 
time, prevent his being able to pay the taxes which belong to 
the Stale. Even the hut which the Hindu inhabits does not 
belong to him. but is the property of the Slate. When he 
leaves his village to settle elsewhere, he has no right to dispose 
of his hovel. It remains unoccupied either until some other 
inhabitant comes, and with the consent of the headmen of the 
village takes possession of it, or until it falls to pieces. 

Thus it may readily be understood that usurious money- 
lending does not always tend to enrich the usurer. It very 
often happens thai borrower and lender are both completely 
ruined together. 

Nevertheless, the lenders need never relinquish all hope. 
The legal system of bankruptcy, which the dishonest man will 
so gladly avail himself of, and by which he can grow rich at 
the expense of his creditors, is unknown in India, If a debtor 
dies insolvent, his descendants to the sixth generation continue 
to be responsible for his debts ', 

Criminal jurisprudence in India varies greatly. In some 
castes, for instance, the woman who commits adultery renders 
herself liable to capital punishment, but neither her parents nor 
the headmen of her caste have to carry out or assist at her exe- 
cution. Her husband alone has the right to put her to death. 
These severe measures, however, have never been put in prac- 
tice except in countries governed by Native princes. The 
Mahomedans always opposed them wherever their rule extended. 
They thought it would be less cruel and more advantageous to 
the State to inflict very heavy fines for offences of this nature. 
Thus, a woman or girl not a prostitute by profession, who is 

' The law <ai this subject is now in conformity witli the English laws.— 



cH. viii] Criminal Justice in former days 665 

proved to have committed adultery, particularly if she afterwards 
became pregnant and thereby convicted herself, would be sen- 
tenced to a very heavy fine, quite beyond her |>ower to pay ; 
and her seducer would also be fined to the same amount. If 
the guilty pair were unable to find the money, the fine would fall 
on their nearest relatives, who would be obliged to pay it for 
them. The same form of punishment was meted out in any 
cases of a glaring nature where caste customs had been broken. 
These fines were collected by the revenue officer of the district 
in which the offences had been committed. It was further the 
custom for the offenders to give a feast to the headmen of their 
caste after their fines had been paid, in consideration of which 
their fault was considered to be wiped out. 

There used to be, and still are in some districts, con- 
tractors who farmed the revenue derivable from such fines. 
These men agree to pay a fixed sum to the public treasury, and 
in exchange they are allowed to keep all the fines they collect 
for minor offences against caste customs, or other peccadilloes. 
One can well imagine that all their energies are directed to 
preventing any persons from going unpunished. 

As to more serious crimes, such as theft, homicide, &c., either 
the ruling prince, his minister, or the governor of a province 
usually passed sentence on them. The governors, however, 
had not the right to condemn a man to capital punishment with- 
out the ruler's sanction. Thieves, as a rule, got off by giving up 
what they had stolen, and a good deal more besides, if they had 
it. The unfortunate man whose goods were stolen only received 
a very small portion of what he had lost, by far the larger por- 
tion remaining in the hands of the judge who had kindly con- 
sented to look into the matter. Highway robbery was punished 
by mutilation— -the right hand, nose, and ears of the robber 
being cut off. 

Murder itself was rarely punished by death. If the person 
accused was rich and knew what to give to the governor who 
tried the case, means could always be found to divert well- 
merited punishment from the culprit. If the offender was a poor 
man, they took away the little that he possessed and banished 
him and his family from the province. 

Thus the most abominable outrages on society were en- 
couraged or only lightly punished in India, whilst imaginary 



666 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

crimes invariably entailed punishment on any who might be 
accused of them. A poor Pariah was put to death in Tanjore 
for having hurled a stone at and killed a bull dedicated to 
Siva, which was devastating all the rice-fields in the neigh- 
bourhood. I knew another man of the same caste whose 
hand was cut off for having killed, also with a stone, a calf 
which was trespassing on his field. He too would have cer- 
tainly lost his life had he not been able to prove that the offence 
was unintentional, and had not several persons of note interceded 
in his behalf. 

A person condemned to capital punishment is either shot, 
hanged, or beheaded. There are many forms of punishment 
and torture prevalent in India. For instance, the offender may 
be banished from the country, severely flogged, or rolled naked 
on burning hot stones; or he may be condemned to carry a heavy 
weight on his head or shoulders until he faints from exhaus- 
tion ; or he may be tied to a stake and exposed to the burning 
rays of the sun with bare head and naked body ; or his hands 
and feet may be put into fetters tightened till they almost dislo- 
cate the joints ; needles may be inserted under his nails ; the 
pungent and acrid juice of the pepper-plant may be injected into 
his eyes and nostrils ; or large bodkins may be plunged into the 
most sensitive and fleshy parts of his body, and on their with- 
drawal the parts be rubbed with salt and vinegar or burning acids. 
These are only a few of the horrors invented as punishments by 
the Hindus. It is not on murderers, thieves, and offenders of 
that class that these terrible punishments fall. They are much 
more likely to be inflicted on Government officials guilty of mal- 
practices or malversation of public moneys, or on anybody who 
is known to be well off, but who declines to allow himself to be 
fleeced. 

In those provinces which are still under Native government, 
and especially in those where the rulers are Mahomedans, no 
man's fortune is safe, however honestly it may have been 
acquired. Government agents, aided by a highly organized 
system of espionage, contrive to obtain most accurate informa- 
tion respecting the amount of every person's fortune ; and 
whenever an unhappy individual is ascertained to have saved 

^ The Indian Penal Code effectually provides against such sentences nowa- 
days.— Ed. 



CH. viii] Torturing Prisoners 667 

enough to attract the prince's cupidity, he is denounced, arrested, 
and imprisoned. If these high-handed proceedings are not 
sufficient to induce him to transfer the contents of his strong 
box into the prince's treasury, harsher measures, such as 
torture, are resorted to. 

Mahomedans treat even the Brahmins in their service with 
the same severity. But, it must be admitted, the latter only 
experience the kind of treatment that they have so often inflicted 
on their fellows. No one can be harder, more cruel, or more 
pitiless towards the poor agriculturists than a Brahmin invested 
with authority, when he sees a chance of wringing money from 
them. Nevertheless there are many Hindus, and Brahmins 
particularly, who endure with unshaken firmness and courage 
the most horrible tortures inflicted on them, even when their 
lives are in danger, rather than give up their treasures. I have 
known Brahmins who have been thus persecuted for year after 
year and without success. They may be seen with their bodies 
so covered with bruises and wounds, that they appear to be but 
one large festering sore, a prey to all kinds of vermin ; and in 
this sad plight all relief is denied them, even to the extent of 
refusing dressing for their wounds. 

If the poor prisoner survives these cruel tortures, his tor- 
mentors, astonished at his fortitude, will set him at liberty, 
ashamed at last of their unsuccessful efforts at coercion. This 
faculty of bearing the most excruciating pain with calm endur- 
ance is very common among the Hindus. There are some, how- 
ever, who are not thus gifted by nature, and who, after resisting 
as long as possible, at length submit and come to terms with 
their oppressors. These weaker members receive a present, 
perhaps, of a new turban or a piece of new cloth. Their 
persecutors express much regret at having been obliged to 
resort to such harsh measures, remarking at the same time 
that their victims might have spared themselves much pain 
and torment by acceding to their requests in the first instance. 
The victims are then restored to their former honours and 
employments. Filled with the desire to recoup themselves 
for their losses, they seize every opportunity for extortion, 
until they become rich once more and are forced to disgorge 
their plunder. But whatever crimes they may commit or what- 
ever tortures they may endure, no disgrace is attached to 



668 Hindu Manners, Cusioms, and Ceremonies [pt. m 



cither. The penalty of death itself leaves no stain on the 
memory of the man who has undergone this supreme punish- 
ment ; and, as a natural consequence, no sort of disgrace is 
reflected on the family of the victim. A Brahmin would be 
degraded and banished from his caste for having eaten food 
which had been prepared, or drunk water that had been drawn, 
by a person of lower caste ; but were he convicted of stealing, 
of uttering vile calumnies, of attempting to take another man's 
life, or of betraying his prince or country, none of these 
offences would prevent his appearing without fear or shame in 
public, or would hinder his being well received everywhere. 

In civil as well as in criminal cases, when the evidence does 
not completely establish a fact, the Hindus often have recourse 
to ordeals to decide the point at issue. There are four ordeals 
generally recognized among Hindus, namely, by the scales, by 
fire, by water, and by poison '. 

It is not the magistrates only who order these trials by 
ordeal. Any one has the right to insist on such a trial. Thus, 
if a thefl has been committed, the head of a household compels 
each member to undergo an ordeal. In the same way, the head 
of a village may force it upon all the inhabitants on whom 
criminal suspicion may rest ; and a jealous husband may order 
the same in the case of his wife whose fidelity he doubts. These 
ordeals sometimes produce such an effect on the real culprits 
thai they are convinced that discovery is inevitable, and think it 
more prudent to confess their guiit at once than to aggravate 
the matter by keeping silence. On the other hand, such ordeals 
often occasion deplorable miscarriages of justice, and result 
in the conviction of innocent persons, who, strong in the 
knowledge of their innocence, fondly believe that the natural 
course of things will be reversed in their favour'. 



' As trial by ordeal is one of the 
principal features in Hindu jurispru- 
dence, 1 have given a more detailed 
account of it in Appendix VI.— Du- 

' This mtthod of deciding a chec, 
degrading example as it is of the 
foolish bcliejs of which the human 

amongst all ancient henthcii nailuiis. 



Indeed it waa still in existence in 
most Christian countries (ill the thir- 
teenth century. In the belief that it 
was impossible, even in the most bar- 
barous ages, for Ihc obvious abuses 
of this system to have escaped (he 
eyes of the judges who were bound 
lo uphold it, some people have sug- 
gested that, while the long cere mo- 



CH. VIIl] 



Trial by Ordeal 



669 



A certain young woman who lived close to my house became 
the victim of her husband's jealous suspicions. To prove her 
innocence, he forced her to plunge her arm up to the elbow 
into a bath of boiling oil. The unhappy woman, sure of her in- 
violable virtue, did not hesitate to obey, and the result was that 
she was most frightfully scalded. The wound became inflamed 
and blistered, finally mortified, and caused the unhappy woman's 
death. 

No doubt the disregard of the sanctity of an oath prevailing 
among the Hindus has, to a certain extent, necessitated the 
adoption of this system of trial by ordeal. 

Certain it is that there is no nation in the world who think so 
lightly of an oath or of perjury. The Hindu will fearlessly call 
upon all his gods— celestial, terrestrial, and infernal — to witness 
his good faith in the least of his undertakings ; but should fresh 
circumstances demand it, he would not have the smallest scruple 
in breaking the word that he had so solemnly pledged. Woe 
to the imprudent person who confides to Hindus any private 
matter that affects his fortune, his honour, or his life ! If it 
served their purpose, they would divulge it without any 
hesitation. 

The unscrupulous manner in which Hindus will perjure them- 
selves is so notorious that they are never called upon to make 
a statement on oath in their own courts of justice, unless they 
are persons who bear an exceptionally high character \ 



preceded the ordeals were going on, 
the judges were able to determine the 
guilt or innocence of the accused by 
their demeanour, and that in the for- 
mer case they left them to the ordeal, 
while in the latter they found means, 
cither by the application of medicines 
or drugs or by some other trickery, 
to ensure their passing through the 
ordeal safe and sound. It appears 
moreover that Hindu judges used to 
protect by other means the accused 
who were to undergo any dangerous 
ordeal. Thus, for instance, in some 
provinces, if a stolen object was of 
small value, such as a gold ornament, 
the judges would order a vessel full 
of water to be brought, and each sus- 



pected person received a smaller 
vessel of soft clay, which he had to 
place in the larger vessel. These 
soft earthen vessels were easily dis- 
solved in the water, and the lost 
property was generally found at the 
bottom. Thus the culprit escaped 
undiscovered, and there was no need 
for the ordeal to take place. — Dubois. 

The detection of crime by ordeal 
is not entirely dead even now. But 
it is not, of course, recognized in the 
regular courts, and in fact is illegal. 
—Ed. 

^ In India: What (an it teach us? 
Professor Max MQller defends with no 
little skill the general credibility of 
the Hindus. He quotes, inter alios, Sir 



670 Hindu Manners J Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

But the jurisprudence of the Hindus, like the rest of their 
political institutions, has undergone a complete change since 
a great European Power has dominated the country. Regular 
courts of justice have been established at great expense in 
every district to protect the rights and settle the differences of 
persons of all classes, irrespective of rank, position, and caste. 
And this is, undoubtedly, one of the greatest benefits that a just 
and enlightened Government can bestow on any country. How- 
ever much opinions may differ as to the usages of these courts, 
it seems to me that no one can deny that they have already 
been productive of immense benefit. Nowadays every member 
of society can rest assured that, sooner or later, the wrongs 
under which he suffers, either in his person or his property, will 
be redressed, and he can also rely unreservedly upon the impar- 
tiality of his judges, an advantage he was far from enjoying 
under the iron rule of his former despotic masters. At the same 
time, it must be admitted that the present judicial system has 
by no means realized all the objects for which it was established. 
Indeed, how could any one reasonably expect that such a huge 
measure of reform would be sealed with perfection from its very 
commencement ? Every creation of the human brain can always 
be improved upon when the light of experience has shown up its 
defects and revealed the mistakes that have been committed. 
For example, the fact cannot be disguised that the slow and 
cautious method of procedure which is customary in a European 
court of law is by no means adapted to the majority of Hindus, 
who from their straitened circumstances and the nature of their 
occupations cannot afford such long and expensive modes of 
litigation. Is it likely that they would find it convenient to 
wait about at the place where justice is dispensed, it may be for 
many days, till their turn to be heard comes, leaving, as they 
must, in the mean time their families without any means of 
subsistence ? From this point of view the new system is all 
to the advantage of the rich and influential and to the detriment 
of the poor, against whom the former can bring vexatious suits 

John Malcolm, who asserted: * I have formed and ti*ustworthy medium, that 

hardly ever known, where a person the result did not prove that what 

did understand the language, or where had at first been stated as falsehood 

a calm communication was made to a had either proceeded from fear or 

native of India through a well-in- from misapprehension.' — £d. 



CH. viii] The European Judicial System 671 

with impunity. So great is the dread amongst the poorer Hindus 
of these lengthy processes, and of the prolonged absences from 
their homes which they entail, that when they are cited to appear 
as witnesses before these new tribunals, they will often spend 
large sums in bribing the official who brings the summons, if 
any means whatever can be found by which they can elude the 
hateful business. If brawls or quarrels arise in a village, the 
neighbours, far from interposing and trying to restore peace, 
retire promptly to their own houses, terribly afraid lest they may 
be called as witnesses in court, and thus waste much precious 
time which otherwise might be profitably employed in the fields 
or in the house. 

The conclusion to be drawn from this seems to be that under 
the new system of judicial administration sufficient attention 
has not been paid to the peculiar character, disposition, and 
prejudices of the people for whose benefit it was devised. It 
was not sufficiently borne in mind that nowhere in the whole 
world is there another race of men so obstinate, so deceitful, 
and so litigious as the Hindus, partly from faults of training 
and partly from their deep-seated attachment to caste customs. 
What we should think trifles appear to them of the utmost im- 
portance, and are often the cause of lawsuits. I defy the most 
active, zealous, and intelligent judge, especially in view of the 
enormous tract of country over which he has to administer justice 
— I defy him, I repeat, to hear one-fifth of the grievances, either 
real or imaginary, which people are ready to pour into his ears. 
Three-fourths at least of the legal proceedings have to do with 
the most petty concerns, though they are far from being regarded 
as such by the complainants. They are usually about small debts, 
quarrels, slanders, trifling assaults without bloodshed, petty 
larceny, &c. The settlement of these small matters might very 
well be removed from the jurisdiction of the higher courts and 
placed in the hands of village panchayats or petty courts of 
arbitration, composed of the best materials available ; or they 
might, in part at any rate, be left to the village headmen, whose 
judgements in either case would be expeditious and without 
appeal. It could certainly not be expected that these sub- 
ordinate courts would fulfil their duties with very scrupulous 
integrity or strict impartiality ; but the parties concerned would 
always have as compensation for the small injustices of which 



672 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

they might now and then be the victims the immense advantage 
of not losing their time or being put to an expense which more 
often than not is out of all proportion to the value of the matter 
in dispute. 

Of the penalties sanctioned by the European courts of justice, 
imprisonment for debt, amongst others, strikes the Hindus as 
a ridiculous expedient, and it is one at which they often laugh. 
To be deprived of liberty without any additional coercion or 
torture appears to them no punishment at all. Any Hindu who 
has sufficient private means would be quite contented never to 
leave his house night or day; he would be in a state of indolent 
repose, chewing betel, smoking his pipe, eating, drinking, and 
sleeping without taking the least interest in what was going on 
in the world outside. 

There are two classes of persons who are imprisoned for 
debt : firstly, those who are fraudulent debtors, who can pay, but 
refuse to do so, and whom torture alone would bring to their 
senses ; and, secondly y those who are absolutely insolvent. The 
first of these two classes will go to prison with the utmost 
indifference, while the second are positively delighted to be 
sent there, because the aggrieved party is obliged to feed them 
while they are in prison. And what can be more pleasing 
to Hindus than to be maintained in idleness? It must be 
borne in mind that most Hindus, when they borrow money, do 
so with the lurking hope that circumstances will arise, or that 
they will think of some expedient, by which they will be able to 
elude repayment. Thus strong measures have to be resorted 
to as the only means by which payment can be exacted from 
such very unscrupulous debtors. When the time for payment 
comes and the creditor demands his money, the debtor declares 
he has none and begs for further grace, swearing by all his 
gods that he will pay everything, capital and interest, at the 
time stipulated. More time is granted, once and even twice, and 
each time the debtor's fine promises end in smoke. At last 
the creditor becomes tired of these interminable delays, grows 
angry, and arrests the debtor in the name either of the ruler of 
the country or of the governor of the province \ The creditor 

* This method of arrest is very com- King or the East India Company, or in 
mon. * I arrest you/ one Hindu will the name of the Collector of the dis- 
say to another, ' in the name of the trict/ &c. The person to whom the 



cH. viii] Debtors and Creditors 673 

forbids his debtor to eat or drink without his permission, and 
at the same time he himself is bound to fast. If this method 
does not succeed, the creditor places a huge stone on the debtor's 
head and a similar one on his own, and thus burdened they 
remain motionless opposite each other, exposed to the heat of 
the sun ; or they walk till one of them faints from exhaustion ; 
or they both stand on one foot like cranes ; or sometimes the 
creditor seizes the debtor's cattle and shuts them up, forbidding 
any one to feed them until pajmient has been made in full. At 
last the debtor is so worried that he is unable to bear it any 
longer ; he comes to terms, pays a large sum on account, and 
gives good security for the remainder. Creditor and debtor 
then part on the best of terms. Very often the creditor is so 
hard pushed himself that he is obliged to relinquish a part of 
what is due to him in order to get back some of his money. 

Is it likely, I may ask, that men who carry obstinacy and 
tenacity to such lengths would be alarmed at the prospect of 
enjoying a few idle weeks in prison ? 

The only object of a prison, according to the Hindus, is to 
prevent the accused or the criminal running away. No disgrace 
is attached to imprisonment, and consequently it is no punish- 
ment at all. In fact mere imprisonment is not looked upon as 
a punishment even by magistrates in native provinces. Every 
one condemned to prison has to undergo more or less severe 
torture according to the gravity of his offence. If it is but 
a trifling misdemeanour, the delinquent is beaten and then set 
at liberty. 

All intelligent Hindus are agreed that the penal laws in- 
troduced by Europeans into their country err considerably on 
the side of leniency. They consider them quite inadequate to 
protect society against evil-doers. To keep peace and order 
amongst a nation constituted like the Hindus, they say, much 
harsher measures must be resorted -to. 

Even capital punishment appears to produce no impression 
whatever on these apathetic people. The sight of an execution, 

summons is addressed is obliged to punished for contempt of the law. — 

obey it, to leave his business, and to Dubois. 

place himself at the disposal of his No such private arrests are now 

adversary- If he attempted to escape, permitted by law. — Ed. 

he would render himself liable to be 

** XX 



674 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies 

far from moving the spectators to feelings of pity or com- 
passion, is only looked upon as an amusement; and they are 
even much diverted by the convulsive contortions of the poor 
wretch who is hanging on the gallows. Perhaps the utter want 
of feeling shown by the crowd under these circumstances was 
one of the reasons why native princes so rarely resorted to 
capital punishment. Probably they reflected that punishments 
were inflicted quite as much for the sake of their deterrent 
effect on others as for the chastisement of the guilty. Mutilation 
appeared to them to be a much more efficacious way of repressing 
vice. Criminals deprived of nose, ears, or right hand, dragging 
out their miserable existence before the eyes of all men, were 
living and lasting witnesses of the severity of the law, and their 
woeful appearance served as a daily example to others. See, 
they seemed to say to every passer-by, what a sad fate awaits 
those who break the laws ! 

The death penalty, on the other hand, barely excites a pass- 
ing terror, and I very much doubt whether the fear of it ever 
restrained any Hindu who was bent on committing a crime. 



CHAPTER IX 

The Military System of the Hindus.— Ancient and Modern Methods of War- 
fare. — The Material formerly composing their Armies. — The Military 
Game of Chess invented by the Hindus. — Pohgars. — Different Weapons 
that have been in Use at various Times in India. 

Here my self-imposed task should have been brought to 
a close, for it is hardly to be expected that I can treat the 
subject-matter of this chapter satisfactorily, seeing how foreign 
it is to my profession. However, as nearly all the public 
monuments of India, both civil and religious, commemorate 
some war, and as all the Hindu books are filled with descrip- 
tions of feats of arms and accounts of battles, I thought that 
a few details on this subject would not be entirely out of place 
in such a work as the present. 

The Kshatriyas, or kings, and their descendants the Rajputs 
formerly held undisputed sway in India, and they alone had 
a right to follow the military profession. All this, however, 
has nowadays undergone a complete change, ambition having 
found a way through this hard and fast rule. At the present 
time there are very few native rulers who belong to the old 
warrior caste. In this case, as in many others, the strongest 
have seized the reins of government. Indeed, in many provinces 
one may find princes of very low origin, who by their courage, 
their talents, or their intrigues have raised themselves to their 
high position. In the same way the profession of arms has now 
been thrown open to men of all castes, from the Brahmin to 
the Pariah. On the one hand one may see a Brahmin who 
has attained the rank of commander-in-chief of an army, while 
on the other hand, especially in the Mahratta armies, you may 
see them serving as common troopers. 

X X 2 



676 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [pt. m 

Though the habits of the Hindus appear more likely to 
impair their courage than to make them good soldiers, the art 
of war nevertheless seems to have been as well understood 
by them from very early times as any other, and those who 
followed the military profession have always been held in high 
esteem. In fact, military officers took rank in the social scale 
immediately after the priesthood. The Brahmins themselves, 
actuated by motives either of gratitude or of self-interest, allowed 
them to participate in some of their own high prerogatives, such 
as the valued privileges of being allowed to hear the Vedas 
read and of wearing the triple cord. But however much the 
Hindus may have honoured the profession of arms, and how- 
ever full their national histories may be of wars, conquests, 
sieges, battles, victories, and defeats, it is nevertheless remark- 
able that no nation has shown at every epoch in its history 
so little skill in military science. When pitiless conquerors, at 
the head of savage and warlike hordes, forced their way over the 
northern mountains and spread themselves like a devastating 
torrent over the fertile provinces of India, the peaceable and 
docile inhabitants were unable to offer any effectual resistance. 
They saw their towns and villages ravaged by fire and sword, 
while rivers of blood, ingloriously and fruitlessly spilt, deluged 
their fields. The readiness with which they bent their necks 
beneath their oppressors' yoke, and the feebleness of the efforts 
which they put forth to recover their independence, proved how 
inferior they were in courage and discipline to the proud Tartars 
who invaded and conquered them. 

The wars of India may be classified under three heads : those 
of. the mythical ages, those of the ancient kings, and those of 
modern times. By the last I mean only the internecine wars 
between native princes before the time when these princes, 
convinced of the superiority of European military science, 
determined to introduce foreigners amongst their trqops, and 
to this end enlisted in their service those European adventurers 
who offered to help them in their undertakings. It was an 
imprudent policy, and the native princes did not see until too 
late the danger of surrounding themselves with such intriguing 
and ambitious auxiliaries. 

I will say nothing about the wars of the gods and the 
giants, which the majority of Hindu books describe with equal 



CH. ix] The Mythical Wars of India 677 

bombast and prolixity. Such exaggerated flights of imagination 
can hardly be considered worthy of a place in serious history. 
It is always the same story of armies of giants whose heads 
touched the stars, and who were mounted on elephants of pro- 
portionate size. One of these giants, for example, is depicted 
as upheaving the very firmament with his shoulders, giving it 
such a violent shock as to overthrow all the gods who dwelt 
therein, and thereby warning them of what they might expect 
from an adversary of such prowess. On the other hand, a god 
who is about to engage these formidable enemies takes the earth 
for his chariot, a rainbow for his bow, and Vishnu for an arrow. 
He shoots this extraordinary missile, and with one shot overthrows 
an immense city, in which all the villains that he is pursuing 
are entrenched, burying them all in the fallen ruins of the city. 

Ab uno disce omnes. I do not think that the history of 
the wars of the ancient kings of India is one whit less absurd. 
It is only the poets who have undertaken the task of trans- 
mitting details to posterity, and as Hindu poets are not wont 
to do things by halves, they have freely availed themselves of 
the privilege of exaggeration and embellishment. Facts are so 
interwoven with foolish and senseless efibrts of the imagination 
that it is impossible to disentangle the truth. Why should 
one feel astonished at Xerxes being able to gather together and 
maintain a million soldiers when he set forth to conquer Greece ? 
Such an army would have formed only a small detachment of 
one of the armies of the kings of India. These latter never 
took the field at the head of less than several hundreds of 
millions of fighting men ! If the reader will recollect what 
I have remarked several times, namely, that only that which is 
extraordinary and extravagant has the power of pleasing the 
Hindu, he will hardly be astonished at the strange mania which 
has induced Hindu authors to carry exaggeration even to 
puerility. In every country writers adapt their work to the 
taste of the public, being anxious to gain from them the greatest 
possible approbation. The maxim 

'Rien ii*est beau que le vrai, le vrai seul est aimable, 

would be rank heresy in good Hindu literature. 

The one fact that I have been able to glean for certain is that 
the armies of the ancient Hindu kings were divided into four 



678 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

arms or sections, of which the whole formed a chatur-angam. 
These four corps were the elephants, the chariots, the cavalry, 
and the infantry. Such, indeed, were the component parts of 
the army of Porus, who was vanquished and taken prisoner on 
the banks^ of the Hydaspes by Alexander. 

No one at the present day denies the fact that the Hindus 
invented the military game of chess*. 

It is very evident that it was the composition and tactics of 
the ancient Hindu armies that originally suggested the game. 
The Hindus, in fact, called it chatur-angam. Though with some 
few small variations we have adopted their method of playing, 
it must be admitted that the innovations which we have in- 
troduced in the shapes and names of the pieces are certainly 
not happy. What can be more ridiculous than the castles which 
move about from place to place, the queen who rushes about 
fighting with the king's people, or the bishops who occupy such 
an exalted position ? 

As with us, the most important piece on the Hindu chess- 



* The following is the story, ac- 
cording to Oriental writers, of how 
this game was invented. At the be- 
ginning of the fifth century of the 
Christian era a very powerful young 
monarch was reigning in India, who 
was of excellent character, but who 
allowed himself to be corrupted by 
flatterers. This prince soon forgot 
that the love of the people is the 
only sure support of a throne. The 
Brahmins and Rajahs uttered many 
remonstrances, but in vain. Intoxi- 
cated by his greatness, which he 
fancied was unassailable, he despised 
their counsels. Accordingly a Brah- 
min named Sissa undertook to open 
the young monarch's eyes by strategy. 
To this end he invented the game of 
chess, in which the king, though the 
most important of all the pieces, can 
nevertheless neither attack nor defend 
himself without the assistance of his 
subjects. This game speedily became 
famous, and the king expressed his 
anxiety to learn it. Sissa while teach- 



ing him the rules, made him realize 
some important truths which up to 
that time he had failed to g^asp, and 
the monarch wishing to show his 
gratitude to the Brahmin asked him 
what he would like as a reward. 
Sissa replied that he would be satisfied 
with as much rice as could be placed 
on the sixty-four squares of the chess- 
board by putting one grain on the first, 
two on the second, four on the third, 
and so on, the number on each square 
always doubling. The king cheerfully 
agreed to such an apparently modest 
demand. But the treasurers soon 
convinced their master that he had 
pledged himself to an act of munifi- 
cence which, in spite of all his treasure 
and vast estates, he would be quite 
unable to fulfil. Sissa at once seized 
the opportunity of pointing out to the 
monarch how easy it was to abuse the 
best intentions of a sovereign if he 
were not perpetually on his guard 
against those who surrounded him. — 
Dubois. 



CH. ix] Ancient Hindu Armies 679 

board is the king\ The second piece, which we call the queen', 
they term the mantri, a title which signifies a minister of state, 
who is also commander-in-chief of the army. Chariots " occupy 
the place of our bishops. Like us, the Hindus have knights, 
but instead of our battlemented castles they have elephants*. 
The pawns or foot-soldiers are, as with us, the simple rank and 
file of which the army is composed. The chess-board is called 
by the Hindus the por-sthaiam; or field of battle. 

But to return to the ancient Hindu armies. In the first line 
came the elephants. It is certain that these animals carried 
castles or howdahs on their backs, containing several men 
armed with javelins. But I think it would be wrong to 
suppose that these castles or howdahs were of any great size, 
as might be imagined from certain illustrations. Like those 
which may still be found in the present day amongst the armies 
of some Eastern princes, these towers or howdahs resembled 
large boxes without lids, as long and as broad as a large 
bed, placed crosswise on the back of the elephant, and capable 
of holding six or seven archers when sitting in Oriental fashion. 
Though an elephant is very strong, so as to be able to carry 
two small cannons and their carriages, there is neverthe- 
less a limit to its powers; and naturally a much larger 
erection, with a still larger number of men in it, would be 
a burden under which even an elephant would succumb. And 
there is yet another point, namely, the difficulty of fixing 
a lofly structure with any degree of security on an elephant's 
back, a difficulty which would be rendered practically insur- 
mountable by the brusque movements and rolling gait of the 
animal. Be this as it may, elephants in days gone by were 
formidable adversaries amongst these half-disciplined nations. 
They broke the ranks, frightened the horses, trampled the 
soldiers underfoot ; and at the same time it was very difficult 
to wound them, on account of their hard and horny epidermis. 
These powerful creatures are still employed in the armies 

* The Arab and Persian name for * In many Eastern countries these 

chess is * the king's game.' — Dubois. are elephants. — Dubois. 

^ In Low Latin this piece was called * Amongst other Asiatic nations 
/emoy from the Persian firs, which these are camels ridden by a man with 
means minister of siaie, vitir. — Du- a bow and arrow in his hand. — Du- 
bois. BOIS. 



68o Hindu Manners j Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. hi 

of native princes, but rather from ostentation than from any war- 
like purpose that they serve. A native general or senior officer 
considers an elephant to be the only mount befitting his dignity ; 
the animal being usually covered with magnificent trappings. 
It is only with great difficulty that elephants can be made to 
stand fire, though every method is employed to familiarize them 
with it. Without these precautions the rattle of firearms and 
the squibs that are hurled at them would excite them to frenzy, 
and would consequently cause the death of their riders. 

They were also used for battering the gates of besieged 
towns ; and it was with a view to counteracting this that most 
of the gates were thickly studded on the outside with long and 
stout iron spikes. 

In the Mogul armies, before the introduction of European 
tactics, an elephant always marched in the van, bearing on 
its head a long pole, from which floated a large flag. Some- 
times this was followed by another elephant carrying a rich 
howdah, on which was placed a box containing a priceless relic, 
which usually was, if one may believe it, an actual hair from 
Mahomet's beard. 

The chief service which these animals render nowadays is 
in the transport of artillery and equipage. When a swamp, 
a ditch, a canal, or any other obstacle arrests the progress of 
the bullocks that drag the cannon, one or more elephants are 
brought up to push the gun-carriage with their heads and trunks 
and thus help them over the difficulty. When rivers which are 
not fordable have to be crossed, elephants are often used to 
carry men and heavy baggage over on their backs. But the 
services of these animals are dearly bought, considering the 
vast expense which their food and keep entail. Thus they are 
falling more and more into disuse. Every day the camel is 
growing in favour as being more patient and tractable. 

Chariots formed the second division of the ancient Hindu 
armies. If one may believe what early Hindu writers say, these 
chariots were used in considerable numbers and were of con- 
siderable size. That of the king was the most magnificent. 
The rest belonged to his subordinate chiefs. When two hostile 
armies met, the leaders on each side were in the habit of inter- 
changing compliments with each other before joining battle. 
One, for instance, would drop an arrow just short of his 



cH. ix] Cavalry in Indian Armies 68i 

adversary's chariot, and the other would return the salute. 
Splendid horses were harnessed to these war-chariots. One 
reads in the Bhagavata that one of the old kings of India, 
when setting out on a campaign, harnessed a troop of demons 
to his chariot, to ensure the pace being good. The chariots 
were usually ornamented all round with large bells, which made 
a great noise, and this custom is still occasionally observed 
at the present time in the case of private carriages. The latter, 
however, in no way resemble the ancient war-chariots, about 
which I have not been able to collect any trustworthy infor- 
mation. 

The cavalry formed the third division. Indian generals in 
ancient times, however, did not rely much on this arm. The 
infantry played the principal part in their wars, which is con- 
trary to the practice of more modem times, for until quite 
recently no use whatever was made of infantry, only a few 
undisciplined regiments of followers being maintained to pillage, 
ravage, and destroy all the villages in their way, and to devastate 
the enemy's country. This idea they had evidently borrowed 
from the Tartars, who had invaded their country, and whose 
superiority in arms they had been forced to acknowledge to 
their cost. 

The Moguls and Mahrattas, the two rival powers who for 
a long while disputed the supremacy of India, placed on some 
occasions as many as 100,000 horse in the field. The 
Mahratta princes combined could have commanded as many 
as 300,000 horse. But they never knew how to utilize this 
unwieldy multitude to its full advantage, because they did not 
understand how to manoeuvre it in a scientific manner. The 
lessons which the European invaders gave them time after 
time, for more than 300 years, seem hardly to have taught them 
^ to appreciate their mistakes. Even at the end of this long period, 
and when it was too late to mend matters, there was a vast 
inferiority in their tactics compared with those of their dreaded 
opponents. They never could be brought to understand the 
value of strict discipline, good tactical handling, orderly arrange- 
ments in marching and camping, and, in short, all the skilled 
dispositions by which it is possible to manoeuvre large bodies 
of troops without confusion. They thought their work was 
done when they had collected a miscellaneous horde of men. 



682 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

who marched to battle in a disorderly mass and fell upon 
the enemy without any method or concerted plan. 

Indian armies always contain a large number of chiefs who 
command as many troopers as they are able to raise at their 
own expense. Each recruit brings his own horse, which remains 
his private property. He receives a fixed sum for himself and for 
the keep of his horse. If he happens to lose his horse, he is 
dismissed as useless. This plan certainly puts the State to 
little expense, but it renders the cavalry as a body less effective, 
for at close quarters the rider's first care is for his horse, which 
belongs to himself; nay, often, when he sees that there is 
much danger, he will take to flight at the first order to charge. 
Desertion indeed is very common in the armies of Indian 
princes. As a rule, little trouble is taken to catch deserters ; 
nor are they severely punished when caught. In order to 
ensure fidelity amongst their troops the chiefs are in the habit 
of keeping their pay in arrear ; and this prevents a large 
number of mercenaries from deserting, as they fear to lose what 
is due to them. Nevertheless, whole armies have been known 
to throw down their arms in face of the enemy and refuse to 
take them up again until they had received their pay. It is by 
no means a rare occurrence for large bodies of troops to refuse 
to set out on a march for a similar reason. Mutinous soldiers, 
too, frequently put their generals under arrest, send them to 
prison, menace them sword in hand, or try to intimidate them 
by loud threats and insults. The generals, strange to say, will 
calmly and patiently put up with these mutinous outbursts. 
Usually they will pay the mutineers a part of their arrears and 
promise the rest in a short time. Quiet is then restored, and 
the men return to duty until another such occasion presents 
itself. 

Although these undisciplined mercenaries make very inferior 
troops, still there are instances on record of honourable and 
brave conduct among their chiefs, especially among Mahomedan 
chiefs of high rank. The latter never cry for quarter; and, 
even when the day is going against them, they will not 
retreat a step as long as they have the support of a few of their 
followers. Flight or retreat under such circumstances is con- 
sidered by them even more ignominious than it is by their 
European opponents. 



CH. ix] Indian Horses 683 

The ordinary cavalry troopers, be they Mahomedan or 
Mahratta, are usually very badly mounted, and their equip- 
ments are still worse. Nevertheless, their weedy-looking 
chargers are so inured to fatigue and so accustomed to privation 
that they will make, with only a little coarse hay for food, 
a succession of forced marches which would be quite beyond 
the capabilities of our best European cavalry, covering as they 
sometimes do as much as sixty miles a day. Mounted on these 
wretched animals, detachments of troops are able to cover great 
distances, and to sweep down suddenly on districts from which 
they were supposed to be far away. It must not be supposed 
that there are not very good horses to be found, especially in 
the Southern provinces of India ; but they are only to be bought 
for very high prices that are quite beyond the means of ordinary 
persons. Only the chiefs possess really fine horses. They 
take remarkably good care of them. They usually decorate 
them in various ways, and often paint their bodies in different 
colours. They train them in an extremely clever manner, and 
ride them most gracefully. Many indeed would be able to 
carry off prizes in our European riding-schools. The Mah- 
rattas, for instance, accustom their horses to stop at a given 
signal. The rider dismounts and goes away, leaving his steed 
loose Sometimes for hours together the animal will remain 
as still as a milestone until his master returns. A horse-stealer 
who one day came across a solitary steed, which had thus been 
left without any one to look after it, mounted it and galloped off. 
The owner of the horse, seeing from a distance what had 
happened, thereupon gave the call by which he always stopped 
the animal. At the sound of its master's voice the horse per- 
ceived its mistake and stood stock still. In spite of every effort 
on the part of the thief it refused to budge ; whereupon the latter 
thought it more prudent to take to flight on his own two legs. 

The troopers, Mahomedan and Mahratta, are armed with 
lances, javelins, and katharis, or daggers. Some few have 
blunderbusses in addition, while others have indifferent sabres. 
A few may be seen armed with nothing but the whip or 
switch which they use in urging on their horses. Each man, 
in short, is expected to arm himself at his own expense, and 
consequently a remarkable variety may be noticed in the equip- 
ments of a troop of native cavalry. 



684 Hindu Manners^ Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

They march in the most irregular fashion, and have no idea 
of regular military movements. Indeed, any such knowledge 
would be of little or no use to them, for they very rarely take 
part in a pitched battle. All their campaigns are reduced to 
mere skirmishes and constant surprises on one side or the 
other, in which very little blood is shed. The chief operations 
of native armies are confined to ravaging the country that they 
happen to be passing through, without distinction of friend 
or foe, and pillaging without mercy all the defenceless inhabi- 
tants, who are put to inconceivable tortures in the attempt 
to force them to disgorge imaginary treasure that they never 
possess. 

The infantry is, if possible, in even a worse plight ; or at any 
rate it was up to the time when native princes were induced 
to admit European adventurers into their service, to reorganize 
and drill their armies. 

The ancient kings of India placed most reliance on their 
infantry. It formed the fourth division of their armies, and was 
numerically larger than the other three. It formed, in fact, the 
main strength of the combined forces. At the present day, too, it 
constitutes the principal, and indeed almost the only, force of the 
smaller native princes who are known by the name o(Po/igars^, 
These Poligars rarely have any cavalry, the smallness of their 
revenues and the character of the country they inhabit rendering 
it almost impossible to maintain them. 

The Poligars in many respects resemble the European barons 
of the Middle Ages, who from their strongholds ventured boldly 
to defy the royal authority. They are fairly numerous in the 
various districts of the Peninsula, and they were much more 
numerous before the great European Power extended its 
dominion over the territories in which they were established 
and subdued the greater number of them. These petty despots 
waged almost incessant war against each other. Safely en- 
sconced in deep jungles or on inaccessible mountain-tops, they 
were able to defy the princes whose territories surrounded them ; 
and the latter, unable to suppress these turbulent vassals for 
fear that they would pillage and devastate their own states, tried 
to live amicably with them. 

These Poligars or self-styled princes made war according to 

* These inhabit the southern districts of the Peninsula. — Ed. 



cH. ix] Laying out Camps 685 

methods of their own. The use of cannon was unknown to 
them ; their only arms being arrows, pikes, and flint-locks. 
They never risked a pitched battle. When attacked by a 
superior force they took refuge in their jungles or on their 
mountains. Their object would be to surprise the advancing 
enemy in some defile. Lying in ambush behind trees or thick 
brushwood, they would pour well-directed volleys upon their 
opponents, forcing them to retire in disorder with considerable 
loss. It was in the midst of their jungles or on the tops of 
their mountains that the English, after much labour and the loss 
of many men, managed to lay hands upon these brigand chiefs 
and their lawless followers. Only by these means were the new- 
comers able to restore peace and tranquillity in provinces which 
had previously been the scene of perpetual outrages. 

The art of laying out camps is as little known to Indian 
generals as that of marching an army. The greatest confusion 
always reigns both in their encampments and on the march. 
When an army makes a halt, the most important point, of 
course, is to see that there is a good supply of water close at 
hand. This is not always to be found where it is wanted, 
especially at certain times of the year, and whole armies have 
been reduced to the direst straits by being temporarily deprived 
of this indispensable element, the want of which is much more 
keenly felt in a tropical climate than elsewhere. 

An officer usually goes on ahead, selects a suitable site for 
the camp, and there sets up a large flag, which is visible from 
a long distance. Each division then encamps in any sort of 
order beyond this landmark. Each chief pitches his tent in the 
midst of his own followers, and hoists his distinctive banner. 
Confusion and disorder prevail everywhere. Things are, how- 
ever, a little more orderly around the commander-in-chiefs 
tent. Fairly good discipline is also maintained in the spot set 
apart as a market-place. Here provisions and commodities of 
various kinds, pillaged from the country through which the army 
has passed, are exposed for sale ; for the progress of an Indian 
army is always attended by fire, sword, and robbery. In fact, it 
is considered unnecessary and troublesome to establish regular 
depots for provisions, or in fact to make commissariat arrange- 
ments of any kind. It was only when an army was obliged 
to pass through a country which had already been devastated 



686 Hindu Manners^ Customs^ and Ceremonies [ 



PT. Ill 



that these precautions were considered necessary. Strings of 
bullocks were then employed with the army to carry its pro- 
visions. At all other times the chiefs relied for their commis- 
sariat on a crowd of purveyors attracted by the hope of gain, 
and especially on the Lambadis, or Sukaiers, professional 
pillagers, whom I have already described, and who kept the 
camp market well supplied by their continual raids on the unfor- 
tunate inhabitants of the surrounding country. 

The most abominable debauchery is openly authorized among 
the soldiery, especially in Mahomedan armies. A special quarter 
in the camp is set apart for the vile and depraved wretches who 
give themselves up to this hideous form of prostitution. 

Charlatans of all kinds swarm in these disorderly camps. 
There are conjurers, soothsayers, astrologers, tight-rope dancers, 
acrobats, quacks, pickpockets, fakirs, religious mendicants, blind 
men ; and furthermore, each soldier is generally followed by his 
whole family. Thus you may often see an army of from twenty- 
five to thirty thousand soldiers with three hundred thousand 
followers of all sorts and conditions in its train, who, profiting 
by the confusion which reigns in the camp, devote their whole 
time to robbery with impunity. The Mahratta armies are less 
troubled with these encumbrances, for they often make forced 
marches, and it would be impossible for the followers to keep 
up with them. 

The generals' tents, especially in the case of Mahomedans, 
are very large and commodious. Oriental taste and luxury 
are conspicuous in them. They are richly adorned, and pro- 
vided with every kind of comfort. They are divided into several 
compartments, some of which are destined for the wives or 
concubines of these pleasure- loving commanders, who are almost 
invariably accompanied by their women. Even in the midst of 
a tumultuous camp, Indian princes and generals never neglect 
anything that can pander to their sensuality. 

One may well believe that it is easy to surprise a camp com- 
posed of such a rabble. There are rarely any outposts. The 
spies who are maintained in the hostile camp partly supply 
this deficiency ; for, as soon as they perceive anything unusual 
going on, they hurry off to warn their employers, who are thus 
prepared to receive the enemy. The latter usually retire as 
soon as they perceive that their opponents are on the alert. 



CH. ix] Fortifications 687 

Moreover, surprises and night marches are not at all to the taste 
of Indian warriors, who do not like to be deprived of their sleep. 
Thus it has sometimes happened that a mere handful of Euro- 
peans has thrown into disorder and routed a whole army by 
unexpected attacks of this nature. 

Nevertheless, however inferior the people of India may be 
in discipline and courage, they have one great advantage over 
Europeans, which, had they only known how to make use of it, 
would certainly have rendered the struggle between them and 
their formidable adversaries much less unequal. I mean their 
extreme temperance in eating and drinking. Give an Indian 
soldier three or four pounds of rice per week with a little salt, 
and on that, with the addition of a little water, he will keep 
himself in good health, be active, cheerful, and in condition to 
undertake forced marches for several days consecutively, without 
suifering any inconvenience. What a fund of latent force the 
Indian armies possessed in this useful faculty for the purpose 
of harassing and annoying an enemy whom they were afraid to 
meet in pitched battles, but who, infinitely less abstemious, 
would soon have become disheartened without a plentiful supply 
of substantial food ! 

The art of fortifying, besieging, and defending strongholds was 
equally neglected in India. The method generally followed 
was to invest a town and trust to famine to force the besieged 
to capitulate. To take a place by assault appeared far too 
dangerous a proceeding to Indian tacticians ; consequently it 
frequently happened that a wretched little fortified town, sur- 
rounded by nothing but mud walls and defended by a few 
hundred peasants armed with a few worn-out matchlocks, was 
able to hold out for months against the attacks of a host of 
assailants, who, tired out at last by the perseverance of their 
adversaries, were obliged to ignominiously raise the siege. 
Even in recent times, though they might have learnt by sad 
experience to what horrors a town taken by assault is exposed, 
several Indian generals have been known to shut themselves up 
behind walls of mere mud or earth, and obstinately refuse to 
listen to any suggestion of capitulation, treating the European 
besiegers with insolent bravado, and fearlessly awaiting the 
chances of an assault. 

It is true, however, that the honour of the commandant of 



688 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [ 



PT. Ill 



any fortress is at stake on such occasions. However advan- 
tageous the conditions offered to him might be, he would never 
willingly capitulate ; for should he be weak enough to do so, he 
would find it difScult to escape the suspicion, on the part of 
his king and of the people, that he had acted with treachery or 
cowardice, and consequently his good name would be for ever 
tarnished. 

Nevertheless, the art of approaching a fortified position by 
mines and entrenchments has long been known to Indian 
generals. When such works have been carried as close to the 
main fortress as possible, the besieged and the besiegers delight 
in insulting and challenging each other by word of mouth. For 
instance, the Hindus will say to the Mahomedans: ' If you do 
not now take the place, it will be as great a slur on your good 
name as if you had eaten pork.' And the besiegers will answer: 
' If we take the place, it will be as great a disgrace to you as if 
you had eaten cow's flesh.' Another proof that bluster is no 
indication of courage. 

A device upon which Indians place great reliance under such 
circumstances is enchantment. The magicians of either party 
are called upon to exercise ail the resources of their black art 
But unfortunately the sorcerers of the besiegers are nearly 
always as clever as the sorcerers of the besieged. One charm is 
consequently nullified by a countercharm, and it comes to the 
same thing in the end, namely, which side is able to display the 
greater amount of courage and skill. Whatever the result may 
be, however, the magicians always enjoy a large share of the 
glory of success or bear the greater part of the shame of defeat. 
These absurd illusions were still in vogue when I left India. 

The fortifications of the most important strongholds, even 
up to recent times, consisted of one or two very thick walls with 
round or triangular towers at the angles, on which were placed 
a few guns very badly served. The fort was surrounded by 
a broad and deep moat, but as the natives of India did not under- 
stand the use of the drawbridge, the ditch was spanned by a road 
leading to the main entrance, which was hidden by a curtain 
wall to prevent its being visible from a distance. 

In several places in the Peninsula strongholds may be seen 
which owe little of their strength to the skill of the engineer, being 
situated on the top of steep and almost inaccessible hills. These 



CH. ix] Hindu Weapons 689 

fortresses are called durgattts. Alexander besieged a fortress 
of this kind on the banks of the Indus, and found great difficulty 
in capturing it*. But there is one great drawback to these dur- 
gams. The air is always cold and damp, even when extreme 
heat prevails in the plains below, and this renders them most 
unhealthy to live in, the men who garrison them being subject 
to long spells of fever which are difficult to cure. 

The people of India have lately learnt from Europeans the 
warlike art of exterminating the human species in a more 
scientific and practical manner. They have introduced great 
changes in their methods of attack and defence, and, in fact, in 
the whole of their military system. A sad and fatal gift, which 
they may perhaps one day use against those who brought it to 
them ! 

Before finishing this subject I will add a few words on the 
different kinds of weapons that have been used in India at 
different times. I have already mentioned that there are thirty- 
two different kinds of old-fashioned weapons, each of which has 
a name and shape peculiar to itself Models of these are to be 
found in the hands of the principal idols. Each deity is pro- 
vided with the one that he most affected. As my readers would 
find no counterpart to them in a European armoury, it would be 
difficult to describe them without illustrations. All that I can 
say about them is that besides many instruments for cutting, 
there were others for hacking, stabbing, and felling. 

Among Indian arms of more modern times the most important 
defensive ones are the helmet and the shield. The latter is 
made of leather, and ornamented in the centre with large bosses. 
Most Indian soldiers can use it very skilfully. Some wear 
a thick-quilted corselet as a cuirass or breast-plate, which, it is 
said, is impervious both to sword and arrow ^ But as this 
breast-plate affords no protection against a bullet and is undeni- 
ably most uncomfortable to wear in a hot climate, its use has 
been almost entirely abandoned. Among the offensive weapons 
of India are bows and arrows. The bow measures only about 
two feet and a half when strung, and each arrow is nearly two 

* See Quintus Curtius, viii. ii. — sort of cuirass, but they also wore. 

Dubois. metal ones of different shapes. — Du- 

' The Greeks, and Romans, and bois. 
many other nations of old used this 



690 Hindu Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies [pt. m 

feet long. These are but poor specimens of the weapons which 
history credits the Hindu gods with using. The bow used 
by Rama, for instance, was so enormous that the fifty thousand 
men who were employed to bring it to him succumbed beneath 
the burden. Vishnu's favourite weapon was the chakram, and 
many of his devotees have it branded on their shoulders with 
a red-hot iron. It is still used in some parts, and consists of 
a metal disk about nine or ten inches in diameter, with well- 
sharpened edges. There is a hole in the centre, and through 
this is passed a stick by means of which a rapid rotatory motion 
is given to the disk, which flies off and inflicts a severe cut on 
any one that it strikes. 

Large grenades or squibs are also frequently used, eight or 
ten inches long, and armed at one end with a keen-edged 
crescent-shaped blade. These are fired off horizontally, and are 
used to produce confusion amongst bodies of cavalry. They 
are less effective than our hand grenades, but carry very much 
further. According to Hindu authors, these grenades, called 
vanamSf were used in very early times. The Rantayana speaks 
of Rama's vanam as one of his most important weapons. It is 
therefore to be inferred that gunpowder was known in India 
in very early times. It is quite certain that the Hindus pos- 
sessed the secret of compounding explosive substances long 
before the invasions of Tartars or Europeans. Still they can 
hardly have been aware of the terrible effect which these 
inflammable materials can produce when enclosed in a metal 
tube : it was reserved for those who conquered this peaceable 
nation to teach them the power of this agent of destruction. 

The Hindus still use the pike, the dagger, and the sword. 
The last is at present their favourite weapon, and they have 
fencing-masters who can teach them to use it with great skill. 

The gun is also much used by them, although in their hands 
it is not a very deadly weapon. Until quite recently they only 
used matchlocks, and their gunpowder was extremely bad, as 
indeed it is even at the present time. Amongst Hindu soldiers 
musketry practice is unknown, as their princes consider that it 
is a useless expense to employ powder for this purpose. 

Europeans have recently introduced bronze and cast-iron 
cannon. In former times Indian cannon were made of iron, 
and were of enormous calibre. From these wretched guns 



CH. ix] The Use of Cannon 691 

they fired stone balls more than a foot in diameter. They took 
no trouble whatever to learn how to aim. I have read in a 
manuscript written nearly eighty years ago that the Rajah of 
Tanjore, having declared war against the Dutch, sent an army to 
besiege their fortress at Negapatam. When it drew near, the 
Dutch fired an ill-directed salvo from the top of the ramparts. 
The Rajah's troops, observing that the balls passed well over 
their heads, thought that they had nothing more to fear from 
the enemy's artillery, and labouring under this delusion, they 
boldly approached the glacis. Just at that moment the garrison 
fired a few well- aimed volleys of grape-shot which annihilated 
the rash assailants, who learnt to their cost that a cannon can 
be aimed both above and below its true level. The author 
adds that the palanquin of a Brahmin who held a high com- 
mand in the Rajah's army, and who had approached a little 
too close to the fortress, was struck by a cannon ball and 
shattered to pieces. The Brahmin got off scot-free with only 
a fright ; but his alarm was so great that he ran off as fast as he 
could, and, when he found himself in a place of safety, swore 
by his three hundred and thirty million gods that never again 
would he venture within ten miles of any place inhabited by 
those dogs of Feringhis. 



vya 



APPENDIX I 



The Jains. — Differences between them and the Brahmins ^ 



The word Jain, or Jaina, is a compound word denoting a person 
who has given up living or thinking like other men *. A true Jain 
should entirely renounce all thoughts of self. He should rise superior 
to the scorn or opposition to which he may be subjected on account 



* Jainism is a heretical offshoot of 
Buddhism, and presents resemblances 
to both Brahminism and Buddhism, 
which have been summarized as fol- 
lows in Elphinstone!' sHisfotyo/Indta: 
*They agree with the Buddhas in 
denying the existence, or at least the 
activity and providence, of God ; in 
believing in the eternity of matter ; in 
the worship of deified saints ; in their 
scrupulous care of animal life and all 
the precautions which it leads to ; in 
disclaiming the divine authority of the 
Vedas ; and in having no sacrifices and 
no respect for fire. They agree with 
the Buddhists also in considering a 
state of impassive abstraction as su- 
preme feh'city, and in all the doctrines 
which they hold in common with the 
Hindus. They agree with the Hindus 
in other points, such as division of 
caste. This exists in full force in the 
south and west of India, and can only 
be said to be dormant in the north- 
cast, for, though the Jains there do 
not acknowledge the four classes of 
the Hindus, yet a Jain converted to 



the Hindu religion takes his place in 
one of the castes from which he must 
all along have retained the proofs of 
his descent, and the Jains themselves 
have numerous divisions of their own, 
the members of which are as strict 
in avoiding intermarriages and other 
intercourse as the four classes of the 
Hindus. Though they reject the 
scriptural character of the Vedas, they 
allow them great authority in all 
matters not at variance with their 
religion. The principal objections to 
them are drawn from the bloody sac- 
rifices which they enjoin, and the loss 
of animal life which burnt- offerings 
are liable (though undesignedly) to 
occasion. They admit the whole of 
the Hindu gods, and worship some 
of them, though they consider them 
as entirely subordinate to their own 
saints, who are, therefore, the proper 
objects of adoration.' 

The following is from Mr. J. A. 
Baines's Census Report for 189 1 : — 

* A second offshoot from the earlier 
Brahminism is found in the Jain, a 



* This is not the true etymology. Jina is *one who has overcome human 
infirmities and passions * ; and Jaina, appertaining to Jina, — Pope. 



694 



Appendix I 



of his religion, the principles of which he must preserve and guard 
unaltered even to death, being fully persuaded that it is the one and 
only true religion on earth, that is, the true primitive religion which 
was given to all mankind. 

In the course of time, the Jains say, the primitive religion gradually 
became considerably corrupted in several essential points, and was 
superseded by the superstitious and detestable sophistries of Brah- 
minism. The ancient dogmas were forgotten or put aside by the 
Brahmins, who invented an entirely new system of religion, in which 
only a shadowy resemblance can be traced to the old Hindu faith. 

It is the Brahmins who invented the four Vedas and the eighteen 
Puranas, the Tn'murft, and the monstrous fables connected with it, 
such as the Avatars of Vishnu, the abominable lingam, the worship of 
the cow and other animals, the sacrifice oi Xh^ yagftam, &c., &c. The 
Jains not only reject all these spurious additions, but look upon them 
with absolute horror. 

The Brahmins introduced all these sacrilegious innovations v^ry 
gradually. The Jains were formerly in close communion with the 



form of belief that still subsists and 
flourishes in India to this day. Its 
origin is veiled from us, but it bears a 
strong family likeness to the earlier 
form of Buddhism, and it is a question 
amongst scholars whether it rose 
about the same time or a little earlier. 
At all events it seems to have been 
unpopular with the Buddhists, and to 
have diverged less from Brahmanic or- 
thodoxy. The monastic system was 
not countenanced, but ritual was sim- 
plified and women were allowed to 
share in it. As in Buddhism, however, 
the larger section of the Jains decline 
to allow that women can attain AVr- 
vana. The latter, however, is with 
them perpetual bliss, instead of com- 
plete annihilation. Caste amongst the 
Jains is maintained, and though they 
have no special reser\'ation of the 
priesthood to a class, there is a general 
tendency in that direction, and in some 
cases Brahmins even are employed. 
In later years the Jai s seem to have 
competed with the Brahmins in litera- 
ture and science, so that they fell into 
disfavour, and would very probably 
have succumbed but for the advent of 



the Mussulman power. In the north 
and west of India they are still a cul- 
tivated class, most Engaged in com- 
merce, whilst in the south, where they 
share with the Buddhists, who pre- 
ceded them, the credit of forming the 
Canarese and Tamil literature, they 
are as a rule agriculturists. Except 
in a few of the larger cities of the north 
there seems to be little sectarian hos- 
tility between them and the orthodox ; 
and in the west, where they are still 
closer in customs and obser\'ances, 
the line of division is scarcely traceable. 
In parts of both tracts there is, in the 
present day, a tendency for Jainism to 
regard itself as a sect of Brahminism, 
in spite of the non-recognition of the 
divine authority of the Veda. It is 
probable that in compliance with this 
tendency many have returned their 
religion as Hindu of the Jain sect, so 
that where sect is not separately com- 
piled, as in the imperial series of 
returns, the total of the Jain religion 
is reduced by that number. As it is, 
the number of Jains is given as about 
1,417,000.* 



Modern J at us 695 



Brahmins both in faith and doctrine, but they opposed these changes 
from the very first with all their power. Then, seeing that their 
remonstrances produced no effect and that these religious innovations 
were daily making progress among the people, they found themselves 
reduced at last to the sad necessity of an open rupture with the 
Brahmins. The immediate cause of this rupture was the introduction 
o{ \\\e yagptam sacrifice, at which some living creature must be immo- 
lated \ This, they contend, is directly opposed to the most sacred 
and inviolable principles of the Hindu religion, which forbids the 
destruction of any living thing, for any reason or on any pretext 
whatever. 

From that moment things came rapidly to a climax ; and it was 
then that the defenders of the pure primitive religion took the name 
of Jains, and formed themselves into a distinct sect, composed of 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. They were the 
descendants of the Hindus of all castes who originally banded 
themselves together to oppose the innovations of the Brahmins, 
and they alone have preserved the religion of their forefathers intact 
to the present day. 

After the schism the Jains, or true believers, perpetually taunted 
the Brahmins with their debased religion, and what at first merely 
furnished subject-matter for scholastic disputes finally became the 
cause of long and bloody hostilities. For a long time success was 
on the side of the Jains, but in the end, the majority of the Kshatriyas 
and other castes having seceded and adopted the innovations of the 
Brahmins, the latter gained the ascendant and reduced their adver- 
saries to the lowest depths of subjection. They overthrew all the 
temples of the Jains, destroyed the objects of their cult, deprived them 
of all freedom, both religious and civil, and banished them from public 
employment and all positions of trust ; in fact, they persecuted them 
to such an extent that they succeeded in removing nearly all traces 
of these formidable antagonists in several provinces where formerly 
they had been most flourishing. 

When these persecutions and wars began is a question that I am 
unable to answer with any degree of accuracy ; but it appears that 
they lasted a long time and only came to an end in comparatively 
recent times. Not more than four or five centuries ago the Jains 
exercised sovereign power in several provinces of the Peninsula. 
Nowadays the Brahmins are the masters everywhere; the Jains, 
on the other hand, are absolutely powerless, and it would be impos- 
sible to find one occupying a position of any importance. They have 
become merged in the lower middle classes. They devote them- 
selves to agriculture, and even more to trade, which is the special 



* It is generally a ram. — Dubois. 



6c6 Appendix I 



profession of the Vaisyas, among which caste the greater number of 
these sectarians are now to be found. Their principal trade is in 
kitchen and household utensils of copper and other metals. 

There are very few of the Brahmin caste who hold the opinions 
of the Jains. There is a village, however, called Maleyur, in South 
Mysore, which contains between fifty and sixty families of them. 
They have a famous temple there, of which the guru is a Brahmin 
Jain. In the other more important temples of the Jains, such as those 
at Belgola, Madighery, and others, the gurus or priests are recruited 
from the Vaisyas, or merchants. The Vaisya Jains are regarded by the 
Brahmins of the same sect as palitas, or heretics, because they have 
thus usurped the priestly office, and also because they have altered 
the religion of the true Jains by introducing some of the innovations 
of their Brahmin adversaries '. This divergence of opinion, however, 
has not led to any serious differences between them. 

The Jains are divided into several sects or schools, which differ on 
the subject of perfect happiness, and on the means of attaining it. 
One of these sects, known by the name of Kashtachenda Swetam- 
bara^, teaches that there is no other moksha, that is to say, no 
other supreme blessedness, than that which is to be obtained from 
sensual pleasures, particularly that which is derived from sexual 
intercourse with women. This sect is, it is true, not numerous. 

The school of the Jaina-bassaru is the most numerous, and it is 
subdivided into several others. Its tenets differ very little from 
those of the Vedania school of Brahminism. It recognizes the dif- 
ferent stages of meditation as taught by the latter, and enjoins very 
much the same means of attaining everlasting felicit}', by which they 
understand reunion with the Godhead. 

The Religious System of the Jains. 

The Jains acknowledge one Supreme Being, to whom they give the 
names oi Jaiitesivara^ Parcunatfua, Parapara-vastu, and several others 
expressing the infinity of his nature. 

It is to this Supreme Being alone that all the prayers and sacrifices 
of the true Jains are offered ; and it is to him that all the marks of 
respect which they pay to their holy personages, known as Saloka- 
purushas, and to other sacred objects represented under a human 
form, are really addressed ; for these, on attaining moksha (supreme 
blessedness) after death, have become united with and incorporated 
into the Supreme Being. 

The Supreme Being is, they say, one and indivisible, a spirit 

' Pa///as literally means 'the fallen.* ^ Swcfawbara literally means ' claJ 

— Kd. in white.'— Ed. 



Religious Tenets of Jains 697 

without corporal parts or limitations. His four principal attributes 
are: — 

1. Ananta-gnanam, infinite wisdom. 

2. Ananta-darsanam, infinite intuition, omniscience, and omni- 
presence. 

3. Ananta-viryam, omnipotence. 

4. Ananta-sukhamj infinite blessedness. 

This noble being is entirely absorbed in the contemplation of his 
infinite perfections, and in the uninterrupted enjoyment of the happi- 
ness which he finds in his own essence. He has nothing in common 
with the things of this world, and does not interfere at all in the 
government of this vast universe. Virtue and vice, good and evil, are 
indifferent to him. 

Virtue being essentially right, those who practise it in this world 
will find their reward in another life, either by a blessed reincar- 
nation, or by immediate admittance to the delights of Swarga. Vice 
being essentially bad and wrong, those who give way to it will be 
punished in another world by an unhappy reincarnation. The worst 
offenders will go straight to Naraka after death, there to expiate their 
crimes. But in no case does God intervene in the distribution of 
punishments or rewards, or pay any attention to the good or evil 
done by men here below. 

Matter is eternal and independent of the Godhead. That which 
exists now has always existed and will always exist. 

And not only is matter eternal, but also the order and harmony 
which reign throughout the universe— the fixed and unchanging 
movements of the stars, the division of light from darkness, the 
succession and constant renewal of the seasons, the production and 
reproduction of animal and vegetable life, the nature and properties 
of the elements ; in fact, all things visible are eternal, and will 
continue to exist just as they have existed from all time. 

M ETEMPS YCHOSIS. 

The fundamental doctrine of the Jains is metempsychosis. Their 
belief in this differs in no way from that of the Brahmins. But they 
do not agree with the latter with regard to the four lokcis or worlds. 
These they refuse to recognize. They also reject the three principal 
Abodes of B\\ss— Sattya-loka, Vaikuniha, and Kailasa, that is to say, 
the paradises of Brahma, of Vishnu, and of Siva. They recognize 
three worlds only, which they describe by the generic name of 
Jagat-triya, and which are the Urddhwa-loka or superior world, the 
Adha-loka or inferior world, which they also call Patala^ and the 
Madhya-loka or middle world, that is to say, the earth where mortals 
dwell. 



693 Appendix I 



Urddhwa-loka. 

This world, which is also called Swarga, is the first of the Jagat- 
triya, and Devcndra is lord of it. There are sixteen distinct abodes 
in it, in each of which a different degree of happiness is enjoyed in 
proportion to the merits of the righteous souls who are admitted. 
The first and highest of these habitations is the Sadhu-dhamia. 
Only the very purest souls have access to this, and they there enjoy 
unbroken happiness for thirty-three thousand years. The Achuda- 
karpa, which is the last and lowest of the sixteen habitations, is 
destined for the souls of those who possess exactly the requisite 
amount of merit, neither more nor less, necessary to procure their 
admittance into the Urddhwa-loka. They there enjoy for one thousand 
years the amount of happiness which is their portion. In the other 
intermediate habitations the degree and duration of happiness are 
fixed in relative proportion to the merits of those who are admitted. 

Women of the rarest beauty adorn these Abodes of Bliss. The 
blessed, however, have no intercourse with them. The sight alone 
of these enchanting beauties is sufficient to intoxicate their senses 
and plunge them into a perpetual ecstasy that is far superior to all 
mere earthly pleasures. In this respect the Swarga of the Jains 
differs little from that of the Brahmins. 

On leaving the Urddhiva-loka at the expiration of the period 
assigned to them, the souls of the blessed arc born again upon earth 
and recommence the process of transmigration. 

The Adha-loka. 

The second world of the JagaNHya is the Adha-loka^ also called 
Naraka^ and sometimes Patala. Il is the lower or inferior regions, 
the abode of great sinners : that is, of those whose crimes are so 
heinous and so manifold that they cannot be expiated by even the 
lowest forms of reincarnation. 

The Adha-loka is divided into seven dwelling-places, in each of 
which the severity of the punishments is proportionate to the gravity 
of the offences. The least terrible is the Retna-pravai, where erring 
souls are tormented for a thousand consecutive j-ears. The torture 
gradual!}' increases in intensity' and duration in the other abodes, 
until in the Maha-damai-pravaiy the seventh, the punishments 
reach a point of awfulness which is beyond all description. It is 
there that the most villainous sinners are sent, and their horrible 
sufferings only terminate at the end of thirty-three thousand years. 
Women, who from their constitutional weakness are not able to 
endure such extremes of suffering, are never sent to this awful Maha- 
damai pravaiy no matter how wicked they may have been. 



The Jain World 699 



The Madhya-loka. 

The middle world, the Madhya-loka^ is the third of the Jagai-triya. 
It is there that mortals live, and that both virtue and vice are to be 
found. 

This world is one reju in extent, a reju being equal to the distance 
over which the sun travels in six months. Jamhu-Dwipa^ which is the 
earth on which we live, occupies only a small part of the Madhya- 
loka, It is surrounded on all sides by a vast ocean, and in the centre 
of it is an immense lake extending for a hundred thousand ^q/awa^, 
or about four hundred thousand leagues. In the middle of this lake 
rises the famous mountain Mahameru. Jamhu-Dwipa is divided into 
four equal parts, which are placed at the four cardinal points ol 
Mahameru, India is in the part called Bharata-Kshetra. 

These four divisions oi Jambu-Dwipa are separated from each other 
by six lofty mountains, which are called Himavata, Maha-Himavata, 
Nishada, Nila, Arumani, Sikari, all running in the same direction 
from east to west, stretching across Jambu-Dwipa from one sea to 
the other. 

These mountains are intersected by vast valleys, where the trees, 
shrubs, and fruits, which all grow wild, are of a beautiful pink colour. 
These delicious retreats are inhabited by good and virtuous people. 
Children of either sex living there arrive at maturity forty-eight hours 
after their birth. The inhabitants are not subject to pain or sickness. 
Always happy and content -d, they live on the succulent vegetables 
and delicious fruits which nature produces for them without any 
cultivation. After death they go straight to the delights of Swarga. 

A spring rises on the top of Mahameru which feeds fourteen large 
rivers, of which the principal are the Ganges and the Indus. All 
these rivers pursue a regular and even course, which never varies. 
Unlike the false Ganges and the false Indus of the Brahmins, the 
waters of which rise and fall, the Ganges and Indus of the Jains can 
never be forded, and their waters always maintain the same level. 

The names of the fourteen rivers of the Jains are the Ganges, the 
Indus, the Rohita-Toya, the Rohita, the Hari-Toya, the Harikanta, 
the Sitta, the Sitoda, the Nari, the Narikanta, the Swarna-kula, the 
Rupaya-kula, the Rikta, and the Riktoda. 

The sea which surrounds Jambu-Dwipa is two hundred thousand 
yojanaSj or eight hundred thousand miles long. 

Beyond this ocean there are three other continents, separated 
from each other by an immense sea. They closely resemble y<iwA/i- 
Dwipa^ and are also inhabited by human beings. 

At the far end of the fourth continent, called Puskara-varUi'Dwipa, 
is situated Manushy-otraparvalay a, very lofty mountain which is the 
extreme limit of the habitable world. No living being has ever gone 



700 Appendix I 



beyond this mountain. Its base is washed by an immense ocean, 
in which are to be found an infinite number of islands which are 
inaccessible to the human race. 

The Succession and Division of Time. 

Time is divided into six periods, which succeed each other without 
interruption throughout eternity. At the termination of each period 
there is an entire revolution in nature, and the world is renewed. 
The first, called Praihama-kala^ lasted for four kotis of kotis, or forty 
million millions of years; the second, DwiHya-kala^ thirty million 
millions ; the third, Tretiya-kala, twenty million millions ; the fourth, 
Chahirtha-kala^ ten million millions, minus forty-two thousand years. 
The fifth period, called Panchama-kalay the period of inconstancy and 
change, is the age in which we are now living. It will last twenty- 
one thousand years. The present year (1824) of the Christian era is 
the year 2469 of the Panchama-kala of the Jains. 

The comparatively recent date of the commencement of this period 
seems to me to be worthy of note. I am inclined to think that it is 
the date of the schism between the Brahmins and the Jains. Such 
a memorable event may well have been considered as giving birth to 
a new era. If this conjecture were confirmed it would be easier to 
fix the time when the principal myths of Hindu theology originated. 
There is no doubt that the new ideas introduced by the Brahmins 
into their religion occasioned the schism which exists to this day. 

The sixth and last of these periods, the Sashta-kala, will also last 
twent3'-one thousand years. The element of fire will then disappear 
from olfthe earth, and mankind will subsist entirely on reptiles, roots, 
and tasteless herbage, which will only grow sparsely here and there. 
There will then be no caste distinction or subordination, no public or 
private property, no form of government, no kings, no laws ; men 
will lead the lives of perfect savages. 

This period will terminate with Tijala-pralaya^ or flood, which will 

deluge the whole earth, except the mountain of silver, called Vidi- 

parta. This flood will be caused by continuous rain for forty-seven 

days, which will result in a complete upsetting of the elements. 

A few people living near the silver mountain will take refuge in the 

caves which are hidden in its sides, and they will be saved amidst 

the universal destruction. After the catastrophe the elect will come 

forth from the mountain and will repeople the earth. Then the six 

periods will begin over again, and follow each other as they did 

before. 

The Learning of the Jains. 

The philosophy of the Jains is contained in four Vedas ^ twenty- 
four Puranas, and sixty- four Sastras. The Puranas take the names 
* These are not called Vedas, but Agamas. — Ed. 



Jain Religious Books 701 



of the twenty-four Tirt/iaptkaras\ or saints. A Purana is assigned to 
each of them, and contains his history. 

The names of the four Vedas are Praihamam'-yoga, C/iaranani-yoga, 
Karanani-yogay and Draviani-yoga, These four books were written 
by Adiswara, the most ancient and most celebrated of all the holy 
personages recognized by the Jains. He came down from Swarga, 
took a human form, and lived on earth for a purva-koii, or a hundred 
million million years. Not only did he compose the Vedas, but it 
was he who divided men into castes, gave them laws and a form 
of government, and laid down the lines of social order. In short, 
Adiswara is to the Jains what Brahma is to the Brahmins ; one of 
them having most probably been modelled from the other. 

The Sixty-three Saloka-purushas. 

Besides Adiswara, who is the holiest and most perfect of all beings 
who have appeared on the earth in human form, the Jains recognize 
sixty-three others, whom they describe by the generic name of 
Saloka-purushas, and whom they also worship. Their history is 
contained in the Prathamani-yoga, 

These venerable personages are subdivided into five classes : 
twenty-four Tirihankaras, twelve Chakravartis, nine Vasu-devatas, nine 
Bala-vasU'devatas, and nine Bala-ramas. 

The twenty-four Tirthankaras are the holiest, and to them most 
honour is paid. Their position is the most sublime that a mortal can 
aspire to. They all lived in the most perfect state of Nirvana. They 
were subject to no infirmity or sickness ; they felt no want, no weak- 
ness, and were not even subject to death. After having lived for 
a long time on earth they voluntarily quitted their bodies and went 
straight to moksha, where they were united with, and incorporated 
into, the Godhead. 

All the Tirthankaras came down from Swarga and took human 
forms among the Kshatriya caste ; but they were subsequently 
incorporated into that of the Brahmins by the ceremony of the 
diksha^. During their lives they were examples of all the virtues to 
other men, whom they exhorted by their precepts and their actions 
to conform strictly to the rules of conduct laid down by Adiswara, 
and to give themselves up entirely to meditation and penitence. 

Some of them lived for millions of years ; the last of them, however, 
only attained the age of eighty-four. 

They were in existence during the period of Chaturtha-kala. Some 

* Tirthankaras means those who Godhead. — Ed. 
have 'passed over' the gulf vvhich * This word literally translated 

separates human beings from the means * initiation.* — Dubois. 



702 Appendix I 



were married, but the greater number remained celibate, being 
professed sannyasis. 

The twelve ChakravariiSy or emperors, recognized by the Jains 
were contemporaries of the twenty-four Tirihankaras, They shared 
amongst them the temporal government of Jambu-Dwipa, They 
came straight from Sivarga^ and when on earth belonged to the noble 
caste of Kshatriyas. Some were initiated into the Brahmin caste 
by the ceremony of the dikshaj completed their lives as Sannyasi 
NirvaniSy and after death obtained moksha^ or supreme happiness. 
Others returned to Swarga, But three of them, having lived ex- 
tremely wicked lives on earth, were condemned to the tortures of 
Naraka, 

The twelve Chakravartis were often at war with one another, but 
they had more especially to fight against the nine Vasu-devataSy the 
nine Bala-vasu-devafaSy and the nine Bala-ramas, who all governed 
different provinces in India '. 

The second Veda, or Charanani-yoga, contains the civil law^s, also 
regulations relating to social status, caste, &c. 

The third Veda, or Karanani-yoga^ is a dissertation on the nature, 
order, and component parts of the Jagai-iriya, 

The fourth, or Draviani-yoga, contains the metaphysical theories of 
the Jains and several controversial subjects. 

The State of Sannyasi Nirvani. 

The most holy and sublime state to which man can possibly 
attain is that of Sannyasi Nirvani, which means * naked penitent.' 
In embracing this state a man ceases to be a man ; he begins 
to be a part of the Godhead. As soon as he has attained the 
highest degree of perfection in this state, he frees himself volun- 
tarily, without any trouble or pain, from his own self, and obtains 
moksha, thus becoming incorporated for ever into the Divine Self. 
There is no real Nirvani existing in this ynga. Those who aspire 
to this state must pass through twelve successive degrees of medi- 
tation and corporal penance, each one more perfect than the last. 
These degrees are a kind of novitiate, and each of them has a special 
appellation. Having at last become a Nirvani, the penitent no 
longer belongs to this world. Terrestrial objects make no impres- 

* Rama of the Brahmins is one of Vishnu. They assert generally that 

the nine Bala ramas of the Jains, and the Brahmins have stolen from them 

their Krishna is one of the Vasu- all the knowledge concerning which 

devatas. The Jains say that the Brah- they so particularly pride themselves, 

mins borrowed these two names to — Dubois. 
make up the Avatars of their god 



Jain Rules of Conduct 703 

sion on his senses. He regards the good and evil, virtue and vice, to 
be found on this earth with equal indifference. He is freed from 
all passion. He scarcely feels the wants of nature. He is able to 
patiently endure hunger, thirst, and privations of all kinds. He can 
live without food of any sort for weeks and months together. When 
he is obliged to eat he partakes indifferently of the first animal or 
vegetable substance that comes to hand, however filthy or disgusting 
it may seem to ordinary people. He has neither fire nor sleeping 
place. He always lives in the open on the bare ground. Though 
absolutely naked from head to foot, he is insensible to cold and heat, 
wind and rain. Neither is he subject to sickness or any bodily infir- 
mities. He ieels the most profound contempt for all other men, no 
matter how exalted their rank may be, and he takes no account of 
their doings, good or bad. He speaks to no one, looks at no one, and 
is visited by no one. His feelings, his affections, and his thoughts are 
immutably fixed on the Godhead, of whom he considers himself as 
already a part. He remains absorbed in the contemplation of God's 
perfections, all earthly objects being to him as though they did not 
exist. 

By a long course of penance and meditation the material part of the 
Nirvani gradually dissolves, like camphor when it is put in the fire. 
At last all that remains of the penitent is the semblance or shadow of 
a body, an immaterial phantom, so to say. Having arrived at this 
pitch of perfection, the Nirvani quits this lower world and proceeds 
to unite himself inseparably with the Godhead, where he enjoys 
eternal and ineffable happiness. 

Jain Rules of Conduct. 

In many respects Jain rules of conduct are similar to those followed 
by other Hindus, and particularly the Brahmins. The Jains recog- 
nize the same observances with regard to defilement and purity. 
They perform the same ablutions and recite the same prescribed 
mantrams. Most of their ceremonies relating to marriage, funerals, 
&c., are the same. In fact, all the rules of social etiquette and the 
general customs in use in ordinary life form part of their education. 

The Jains differ from their compatriots in several particulars, of 
which the following are the most remarkable : — 

Under no circumstances do they take any solid food beween 
sunset and sunrise. They always take their meals while the sun is 
above the horizon. 

They have no Hiis or anniversaries in honour of the dead. As soon 
as one of them is dead and his funeral is over, they put him out of 
their memories and speak of him no more. 

They never put ashes on their foreheads, as do most Hindus ; they 



704 Appendix I 



are satisfied with making with sandalwood-paste the little round mark 
called hotiu^ or else a horizontal line. Some devotees put these marks 
on their forehead, neck, stomach, and both shoulders in the form of 
a cross, in honour of their five principal Tirthankaras, 

The Jains are even stricter than the Brahmins in regard to their 
food. Not only do they abstain from all animal food, and from vege- 
tables the stalks or roots of which grow in a bulbous shape, such as 
onions, mushrooms, &c., but they also refrain from eating many of the 
fruits which the Brahmins allow on their tables, such as the kairi-kai^ 
or brinjal, called beringela in Portuguese, the pudalan»kai, &c. Their 
motive is the fear of taking the life of some of the insects which are 
generally to be found in these vegetables and fruits. The principal, 
and indeed almost the only, articles of food used by the Jains are 
rice, milk, things made with milk, and peas of various kinds. They 
particularly dislike assafoetida, to which Brahmins are so partial*, 
and honey is absolutely forbidden. 

Whilst they are eating their food some person sits beside them and 
rings a bell, or strikes a gong. The object of this is to prevent the 
possibility of their hearing the impure conversation of their neigh- 
bours, or of the passers-by in the street. Both they and their food 
would be defiled if any impure words reached their ears while they 
were eating. 

Their fear of destroying life is carried to such a length that the 
women, before smearing the floor with cow-dung, are in the habit of 
sweeping it very gently first, so as to remove, without hurting them, 
any insects that may be there. If they neglected this precaution 
the}^ would run the risk of crushing one of these little creatures 
whilst rubbing the floor, which would be the source of the keenest 
regret to them. 

Another of their customs, and one which, though for a very different 
motive, might be advantageously introduced into Europe, is to wipe 
most carefully anything that is to be used for food, so as to exclude 
as tenderly as possible any of the tiny living creatures which might 
be found in or on it. 

The mouth of the vessel in which water for household purposes is 
drawn is always covered with a piece of linen, through which the 
water filters. This prevents the animalculae, which float or swim on 
the surface of the well, from getting into the vessel and being after- 

* This resinous gum. the smell of flavour. The ancient Greeks and 

which appears to us so abominable Romans shared their partiality for 

that we have called it stercus diabolic this substance ; for it seems certain 

strikes the smell and taste of the Hindus that the ai\<piov of the former and the 

and almost all Asiatics very differently. laser of the latter were nothing more 

They consider it to be possessed of or less than assafoetida. — Dubois. 



an agreeable perfume and an exquisite 



Jain Temples 705 



wards swallowed. When a Jain traveller wishes to quench his 
thirst at a tank or stream, he covers his mouth with a cloth, stoops 
down, and thus drinks by suction. This cleanly custom is highly 
to be recommended everywhere, apart from the superstition which 
prompts the Jains to practise it. 

The Jains form a perfectly distinct class. Brahmins never attend 
any of their religious or civil ceremonies, while they, on their part, 
never attend those of the Brahmins. They have their own temples, 
and the priestly office is filled by men professing the same tenets as 
themselves. 

Amongst these temples there are some which are richly endowed 
and very famous. The Jains make pilgrimages to them, sometimes 
from great distances. There is a very remarkable one in Mysore, at 
Sravana Belgola, a village near Seringapatam. It is between three 
mountains, on one of which is an enormous statue, about seventy feet 
high, sculptured out of one solid piece of rock. It must have been 
a tremendous piece of work ; for to execute it, it was necessary to level 
the ground from the top of the mountain to below the base of the 
statue, and there form a sort of terrace, leaving in the centre this 
mass of rock which was to be carved into the shape of the idol. It is 
a very fine piece of Hindu sculpture. Many Europeans who have 
seen it have greatly admired the correctness of its proportions. It 
represents a celebrated Nirvani called Gumatta, a son of Adis- 
wara. The figure is absolutely nude, as are most of the idols to 
which the Jains offer adoration, and which are always likenesses 
of ancient penitents belonging to this sect. In those days it would 
have shocked them to represent these penitents as wearing garments, 
since they made it a point of duty to go absolutely naked. Childless 
women may oflen be seen praying to these indecent idols, in order 
that they may become mothers. 

This temple of Belgola, being only a day's journey from Seringa- 
patam, has been frequently visited by Europeans. It was a great 
source of grief to the devotees of the sect to see this punyasthala 
(holy place) defiled by a crowd of unbelieving visitors. And what 
was still worse, these inquisitive foreigners were oflen accompanied 
by their dogs and their Pariah servants. In one resting-place they 
would cook a stew, in another they would roast a piece of beef under 
the very nose, as it were, of the idol, whose sense of smell, the Jains 
thought, was infinitely disgusted by the smoke of this abominable 
style of cooking. At last the guru attached to the temple, shocked at 
all this desecration, fled from the unhallowed spot, and retired to 
some solitary place on the Malabar coast. After three years of this 
voluntary exile, he returned to his former abode on the assurance 
that Europeans had ceased to visit the place, and that the temple had 
been thoroughly purified. Now, I ask you whether it is not the 

*• zz 



7o6 Appendix II 



duty of any well-conducted man, even if he does not respect them, 
at least not to openly outrage the prejudices, feelings, and customs of 
any people amongst whom he may happen to be thrown, no matter 
how peculiar or ridiculous they may appear to him. What pleasure 
could be derived, or what good could be gained, by exciting the anger 
and contempt of those from whom one has nothing to fear, and who 
cannot retaliate? 

An invalid European officer, who was going to the Malabar coast 
for change of air, on passmg near Belgola, was seized with the idea 
of spending a night in the temple, which he did, in spite of much 
opposition on the part of the inhabitants. Two days afterwards the 
officer died on the road, to the great delight of all the natives, who, 
of course, attributed his death to a miracle, and looked upon it as 
a direct retribution from their outraged deity. This just and condign 
punishment, said they, would inspire vwth wholesome fear others 
who might be tempted to try a similar experiment. 

The idols of the Jains differ in many respects from those of the 
Brahmins. Almost all have curly hair like Negroes. They wear 
neither ear-rings, necklaces, bracelets, nor bangles on their ankles, 
whilst the Brahmins, on the other hand, overload the objects of their 
devotion with such ornaments. 



APPENDIX II 

The Eka-dasi, or Eleventh Day of the Moon. 

The eleventh day of the moon is religiously observed, not only by 
Brahmins, but by all those castes which have the right to wear the 
triple cord. They keep a strict fast on this day, abstain entirely from 
rice, do no servile work, and give themselves up wholly to devotional 
exercises. The following is what the Vishnu-purana says on the 
subject : — 

The Eka-dasi is a da}^ specially set apart for the worship of Vishnu ; 
those who offer him pi^ja on this day ensure for themselves immor- 
tality. Even before the creation of the world the * Man of Sin' was 
created by Vishnu to punish mankind ^ He is of enormous stature, 
with a terrific countenance and a body absolutely black ; his eyes 
arc wild and glaring with rage ; he is the executioner of mankind '. 
Krishna, having seen this 'Man of Sin,' became thoughtful and 

* See the description in the chapter on the Sandhya. 



The Eka-dast Ceremony 707 

pensive. Touched by the woes with which mankind was over- 
whelmed, Krishna resolved to remedy the evil. With this end in 
view he mounted the bird Garuda, son of Binota, and went in search 
of Yama, the King of Hell. The Child of the Sun, delighted at this 
visit of Narayana, who was master and guru of the world, hastened 
to offer him puja, and placed him on a massive throne of gold. No 
sooner had Krishna seated himself thereon than he heard the most 
piteous and plaintive cries. Moved with compassion, he asked the 
King of Naraka whence these lamentations proceeded, and what 
caused them. 

* The lamentations that you hear, O Lord of the World,' replied 
Yama, * are the tears and groans of the unfortunate beings who, 
having spent their whole lives in sin, are now suffering the tortures 
of Hell, where they are treated according to their deserts.' 

*Then,' said Krishna, Met us go to this place of torment, that I may 
see for myself what these sinners are enduring.' 
And he did see, and his heart was soflened. 

* What ! ' cried he, overcome with grief, * is it possible that men, 
who are creatures and children of mine, are enduring such cruel 
agony ! Shall I be a witness of their sufferings and do nothing to 
help them ? Cannot I give them 3ome means of avoiding them in 
the future ? ' 

Thereupon he considered how he might bring the reign of the 
* Man of Sin ' to an end, he being the sole cause of all mankind's 
misfortune. Accordingly, to preserve henceforth the human race 
from the torments of Naraka he transformed himself into the Eka-dasiy 
or eleventh day of the moon. This is, therefore, the blessed day 
that Vishnu has selected in his mercy to redeem and save mankind. 
It is the happy day that procures the pardon of one's sins ; it is 
the day of days, since one must look upon it as being Krishna 
himself. 

The inhabitants of Hell, full of gratitude for the kindness that 
Vishnu had showed towards them, worshipped him and chanted his 
praises loudly. Thereupon Vishnu, being much pleased by their 
prayers and praises, wished to give them an immediate proof of his 
goodness. Turning to the** Man of Sin,* he addressed him in the 
following words ; — 

* Begone, wretched being, begone ! Thy reign is over. Till now 
thou hast been the tormentor of mankind; I command thee to let 
them live in peace for the future. They are my children, and I desire 
them to be happy. I wish, nevertheless, to assign to thee a place 
where thou mayest live, but thy place shall be unique ; it shall be 
here. The Eka-dasi, or eleventh day of the moon, is myself in another 
form. It is the day that I have chosen, in my mercy, to save men 
and deliver them from their sins. Nevertheless, in order that they 

z z 2 



708 



Appendix H 



may be worthy of so great a favour, I expressly forbid them lo eat 
rice on this day. I ordain that thou shalt dwell in this rice. This is 
the abode that 1 assign to thee. Whoever shall have the temerity lo 
eat this food, thus defiled by thy presence, will incorporate ihec with 
himself, and will forfeit all hope of pardon.' 

Thus spake Vishnu; and the following is the sentence of life 
and death which he pronounced, and which cannot be too strongly 
impressed on the attention of mankind ; — 

' I repeal, therefore, again, because I cannot say it too often : Do 
not eat rice on that day; whoever you are, be your position and 
condition what they may, do not eat rice. Once more I say, do not 
eat rice.' 

To fast on ihis holy day and to offer puja to Vishnu is to ensure 
the forgiveness of sins and the gratification of all one's wishes. 
Moreover these further observances must be followed. On the 
tenth day the sandhya must be performed, and only one meal must be 
eaten, and that without salt or any kind of peas or vegetables. It 
must only be seasoned with a small quantity of melted butter, and it 
must be eaten quickly. In the evening one must visit a temple dedi- 
cated to Vishnu, and, holding some darhha grass in one's hands, must 
meditate for some time on the greatness of the deity, addressing to 
him the following praj'er r — 

' Behold me in thy presence, great god ! I prostrate myself at 
thy feet. Hold out a helping hand to me and remove the obstacles 
which 1 encounter at each step. My feeble will is olten led astray by 
the passions that influence me. Thou alone canst give it strength to 
resist such weaknesses, and keep it straight in the path of virtue.' 

This prayer being ended, some darbha grass must be offered to 
Narayana, and the worshipper must prostrate himself before him with 
his face lo the ground. 

Making a bed of this same grass at the feet of Vishnu, he must 
pass the night upon it. On rising in the morning he must wash his 
mouth out twelve times and perform the usual ablutions. During 
the day he must fulfil his ordinary religions duties, the chief of 
which is the sacrifice lo Vishnu. He must fast for the whole of the 
day, eating and drinking nothing. The night of the eleventh day 
must also be spent in a icmple dedicated to Vishnu. The whole 
family— father, mother, wife, brothers, and children — must remain 
together in the presence of Vishnu, and remain awake. 

The wife who performs this act of devotion along with her husband 
will, on her reincam.iiion, have a husband who will make her very 
happy, and by whom she will have a numerous family. After her 
death she will be conveyed to VaiktiHlha, and be reunited to her first 
husband. 

Whoever during this night shall occupy himself in drawing the 



The Eka-dasi Ceremony 709 

emblems of the chakra and sankha, which Vishnu carries in his hand, 
will obtain the remission of his sins committed in former genera- 
tions. Whoever shall make a model of these two weapons with 
dough of rice flour, in several colours, shall receive a much greater 
reward, for his sons and his grandsons shall enjoy prosperity on 
earth, and occupy after their death a high place in Vaikuntha, 

If any one places little flags of various colours in Vishnu's temple 
he will eventually be born again king of a fine country. And if any 
one allows the cloths and flags that have been offered to Vishnu to 
flutter freely in the wind, he will receive pardon for all his sins, how- 
ever heinous they may have been. Any one who places an umbrella 
over Vishnu's head will be reborn rich and powerful, and will himself 
have the right to use one. 

To employ oneself during this same night in making a little house 
of flowers for Vishnu is as meritorious a work as if one had sacrificed 
a horse a hundred times over. And if any one should make this 
house in cloth, he will himself have a house of bricks in Vaikuntha. 

On the salagrama stone or on the image of Vishnu must then be 
poured some pancha-amrita^ that is to say milk, melted butter, curds, 
honey, and sugar mixed together. The image must then be adorned 
with rich stufls and precious jewels, and a fan must be placed before 
it. Having performed the sam-kalpa, and purified by the santi-yoga^ 
the five elements of which man is composed, the worshippers must 
fix their thoughts on Vishnu, and, holding flowers in their hands, 
must meditate for some time on the perfections of the deity. They 
must picture him to themselves in their mind's eye as seated on 
a golden throne with his daughter by his side, casting around 
the effulgent light that encircles him, having sometimes two and 
sometimes four arms. To this Supreme Lord of the Universe must 
their homage be addressed. 

This act of meditation ended, the worshippers must offer him 
puja^ beginning with the Swagata ; that is to say, they must ask the 
god whether he is in good health, and has accomplished his journey 
safely. 

They will then present to him water to wash his feet, and to 
refresh him after the fatigues of his journey. They must say : 
* God of Gods, receive this water to wash your feet ; it is pure and 
sweet, and will refresh you, and it will remove the dust which has 
covered you on your way.' 

They will then give him water for rinsing out his mouth, and more 
water and flowers to put on his head ; some milk, honey, and sugar, 
mixed together, to quench his thirst ; and various kinds of food to 
satisfy his appetite. It is thus, at intervals of three hours, that they 

^ See the description in the chapter on the Sandhya, 



7IO Appendix II 



must offer puja to Vishnu. Everything that is offered to him must be 
the very best that can be procured. 

I have already said that they must pass the night without closing an 
eye for a moment ; they must spend it in dancing and singing to the 
sound of musical instruments. It is sufficient to repeat Vishnu's 
names, or even to hear them repeated, to obtain the remission of all 
one's sins and the accomplishment of all one's desires. It is con- 
sidered a meritorious action even to go and k)ok at persons who are 
spending the night in the performance of these pious exercises. 

Great care must be taken on this holy day not to speak to any one 
who is not a true worshipper of Vishnu. To address even one word 
to unbelievers would cause Vishnu's worshippers to lose all the 
benefit of their devotion. 

He who on this day hears the sound of musical instruments played 
in honour of Vishnu and is not enchanted, is like a dog when it hears 
the vina. The pious man should delight in listening to a symphony 
which is in itself capable of remitting sins, because it adds to the 
glory of the Lord of the World. He should join in the saintly throng 
of worshippers, when they with one accord hasten to show their 
devotion and their zeal by their dances, songs, and hymns in honour 
of the great deity. 

He who objects to such acts of worship is the greatest of sinners. 
He who, while not actually disapproving, refrains from taking part in 
them, and occupies himself instead with other matters, will be pun- 
ished for his indifference by being reborn as a cock in another life. 
He will be reborn dumb if he does not contribute as much as ever he 
can towards the pomp and ceremony of the Eka-dasi, 

Every kind of musical instrument must be played on that night, 
and in fact everything that is possible must be done to contribute to 
V^ishnu's pleasure. The worshippers must walk round the image of 
the god several times in procession ; they must prostrate themselves 
before it, and from time to time they must pour milk upon its head. 
Each worshipper, at the conclusion of the ceremony, must give 
a present to the Brahmins in proportion to his means. 

Ordinary food may be taken on the twelfth day in the afternoon, 
but not before, on pain of forfeiting for a hundred generations all the 
blessings which should flow from these ceremonies ^ 

Those who faithfully observe the fast of the Eka-dasi in the manner 
described will make sure of salvation. If any one has killed a Brah- 
min or a cow, taken away the wife or property of another, committed 
fornication with the wife of his guru, drunk intoxicating liquors, 
caused abortion in a pregnant woman ; all these and other similar 

* This is incorrect. Those who fast on the eleventh day break their fast 
before sunrise on the twelfth day. — Ed, 



Stva^s Night ^ii 



sins, no matter how numerous or heinous they may be, will be entirely 

absolved by the fast of the Eka-dasi, and by sacrifices offered to 

Vishnu on that day. 

• •••••••• 

Such, in brief, is what Markandeya teaches us. 

Before leaving this subject 1 ought to mention that the precepts 
contained in these instructions are not strictly kept, except by a very 
small number of devotees. The Eka-dasi, it is true, is kept as a holy 
day by Brahmins, and by all persons who have the right to wear the 
triple cord, and even by a few Sudras of good position, but they 
content themselves with spending the day in performing a few 
religious rites and in amusements. Nevertheless they all abstain 
from eating rice. Towards evening, however, they have a meal 
composed of cakes and fruit, which greatly modifies and simplifies 
the severity and length of the fast prescribed by the Vishnn-purana, 



APPENDIX III 

Siva-Ratrif or Siva's Night. 

The feast of Siva-Ratri is celebrated with great ceremony, especially 
by the Sivaites. This is what we read in the Skanda-purana on the 
subject:— 

There is in Jantbu-Dwipa a. large town known by the name of 
Varanasi, where dwelt a man belonging to the bqya or huntsman caste, 
who was short of stature, very dark in complexion, and of a most 
violent and passionate temper. One day when out hunting in the 
woods, as was his wont, he killed such an enormous quantity of birds 
of all kinds that he was hardly able to carry them, and was obliged to 
sit down and rest at almost every step. Dusk was coming on while 
he was still in the middle of a thick forest, and anxious not to lose the 
spoil of his day's hunting or to become a prey to the wild beasts that 
infested the place, he went up to a vepu ' or margosa-tree, hung his 
game upon one of the branches, and climbed up into the tree, 
intending to spend the night there. Now that night happened to be 
the night of the new moon of the month oi Phalguna (March), a time 
of year when dew falls heavily and the nights are chilly. The hunter, 
benumbed with cold, tormented by hunger (for he had eaten nothing 
during the day), and half dead with terror, passed a very miserable 
night. At the foot of the tree was a lingam, and this circumstance 

^ It should be the bilva, not the vepu, — £o. 



712 • Appendix III 



proved to be the salvation of the hunter. The discomforts that he 
was enduring obliged him to change his position frequently, and the 
shaking of the branches of the vepu'^ caused some drops of dew, 
together with some leaves, flowers, and fruit, to fall on the lingam. 
This fortunate accident was sufficient to win Siva's favour and to 
obtain for the hunter absolution for all his sins. For Siva, to whose 
worship this night was specially consecrated, was much gratified 
at the offering thus made to his adored symbol ; and he ordained that 
he who had made it, involuntary though his offering was, should be 
rewarded, and that his long fast and attendant anxieties should 
be reckoned in his favour. The hunter regained his house the 
following morning, and died a few days aflerwards. Yama, King 
of Hell, on hearing of his death, immediately sent his emissaries to 
secure him and bring him away. But Siva, on hearing of this, also sent 
his own emissaries to oppose those of Yama and to claim the dead 
man. Yama's messengers declined to yield, and a violent quarrel 
ensued between them and the emissaries of Siva. From insults they 
quickly proceeded to violence. Siva's party, being the stronger, put 
the agents of Naraka to flight, afler severely punishing them. The 
latter, in shame and bitterness, went and told their story to their 
master, and to excite his wrath showed him the wounds that they 
had received in the combat. Yama, beside himself with indigna- 
tion, went at once to Kailasa to make complaint to Siva in person. 
At the gate of the deity's palace he found Nandi, the prime minister, 
to whom he explained the object of his visit, at the same time 
expressing his surprise that Siva should thus declare himself the 
protector of a common boya^ a hardened sinner, whose trade neces- 
sitated the slaughter of many living creatures. 

* King of Hell,' replied Nandi, * it is true that this man has been 
a great sinner and that he has not scrupled to shed blood ; but before 
he died he, fortunately for himself, fasted, watched, and offered 
a sacrifice to the lingam during the night consecrated to Siva. This 
meritorious action has obtained for him the remission of all his sins, 
the protection of Siva, and an honourable place in Kailasa,* 

When Yama heard Nandi's words, he became thoughtful, and with- 
drew without uttering another word. 

This is the origin of the feast of Siva-Ratri, or Night of Siva. In 
commemoration of the fortunate boya the devotees of Siva spend the 
night and the preceding day in fasting and without sleep, entirely 
absorbed in worshipping the god, in offering him sacrifices, and pre- 
senting him with the bitter leaves of the vepu^ or margosa-tree as 
neiveddya, which they afterwards eat. 

* It should be the biiva, not the vepu, — Ed. 



Rules of Conduct for Women 713 



APPENDIX IV 

Rules of Conduct for Women during their Periodical Uncleanness. 

When a woman is in a state of periodical uncleanness, she is 
isolated in some place apart, and may have no communication with any 
one during the three days that her defilement is supposed to last. 
The first day she must look upon herself as a Pariah. The second 
day she must consider herself as unclean as if she had killed 
a Brahmin. The third day she is supposed to be in an intermediate 
state between the two preceding ones. The fourth day she purifies 
herself by ablutions, observing all the ceremonies required on these 
occasions. Until then she must neither bathe nor wash any part 
of her body, nor shed tears. She must be very careful not to kill any 
insect, or any other living creature. She must not ride on a horse, 
an elephant, or a bullock, nor travel in a palanquin, a dooly, or 
a carriage. She must not anoint her head with oil, or play at dice and 
other games, or use sandalwood, musk, or perfumes of any kind. She 
must not lie on a bed or sleep during the day. She must not brush 
her teeth or rinse out her mouth. The mere wish to cohabit with 
her husband would be a serious sin. She must not think of the gods 
or of the sun, or of the sacrifices and worship due to them. She is 
forbidden to salute persons of high rank. If several women in this 
unclean state should find themselves together in one place, they must 
not speak to or touch each other. A woman in this condition must not 
go near her children, touch them, or play with them. After living 
thus in retirement for three days, on the fourth she must take 
off the garments that she has been wearing, and these must be 
immediately given to the washerman. She must then put on a clean 
cloth and another over it, and go to the river to purify herself by 
bathing. On her way there she must walk with her head bent, and 
must take the greatest care to glance at nobody, for her looks would 
defile any person on whom they rested. When she has reached the 
river she must first enter the water and fill the copper vessel, or 
chembuy which she has brought with her from the house. Then, 
returning to the bank, she must thoroughly cleanse her teeth, rinse 
out her mouth twelve times, and wash her hands and feet She must 
then enter the water and plunge twelve times into it, immersing 
the whole of her body. She must take the greatest care while doing 
this not to look at any living soul, and to this end each time her head 
rises above the water she must turn her eyes towards the sun. On 
coming out of the water she must take a little fresh cow-dung, some 
(ulasi, and some earth. These she must mix together in a little water, 



714 Appendix V 



until they make a thin paste, and with this she must thoroughl3'' rub 
her hands and feet and then her whole body. After this she must 
re-enter the water, and completely immerse herself twenty-four times. 
When she again leaves the water she must rub herself over wth 
saffron, and again dip three times in the water. Then mixing saffron 
in a little water, she must drink some and pour the rest on her head, 
after which she must put on a pure cloth freshly washed and the 
little bodice called ravikai. She may then paint the little round red 
mark on her forehead called kunkuma and return home. On entering 
the house she must take special care that her eyes do not rest on her 
children, for they would thereby be exposed to the greatest danger. 
She must immediately send for a Brahmin purohita so that he may 
complete her purification. On his arrival this venerable person 
first plaits together thirty-two stalks of darhha grass, to make the 
ring called paviiram, which he dips in consecrated water that he has 
brought with him. The woman then takes another bath, drinks 
a little of the consecrated water, places the paviiram on the ring 
finger of the right hand, and drinks some pancha-gavia or some 
cow*s milk. After these ceremonies her purification is complete. 



APPENDIX V 

Remarks on the Origin of the Famous Temple cf Jagannath. 

The Province of Orissa, in which the temple of Jagannath is 
situated, is called in Hindu books Utkala-desa. Indra-mena, say 
these books, reigned over the country. Inflamed with desire to 
save his soul, the prince saw with dismay that he had as yet done 
nothing which would ensure his happiness after death. This 
thought troubled him exceedingly, and he confided his anxiety 
to Brahma with the Four Faces, who was his favourite divinity. 
Brahma, being greatly touched by the sincere regrets and fervent 
piety of the prince, addressed him one day in the following consola- 
tory terms : — 

' Cease, great king, from troubling thyself about thy future state ; 
I will point out to thee a way of assuring thy salvation. On the 
sea-coast is a country called Utkala-desa, and therein rises the 
mountain sometimes called Nila and sometimes Purushottama, which 
is ayojana or three leagues in length. It is called by the latter name 
after the god who formerly took up his abode there. This mountain 
is a holy place, and the sight of it has the virtue of taking away sins. 



The Temple of Jagannath 715 

In former yugas there was a temple of solid gold upon it, dedicated 
to Vishnu. This temple is still in existence, but has been buried in 
the sand cast up by the sea, which renders it invisible at the present 
time. Restore this temple, cause its ancient glory to be revived, 
renew the sacrifices which were formerly offered there, and thou 
shalt thus ensure thyself a place of felicity after death/ 

The king, Indra-mena, delighted with what he had heard, asked 
Brahma who was the founder of this magnificent temple, and 
where the exact spot was on which it had been built Brahma 
responded : — 

* It was thy ancestors, great king, who erected it in the preceding 
yugGj and who by this means procured for mankind the ineffable 
happiness of seeing the Supreme Being on this earth. Go, then, 
and reclaim this venerable spot from oblivion ; cause the deity to 
descend there anew, and thou shalt procure a similar happiness for 
the human race.* 

* But how,' again asked the prince, *can I discover a temple 
which is completely buried in the sand, unless you yourself help me 
to find it ? ' 

Thereupon Brahma gave him a few directions, and added that 
he would find, not far from the mountain of Nila, a tank wherein 
lived a turtle as old as the world, who would give him more definite 
particulars. 

Indra-mena thanked Brahma and at once set forth to find the tank. 
Hardly had he arrived on its banks when a turtle of enormous size 
approached him, and asked who he was and what he wanted in that 
desert place. 

* I am,' replied the prince, * by birth a Kshatriya and sovereign 
of a great kingdom, but the enormity of my sins and the remorse that 
I feel oppress me and make me the most miserable of men. Brahma 
with the Four Faces has given me §ome vague information respecting 
a holy place near the mountain of Nila, assuring me that I shall be 
able to obtain from you all the necessary directions to guide me in my 
search.' 

* I am delighted, O prince,' replied the turtle, * to have an oppor- 
tunity of contributing to your happiness. Unfortunately, however, 
I am unable to satisfy you upon all the points about which you seek 
information, for my great age has caused a partial loss of memory ; 
yet the indications that I can give may, perhaps, be useful to you. It 
is quite true that in former days there existed a temple near the 
mountain of Nila, which was famous for its wealth. The God with Four 
Arms, the God of Gods, the Great Vishnu, had taken up his abode 
there. All the other gods resorted to it regularly to do him honour, 
and it was also a spot which they greatly affected for indulging in 
their amours. But for a long time past the sand thrown up by the 



71 6 Appendix V 



sea has covered this sacred pile, and the god, finding that he no 
longer received the accustomed marks of respect, left it and returned 
to VaikuMiha, All that I know is that this edifice is buried a yqjama 
(three leagues) deep in this sandy soil. I have lost all trace of the 
site that it formerly occupied. Nevertheless there is another and 
a certain way by which you can discover it Go to the tank called 
Markandeya ; on its banks you will find a crow which has been gifted 
with immortality, and' which can recall everything that happened in 
the most distant times. Go and inquire of it and you will obtain all 
the information you want/ 

The king hastened to the tank Markandeya and there found the 
crow, which from its extreme age had become quite white. Pros- 
trating himself before it, he joined his hands in a supplicating manner 
and said : — 

* O crow, who enjoyest the gift of immortality ! you see before 
you a king who is a prey to the deepest despair ; and only you can 
comfort him ! * 

* What,' said the crow, *is the cause of your sorrow? What can 
I do for you ? * 

* I will tell you,' replied Indra-mena ; ' but do not hide from me, 
I implore you, anything that I want to know. Tell me first of all, 
who was the first king who ever reigned over this country, and what 
he did that was remarkable ?' 

The crow, well versed in ancient history, had no difficulty in 
satisfying the monarch, and answered in the following terms : — 

* The first king of this country was called Chaturanana. He had 
a son called Visva-Bahu, who in turn had a son called Indra-mena, 
a prince who, having always shown great devotion to Brahma with 
the Four Faces, was thought worthy after death to be admitted to 
the presence of the deity. The reign of Chaturanana was a period 
of great happiness. He dealt with his subjects as a tender father 
deals with his children. Amongst the many praiseworthy acts which 
made his reign remarkable was one by which his name will be for 
ever remembered. It was he who had the honour and glory of 
inducing the God of Gods to come down to earth from Vaikuntha. He 
built for him a dwelling-place at the foot of the mountain of Nila, 
a magnificent temple, the walls of which were of massive gold, while 
the interior was embellished with most precious stones. Time, that 
universal destroyer, has respected this edifice, and it is still in 
existence perfectly uninjured. But for a long time past it has been 
swallowed up by the sands of the sea. It is true that the god who 
inhabited the sacred spot has ceased to dwell there ; nevertheless, he 
could not entirely forsake a mountain that had once been consecrated 
by his presence, and he has taken up his abode there in the shape of 
a vepn or margosa-tree. One day the famous penitent Markandeya, 



The Jagannath Legend 717 

who for many centuries did penance on this mountain, perceiving that 
this tree gave no shade, was roused to indignation, and breathing upon 
it he partially reduced it to ashes. This tree, however, was Vishnu, 
the Supreme Being, and consequently immortal. The penitent 
could not, therefore, entirely destroy it, and the trunk still remains. 
The only thing that I do not know is the exact spot where this tree 
grew.* 

Here Indra-mena interrupted the crow, and asked if it could 
recognize the spot where the temple stood. The crow replied in the 
affirmative. So they both set out together to find the site. At 
the place where they stopped the crow set to work to dig into the 
sand with his beak to the depth of a yojanay and at last succeeded in 
disclosing in its entirety the magnificent temple which had formerly 
been the abode of Narayana, the God of Gods. Having shown it to 
the king, the crow covered it up again as before. 

The king, convinced of the truth of all that the crow had told him, 
and enraptured at having found that for which he had been seeking 
so earnestly, questioned his guide as to what steps he should take to 
restore to its former state of splendour and fame a place which had 
been so venerated. 

*What you now ask of me,* the crow replied, *is beyond my 
province. Go and find Brahma with the Four Faces, and he will tell 
you how to accomplish your desire.* 

Indra-mena followed this advice. He again sought Brahma, and 
having offered him worship several times, he said : — 

* I have now seen with my own eyes near the mountain Nila that 
superb temple which was formerly the abode of the great Vishnu, 
and am come to consult you, great god, on the course that 
I should pursue in order to rekindle in the heart of the people the 
holy fervour which this sacred place inspired in former times. If 
I build a town, what name shall I give to it ? Vishnu, I know, will 
return and honour the place with his presence under the form of the 
trunk of a tree, but how will he come, and what sacrifices and 
offerings must be made to him ? Deign to enlighten me, great god, 
and help me in this difficulty.* 

* To accomplish the praiseworthy object that is in thy mind,* said 
Brahma, *thou must erect a new temple on the very spot where 
the old one is now buried. Thou shalt give it the name of Sridehul. 
It is not necessary to make it as costly as the former one, because the 
present inhabitants of the country, being reduced to great poverty, 
would remove it piecemeal, and thy labour would be lost. It need 
only be built of stone. In order to provide the necessary accommo- 
dation for the crowd of devotees who will visit it, thou must build 
near the temple a town which will receive the name of Purushottama. 
The moment the work is finished the trunk of a tree, that is to say 



7i8 Appendix V 



Krishna himself, will appear on the sea-shore. This thou must 
remove with much pomp and ceremony into the new temple. The 
carpenter Visvakarma will come and work at it, and will fashion 
it into the face and form of the god. Thou shalt place beside this 
god his sister Subadra and his brother Balarama. Thou must offer 
sacrifices to the god day and night, but especially in the morning, at 
noon, and in the evening. This will be a sure and certain means of 
securing for thyself, and for all those who follow thy example, a place 
in Vaikuniha^ the Abode of Bliss. As Vishnu will not be able to 
consume the enormous quantity of food that will be offered to him as 
neiveddya by the multitude of his devotees, men may therein find 
a means of purifying themselves and obtaining the remission of their 
sins by eating the remnants. Happy is he who shall secure for 
himself the smallest particle, for he will certainly go to Vaikuntha 
after death. To give thee some idea of the inestimable value of the 
remnants of Krishna's food, let me tell thee that if by accident or inad- 
vertence some fragments should fall to the ground, the very gods 
themselves would strive for them, even if the dogs had already 
devoured a portion. In short, if a Pariah were to take some rice 
destined for Krishna from the mouth of a dog and put it into that of 
a Brahmin, this rice would be so pure, and would possess so many 
virtues, that it would immediately purify that Brahmin. The goddess 
Laksh mi cooks and prepares the food destined for Krishna, and the 
goddess Annapurni waits upon him. A portion of the tree kalpa 
will come down from Swarga and take root in the centre of thy 
new city. Thou knowest that this tree is immortal, and that thou 
hast only to ask it for what thou desirest to be sure of obtaining it. 
The mere sight of the temple that thou art about to erect will be 
sufTicient to procure inestimable blessings. Even to be beaten \\nth 
sticks there by the priests who serve the temple will be reckoned 
of peculiar merit. Indra, and the gods who follow in his train, will 
come and live in thy new city, and will be company for the god 
Krishna. The side of the city which faces the sea will be much more 
sacred than the other parts. Those who live on this side of it will 
daily increase in virtue. The sand which the sea deposits there thou 
shalt call kanaka^ or gold dust. Any one who shall die on this sand 
will assuredly go to Vaikuntha. This, prince, is my answer to thy 
requests. Go at once and execute all my commands. In the mean- 
time Vishnu, under the guise of the tree which is to form the trunk 
of which I have spoken, will grow and become fitted for the purpose 
for which it is destined.' 

Indra-mena, having offered thanks to Brahma, set about to obey 
him. The temple and the new city were built with the utmost 
celerity. Yet when the work was completed the god did not appear. 
This delay began to cause the prince some uneasiness, when one day, 



The Jagannath Legend 719 

having risen very early, he perceived on the sea-shore the trunk of 
the tree for which he was watching so impatiently. He prostrated 
himself several times before it with his face to the ground, and in the 
fullness of his joy cried : * O happiest day of my life ! I now have 
certain proofs that I was born under a lucky star, and that my sacri- 
fices have been pleasing to the gods. Nothing can equal the happi- 
ness that I derive from this; for with my own eyes I see the Supreme 
Being, him whom the most favoured and the most virtuous among 
men are not permitted to see.* 

Having thus rendered to the trunk of the tree these preliminary 
acts of worship, the king put himself at the head of a hundred 
thousand men, who marched to the new deity and placed him on 
their shoulders. He was thus removed to the temple with the 
greatest pomp. 

The famous carpenter, Visvakarma, speedily arrived and undertook 
to carve the face and figure of the god Krishna on the tree which had 
just been deposited in the temple. He promised to finish the work 
in one night ; but only on condition that no one looked on while he 
performed his task. A single inquisitive glance, he said, would be 
sufficient to make him abandon it, never to return. 

This was agreed upon, and Visvakarma at once set to work. As he 
made no noise about it, the king, who was in a constant state of 
anxiety, imagined that he had run away and was not going to fulfil his 
promise ; so to make sure, he crept softly up to the temple and 
peeped through the cracks in the door. To his great delight he 
saw the carpenter quietly at work, so he retired at once. But 
Visvakarma had caught sight of him ; and, angered at this breach of 
confidence, he left the work as it was, roughly hewn out, with only an 
indistinct indication of a human form. And so the trunk of the tree 
remained much as it was in its original state, and just as it may be 
seen at the present day. 

Indra-mena was vexed at this untoward occurrence, but in spite of 
it the tree-trunk became his god, and he gave it his daughter in 
marriage; the wxdding being celebrated with the utmost magnifi- 
cence. 

This, then, is the history of the foundation of the city of Puru- 
shottama, now called Jagannath, and of the tree-trunk which is 
worshipped under the name of Jagannatha, or Lord of the Universe. 



720 Appendix VI 



APPENDIX VI 

Trial by Ordeal. — Its Different Forms. 

When the evidence against a man accused of either a civil or 
criminal offence is not sufficiently strong to convict him, the Hindus 
of\en have recourse to trial by ordeal, this method of settling doubtful 
cases being a regular part of their judicial system. The principal 
ordeals are those by scales and weights, by fire, by water, and by 
poison ^ The following are the rules to be observed. The months 
of Cheitra, Vaisaka, and Margasira (April, May, and December) are 
the most favourable for ordeals, though that of the scales can take 
place at any time when there is not too much wind. The ordeal by 
fire should be practised during the rainy season, that by water in the 
hot weather and in autumn, that by poison in winter and in foggy 
weather. If careful attention is not paid to these points grave errors 
are liable to occur. An ordeal which took place at an unfavourable 
moment would be of no assistance in ascertaining the truth. The 
accused who is to be tried by ordeal prepares himself by fasting 
and ablutions. He then goes to a Brahmin purohita, explains the 
circumstances of the case, and receives his advice and instruction. 
After this he offers a sacrifice to all the Brahmins present, asks for 
their asirvadam (blessing), and then speaks as follows : — * Say that this 
day shall be a fortunate one for me, a day of virtue, a day on which 
it will be recognized that I am innocent of the crime of which I am 
accused, a day on which I shall receive many blessings.' 

To this the Brahmins reply three times : — 

* May this day be a fortunate one for thee, a day of virtue, a day on 
which thy innocence will be proved, a day on which thou shalt 
receive many blessings.' 

This preliminary^ ceremony, which is called the sasfi-itassa, being 
ended, they o?lqt homam in honour of the nine planets. The scales 
are then brought in. Over them is a little white flag, and a stake 
is driven into the ground to si pport them. The ///ro^//rt presiding 
over the ceremony takes a vessel containing water, rice, and flowers, 
and turning towards the east, says : — 

' There are ten forms of trial by gold out of heated oil ' ; Phala, 'hold- 
ordeal: — T'M/fl, * the balance'; Agtti, ing a hot ploughshare'; Dhartna 
'fire'; yr?/a, 'water'; K/iAa, 'poison'; <//irtr»ia, * drawing concealed images of 
Kosa, * drinking water in which an Virtue and Vice out of a vessel filled 
idol has been washed ' : Tanduloy with earth ' ; Tulasi, * holding the 
* ejecting chewed rice grains'; Tapta leaves of holy basil.' This holy basil 
ntasha, * taking a masha weight of is sacred to Vishnu. — Ed. 



Trial by Ordeal 721 



* Glory to the three worlds ^ ! 

* Goddess of Virtue, approach this place, come near, accompanied by 
the eight divine guardians of the eight corners of the world, and by 
the gods of wealth and of winds.' 

He offers puja to the goddess of Virtue ; then turning successively 
to the eight principal points of the globe, he says : — 

To the east, * Glory to Indra ! ' (the king of the gods). 

To the south, * Glory to Yama ! ' (the Hindu Pluto). 

To the west, * Glory to Varuna ! * (the Hindu Neptune). 

To the north, * Glory to Kubera ! ' (the Hindu Plutus). 

To the south-east, * Glory to Agni ! ' (fire). 

To the south-west, * Glory to Nairuta ! ' (the Chief of the Devils). 

To the north-west, * Glory to Vayu ! ' (the wind). 

To the north-east, * Glory to Isana ! ' (the Destroyer). 

He then offers puja to these eight deities. He also offers it to the 
eight gods of wealth, to the twelve suns ', to the twelve Rudras, to 
the sixteen mothers, to Ganesha, and finally to the eight winds'. 
He offers to Virtue the lesser puja^ that is to say, sandalwood, flowers, 
incense, a lamp, and neiveddya. 

Then follows the hontam. The fire having been consecrated and 
purified by the purohita according to Vedic rites, and the gayatri 
mantram having been recited, they throw into the fire a hundred and 
eight, or twenty-eight, or at least eight pieces of the villi tree, dipped 
in a mixture of butter and rice. At this juncture presents must be 
given to the Brahmins. 

Then the accused, who must be fasting and be wearing very damp 
clothes, is placed on that side of the scale which is towards the west. 
They then put bricks and darhha grass on the other side until a per- 
fectly just balance has been obtained. The accused then leaves his 
scale and is sent to perform his ablutions without taking off his 
garments. During this interval the purohita writes in two lines of 
equal length, and each containing an equal number of letters, the 
mantram of which the following is a translation : — 

* Sun, moon, wind, fire, Swarga^ earth, water, virtue, Yama, day, 
night, dusk, and dawn, you know this man's deeds, and whether the 
accusation is true or false.' 

He then specifies below the offence which the accused is supposed 
to have committed. This writing must not be in black ink; ink 
of some different colour must be used. 

* The three worlds, called the /n- Persian name for this luminary, 
loka when spoken of collectively, are which peculiarity strikes me as note- 
SwargOy BhuJokay snidPataJa — heaven, worthy. — Dubois. 

earth, and hell. — Dubois. ^ Amongst these winds there is one 

^ Mitra is one of the most common called amma, which, I think, is also 
names for the sun. It is also the worth noticing. — Dubois. 

3 A 



722 Appendix VI 



The purohita places the writing on the head of the accused, and 
addresses the scales in these words : — * Scales, you know everything 
that is in the hearts of men ; you know their vices and their virtues. 
What escapes man's perspicacity is not hidden from you. Behold 
a person who is accused of a crime of which he declares himself 
to be innocent, and who desires to prove his innocence to the public. 
If he is not guilty, justice demands that you should pronounce in his 
favour.* 

The duty of watching the movements of the scales must be left 
neither to a religious recluse, nor yet to a person of doubtful honesty. 
The former would be too likely to be influenced by compassion ; the 
latter would not scruple to trifle with his conscience. A Brahmin of 
tried wisdom and virtue is therefore chosen to fill the office, and he in 
his turn makes this speech to the scales : — 

* Scales, the gods have appointed you to dispense justice to mankind 
and to reveal the truth. Show it, therefore, on this occasion ; and if 
the man you are about to try is really guilty, do not allow him to 
preserve his equilibrium, but make the weight of his sin turn the 
scale against him.' 

The purohita then puts the accused again in the scales. He chants 
five times a stanza suitable to the occasion. If the scale on which the 
accused is standing forthwith drops, he is declared guilty; if the 
contrary is the case, he is declared innocent. If the scales remain 
equal, he is considered to be partially guilty ; and if the rope breaks, 
he is. reckoned altogether guilty. 

The ceremony, as usual, terminates with a distribution of presents 
to the assembled Brahmins. 

In the ordeal by fire they first of all draw eight circles on the 
ground, each sixteen fingers in diameter, leaving the same amount 
of space between each. Fire is the presiding genius of the first 
circle. Varuna. the wind, Yama, Indra, Kubera, the moon, and 
Savitru preside over the seven others. 

These eight circles are arranged in two parallel lines. A ninth, 
placed by itself, is dedicated to all the gods. All the circles are 
purified by being smeared over with cow-dung, on the top of which 
they scatter darbha grass. They then offer puja in turn to the deity 
presiding over each circle. 

Meanwhile the person about to undergo the ordeal bathes without 
removing his clothing, and while still quite wet places himself in 
the first circle of the line on the west side, his face towards the 
east. They then dip his hands into wheat flour mixed with curdled 
milk, and cover them over with seven leaves of the aswaita tree, seven 
leaves of chom, and seven stalks of darbha grass. 

A blacksmith then heats a small iron rod in the fire to a red heat. 
The rod should be about eight inches long, and the weight of fifty 



Ordeal by Fire 723 



rupees. Then the purohita places some fire purified according to the 
rites of his Veda to the south of the ninth circle and performs 
the homam. He invokes the goddess of Virtue in the same words as 
those used in the ordeal by scales. He throws the red-hot iron into 
water ; and after it has been re-heated to the same degree, he speaks 
as follows : — 

* Fire, you are the Four Vedas, and as such I offer you homam. 
You are the countenance of all the gods, and you are also the 
countenance of all learned men. You take away all our sins, and that 
is why you are called pure and purifying. I am the greatest of 
sinners, but I have the happiness to see you. Purify me from all my 
sins, and if this man who is about to undergo this ordeal is really 
innocent, refrain for his sake from making use of your natural power 
of burning, and do him no harm.' 

He finishes his discourse by doing homage to the power which this 
element possesses of penetrating into the inmost recesses of the 
human heart and discovering the truth. Then he says : — 

* Glor^' to the three worlds ! * and finally pronounces this evocation : 

* O fire, come near ! come near and stay here ! stay here ! ' and he 
offers puja. The accused places himself in the first circle, and the 
purohita, taking up the bar of hot iron with some tongs, says again : 

* O fire, you know the secrets of men ! reveal the truth to us on 
this occasion ! ' At the same moment he puts the red-hot iron 
on the hands of the accused, who then, still keeping hold of the 
iron, runs over all the circles, in such a manner as to place his 
feet alternately on all. Arrived at the eighth circle he throws the 
iron into the ninth on to some straw, which should be set on fire by 
the contact. 

In the case of the accused dropping the iron before he has covered 
the whole distance, the trial would have to begin over again. If, 
on an inspection of his hands, it is seen that the iron has not injured 
the skin, he is considered innocent An accidental burn on any 
other part of his body would not count. To make quite sure that 
contact with the red-hot iron has produced no sensible effect on 
the skin, the accused is given some unhusked rice, which he has 
to rub vigorously between his hands to separate the grains from 
the husk. 

The preparatory formalities for the ordeal by water are much the 
same as the preceding ones. For this they draw a single circle in 
which they place flowers and incense. A stake is also driven into 
a tank or a river where the current is not too strong. Near this 
stake the accused must place himself, the water being up to his 
waist. The purohita, with his face to the east, then speaks these 
words : — 

' Water, you are the life of all that has life ; you create and destroy 

3 A2 



724 Appendix VI 



at will ; you purify everything, and we may always be sure to 
leam the truth when we take you for judge. Settle the doubtful 
question which now concerns us and tell us whether this man is 
guilty or not.' 

Some one is then told to go a certain distance and to return. 
During the time so occupied the accused must immerse himself 
completely, holding on to the bottom of the stake fixed close to 
hini. If he raises his head above the water before the person 
returns, he is accounted guilty ; if he comes up afterwards, he is 
declared innocent. 

If both accuser and accused are condemned to undergo the ordeal, 
they must both go under the water at the same time, and he who first 
comes to the surface to breathe is considered guilty. 

The ordeal by poison is preceded by al! the usual ceremonies. 
A little powdered arsenic is mixed in some melted butter. The 
pitrohita then says :— 

' Poison, you are a harmful substance, created to destroy the guilty 
and impure. You were vomited by the great snake Vasuki to cause 
the death of guilty giants. Behold a person who is accused of a crime 
of which he declares himself to be innocent. If in reality he is not 
guilty, divest yourself of your injurious qualities and become to him 
as amrila (nectar).' 

The accused then swallows the poison ; and if, though he may feel 
unwell, he survives for three days, he is proclaimed innocent. 

There are also several other kinds of trial by ordeal. Amongst the 
number is that of boiling oil, which is mixed with cow-dung, and into 
which the accused must plunge his arm up to the elbow; that of the 
snake, which consists in shutting up some very poisonous snake in 
a basket, in which has been placed a ring or a piece of money vvhich 
the accused must find and bring out with his eyes bandaged ; if, in 
the former case, he is not scalded, and in the latter is not bitten, his 
innocence is completely proved. 



INDEX 



-»♦- 



Ablutions, ceremonious, 187. 
Abodes of Bliss, 573, 639 et seq. 
Actors, travelling, 74. 
Adoption, rules of, 371 et seq. 
Adventures of the Brahmin Kala-Sarma, 

447 et seq. 
Adwaita sect, the, 407. 
Agraharas, or Brahmin villages, 105, 

178. 
Agriculturists, 83 et seq. 
Akshatas, or coloured rice, 150, 152. 
Albinoes, 320. 
Allegory, religious, 563. 
Almanac, the Hindu, 136 ct seq. 
Alphabets, Indian, 43a et seq. 
Anglo-Indian officials, 8. 
Animals, unclean, 187. 
Animal-worship, 643 et seq. 
Anna-prasana ceremony, the, 158. 
Aphorisms, popular, 480 et seq. 
Appaji, the story of, 471 et seq. 
Aratti ceremony, the, 150 et seq. 
Armies, Hindu, 675 et seq. 
Artisans, five castes of, 17, 23. 
Arts and industries, Hindu, 34 ct seq., 

64, 95. 
Arundhati marriage- vow, the, 230. 

Ascetics, Hindu, 526 et seq., 544 et 

seq. 
Ashta-Dik-Palakas, the, 638. 
Ashta-yoga, the penances of, 541 et 

seq. 
Asirvadam, the, 132. 
Astrology, Hindu, 382 et seq. 
Astronomy, Hindu, 381. 
Aswatta, or sacred fig-tree, 659. 
* Aum,' the mysterious word, 142, 541. 



Bairagis, 527. 

Barbers and washermen, 63. 

Basil plant, worship of the, 6b:,6, 

Bassinam, the, 230. 

Bathing, rules as to, 187, 198, 244. 

Beef, Hindu repugnance for, 193. 

Beggars, religious, 11 3-1 15, 118. 

BhagcevcUay the, 4, 404. 

Bhootams, or evil spirits, 650 et seq. 

Birth ceremonies, 157 et seq. 

Bodily cleanliness, 203. 

Brahma, 103, 619 et seq. 

Brahmachari, rules followed by the, 162 

et seq., 173. 
Brahmin ceremonies, 146 et seq. 

— characteristics, 13, 325. 

— funeral ceremonies, 488 et seq. 

— influences in Hinduism, 613. 

— origins, 98 ct seq. 

— rule of life, the, 277. 

— rules to be observed while taking 
meals, 248 et seq. 

— sects, 109. 

— selfishness, 317. 

— wives, 339. 
Brahminical degeneration, 10^. 

— life, the four states of, 162 et seq. 
Brahmins, different kinds of, 1 09 et seq. 

— feasts to, 278. 

— gifts to, 1 77 et seq. 

— occupations and character of, 246, 
291 et seq. 

— punishment of, 180. 

— special privileges of, 174 et seq., 179. 

— the four foolish, 459 et seq. 

— Vishnavite, no, 122. 
Brinjals, 160. 



726 



Index 



British dominion in India, 5 et seq., 93 

et scq. 
Buddhists, the, 106, 415. 
Bull, worship of the, 500, 644. 
Burial, superstitions about, 321, 323. 

Camps, Hindu military, 685. 
Caste, advantages of, 28 et seq. 

— and morality, 33. 

— and religion, 31. 

— antiquity and origin of, 15, 31 et seq., 
45 et seq. 

— customs, special, 1 7 et seq. 

— expulsion from and restoration to, 38 
et seq. 

— main divisions and subdivisions of, 
15 et seq., 48. 

— marks, 19, 24, 112, 118. 

— penalties, 33, 37. 

— system, the, 12, 15 et scq. 

— unpardonable sins of, 43. 
Cattle-killing, prejudice against, 87 n., 

194, 645- 
Celibacy, distaste for, 208. 

Chaula ceremony, the, 160. 

Cherumars of Malabar, the, 59 n. 

Chess, the origin of, 678. 

Child-marriages, 214. 

Children, a Hindu's desire for, 600. 

Christian missions, 303. 

Christianity, Brahmin attitude toward.^, 

302 et seq. 

— in India, 11, 614 et seq. 
Chronology, Hindu, 420 et seq. 
Chucklers, or leather- workers, 62. 
Climate, the influence of, 323. 
Clothing, Hindu, 325. 

CokI, the triple, 24, 163, 171. 
Cotton industry, the indigenous, 82, 95. 
Cow-killing superstition, the, 194. 
Criminal justice in former days, 664. 

— tribes, 66 et seq. 
Cycles of time, Hindu, 423. 

Dancing-girls, temple, 592. 
Darbha grass, 152,658. 
Dasara feast, the, 577. 
Death, ceremonies after, 488 et seq., 
495 et seq. 

— unlucky days for, 505. 

Debt and usury, 84 et seq., 663, 672. 



Deepavali feast, the, 578. 
Defilements and purifications, 201 et 
seq. 

— external, 181 et seq. 

— internal, 189 et seq. 

— of the soul, 197. 
Deification, the system of, 557. 
Demons, 650. 

Desires of man, the three, 513. 

Devil-worship, 650. 

Dharma StutraSy the, 662. 

Diksha, or initiation, 119. 

Divorce, 214. 

Dombers, the, 74. 

Domestic animals, privations of, ^7. 

Dubois MS., the, 5. 

Dvija, or twice-born, 98, 171. 

Dwaita sect, the, 407. 

Earthenware vessels, 184. 

Eatmg, a Brahmin's method of, 248. 

— and drinking, care in, 185 ct seq. 

— gluttony in, 274. 
Eclipses, 199. 

Educational systems, Hindu, 381. 
Eka-dasi ceremony, the, 706 et seq. 
Elements, worship of the. 557 et seq. 
Epics, Hindu, 404. 
Epistolary style of the Hindus, 426 et 

seq. 
Etiquette, Hindu rules of, 329 et seq. 
European courts of law, 670. 

— influence in India, 97. 
Europeans, Hindu contempt for, 41 , 54, 

204, 307. 
Evil eye, or drishti -dosha, the, 152, 230. 
Evil spirits, 650. 

Fables, Hindu, 439 et seq. 
Family councils, 377. 
Fasting and fast days, 271 et seq. 
Fate, Hindu conception of, 621. 
Feasts, religious, 575 et seq. 

— Sudra, 280. 
Fig-tree, the sacred, 659. 
Fish-worship, 649. 

Flattery, Hindu love of, 170, 429. 
Flood, Hindu traditions as to the, 421. 
Food, forbidden articles of, 284, 568. 

— jungle products as, 83. 

— prejudice against animal, 194, 568. 



Index 



727 



Food, roles about eating, 185, 191, 248 

et seq. 
Fortifications, Hindn, 687. 
Funeral ceremonies, 488 et seq. 

of sannyasis, 547 et seq. 

Funerals of non-Brahmins, 503 et seq. 

Ganesa, the god of obstacles, 164, 637. 
Gamda, or kite, worship of the, 134, 

646. 
Gauri feast, the, 576. 
Gayatri prayer, the, 14a, 257 et seq. 
Gentlefolk, Hindu, 91. 
Giants, the Hindu, 522. 
God, Brahmin conception of, 300 et seq. 

— native Christian name for, 204. 
Goddesses, principal, 210. 
Gods, irreverence for the, 299. 

— principal Hindu, 619 et seq. 
Grahastha, the, 162, 238 et seq. 
Greeting, methods of, 330 et seq. 
Guru, Dubois as a, 205. 

Gurus, blessings and curses of, 126. 

— magnificence of, 129. 

— or priests, 1 24 et seq. 

— pastoral visits of, 130. 

Heavens, the Hindu, 573, 639. 
Hermitages, or mutts, 132. 
Hill tribes, 76 et seq. 
Hindu history, ancient, 4. 

— pride, 305. 

— sects, 24, 112 et seq., 406 et seq. 

— vices, 31 1 et seq. 

Hinduism, corruption of primitive, 104 
et seq. 

— observations on, 613 et seq. 

— unifying influence of, 618. 
Hindus, mental characteristics of, 324. 

— moral characteristics of, 309 et seq. 

— outward appearance of, 319 et seq. 
Homam, or sacrifice to fire, the, 177,516. 
Hook-swinging, 605. 

Horoscopes, 157, 385. 

Horse, sacrifice of the, 521 et seq. 

Horses, Indian, 683. 

Houses, Hindu style of, 327. 

Human sacrifices, 652 et seq. 

Idols, 552, 589. 

Implements and tools, worship of, 576. 



Indebtedness and usury, 84 et seq., 663^ 

672. 
India, our knowledge of, 3. 
Indians wealth, false ideas of, 81 et 

seq. 
Indra, or Devendra, 638. 
Infanticide, 506, 612. 
Inheritance, rules of, 371 et seq. 
Inscriptions, ancient, 437. 
Intoxicants, the use of, 19, 190. 
Ishta devata, or tutelary deity, the, 

166. 

Jagannath temple, the, 528, 609, 714 

et seq. 
Jains, the, 107, 693 et seq. 
Jata-karma ceremony, the, 157. 
Jewellery and ornaments, 335 et seq. 
Jugglers, quacks, and others, 74. 
Jungle tribes, 76 et seq. 
Justice, European administration of, 

670. 

— Hindu administration of, 661 et seq. 

Kailasa, or Siva*s paradise, 640. 
Kali-yuga era, the, 141, 420 et seq. 
Kalla-bantrus, the, 67 et seq. 
Kania-dana, 225. 
Krishna, 630 et seq. 
Kshatriyas, 15 et seq., 174, 235 et seq., 
502. 

— marriage among, 234 et seq. 
KuUar, or robber caste, the, 18. 
Kuravers, the, 66. 

Lambadis, the, 69. 

Law, administration of the, 661 et 

seq. 
Learning, Hindu, 380 et seq. 
Letter-writing, 426 et seq. 
Lingam, the, 21 n., 113, 117, 121, 634 

et seq. 
Lingayats, the, 21, 112 et seq., 117, 

192, h1^' 
Lizard omen, the, 218. 
Low castes, defilement from, 52. 

— outcastes, and wild tribes, 50 et 
seq. 

Magic, Hindu, 385 et seq. 

— syllables, 144. 



728 



Index 



Maba>iiiakhaiii festiraJ, the, at Comba- 

connniy 198. 
Mahomedanum, Hinda attitude towazdi^ 

506 et seq. 
Mahratta annies, 681. 
Malai-KoDdigaruf, the, 78. 
Mantradaris, 143. 
Mantramsy 140 ct leq. 

— magic, 391 et seq. 

— of physicians, the, 143. 
ManU'SastraSf 663. 
Manuscripts, Hinda, 436. 
Marriage, arranging the preliminaries 

of, 216. 

— consummation of, 233. 

— expenses, 215, 217, 232. 

— feast, 228. 

— Hindu ideas as to, 208. 

— lucky months for, 216. 

— relationships, 21. 

— rites, 219 et seq. 

— tie, sacredncss of the, 214. 

— vow, the Arundhati, 230. 

— within the gotram, 22. 
Marriages, games at, 231. 

— Kshatriya, 234 et seq. 

— Sudra, 232 et seq. 
Materialistic philosophy, 415. 

Maya, or illusion, 407, 412, 415, 417, 

535- 
Meditation, the practice of, 527, 537 

et seq. 
Men, the four deaf, 456 et seq. 
Metempsychosis, 564 et seq., 697. 
Mid wives, 143. 
Military system of Hindus, the, 675 et 

seq. 
Millc as a beverage, 190. 
Mimamsa philosophy, the, 4 14. 
Miracles, 599. 
Monkey-worship, 644. 
Moochis, or tanners, 64. 
Moral stanzas, 480 et seq. 
Morning ablutions, 239 et seq. 

— prayers, 239, 253 et seq. 
Mourners, professional, 355. 
Music, Hindu, 64, 596. 

Musical instruments, 65, ^(i^ 503, 595. 
Musicians, temple, 595. 
Muttadars, 89. 
Mutts and agraharas, 132. 



Nagan-pancfaami feast, the, 579. 
Nairs and Nambmis, 17. 
Namam, the, 1 13, 119. 
Name-giving or nama-kamia ceremocr. 

the, 158. 
Naraka, or hell, 571. 
Natnral objects, worship of^ 655 et seq. 
Nehreddya, or Divine oficring, 150. 
Xilgiris, the, y^n. 
A'ili-SastraSy 663. 
Niti Slokas, or moral stanxais, 480 et 

seq. 
Nomad self-government, 73. 

Obscene rites, 287 et seq. 

Oil, hygienic use of, 273. 

Opium, the use of, 20. 

Ordeal, trial by, 668, 669, 720 et seq. 

Ornamental marks, 336. 

Ornaments, 326, 335 et seq., 345, 346. 

Pakanattis, the, 71. 

Fallen, the, 61. 

Pancha-amrita, 155. 

Pancha-gavia offering, the, 42, 154. 

197. 
Panchalas, or five artisan classes, the, 

'7. 23. 

Panchangam, or Hindu almanac, 136 

et seq. 
Pancha-tatitra f or fables, the, 440 et 

seq. 
Panchayat, or arbitrators, 662. 
Pandals, or pavilions, 156. 
Paramatma, or Supreme Spirit, the, 

406 n. 
Parents, Hindu, 310. 
Pariah domestic servants, 54. 

— huts, 60. 
Pariahs, the, 50 et seq. 

— as soldiers, 55. 

— Brahmins of the, 62. 
Pavadam sacrifice, the, 115. 
Pavitram amulet, the, 152. 
Penances, 525 et seq., 539, 540, 604, 
Penitents, religious, 525 et seq. 
Philosophy, Hindu systems of, 276, 

406 et seq., 510. 
Poet historians of India, 4. 
Poetry, Hindu, 396 et seq. 

— superstition in Hindu, 399. 



Index 



729 



Poligars, or chiefs, 684. 
Polygamy, 210, 313. 
Poogul feast, the, 579 et scq. 
Population, increase of, 93. 
Poverty, causes of Hindu, 94 et seq. 

— of India, the, 9, 81 et seq. 
Prasadam, the, 126, 128. 
Pride, spiritual, 305, 525. 
Priests, 591. 

Property, the division of, 375 et seq., 

663. 
Propriety, outward, 315. 
Probiitution, 593. 
Public feasts, 278 et seq. 
Puja, ur sacrifice, 149 et seq. 
Puliahs, 61. 

Puniaha-vachana ceremony, the, 153. 
Punishments for crimes, 286, 664 et scq. 
Puranas, the, 110. 
Purl, the Jagannath temple at, 5 2 8, 714 

et seq. 
Purification of places, the, 155. 
Purifications and defilements, 201 et 

seq. 
Purohitas, 135 et seq. 
Putra, meaning of, 208 «. 

Qualities, the three inherent, 560. 

Rama, 625 et seq. 
Ramayana, the, 4, 404, 625. 
Recluse, the Vanaprastha, 507 et scq. 
Religion and polity, Hindu, 582. 
Religious tolerance, 298. 
Right-hand and left-hand factions, 25 

et seq., 156 n. 
Rishis, the seven, 99. 
Robber castes, 18, 67 et seq. 
Rndrakshas, 119. 

Sacred objects in nature, 199. 

— rivers and tanks, 198. 
Sacrifices, Brahmin, 516 et seq. 

— human, 652 et seq. 
Sakti-puja, 115, 288, 414. 
Saktis, the four, 415 et seq. 
Salagrama stone, worship of the, 655. 
Saliva, the defilement of, 186. 
Samaradhanas, or public feasts, 278 

et seq. 
Sam-kalpa, the, 146 et seq. 



Sandhya, the, 109, 244 et seq. 

— evening, 264 et seq. 

— morning, 253 et seq. 

— noonday, 259 et seq. 
Sankhya philosophy, 412. 
Sannyasis, or penitents, 163, 530 et seq., 

536 et seq. 

— funeral ceremonies of, 547 et seq. 
Sanskrit, study of, 1 76. 
Sashtanga, the, 42. 

Sattya-loka, or Brahma*s paradise, 641. 
Savages, jungle, 76 et seq. 
Sectarian squabbles, 1 20. 

— subdivisions, 1 23. 
Sectarianism, tolerance in, 119. 
Sesha ceremony, the, 227. 
Sexes, proportion of the, 211. 
Shan Mata, or six sects, the, 410. 
Simhasanas, no, 138. 

Sin, Hindu theory as to, 197 et seq. 
Sins of former existences, 200. 

— unpardonable, 200. 
Sita, 625, 627. 

Siva, 634 et seq. 

— priests of, 118. 
Sivaites, 21, 112, 117, 192. 
Siva-Ratri, or Siva's night, 272, 71 1. 
Skins of antelope and tiger, purity of, 

164 n. 
Slavery amongst low castes, 50 et seq. 
Sleeping, faculty of, 89. 

— rules about, 251. 
Smartha Brahmins, no. 
Snake-charmers, 75. 
Snake-worship, 647 et seq. 
Sorcerers, 144. 

Soul, Hindu ideas as to the, 408 et 
seq. 

— purification of the, 527 et seq., 536 
et seq. 

Souls, transmigration of, 564 et seq. 
Sraddha ceremony, the, 492. 
Starvation, borderland of, 87. 
Sub-sects, Vishnavite and Sivaite, J23. 
Sudras, 16 et seq., 174, 503. 

— lower classes of, 50 et seq. 

— marriage among, 222 et seq. 
Suicides, religious, 528. 
Superstition, effects of, 583. 
Suttee, or widow-burning, 359 et seq. 
Swarga, or India's paradise, 639. 



730 



Index 



Tales, Hindu, 456 et seq. 

Tali, or marriage-cord, the, -226, 356. 

Tapasas, or penances, 543. 

Tattooing, 344. 

Teeth, rules for cleaning, 242. 

Temple car festivals, 611. 

— carvings, 590. 

— musicians, 595. 

— offerings, curious, 607. 

— orgies, 603. 

— revenues, 597. 

— servants, 591. 

— women, 133, 597. 
Temples, 585 et seq. 
Tirupati temple, the, 608. 
Tonsure ceremony, the, 160. 
Torananis, or wreaths, 159. 
Torture, religious, 604 et seq. 
Torturing prisoners, 667. 

Trial by ordeal, 668 et seq., 720 et 

seq. 
Trimurti, or Hindu Trinity, the, 550 et 

seq. 
Triple cord, the, 24, 163, 171. 
Tulasi plant, worship of the, 656 et 

seq. 
Tutelary deities, 166. 
Twice-born, the, 98, 171. 

Upanaynna, or triple-cord ceremony, 

the, 163 et seq. 
Vpauishnds, or Vedic commentaries, 

the, 176. 
Usury, 84 et slh]., 663, 672. 

Vaikuntha, or Vishnu's j^aradise, 641. 
Vaisya women. 23. 
Vaisyas, 15 ct se(j., 23, 502. 
Valluvas, the, 62. 
Vanaprastha, the, 162, 507 et seq. 
Vanaprasthas, sacrifices of, 516 et seq. 
Vcdanta philosophy, 411. 
Vedas, or Sacred Books, the, 109, 174 
ct seq. 



Vegetables, forbidden, 191. 
Vegetarian diet, 191. 
Versifying, Hindu, 396 et seq. 
Vigneshwara, 164, 637. 
Village headmen, 89, 90. 

— menials, 63. 

* Virgin, gift of the,* 225. 
Vishnavite Brahmins, 122. 

— devotees, 113. 
Vishnavites, 112 et seq. 
Vishnu, 622 et seq. 
Visishtadwaita sect, the, 406 n. 
Visits, ceremonious, 334. 

Wandering tribes, ^(i et seq. 

Warfare, Hindu, 675 ct seq. 

Water-drinking, 189. 

Wealth, parasites of, 92. 

Weaning ceremony, 158. 

Weapons, Hindu, 689. 

W^idow-buming, 359 et seq. 

Widow in funeral ceremonies, the, 497 

et seq. 
Widowhood, condition of, 353 ct seq. 
Widow-remarriage, 24, 215, 358. 
Wives, Hindu, 233, 339, 347 et seq. 

— of the gods, 133. 

Women and children in India, 94. 

— funeral ceremonies of, 502. 

— Hindu ideas as to, 210, 233, 339 et 
seq. 

— rules of conduct for, 713. 
Women's dress and ornaments, 34,: 

et seq. 
Wiitinj^ materials, 434. 

— origin of, 430. 
Wuddars, the, 71. 

Yagnam sacrifice, the, 109, 177, 516 

et seq. 
Ycruvaru tribe, the, 78. 
Yogam, doctrine of, 537 et seq. 
Yojana, the, 147 «. 
' Young men's feast,* the, 167. 



THE END 



ox FOR I » 

rKIN'TEU AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

BY HORACE HART. M.A. 

I-mVTER TO THE UNIVKRSITY 



Sacred Books of the East 

TRANSLATED BY 

VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS 

AND EDITED BY 

F. MAX MULLER. 

41% This Series is published with the sanction and co-operation of the Secretary of 

State for India in Council. 



BBPOBT prasentad to th« AOADixza DBS ZV80RZPTZOV8, May 11, 

1883, 1>7 M. 

'M. Renan pr^ente trois nonveaax 
yolumes de la grande collection des 
"Livres sacr^s dc I'Orieut" (Sacred 
Books of the East), que dirige k Oxford, 
avec nne si yaste tradition et une critiqne 
si sdre, le savant associ^ de TAcad^mie 
des Inscriptions, M. Max Miiller. ... La 
premiere serie de ce beau recneil, com- 
pos^e de 24 yolumes, est presque achey^e. 
M. Max Miiller se propose d*en publier 



une seconde, dont l*int^r6t historique et 
religieux ne sera pas moindre. M. Max 
Miiller a su se procurer la collaboration 
des sayans les plus ^minens d*£urope et 
d'Asie. L'Uniyersit^ d'Oxford, que cette 
grande publication honore au plus haut 
degr^, doit tenir k continuer dans les plus 
larges proportions une oeuvre anssi philo- 
sophiqnement con9ue que savamment 
exJcut^.' 



firom tha 

' We rejoice to notice that a second 
series of these translations has been an> 
nounced and has actually begun to appear. 
The stones, at least, out of which a stately 
edifice may hereafter arise, are here being 
brought together. Prof. Max Miiller has 
deserved well of scientific history. Not 
a few minds owe to his enticing words 
their first attraction to this branch of 
study. But no work of his, not even the 



great edition of the Rig- Veda, can com- 
pare in importance or in usefulness with 
this English translation of the Sacred 
Books of the East, which has been devised 
by his foresight, successfully brought so 
far by his persuasive and organising 
power, and will, we trust, by the assist- 
ance of the distinguished scholars he has 
gathered round him, be carried in due 
time to a happy completion.* 



ProfiiSMr B. HABDY, Xaauffural Laotura in tha VBlvarsltj of rrei1mrir» 1887. 



' Die allgemeine vergleichende Reli- 
gionswissenschaft datirt von jenem gross- 
artigen, in seiner Art einzig dastehenden 
Untemehmen, zu welchem auf Anregung 
Max Miillers im Jahre 1874 auf dem 



internationalen Orientalistencongress in 
London der Grundstein gelegt worden 
war, die Ubersetzung derheiligen Biicher 
des Ostens' {the Sacred Books of the 
East), 



Tlio Hon. A^BBBT 8. O. OABBIVO, < Words on Bzistintf Bollgioiui/ 

' The recent publication of the " Sacred a great event in the annals of theological 
Books of the East*' in English is surely literature.* 



Ojcfoi:6 



AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
LONDON: HENRY FROWDE 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, B.C. 



SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST: 



FIRST SERIES. 

Vol. I. The Upanishads. 

Translated by F. Max MUllkr. Part I. The JTAindogya- 
upanishad, The Talavakdra-upanishad, The Aitareya-SrafryaJca, 
The Kaushftaki-brdhma/ia-upanishad, and The VS^asaneyi- 
sa/nhild-upanishad. 8vo, cloth, los. 6d. 

The Upanishads contain the philosophy of the Veda. TTiey have 
become the foundation of the later Veddnta doctrines, and indirectly 
of Buddhism. Schopenhauer, speaking of the Upanishads , says : 
^ In the whole world there is no study so beneficial and so elevating 
as that of the Upanishads, It has been the solate of my life, it will 
be the solace of my death! 

[Sec also Vol. XV.] 

VOL. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, 

As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vdsish/Aa, 
and Baudhdyana. Translated by Georg BOhler. Part I. 
Apastamba and Gautama. Second Edition, 8vo, cloth, los. 6d. 

The Sacred Laws of the Aryas contain the original treatises on 
which the Laws of Manu and other lawgivers were founded, 

[See also Vol. XIV.] 

Vol. III. The Sacred Books of China. 

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. 
Part I. The Shfi King, The Religious Portions of the Shih 
King, and The Hsido King. 8vo, cloth, 1 2s, 6d, 

Confucius was a collector of ancient traditions, not the founder of 
a new religion. As he lived in the sixth and fifth centuries B, C 
his works are of unique interest for the study of Ethology, 
[See also Vols. XVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXXIX, and XL.] 

Vol. IV. The Zend-Avesta. 

Translated by James Darmesteter. Part I. The VendldSd. 
Second Edition, 8vo, cloth, 14J. 

The Zend-Avesta contains the relics of what was the religion of 
Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes, and, but for the battle of Marathon, 



EDITED BY F. MAX MOLLER. 



might have become the religion of Europe, It forms to the present 
day the sacred book of the Parsis, the so-called fire-worshippers. 
Two more volumes will complete the translation of all that is left us 
of Zoroaster's religion, 

[See also Vols. XXIII and XXXL] 

VOL. V. Pahlavi Texts. 

Translated by E. W. West. Part I. The Bundahlr, Bahman 
Yajt, and Shdyast Id-shdyast. 8vo, cloth, 1 2s, 6d. 

The Pahlavi Texts comprise the theological literature of the revival 
of Zoroaster s religion^ beginning with the Sassanian dynasty. They 
are important for a study of Gnosticism, 

VOLS. VI AND IX. The Qur dn. 

Parts I and II. Translated by E. H. Palmer. 8vo, cloth, 21s, 

This translation, carried out according to his own peculiar views 
of the origin of the Qur'dn, was the last great work ofE, H, Palmer^ 
before he was murdered in Egypt, 

Vol. VII, The Institutes of Vishwu. 

Translated by Juuus Jolly. 8vo, cloth, lox. dd, 

A collection of legal aphorisms^ closely connected with one of the 
oldest Vedic schools, the KaMas, but considerably added to in later 
time. Of importance for a critical study of the Laws of Manu, 

VOL. VIII. The Bhagavadglt4,with The Sanatsu^tlya, 
and The Anuglti. 

Translated by Kashinath Trimbak Telang. 8vo, cloth, 
\os, 6d, 

The earliest philosophical and religious poem of India, It has been 
paraphrased in Arnold* s ^Song Celestial* 

VOL. X. The Dhammapada, 

Translated from Pili by F. Max Muller ; and 

The Sutta-Nipdta, 

Translated from Pili by V. Fausb(5ll ; being Canonical Books 
of the Buddhists. 8vo, cloth, los, 6d, 

The Dhammapada contains the quintessence of Buddhist morality. 
The Sutta-Nipdta gives the authentic teaching of Buddha on somi 
of the fundamental principles of religion. 



SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST: 



VOL. XI. Buddhist Suttas. 

Translated from Pili by T. W. Rhys Davids, i. The Maha- 
parinibbdna Suttanta; 2. The Dhamma-^kka-ppavattana 
Sutta. 3. The Tevi^^a Suttanta ; 4. The Akahkheyya Sutta ; 
5. The Aetokhila Sutta; 6. The Maha-sudassana Suttanta; 
7. The Sabbdsava Sutta. 8vo, cloth, los, 6d, 

A coUeciion of the most important religious, moral , and philosophical 
discourses taken from the sacred canon of the Buddhists, 

Vol. XII. The *Satapatha-Brdhma«a, according to the 
Text of the Midhyandina School. 

Translated by Juuus Eggeling. Part I. Books I and II. 
8vo, cloth, 1 2S, 6d, 

A minute account of the sacrificial ceremonies of the Vedic age. 
It contains the earliest account of the Deluge in India. 

[See also Vols. XXVI. XLI.] 

VOL. XIII. Vinaya Texts. 

Translated from the Pdli by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hkrmank 
Oldenberg. Part I. The Pitimokkha. The MahSvagga, I-IV. 
8vo, cloth, I ox. dd. 

The Vinaya Texts give for the first time a translation of the moral 
code of the Buddhist religion as settled in the third century B, C 

[See also Vols. XVII and XX.] 

Vol. XIV. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, 

As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, VdsishMa, 
and BaudhSyana. Translated by Georg Buhler. Part II. 
VdsishMa and Baudhdyana. 8vo, cloth, los, 6d. 

VOL. XV. The Upanishads. 

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part II. The Ka/)4a-upanishad, 
The Mu//d?iaka-upanishad, The Taittiriyaka-upanishad, The 
Br/hadarawyaka-upanishad, The 5vetdjvatara-upanishad, The 
Prar^a-upanishad, and The Maitrdya«a-brihma«a-upanishad. 
8vo, cloth, 10 J. 6d, 

Vol. XVI. The Sacred Books of China. 

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. 
Part II. The Yf King. 8vo, cloth, loj. 6d, 
[See also Vols. XXVII, XXVIII.] 

Vol. XVII. Vinaya Texts. 

Translated from the Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann 
Oldenberg. Part II. The Mahivagga, V-X. The A!ullavagga, 
I-III. 8vo, cloth, los, 6d, 



EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER. 



VOL. XVIII. Pahlavi Texts, 

Translated by E. W. West. Part II. The Da^istan-t Dinik 
and The Epistles of Miniij^fhar. 8vo, cloth, 1 2s. 6d. 

Vol. XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king. 

A Life of Buddha by Ajvaghosha Bodhisattva, translated from 
Sanskrit into Chinese by Dharmaraksha, a.d. 420, and from 
Chinese into English by Samuel Beal. 8vo, cloth, lox. 6d, 

This life of Buddha was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese, 
A,D. 420. // contains many legends , some of which show a certain 
similarity to the Evangelium infant iae, ifc, 

VOL. XX. Vinaya Texts. 

Translated from the Pili by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann 
Oldenberg. Part III. The Ajillavagga, IV-XII. 8vo, cloth, 
\os, 6d, 

Vol. XXI. The Saddharma-pu«^/arlka ; or, The Lotus 
of the True Law. 

Translated by H. Kern. 8vo, cloth, 1 2x. 6d, 

* The Lotus of the true Law' a canonical book of the Northern 
Buddhists^ translated from Sanskrit, There is a Chinese transla- 
tion of this book which was finished as early as the year 286 A,D, 

Vol. XXII. (7aina-Sfltras. 

Translated from Prikrit by Hermann Jacobi. Part I. The 
A^drahga-S(itra and The Kalpa-Sfttra. 8vo, cloth, 10s, 6d, 

The religion of the Gainas was founded by a contemporary of Buddha. 
It still counts numerous adherents in India^ while there are no 
Buddhists left in India proper, 

[See Vol. XLV.] 

VOL. XXIII. The Zend-Avesta. 

Translated by James Darmesteter. Part II. The Sirdzahs, 
Yajts, and NySyij. 8vo, cloth, loj. dd. 

Vol. XXIV. Pahlavi Texts. 

Translated by E. W. West. Part III. Dfni-t Maindg- 
Khira^, .Sikand-giimantk Vi^r, and Sad Dar. 8vo, cloth, 
\os, 6d, 



SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST: 



SECOND SERIES. 

VOL. XXV. Manu. 

Translated by Georg Buhler. 8vo, cloth, 2 is. 

This translation is founded on that 0/ Sir William Jones ^ which 
has been carefully revised and corrected with the help of seven native 
Commentaries, An Appendix contains all the quotations from Manu 
which are found in the Hindu Law-hooks^ translated for the use of 
the Law Courts in India, Another Appendix gives a synopsis of 
parallel passages from the six Dharma-sHtras^ the other Smntis, 
the UpanishadSf the Mahdbhdrata^ 6(c, 

VOL. XXVI. The 6atapatha-Br&hma«a. 

Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part II. Books III and IV. 
8vo, cloth, \2s, 6d, 

Vols. XXVII and XXVIII. The Sacred Books of China. 

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. Parts 
III and IV. The Li ICi, or Collection of Treatises on the Rules 
of Propriety, or Ceremonial Usages. 8vo, cloth, 25^. 

Vol. XXIX. The Gr/hya-SCltras, Rules of Vedic 
Domestic Ceremonies. 

Part I. ^hkhdyana, Ajvaldyana, P&raskara, Kh&dira. Trans- 
lated by Hermann Oldenberg. Svo, cloth, 12s, 6d, 

These rules of Domestic Ceremonies describe the home life of the 
ancient Aryas with a completeness and accuracy unmatched in any 
other literature. Some of these rules have been incorporated in the 
ancient Law-books. 

VOL. XXX. The Gr/hya-SCltras, Rules of Vedic 
Domestic Ceremonies. 

Part II. Gobhila, Hirawyakcjin, Apastamba. Translated by 
Hermann Oldenberg. Apastamba, Ya^^a-paribhdsha-siitras. 
Translated by F. Max Muller. Svo, cloth, i2x. 6d, 

Vol. XXXI. The Zend-Avesta. 

Part III. The Yasna, Visparad, Afrfnagdn, Gahs, and 
Miscellaneous Fragments. Translated by L. H. Mills. Svo, 
cloth, 1 2 J. 6d, 

Vol. XXXII. Vedic Hymns. 

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part I. Svo, cloth, iSj. 6d, 

VOL. XXXIII. The Minor Law-books. 

Translated by Julius Jolly. Part I. Nirada, Bnhaspati. 
Svo, cloth, loj. 6d, 



EDITED BY F. MAX MOLLER. 



Vol. XXXIV. The Veddnta-Sfltras, with the Com- 
mentary by 6ankar4^drya. Part I. 

Translated by G. Thibaut. 8vo, cloth, i2j. 6</. 

Vols. XXXV and XXXVI. The Questions of King 

Milinda. 

Translated from the Pili by T. W. Rhys Davids. 
Part I. 8vo, cloth, loj. dd. Part II. 8vo, cloth, i2x. dd. 

Vol. XXXVII. Pahlavi Texts. 

Translated by E. W. West. Part IV. The Contents of the 
Nasks, as stated in the Eighth and Ninth Books of the Dtnkard. 
8vo, cloth, 15J. 

VOL, XXXVIII. The VedSnta-Siltras. Part II. 8vo, 

cloth, with full Index to both Parts, 1 2s. 6d, 

Vols, xxxix and XL. The Sacred Books of China. 

The Texts of Taoism. Translated by James Legge. 8vo, 
cloth, 21s, 

Vol. XLI. The 6atapatha - Brdhma^^a. Part III. 

Translated by Julius Eggeling. 8vo, cloth, 12s, 6d, 

VOL. Xlill. Hymns of the Atharva-veda. 

Translated by M. Bloomfield. 8vo, cloth, 2 is. 

Vols. Xlilll and xliv. The 6atapatha-Brihma;/a. 

Parts IV and V. [In the Press.^ 

VOL. XLV. The G^aina-SCltras. 

Translated from Prakr/l, by Hermann Jacobi. Part II. The 
Uttar^dhyayana Sfttra, The Sditrakr/tdhga S(itra. 8vo, cloth, 
12^. 6d, 

Vol. XIiVI. Vedic Hymns. Part II. 8vo, cloth, 14^. 
Vol. XL VII. Pahlavi Texts. 

Translated by E. W. West. Part V. Marvels of Zoroas- 
trianism. 8vo, cloth, 8^. 6d, 

VOL. XLVIII. Rdmdnu^'s ^rlbhdshya. 

Translated by G. Thibaut. [In preparation,'] 

Vol. XLIX. Buddhist Mahdydna Texts. Buddha- 

^arita, translated by E. B. Cowell. Sukhavatt-vy(iha,Vg^a^Me- 
diki, &c., translated by F. Max Muller. Amitayur-DhySna- 
S(ilra, translated by J. Takakusu. 8vo, cloth, 12s, 6d, 



8 RECENT ORIENTAL WORKS. 

^necliota <!^xoniensJa. 

ARYAN SERIES. 

Buddhist Texts from Japan. I. Vafra^>&Aedikd ; The 
Diamond- Cutter. 

Edited by F. Max Mullkr, M.A. Small 4to, 3X. 6</. 

One of the most famons metaphysical treatises of the Mah&yina Buddhists. 

Buddhist Texts from Japan. 1 1 . Sukhdvatl-VyQha : 
Description of Sukhdvatt^ the Lafid of Bliss. 

Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio. With 

two Appendices : (i) Text and Translation of Sahghavarman's 

Chinese Version of the Poetical Portions of the Sukhivatf- 

Vydha ; (2) Sanskrit Text of the Smaller Sukhdvati-Vyiiha. 

Small 4 to, 7 J. 6d, 

The ediiio princeps of the Sacred Book of one of the largest and most 

inflaential sects of Buddhism, numbering more than ten millions of foilowen 

in Japan alone. 

Buddhist Texts from Japan. III. The A ncient Palm^ 
Leaves containing the Pra^«d-Pfiramitd-Hr/daya- 
Siitra and the Ush;ilsha-Vi;jiaya-Dhdra/«i. 

Edited by F. Max MUller, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio, M.A. 
With an Appendix by G. Buhler, CLE. With many Plates. 
Small 4to, lox. 

Contains facsimiles of the oldest Sanskrit MS. at present known. 

Dharma-Sawgraha, an Ancient Collection of Buddhist 
Technical Terms. 

Prepared for publication by Kenjiu Kasawara, a Buddhist 
Priest from Japan, and, after his death, edited by F. Max 
Muller and H. Wenzel. Small 4to, 7J. 6d, 

KAty&yana's Sarvdnukramawl of the Rigw^ddi. 

With Extracts from Sha^gurujishya's Commentary entitled 
Ved^rihadipika. Edited by A. A. Macdonell, M.A., Ph.D. i6x. 

The Mantrapatha, or the Prayer Book of the Apa- 
stambins. 

Edited, together with the Commentary of Haradatta, and 
translated by M. Winternitz, Ph.D. First Part. Introduc- 
tion, Sanskrit Text, Varietas Lectioni?, and Appendices. 
Small quarto, loj. 6d. 

0;cfor6 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

LONDON : HENRY FROWDE 

oxford university press warehouse, amen corner^ E.C. 




iiNWiiiiiiiH 

3 1)1D5 DSH 3m im'1 



STANFORD UNIVERSITY IIBRARIES 

CECIL H, GREEN LIBRARY 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 

|415) 723-1493 



All books 



7 be recoiled oFtec 7 do 
DATE DUE 




