The Yoga- 
Vasishtha 
Maharamayana of 
Valmiki, vol. 3 (of 


Valmiki 


THE 
YOGA-VASISHTHA- 
MAHARAMAYANA. 


PROSPECTUS. 


Plato advised the Athenians to betake themselves to the study of 
Mathematics, in order to evade the pestilence incident to the international war 
which was raging in Greece; so it is the intention of this publication, to exhort 
our countrymen to the investigation of Metaphysics, in order to escape the 
contagion of Politics and quasi politics, which has been spreading far and 


wide over this devoted land. 


V.L.M. 


THE 
YOGA-VASISHTHA 
MAHARAMAYANA 
OF 
VALMIKI 
Translated from the original Sanskrit 


By 
VIHARI-LALA MITRA 


Preface 


This edition was intended as a complete single volume personal study version that would read 
slightly more smoothly than the original and serve as a basis for a text to speech production. This 
version was produced from the freely available online volumes at Project Gutenberg. The original 
Preface and Prologue have been omitted. This edition has been slightly revised for minor punctuation; 
underlined words indicate inserted or altered words from the original in some way; italics mostly follow 


the original text. 


License 


Creative Commons Zero (CCO). This work is an expression of an ancient 
spiritual text for the benefit of all sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public 
domain via Creative Commons Zero (CCO). You are encouraged to copy, 
reproduce, adapt, alter, perform, or otherwise make use of this revised 
translation. 


BOOK I. 
ON MORAL APATHY 


CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTION. 


SECTION I. 
Divine Adoration 


Hail The Eternal. 


Om, salutation to the self-same Reality, from whom all beings proceed, by 
whom they are manifest, upon whom they depend, and in whom they become 
extinct (in the end). 


2. He is the knower, the knowledge and all that is to be known. He is the 
seer, the (act of) seeing, and all that is to be seen. He is the actor, the cause 
and the effect; therefore, salutation to Him (who is all) knowledge himself. 


3. Salutation to Him (who is) supreme bliss itself, from whom flow the 
dews of delight (as water springs from a fountain) both in heaven and earth, 
and who is the life of all. 


SECTION ILI. 
Narrative of Sutikshna. 


4. One Sutikshna, a Brahmana, whose mind was full of doubts, went to the 
hermitage of Agasti and asked the sage respectfully: — 


5. Oh great sage! that art informed in all the ways and truths of virtue, and 
knowest with certainty all the Sdstras, Iam in a great doubt (about something) 
which I pray you will kindly remove. 


6. Tell me whether a man’s acts or his knowledge or both of these, is in 
your opinion, the cause of his emancipation. 


7. Agasti replied: — 


As the flight of birds in the air is effected by means of both their wings, so 
the highest state of emancipation is attained through the instrumentality of 


both knowledge and acts. 


8. It is neither our acts nor knowledge alone that produces emancipation, 
but both together are known as the means of it. 


SECTION III. 
Anecdote of Karunya. 


9. I will recite to you an instance on this subject from the old traditions, 
relating a Brahman named Kaérunya, who was learned in the Vedas in days of 
yore. 


10. He was the son of Agnivesya and accomplished in the Vedas and all 
their branches, and after finishing his studies at the preceptor’s, returned to his 
own abode. 


11. He remained a sceptic at home, holding his taciturnity and inertness to 
acts: when his father Agnivesya saw his son so slack in his duties, he 
upbraided him thus for his good. 


12—13. Agnivesya said: — 


Why my son do you not discharge your duties, tell me how can you 
succeed (in anything) if you remain inactive, and tell me also the reason of 
your cessation from acts. 


14. Karunya replied: — 


The offering of daily oblations, and performance of morning and evening 
devotions during life, are inculcated in the Veda and law as the active duties 
(of men). 


15. But it is neither by acts or riches, nor by means of progeny, that one 
obtains his liberation, it is solely by self-denial that Stoics taste the ambrosia 
(of emancipation). 


16. Tell me my father! which of these two ordinances is to be observed by 
me? Doubtful of this, I have become indifferent to acts. 


17. Agasti said: — 


Hear me my son, that Kaérunya after saying so held his silence; when his 
father seeing him thus, rejoined his speech. 


18. Agnivesya said: — 


Hear me relate a narrative (to you) my son, and you having fully 


considered its purport in your mind, may do as you may choose (best for you). 


SECTION IV. 
Story of Suruchi. 


19. There was a damsel named Suruchi, the best of the Apsara nymphs, 
who was seated on the mountain peak of Himalaya, beset by peacocks around. 


20. Here Kinnaras inflamed by love sported with their mates, and the fall of 
heavenly streams, (Ganga and Yamuna), served to expurgate the gravest sins 
(of men). 


21. She beheld a messenger of Indra making his way through the sky; and 
then this most fortunate and best of Apsards, addressed him thus: 


22. Suruchi said: — 


O thou herald of gods, tell me kindly whence thou comest and whither art 
thou destined at present. 


SECTION V. 
Account of Arishtanemi. 


23. The divine Ariel replied: — Well hast thou asked Oh pretty browed 
maid, and I will tell thee all as it is. Know, Arishtanemi the royal sage, who 
has made over his realm to his son. 


24. He has (now) with religious indifference (to the world), set out to the 
forest for (practice of) asceticism, and is performing his austerities on the 
Gandha Madana mountains. 


25. I am now returning from there after discharge of my errand, and 
repairing to Sakra’s (palace) to report the matter. 


26. Suruchi said: — 


Tell me, my Lord, what matter has taken place there. I am with submission 
(much) inquisitive after it, nor shouldest thou cause me (the pain of) anxiety. 


27. The messenger replied: — 


Hear me gentle maid, relate to thee in length (everything) as it has 
occurred. 


28. On hearing that the king was practising the utmost rigors of asceticism 
in that forest, Indra, the lord of gods, desired me to take this heavenly car and 
repair at once to the spot. 


29. “Take this car,” said he, “bearing the (dancing) Apsards equipped with 
all their musical instruments, and furnished with a band of Gandharvas, 
Siddhas, Yakshas and Kinnaras.” 


30. “Convey them,” said he, “with all their wired instruments, flutes and 
drums to the auspices of the Sylvan mount of Gandha Madana. 


31. “There having placed the Prince Aristanemi in the vehicle, bring him to 
the enjoyment of heavenly delight in this city of Amaravati (the seat of 
immortals).” 


32. The messenger added: — 


Receiving this injunction of Indra and taking the car with all its 
equipments, I proceeded to that mountain. 


33. Having arrived at the mountain and advancing to the hermitage of the 
king, I delivered to him the orders of the great Indra. 


34. Hearing my words, Oh happy damsel! the king spoke to me with 
reluctance and said: — “I wish to ask thee something O messenger, which (I 
hope) thou wilt deign to answer. 


35. “Tell me what good and what evils there are in heaven, that knowing 
them, (beforehand), I may think of settling there as I may choose.” 


36. | answered, saying: — 


In heaven there is ample reward for merit, conferring perfect bliss (to all); 
but it is the degree of meritoriousness that leads one to higher heavens. 


37. By moderate virtue, one is certainly entitled to a middle station, and 
virtue of an inferior order, leads a person to a lower position (in the heavens). 


38. But one’s virtue is destroyed by his impatience at the excellence of his 
betters, by his haughtiness to his equals, and by his joy at the inferiority of 
others. 


39. When one’s virtue is thus destroyed, he must enter the abode of 
mortals. These and the like are the effects of merit and demerit (with us) in 
heaven. 


40. Hearing this, Oh good maiden, the king answered and said: — “I do 
not, Oh divine messenger! like the heaven that is of such like conditions. 


41. “I will henceforth practise the most austere form of devotion, and 
abandon this my unhallowed human frame in the same way, as the snake 
abandons his time-worn-skin, (slough). 


42. “Be thou pleased, Oh delegate of the gods! to return with thy heavenly 
car to the presence of the great Indra whence thou comest, and fare thee well.” 


43. The celestial emissary resumed: — 


Thus being bid, I went, Oh goodly dame, to the presence of Sakra to report 
the matter. Who upon my rehearsal of the matter, was struck with great 
wonder. 


44. Then the great Indra again spoke to me with a sweet voice and said: — 
“Go you my herald again to that king, and take him to the hermitage of 
Valmiki. 

45. “He is well acquainted with every truth, tell him my errand for the 
instruction of the dispassionate prince, saying: — 


46. ‘Oh thou great sage! remonstrate with this prince who is humble and 
dispassionate, and dislikes the enjoyments of heaven. 


47. ‘So that this prince who is aggrieved at the miseries of the world, may 
gradually come to attain his emancipation.’” 


48. I then went and explained my mission to the royal hermit, took him to 
the sage Valmiki, (who had grown amidst the ant-hills), and to whom I 
delivered great Indra’s charge for the king’s practice (of the means) for his 
final liberation. 


49. Then the sage, (named after the ant-hill in which he had grown), 
welcomed the King with gentle inquiries regarding his welfare. 


50. The prince replied: — 


“Oh great seer, that art informed in all the truths of religion, and art the 
greatest of them that know the knowable, thy very sight has given me all that I 
desired, and therein is all my welfare. 


51. “Great sire, I wish to learn from thee how I may escape the miseries 
which arise from one’s connection with this world, and which, (I hope), thou 
wilt reveal to me without reserve.” 


52. Valmiki said: — 


Hear me Oh king! I will relate to you the entire Ramayana, by the hearing 
and understanding of which you will be saved even while in this life. 


SECTION VI. 
History of Rama. 


53. Hear me Oh great and intelligent king, repeat to you the sacred 
conversation which took place between Rama and Vasishtha relating the way 
to liberation, and which I well know from my knowledge (of human nature). 


54. The prince said: — 


“O thou best of sages, tell me precisely who and what this Rama was, what 
was his bondage and how he got freed from it.” 


55. Valmiki said: — 


Hari was proscribed under an imprecation to take upon himself the form of 
a prince, with an assumed ignorance as that of a man of little understanding. 


56. The prince said: — “Tell me who was the author of that imprecation, 
and how it could befal on Rama, who was the personification of 
consciousness and felicity, and the very image of wisdom.” 


57. Valmiki replied: Sanat-kumara, who was devoid of desires, had been 
residing at the abode of Brahma, to which Vishnu, the Lord of the three 
worlds, was a visitor from Vaikuntha. 


58. The Lord God was welcomed by all the inhabitants of the Brahmaloka 
as well as by Brahma himself, except by Sanat-kumara who was thus beheld 
and addressed to by the god. 


59. “Sanat-kumar, it is ignorance that makes thee forsake thy desires for 
fear of regeneration (on earth), therefore must thou be born under the name of 
Sara-janma to be troubled with desires.” 


60. Sanat-kumara in return denounced Vishnu by saying: — “Even all 
discerning as thou art, thou shalt have to sacrifice thine omniscience for some 
time, and pass as an ignorant mortal (on earth).” 


61. There was another anathema pronounced upon Vishnu by the sage 
Bhrigu, who seeing his wife killed (by him), became incensed with anger and 
said: — “Vishnu thou shalt have also to be bereft of thy wife.” 


62. He was again cursed by Vrinda to be deprived of his wife, on account 
of his beguiling her (in the form of her husband). 


63. Again when the pregnant wife of Deva-datta was killed (with fear) on 
seeing the man-lion figure of Vishnu; 


64. The leonine Hari was denounced by the husband, who was sorely 
afflicted at the loss of his consort, to be thus separated from his wife also. 


65. Thus denounced by Bhrigu, by Sanat-kumdra, Deva-datta and Vrinda, 
he was obliged (to be born in this earth) in the figure of a human being. 


66. I have thus explained to you the causes of all the imprecations (which 
were passed on Vishnu), and will now relate to you all other things which you 
shall have carefully to attend to. 


CHAPTER II. 
Reason of Writing the Ramayana. 


SECTION I. 
Persons Entitled to its Perusal. 


Salutation to the Lord, the universal soul, shining manifest in heaven, earth, 
and the sky, and both within and without myself. 


2. One convinced of his constraint (in this mortal world), and desiring his 
liberation from it, and, who is neither wholly ignorant of, nor quite conversant 
with divine knowledge, is entitled to (the perusal of) this work. 


3. The wise man, who having well considered the narrative (of Rama) as 
the first step, comes afterwards to think on the means of liberation (as are 
expounded herein), he shall verily be exempt from transmigration (of his 
soul). 


4. Know, O destroyer of thy enemies! that I have first embodied the history 
of Rama in this Ramayana, (as the preparatory step to salvation). 


5. And I have given the same to my attentive pupil, the obedient and 
intelligent Bharadwaja, as the sea yields his gems to their seeker. 


6. These historical preparatories were rehearsed by the learned Bharadwaja 
in the presence of Brahma, seated in a certain forest of the Sumeru Mountain. 


7. Then the lord Brahma, the great grandfather of the inhabitants (of the 
three worlds), was so highly pleased with him that he addressed him, saying: 
— “Oh my son! ask the best boon that thou wishest for.” 


8. Bharadwaja said: — “Oh thou lord, that art master of the past and future 
times, grant me the desired boon of communicating to me the means whereby 
people are liberated from their miseries.” 


SECTION II. 
Brahma’s Behest. 


9. Brahma said: — “Go ask diligently of thy preceptor Valmiki, to 
complete the faultless Ramayana that he has undertaken (to write). 


10. “By the hearing of which men will get over their manifold errors, in the 
same manner as they pass over the sea by the bridge built over it by the great 
Rama, who was fraught with all good qualities.” 


11. Valmiki said: — Saying this to Bharadwaja, the supreme maker of all 
beings, (Brahma), accompanied him to my hermitage. 


12. In right earnest was the god welcomed by me with the argha and 
offerings of water and the like, when the lord of truth spoke to me for the 
good of all creatures. 


13. Brahma spake to me saying: — “Do not Oh sage! give up your 
undertaking until its final completion. No pains ought to be spared to make the 
history of Rama as faultless as it ought to be. 


14. “By this work of yours, men will forthwith pass over this hazardous 
world, in the same manner as one crosses the sea in a vessel.” 


15. Again said the increate Brahma to me: — “I come to tell this very thing 
to you, that you complete the work for the benefit of mankind.” 


16. Then, Oh king, the God disappeared from my sacred hermitage in a 
moment, just as the wave subsides in the water no sooner it has heaved itself. 


17. I was struck with wonder at the disappearance of that (deity), and then 
being composed in my mind, I inquired of Bharadwaja, saying: — 
18. Tell me, Bharadwaja, what Brahma spoke (to me) in the hermitage; to 


which he answered, saying: — 


19. “The God commanded you to complete the Ramayana for the good of 
men, and as a means of their crossing over the gulf of the world.” 


SECTION III. 
Inquiry of Bharadwaja. 


20. “Now Sir,” said Bharadwaja, “explain to me how the great minded 
Rama and Bharata conducted themselves amidst the troubles of this world. 


21. “Tell me also how did Satrughna, Lakshmana, and the renowned Sita, 
and all those who followed Rama, as also the ministers and their highly 
intelligent sons, conducted themselves (on earth). 


22. “Tell me clearly how they escaped all its miseries, that I may do the 
same with the rest of mankind: (for our salvation).” 


23. Being thus respectfully addressed by Bharadwaja, I was led, Oh great 
King! to carry out the behest of my lord (Brahma), and to narrate the 
Ramayana to him, saying: — 


24. Hear my son Bharadwaja, I will tell you all that you have asked, and by 
the hearing of which you shall be enabled to cast away the dross of errors 
(under which you labour). 


25. You are wise and have to manage yourself in the manner of the 
felicitous and lotus-eyed Rama, with a mind free from (worldly) attachments. 


26. (Know that) Lakshmana, Bharata, the great minded Satrughna, 
Kausalya, Sita, Sumitra as well as Dasaratha; — 


27. With Kritastra and the two friends of Rama, and Vasishtha and 
Vamadeva, and the eight ministers of state as well as many others, had 
reached the summit of knowledge (by this means). 


28. Their names are Dhrishta, Jayanta, Bhasa, Satya, Vijaya, Vibishanah, 
Sushena and Hanumana. And also Indrajita, (who had attained his highest 
knowledge). 


29. These were the eight ministers of Rama, who are said to have been 
equally dispassionate in their minds, and content with what was their lot. They 
were great souls, and free in their lives. 


30. Well my son, if you follow the manner in which these men observed 
sacrificial rites, gave and received their offerings, and how they lived and 
thought, you are at once freed from the turmoils (of life). 


31. One fallen in this boundless ocean of the world, may enjoy (the bliss 
of) liberation by the magnanimity of his soul. He shall not come across grief 
or destitution, but remain ever satisfied by being freed from the fever of 
anxiety. 


CHAPTER III. 
Valmiki’s Admonition. 


SECTION I. 
On True Knowledge. 


Bharadwaja said, O Brahman! relate to me first about Rama, and then 
enlighten me by degrees with the conditions of attaining liberation in this life, 
that I may be happy for ever. 


2. Valmiki replied: — Know, holy Saint! all worldly conceptions to be as 
erroneous as the various hues that taint the clear firmament. It is better 
therefore to efface them in oblivion, rather than revive their reminiscence (in 
repeated states of existence). 


3. All visible objects are absolute negation; we have no idea of them, save 
from sensation. Inquire into these apprehensions, and you will never find them 
as real. 


4. It is possible here (on earth) to attain to this knowledge (of worldly 
vanities) which is fully expounded herein: if you will listen to it attentively, 
you shall get at the truth and not otherwise. 


5. The conception of this world is a mistake, and though we actually see it, 
it is never in existence. It appears in the same light, O sinless saint, as the 
variegated colours in the sky. 


6. The conviction of the non-existence of the objects of vision, leads to 
efface their impressions from the mind. Thus perfected, there springs in it the 
supreme and eternal bliss of self-extinction. 


7. Otherwise there is no quietism to be had herein by men like you, rolling 
in the depths of science for thousands of years and unacquainted with the true 
knowledge. 


8. Complete abandonment of desires, styled as the best state of liberation, is 
the only pure step towards beatitude. 


9. The absence of desires leads to the extinction of mental actions, in the 
same manner as the absence of cold conduces to the dissolution of small 


particles of ice. 


10. Our desires which uphold our living bodies (and minds), bind us fast as 
by strings to our bodily prison. These being loosened, the inward soul is 
liberated (as a bird from its cage). 


11. Desires are of two kinds, pure and impure. The impure ones are the 
cause of transmigration, while the pure ones serve to destroy it. 


12. An impure desire is of the form of a mist of ignorance, consisting in the 
feeling of an obdurate egoism. This is said by the wise to be the cause of birth, 
(transmigration). 


13. A pure desire is like a parched seed incapable to bring forth the germ of 
transmigration, and only supports the present body (in its dry rigidity). 


14. The pure desires which are unattended with transmigration, reside in 
the bodies of living-liberated men, like unmoving wheels (unable to move 
them to action). 


15. Those that have the pure desires are not liable to transmigration, and are 
said to be knowing in all things that ought to be known. These are called the 
living-liberated and are of superior intelligence. 


16. I will explain to you how the high minded Rama attained the state of 
liberation in life, hear you this that old age and death may not come upon you. 


SECTION II. 
Early History of Rama. 


17. Hear, Oh highly intelligent Bharadawaja, the auspicious course and 
conduct of Rama’s life: whereby you shall be enabled to understand 
everything at all times. 


18. The lotus-eyed Rama after coming out of his school, remained for 
many days at home in his diversions, and without anything to fear. 


19. In the course of time as he took the reins of the Government, (in his 
hand), his people enjoyed all the bliss that absence of grief and diseases could 
impart (to them). 


20. At one time, Raéma’s mind, virtuous as he was, became anxious to see 
the different places of pilgrimage, the cities and hermitages (that lay about). 


21. So Raghava with this view, approached his father’s feet, he touched the 
nails (of his toes) as a swan lays hold on the buds of lotus. 


22. “Oh my father,’ he said, “my mind is desirous to see the different 
places of pilgrimage, temples of gods, forests and abodes (of men). 


23. “Grant me my lord this my petition, as there is no petitioner of thine on 
earth whom didst thou ever dishonor.” 


24. Thus solicited (by Rama), the king consulted with Vasishtha, and after 
much reflection granted him the first request he ever made. 


25. On a day of lucky stars, Rama set out (on his journey) with his two 
brothers, (Lakshmana and Satrughna), having his body adorned with 
auspicious marks, and (receiving the) benedictions which were pronounced on 
him by the priests. 


26. Accompanied also by a body of learned Brahmans whom Vasishtha had 
chosen on the occasion, and a select party of his associate princes; 


27. He started from home towards his pilgrimage after he received the 
benedictions and embraces of his mothers. 


28. As he went out of his city, the citizens welcomed him with the sounds 
of trumpets, while the bee-like fickle eyes of the city ladies were fixed upon 
his lotus like face. 


29. He was bestrewn with handfuls of fried paddy thrown over his body by 
the beautiful hands of village-women, that made him appear like the Himalaya 
covered over with snow. 


30. He dismissed the Brahmans with honor, and went on hearing the 
benedictions of the people, and taking a full view of the landscape around him 
until he proceeded towards the forest. 


31. He went on distributing alms after making his holy ablutions and 
performing his devotion and meditation, as he gradually passed the limits of 
Kosala after starting from his palace. 


SECTION III. 
Rama’s Pilgrimage. 


32. He went about seeing the many rivers and their banks, visiting the 
shrines of gods, sacred forests, and deserts far and remote from the resorts of 
men, as also the hills, seas, and their shores. 


33. He saw the Mandakini bright as the moon, the K4lindi, clear as the 
lotus, and also the following rivers, Saraswati, Satadru, Chandrabhagaé and 


Iravati. 

34, Also Veni, Krishnaveni, Nirvindhyd, Saraju, Charmanvati, Vitastd, 
Vipdsd and Bahiidakd. 

35. He saw also the (holy places of) Praydga, the Naimisha, the 


Dharmaranya, Gya, Varanasi, Srigiri, Kedara and Pushkara. 


36. He saw the Manasa and the northern Mansaravara lakes, and many fiery 
lakes and springs, the Bada, the Vindhyé range and the sea. 


37. He saw the fiery pool of Jwdlamukhi, the great shrine of Jagannatha, 
the fountain of Indradumna and many other reservoirs, rivers, and lakes. 


38. He visited the shrine of Kartikeya and the Gandak river of Salagramas, 
and also the sixty four shrines sacred to Hari and Hara. 


39. He saw various wonders, the coasts of the four seas, the Vindhya range, 
the groves of Hara, and the boundary hills and level lands. 


40. He visited the places of the great Rajarshis and the Brahmarshis, and 
went wherever there was any auspicious sanctuary of the gods and Brahmans. 


41. Thus they all honouring Rama, travelled far and wide in company with 
his two brothers, and traversed all the four quarters on the surface of the earth. 


42. Honoured by the gods, Kinnaras, and by men, and having seen all the 
places on earth, the descendant of Raghu returned home, like Siva when he 
returns to the Sivaloka. 


CHAPTER IV. 
Raéma’s Return from Pilgrimage. 


Rama strewn over with handfuls of flowers by the citizens (surrounding him) 
entered the palace, as when the beauteous Jayanta (son of Indra) enters his 
celestial abode. 


2. On his first arrival he bent himself in reverence before his father, before 
Vasishtha, before his brothers, his friends, the Brahmanas and the elderly 
members of the family. 


3. Repeatedly embraced as he was by friends, by his father, mothers, and 
by the Brahmanas, the son of Raghu bowed down his head to them with joy. 


4. The assembled people after their familiar conversation with Rama in the 
palace, strolled about on all sides highly delighted with his speech, resembling 
the music of a flute. 


5. Thus eight days were passed in festive mirth consequent to the arrival of 
Rama, and shouts of joy were sent forth by the elated multitude. 


6. Thenceforth Raghava continued to dwell happily at home, with relating 
to his friends, the different customs and manners of the countries (he visited) 
on all sides. 


7. He rose early in the morning and performed his morning service 
according to law. He then visited his father seated as Indra in his Council. 


8. He next passed a fourth part of the day in company with Vasishtha and 
other sages, and was greatly edified by their conversations which were full of 
instruction. 


9. He used also to go out for sport under orders of his father; and 
surrounded by a large number of troops, to forests full of (wild) boars and 
buffaloes. 


10. Then after returning home and performing his bath and other rites with 
his friends, he took his meal with them, and passed the night in company with 
his beloved companions. 


11. In these and similar practices did he pass his days with his brothers at 
his father’s house, after his return from the pilgrimage. 


12. Oh sinless (Bharadwaja), with his conduct becoming a prince, Rama 
passed his days with giving delight to the good men that surrounded him, in 
the manner of the moon that gladdens mankind with his soothing ambrosial 
beams. 


CHAPTER V. 
Of Rama’s self-dejection and its cause. 


Valmiki said: — 


Afterwards, Rama attained the fifteenth year of his age, and so also 
Satrughna and Lakshmana who followed Rama (in birth), attained also the 
same age. 


2. Bharata continued to dwell with joy at the house of his maternal 
grandfather, and the king, (Dasaratha), ruled the whole earth as usual. 


3. The most-wise king Dasaratha (now) consulted his ministers day after 
day about the marriage of his sons. 


4. But as Rama remained at home since his return from pilgrimage, he 
began to decay day by day as the translucent lake in autumn. 


5. His blooming face with its out-stretched eyes, assumed by degrees a 
paleness like that of the withering petals of the white lotus beset by a swarm 
of bees. 


6. He sat silent and motionless in the posture of his folded legs, 
(Padmasana), and remained absorbed in thought with his palm placed under 
his cheek and neck. 


7. Being emaciated in person, and growing thoughtful, sad, and distracted 
in his mind, he remained speechless as a mute picture in painting. 


8. On being repeatedly requested by the anxious inmates of the family to 
perform his daily rites, he discharged them with a melancholy countenance, 
(literally, — with his faded lotus-like face). 


9. Seeing the accomplished Rama, — the mine of merits in such a plight, 
all his brothers likewise were reduced to the same condition with him. 


10. The king of the earth observing all his three sons thus dejected and 
lean, gave way to anxiety together with all his queens. 


11. Dasaratha asked Rama repeatedly and in a gentle voice (to tell him) 


what his anxiety was, and what was the cause of his thoughtfulness; but he 
returned no answer to it. 


12. Then being taken up in his father’s lap, the lotus-eyed Rama replied, 
that he had no anxiety whatever, and held his silence. 


13. Afterwards the king Dasaratha asked Vasishtha, the best of speakers 
and well informed in all matters, as to the cause why Rama was so sorrowful. 


14. The sage Vasishtha thought over the matter (for a while), and then said, 
“There is, Oh king! a cause of Rama’s sadness, but you need not be anxious 
about it. 


15. “Wise men, Oh king! never entertain the fluctuations of anger or grief, 
or a lengthened delight from frivolous causes, just as the great elements of the 
world do not change their states (of inertness) unless it were for the sake of 
(some new) production.” 


CHAPTER VI. 
Advent of Viswamitra to the Royal Court. 


The king was thrown into sorrow and suspense at these words of the prince of 
sages, (Vasishtha); but kept his silence for sometime, and waited (that time 
might work a change). 


2. (Meanwhile), the queens of the palace, kept themselves watchful of the 
movements of Rama with anxious carefulness. 


3. At this very time, the famous Viswamitra, the great sage came to visit 
the king of men at Ayodhya. 


4. The intelligent and wise seer had his sacrificial rites disturbed by the 
Rakshasas, who were deceitfully powerful and giddy with their strength. 


5. It was for the security of his sacrifice that the sage waited on the king, 
because he was unable to accomplish it in peace (by himself). 


6. It was also for the purpose of their destruction, that the illustrious 
Viswamitra, who was the gem of austere devotion, had come to the city of 
Ayodhya. 


7. Desirous of seeing the king, he spoke to the guards at the gate, to report 
the arrival of Kausika the son of Gadhi to the king with despatch. 


8. On hearing these words, the guards were struck with fear in their minds, 
and ran as they were bid to the palace of the king. 


9. Coming to the Royal abode, the door-keepers informed the chief-warder 
of the arrival of Viswamitra the royal sage. 


10. The staff-bearer immediately proceeded to the presence of the king, 
seated among the princes and chiefs (under him) in the Court house, and gave 
his report, saying: — 


11. “Please your majestic, there is waiting at the door a mighty personage 
of majestic appearance, bright as the morning sun, with his pendant locks of 
hair, (red and ruddy), as sunbeams. 


12. “The brilliancy of his person has brightened the place from the top- 
most flag down to the ground, and made the horses, men and armory shine as 
with a golden hue.” 


13. No sooner had the warder appeared (before the king), and with hurried 
words announced the arrival of the sage Viswamitra: 


14. Then the best of kings as he heard the herald say so, rose at once from 
his throne of gold with all the ministers and chiefs that surrounded him. 


15. He walked immediately on foot with the staff of princes and chiefs by 
whom he was held in honour and regard, and in company with Vasishtha and 
Vamadeva. 


16. He went to the spot where the great sage was waiting, and saw 
Viswamitra the chief of sages, standing at the gateway. 


17. His priestly prowess joined with his military valour, made him appear 
as the sun descended on earth on some account. 


18. He was hoary with old age, rough-skinned by the practice of austerities, 
and covered down to his shoulders by red-bright braids of hair, resembling the 
evening clouds over topping a mountain brow. 


19. He was mild looking and engaging in his appearance, but at the same 
time as brilliant as the orb of the sun. He was neither assuming nor repulsive, 
but possessed of an ineffable gravity and majesty in his person. 


20. He was attractive yet formidable (in his look), clear yet vast (in his 
mind), deep and full (in knowledge), and shining (with his inward light). 


21. His life time had no limit, nor his mind any bound to it, nor had age 
impaired his understanding. He held the ascetics pot in one hand, that went 
(through life) as his only faithful companion. 


22. The compassionateness of his mind, added to the sweet complacency of 
his speech and looks, pleased the people as if they were actually served with 
nectar drops, or sprinkled over with ambrosial dews. 


23. His body decorated by the sacred thread, and his white prominent 
eyebrows, made him appear as a wonder to the eyes of his beholders. 


24. On seeing the sage, the lord of earth lowly bent himself at a distance, 
and then bowed down to him (so low), that the ground was decorated by the 
gems pendant upon his crown. 


25. The sage also in his turn greeted the Lord of the earth on the spot with 
sweet and kind words, like the sun greeting the lord of the gods. 


26. Afterwards the assembled Brahmans (of the court) headed by 
Vasishtha, honoured him with their welcomes. 


27. The king said: — We are as highly favoured, Oh holy sage! by thine 
unexpected appearance and thy glorious sight, as a bed of lotuses at the sight 
of the luminous sun. 


28. Oh sage, I have felt at thine appearance the happiness which knows no 
bounds, and which has no diminution in it. 


29. This day we must be placed at the front rank of the fortunate, as we 
have become the object of thine advent. 


30. With these and similar conversations that went on among the princes 
and the sages, they proceeded to the court-hall where they took their 
respective seats. 


31. The king finding the best of sages (Viswamitra) so very prosperous in 
his devotion, felt some hesitation to offer him the arghya (honorarium) 
himself with his cheerful countenance. 


32. He, (the sage), accepted the arghya offered him by the king, and hailed 
him during his act of turning round (the sage), according to the rules of 
Sdstra. 


33. Thus honoured by the king, he with a cheerful countenance asked the 
Lord of men about the good health (of himself and family), and the fulness of 
his finance. 


34. Then coming in contact with Vasishtha, the great sage saluted him as he 
deserved with a smile, and asked him about his health (and of those in his 
hermitage). 

35. After their interview and exchange of due courtesies had lasted for a 


while to the satisfaction of all in the royal assembly; 


36. They both took their respective seats; when every one (in the court) 
respectfully greeted the sage of exalted prowess. 


37. After the sapient sage (Viswdmitra) was seated, they made various 
offerings of padya, arghya and kine to him. 


38. Having honoured Viswamitra in due form, the lord of men 
condescended to address him with a gladdest mind and in submissive terms, 
with his palms folded over each other. 


SECTION ILI. 
Address of King Dasaratha. 


39. He said, “Sir, your coming here is as grateful to me as the obtaining of 
nectar by one, as a rainfall after a drought, and as the gaining of sight by the 
blind.” 


40. Again, it is as delightful to me as the getting of a son by a childless man 
in his beloved wife, and coming in possession of a treasure in a dream. 


41. Your advent is no less pleasing to me than one’s meeting with the 
object of his wishes, the arrival of a friend, and the recovery of a thing that 
was given for lost. 


42. It gives me the joy that is derived from the sight of a deceased friend 
suddenly returning by the way of the sky. It is thus, Oh Brahman, I welcome 
your visit to me. 


43. Who is there that is not glad to live in the heaven (Brahma-loka)? I feel 
myself as happy Oh sage! at your advent, and this I tell you truly. 


44. (Now tell me) what is your best pleasure, and what I may do for you; O 
Vipra, that are the best of the virtuous, and most properly deserving of my 
services. 


45. Formerly had you been famed under the title of Rajarshi, (or royal 
sage); but since, made glorious by dint of your asceticism, you have been 
promoted to the rank of a Brahmarshi, (or Brahman sage). Wherefore you are 
truly the object of my worship. 


46. I am so glad at your sight that it soothes my inmost soul, in the same 
manner as an ablution in Ganga’s stream cheers the mind. 


47. Free as you are from fears and desires, from wrath and passions and the 
feelings of pleasure, pain and disease, it is very wonderful, Oh Brahman, that 
you should have recourse to me (for anything). 


48. I consider myself as situated at a holy sanctuary, and absolved from all 
my sins, or as merged in the lunar sphere (by your presence), Oh! best of the 
learned in the truths of the Vedas. 


49. I understand your appearance as that of Brahma himself before me, and 
I confess myself, O sage! to be purified and favoured by your advent. 


50. I am indeed so gratified at your arrival, that | deem myself fortunate in 
this birth, and that I have not lived in vain but led a truly good life. 


51. My heart cannot contain within itself, but overflows (with joy) like the 
sea at the sight of the moon, since I beheld your person here and made my 
respectful obeisance to you. 


52. Whatever is your commission, and whatsoever may be the object, O 
greatest of sages! which has brought you hither, know it as already granted 
(by me); for your commands are always to be obeyed by me. 


53. You need not hesitate to communicate to me your hest, O progeny of 
Kausika, there is nothing, with me which is to be kept from you, if you should 
ask for it. 


54. You need not dubitate about my performance of the act. I tell it 
solemnly that I will execute your behest to the last item, as I take you in the 
light of a superior divinity. 


55. Upon hearing these sweet words (of the king), which were pleasing to 
the ears, and delivered with a humility worthy of one knowing himself, the far 
famed and meritorious chief of the sages felt highly gratified in himself. 


CHAPTER VII. 
Viswamitra’s Request for Rama. 


After the illustrious Viswamitra had heard the aforesaid unusually lengthy 
speech of the lion among kings, his hairs stood erect with joy, and he said (in 


reply): — 


2. This speech is worthy of thee, O best of kings on earth, and one 
descended from a royal race, and guided by the sage Vasishtha himself. 


3. Consider well O king about the performance of the act which I have in 
mind, and support (the cause of) virtue. 


4. Iam employed, O chief of men, in religious acts for attainment of my 
consummation, whereto the horrible Rdkshasas have become my great 
obstructions. 


5. Whenever I betake myself to offer sacrifices (to the gods) at any place, 
instantly do these nocturnal demons appear to destroy my sacrificial rites. 


6. The chiefs of the Rdkshasas fling heaps of flesh and blood on the 
sacrificial ground (before me), on very many occasions that I commence my 
ceremonies. 


7. Being thus obstructed in my sacrificial duties, I now come to thee from 
that spot and with a broken spirit, after having laboured in vain (for 
completion of the rites). 


8. [have no mind, O king, to give vent to my anger by imprecations, which 
have no room in my conduct (of religious life). 


9. Such being the sacrificial law, I expect to gain its great object in peace 
by thy favor. 


10. Being thus oppressed I have recourse to thy protection, and thou 
shouldst protect me (from wrongs); otherwise, it is an insult to solicitors to be 
put to disappointment by the best of men (as thyself). 


11. Thou hast a son, the beauteous Rama, powerful as the fierce tiger, and 
strong as the great Indra himself. He it is who is able to destroy the 


Rdkshasas. 


12. Now mayst thou deliver to me that Rama thy eldest son, having his 
youthful locks of hair like the sable plumage of a crow, but possessing the 
true valour of a hero. 


13. Protected under my sacred authority, he will be able by his personal 
prowess, to sever the heads of the malicious Rdkshasas. 


14. I will do him an infinity of good services, whereby he will in the end 
become adored by the inhabitants of the three worlds. 


15. The night-wandering Rdkshasas cannot abide in the field before Rama, 
but must fly like stags in the wilderness before the furious lion. 


16. No other man than Rama can make bold to fight with the Rdakshasas; as 
no animal other than the furious lion can stand to fight with the wild 
elephants. 


17. Elated with their strength, these vicious beings have become (as deadly) 
as poisoned shafts in fighting, and being delegates of Khara and Dushana, 
they are as furious as death itself. 


18. They cannot, Oh thou tiger among kings! be able to sustain the arrows 
of Rama, but must set down like the flying dust under the ceaseless showers 
of his arrows. 


19. Let not paternal affection prevail over thee O king (to withhold thy 
son), as there is nothing in this world, which the high-minded will refuse to 
part with (to their suitor). 


20. I know it for certain, and so shouldst thou know also, that the 
Rdkshasas must be destroyed by him; and (believe me), that wise men like 
ourselves will never undertake to engage in an uncertainty. 


21. I well know the great soul of the lotus-eyed Rama, and so does the 
illustrious Vasishtha, and all other far-seeing (sages and seers). 


22. Should the sense of greatness, duty, and renown, have a seat in thy soul, 
thou shouldst deliver my desired object, — thy son to me. 


23. It will take me ten nights to perform the rites of my sacrifice, at which 
Rama shall have to stay with me and kill the Rakshasas, who are obnoxious to 
my rites and enemies of the sacrifice. 


24. Let the ministers, Oh Kakutstha! headed by Vasishtha, join to give their 
assent (to it), and deliver thy Rama to me. 


25. Thou O son of Raghu, that knowest the times (of religious observances) 


must not allow my time to slip, so do as I may have Rama. Be blest and give 
not way to sorrow. 


26. Even the smallest service appears to be much if done in good time, and 
the best service is of no avail if done out of season. 


27. The illustrious and holy chief of the sages, Viswamitra, paused after 
saying these words fraught with a virtuous and useful intention. 


28. Hearing these words of the great sage, the magnanimous king held his 
silence for some time, with a view to prepare a fitting answer; because no man 
of sense is ever satisfied with talking unreasonably either before others or to 
himself. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
Dasaratha’s Reply to Viswamitra. 


Valmiki added: — On hearing these words of Viswamitra, the tiger among 
kings remained speechless for a moment, and then besought him in the 
lowliness of his spirit. 


2. Rama my lotus-eyed boy is only of fifteen years of age. I do not see he is 
a match for the Rdkshasas. 


3. Here is a full Akshauhini legion of my soldiers; of whom, Oh my Lord! I 
am the sole commander; surrounded by them I will offer battle to the 
Rakshasa cannibals. 


4. Here are my brave generals who are well disciplined in warfare; I will be 
their leader in the height of war with my bow in hand. 


5. Accompanied with these, I can offer fight to the enemies of the gods, and 
to the great Indra himself, in the same manner as the lion withstands the wild 
elephants. 


6. Rama is but a boy who has no knowledge of the strength of our forces, 
and whose experience has scarcely stretched to the battle field beyond the 
inner apartments (of the house). 


7. He is not well trained in arms, nor is he skilled in warfare. He does not 
know to fight with a foe, arrayed in the order of battle. 


8. He only knows how to walk about in the gardens of this city and amidst 
the arbours and pleasant groves. 


9. He only knows how to play with his brother princes, in the flowery parks 
set apart for his play within the precincts of the palace. 


10. Nowadays, Oh Brahman! he has become by a sad reverse of my 
fortune, as lean and pale as the withering lotus under the dews. 


11. He has no taste for his food, nor can he walk from one room to another, 
but remains ever silent and slow brooding over his inward grief and 
melancholy. 


12. In my great anxiety about him, O chief of sages, I have been, with my 
family and dependents, deprived of the gist of our bodies, and become as 
empty clouds of autumn. 


13. Can my boy, so young as he is, and thus subjected to distemper, be fit 
to fight at all, and again with those marauders who rove about at nights? 


14. Oh thou high-minded sage! it is one’s affection for his son that affords 
him far greater pleasure than his possession of a kingdom, or his connection 
with beauteous females, or even his relish for the juice of nectar. 


15. It is from paternal affection that good people (engage to) perform the 
hardest duties and austerities of religion, and anything which is painful in the 
three worlds. 


16. Men are even prepared under certain circumstances to sacrifice their 
own lives, riches, and wives; but they can never sacrifice their children; this is 
the nature with all living beings. 


17. The Rdkshasas are very cruel in their actions and fight deceitful 
warfares, so that Rama should fight them, is an idea which is very painful to 
me. 


18. I that have a desire to live, cannot dare to live for a moment in 
separation from Rama; therefore, thou shouldst not take him away (from me). 


19. I have, O Kausika! passed nine thousand rains in my lifetime, ere these 
four boys were born to me after much austerity. 


20. The lotus-eyed Rama is the eldest of these without whom the three 
others can hardly bear to live. 


21. This Rama is going to be conveyed by thee against the Rdkshasas; but 
when I am deprived of that son, know me certainly for dead. 


22. Of my four sons he is the one in whom rests my greatest love. 
Therefore, do not take away Rama, — my eldest and most virtuous son from 
me. 


23. If thy intention, Oh sage, is to destroy the force of night wanderers, take 
me there accompanied by the four kinds (elephants, horse, chariots and foot 
soldiers) of mine army. 


24. Describe to me clearly what these Rdkshasas are, how strong they are, 
whose sons they be and what their size and figure. 


25. Tell me the way in which the Rdkshasas are to be destroyed by Rama 
or my boys or by myself, when they are known to be treacherous in warfare. 


26. Tell me all these, Oh great sage! that I can calculate the possibility of 
our making a stand against the fiercely disposed Rdakshasas in the open field, 
when they are certainly so very powerful. 


27. The Rakshasa named Ravana is heard as being very powerful, he is 
brother of Kubera himself, and is the son of the sage Visravas. 


28. If it is he, the evil minded Ravana, that stands in the way of thy rites, 
we are unable to contend with that pest. 


29. Power and prosperity in all their flourish come within the reach of the 
living at times, but they disappear at others. 


30. Nowadays, we are no match for such foes as Ravana and some others. 
Such is the decree of destiny. 


31. Therefore, O thou, that art acquainted with law, do this favour to my 
son (as not to take him away); unlucky as I am, it is thou that art the arbiter of 
my fate. 


32. The gods, and Asuras, the Gandharvas and Yakshas, the huge beasts, 
birds and serpents are unable to fight with Ravana; what are we human beings 
in arms to him. 


33. That Rdkshasa holds the prowess of the most powerful, we cannot 
afford to fight with him, nor even with his children. 


34. This is a peculiar age in which good people are made powerless; I am 
moreover disabled by old age and want that spirit (that I was expected to 
possess) derived as Iam from (the most powerful) race of the Raghus. 


35. Tell me, O Brahmana! if it is Lavan the son of Madhu, (the notorious 
Astra), that disturbs the sacrificial rites; in that case also I will not part with 
my son. 


36. If it be the two sons of Sunda and Upasunda, terrible as they are like the 
sons of the sun, that disturb your sacrifice, in that case also I will not give my 
son to thee. 


37. But after all, O Brahman, shouldest thou snatch him from me (by dint 
of the supernatural power that thou possessest), then I am also dead and gone 
with him. I do not see any other chance of a lasting success of thy devotion 
(except by my death). 


38. Saying these gentle words, the descendant of Raghu was drowned in 
the sea of suspense with regard to the demand of the sage, but being unable to 
arrive at a conclusion, the great king was carried away by the current of his 


thoughts as one by the high waves of the sea. 


CHAPTER IX. 
Viswamitra’s Wrath And His Enraged Speech. 


Valmiki said: — On hearing this speech of the king with his piteous look and 
eyes full of tears, the son of Kausika became highly incensed and replied: — 


2. Thou art about to break thy promise after pledging thyself to its 
performance, and thus wishest to behave as a deer after having been a lion 
(before). 


3. This is unbecoming of the race of Raghu, it is acting contrary (to the 
rules) of this great family. Hot rays must not proceed from the cool beamed 
moon. 


4. If thou art so impotent, Oh king! let me return as I came. Thou promise- 
breaking Kakustha, live happily with thy friends. 


5. As the high spirited Viswadmitra now moved with ire, the earth trembled 
under him, and the gods were filled with fear. 


6. Vasishtha the meek and wise and observant of his vows, perceiving the 
great sage and friend of the world thus influenced by ire, gave vent to his 
speech (as follows). 


7. Oh king that art born of the race of the Ikshakus, and art a form of virtue 
itself, and called Dasaratha the fortunate, and art adorned with all the good 
qualities known in the three worlds. 


8. Being famed for thy meekness and strictness to thy vows, and renowned 
in all three worlds for thy virtues and fame, thou canst not break thy plighted 
faith. 


9. Preserve thy virtue and think not to break thy faith, comply with the 
request of the sage who is honoured in all the three worlds. 


10. Saying, thou wilt do it, if thou retract thy promise, thou losest the object 
of thy yet unfulfilled desires. Therefore, part with Rama from thee. 


11. Descended from the race of Ikshaku, and being Dasaratha thyself, if 
thou failest to perform thy promise, who else on earth will ever keep his 


word? 


12. It is in pursuance of the conduct of great men like thee, that low people 
even do not dare to transgress the bounds of their duty, how then dost thou 
wish to violate it thyself. 


13. Guarded by this lion-like man, (Viswaémitra), in the manner of ambrosia 
by fire, no Rakshasa will have power to prevail over Rama, whether he be 
accoutered and armed or not. 


14. Behold him here as the personification of virtue, the mightiest of the 
mighty, and superior to all in the world in his intelligence, and devotedness to 
asceticism. 


15. He is skilled in all warlike arms that are known in the three worlds, no 
other man knows them so well nor shall ever be able to master them like him. 


16. Among the Gods, the Sages, the Asuras, the Rakshasas, the Nagas, the 
Yakshas and Gandharvas, there is none equal to him (in might). 


17. In bygone days when this son of Kaushika used to rule over his realm, 
he was furnished with all the arms by Kris4swa, and which no enemy can 
baffle. 


18. These arms were the progeny of Krisdswa, and were equally radiant 
and powerful as the progeny of the Prajapati, and followed him (in his train). 


19. Now Daksha, (the patriarch), had two beauteous daughters, Jaya and 
Supraja (alias Vijaya), who had a hundred offspring (as personifications of the 
implements), that are invincible in war. 


20. Of these, the favoured Jaya has given birth to fifty sons of old, who are 
implacable agents of the destruction of Astra forces. 


21. In like manner, Suprajaé gave birth to fifty sons of very superior 
qualities, who are very powerful and terrible in their appearance, and 
indomitably aggressive. 


22. Thus Viswamitra is strengthened and grown powerful (by means of 
these). He is acknowledged as a sage in the three worlds. Thou therefore must 
not think otherwise than deliver Rama to him. 


23. This mighty and virtuous man and prince of sages being nigh, any one 
even at the point of death in his presence, is sure to attain his immortality (on 
earth), therefore, be not disheartened like an insensible man. 


CHAPTER X. 
Melancholy of Rama. 


Valmiki related: — After Vasishtha had done saying in this manner, king 
Dasaratha was glad to send for Rama with Lakshmana, and said: — 


2. Go you chamberlain, and bring here quickly the truly mighty and long 
armed Rama with Lakshmana, for the meritorious purpose of removing the 
impediments (in the way of religious acts). 


3. Thus sent by the king, he went to the inner apartment, and coming back 
in a moment informed the king. 


4. Oh sire! Rama, whose arms have crushed all his foes, remains rapt in 
thoughts in his room like the bee closed in the lotus at night. 


5. He said, he is coming in a moment, but is so abstracted in his lonely 
meditation that he likes no body to be near him. 


6. Thus acquainted by the chamberlain, the king called one of the 
attendants of Rama to him, and having given him every assurance, asked him 
to relate the particulars. 


7. On being asked by the king how Rama had come to that state, the 
attendant thus replied to him in a sorrowful mood. 


8. Sir, we have also become as lean as sticks in our persons, in sorrow for 
the fading away of your son, Rama, in his body. 


9. The lotus-eyed Rama appears dejected ever since he has come back from 
his pilgrimage in company with the Brahmanas. 


10. When besought by us with importunity to perform his daily rites, he 
sometimes discharges them with a placid countenance, and wholly dispenses 
with them at others. 


11. He is averse, Oh Lord! to bathing, to worshipping the gods, to the 
distribution of alms, and to his meals also; and even when importuned by us 
he does not take his food with a good relish. 


12. He no longer suffers himself to be rocked in the swinging cradles by the 
playful girls of the harem, nor does he divert himself under the showering 
fountains like the chdtaka, (in rain water). 


13. No ornaments beset with the bud-shaped rubies, no bracelets nor 
necklace, Oh king, can please him now, in the same manner as nothing in 
heaven can please its inhabitants who expect their fall from it (after the 
expiration of their terms). 


14. He is sorrowful even while sitting in the arbours of creepers, regaled by 
flowery breezes, and amidst the looks of damsels playing around him. 


15. Whatever thing Oh king! is good and sweet, elegant and pleasing, to the 
soul, he looks at them with sorrowful eyes, like one whose eyes are already 
satiate with viewing them heaped up in piles (before him). 


16. He would speak ill of the girls that would dance merrily before him, 
and exclaim out saying, “why should these ladies of the harem flutter about in 
this way, causing grief in me.” 


17. His doings are like those of a madman, who takes no delight at his food 
or rest, his vehicles or seats, his baths, and other pleasures, however excellent 
they be. 


18. As regards prosperity or adversity, his habitation or any other desirable 
things, he says of them to be all unreal, and then holds his silence. 


19. He cannot be excited to pleasantry nor tempted to taste of pleasures; he 
attends to no business, but remains in silence. 


20. No woman with her loosened locks and tresses, and the negligent 
glances of her eyes, can please him any more than the playful fawn can please 
the trees in the forest. 


21. Like a man sold among savages, he takes delight in lonely places, in 
remotest skirts, in the banks (of rivers) and wild deserts. 


22. His aversion to clothing and conveyance, food and presents, bespeaks 
O king! that he is following the line of life led by wandering ascetics. 


23. He lives alone, Oh lord of men! in a lonely place, and neither laughs 
nor sings nor cries aloud from a sense of their indifference to him. 


24. Seated in the posture of folded legs, (Padmdsana), he stays with a 
distracted mind, reclining his cheek on his left palm. 


25. He assumes no pride to himself nor wishes for the dignity of 
sovereignty; he is neither elated with joy nor depressed by grief or pain. 


26. We do not know where he goes, what he does, what he desires, what he 
meditates upon, whence and when he comes and what he follows. 


27. He is getting lean every day, growing pale day by day, and like a tree at 
the end of autumn, he is becoming discoloured day after day. 


28. Satrughna and Lakshmana are, Oh king! the followers of all his habits, 
and resemble his very shadows. 


29. Being repeatedly asked by his servants, his brother-princes and his 
mothers (as to the cause of his dementedness), he says he has none, and then 
resumes his taciturnity and indifference. 


30. He would lecture his companions and friends saying, “do not set your 
mind to sensual enjoyments which are only pleasing for the time being.” 


31. He has no affection for the richly adorned women of the harem, but 
rather looks upon them as the cause of destruction presented before him. 


32. He often chaunts in plaintive notes, how his life is being spent in vain 
cares, estranged from those of the easily attainable state of (heavenly bliss). 


33. Should some dependent courtier speak of his being an emperor (one 
day), he smiles at him as upon a raving madman, and then remains silent as 
one distracted in his mind. 


34. He does not pay heed to what is said to him, nor does he look at 
anything presented before him. He hates to look upon things, even the most 
charming (to sight). 


35. As it is chimerical to suppose the existence of an ethereal lake, and 
lotus growing in the same, so it is false to believe the reality of the mind and 
its conceptions. Saying so, Rama marvels at nothing. 


36. Even when sitting amidst beauteous maids, the darts of Cupid fail to 
pierce his impenetrable heart, as showers of rain the (unimpregnable) rock. 


37. That, “no sensible man should ever wish for riches which are but the 
seats of dangers”; making this his motto, Rama gives away all that he has to 
beggars. 


38. He sings some verses to this effect that, “it is an error to call one thing 
as prosperity and the other adversity, when they are both but imaginations of 
the mind.” 


39. He repeats some words to this purport that, “though it is the general cry, 
“O I am gone, I am helpless grown,” yet it is a wonder, that no body should 
betake himself to utter indifference.” 


40. That Rama, the destroyer of enemies, the great Sala, (oak), that is 
grown in the garden of Raghu, should get into such a state of mind is what 
causes grief in us. 


41. We do not know, Oh great armed and lotus-eyed king! what to do with 
him in this state of his mind. We hope only in thee. 


42. He laughs to scorn the counsels of the princes and Brahmans before 
him, and spurns them as if they were fools. 


43. He remains inactive with the conviction, that the world which appears 
to our view is a vanity, and the idea of self is also a vanity. 


44. He has no respect for foes or friends, for himself or his kingdom, 
mother or riches, nor does he pay any regard to prosperity or adversity. 


45. He is altogether quiescent, without any desire or effort, and devoid of a 
mainstay; he is neither captivated by anything nor freed from worldly 
thoughts. These are the reasons which afflict us most. 


46. He says, “what have we to do with riches, with our mothers, with this 
kingdom and all our activities.” Under these impressions, he is about to give 
up his life. 


47. As the chdtaka, (swallow), grows restless at the obstruction of rains (by 
hurricanes), so has Rama become impatient (under the restraint) of his father 
and mother, his friends and kingdom, his enjoyments and even his own life. 


48. Now, in compassion on thy son, incline to root out this chagrin which 
like a noxious creeper has been spreading its branches (in his mind). 


49. For notwithstanding his possession of all affluence, he looks upon the 
enjoyments of the world as his poison under such a disposition of his mind. 


50. Where is that potent person in this earth, who can restore him to proper 
conduct, (as by a potent medicine?). 


51. Who is there, that like the sun removing the darkness of the world by 
his rays, will remove the errors that have been the cause of grief in Rama’s 
mind, and thereby make his generosity effectual in his case. 


CHAPTER XI. 
Consolation of Rama. 


Viswamitra said: — If such is the case, you who are intelligent, may go at 
once, and persuade that progeny of Raghu to come hither, as they do one deer 
by others (of the train). 


2. This stupor of Rama is not caused by any (external) accident or (inward) 
affection; it is I think the development of that superior intellect which rises 
from the right reasoning of dispassionate men. 


3. Let Rama come here for a while, and here shall we in a moment dispel 
the delusion (of his mind), as the wind drives away the clouds from the 
mountain-tops. 


4. After his hebetude is removed by my reasoning, he shall be enabled to 
repose in that happy state of mind, to which we have arrived. 


5. He shall not only attain to pure truth and a clear understanding of 
uninterrupted tranquility, but secure to himself a plumpness and 
beauteousness of his figure and complexion, as one derives from a potion of 
ambrosia. 


6. He will then attend with all his heart to the full discharge of the proper 
course of his duties without remission, which will redound to his honour. 


7. He will become strong with a knowledge of both worlds, and his 
exemption from the states of pleasure and pain, and then he will look upon 
gold and stones with an indifferent eye. 


8. After the chief of the sages had spoken in this manner, the king resumed 
the firmness of his mind, and sent heralds after heralds to bring Rama to him. 


9. By this very time, Rama was preparing to rise from his seat in the palace 
to come over to his father, in the manner that the sun rises from the mountain 
in the east. 


10. Surrounded by a few of his servants, he came with his two brothers to 
the hallowed hall of his father, resembling the heaven of the king of gods. 


11. He saw at a distance his kingly sire seated amidst the assemblage of 
princes, as Indra surrounded by the gods. 


12. He was accompanied on either side by the sages Vasishtha and 
Viswamitra, and respectfully attended by his staff of ministers, all well versed 
in the interpretation of all Sdstras. 


13. He was fanned by charming damsels, waving the fine chauri flappers in 
their hands, and equalling in beauty the goddesses presiding over the quarters 
of heaven. 


14. Vasishtha, Viswamitra and the other sages, with Dasaratha and his 
chiefs, saw Rama coming at a distance as beautiful as Skanda himself. 


15. He appeared by his qualities of mildness and gravity to resemble the 
mount Himéalaya, (with his cooling frost and firmness), and was esteemed by 
all for the depth and clearness (of his understanding). 


16. He was handsome and well proportioned (in his features), auspicious in 
his look, but humble and magnanimous in his mind. With loveliness and 
mildness of his person, he was possessed of all manly prowess. 


17. He was just developed to youth, yet he was as majestic as an elderly 
man. He was neither morose nor merry, but seemed to be fully satisfied with 
himself, as if he had obtained all the objects of his desire. 


18. He was a good judge of the world, and possessed of all holy virtues. 
The purity of his mind was the attraction for all the virtues which met in him. 


19. The receptacle of his mind was filled by his magnanimity and 
honourable virtues, and the candour of his conduct showed him in the light of 
perfection (to everybody). 


20. Endowed with these various virtues and decorated by his necklace and 
fine apparel, Rama, the support of Raghu’s race, approached (his father) with 
a smiling countenance. 


21. He bowed his head to his father with the sparkling gems trembling in 
his locks, and imparting to his head the graceful appearance of the mountain 
Sumeru shaken by an earth-quake. 


22. The lotus-eyed Rama came up to salute the feet of his father, when the 
lord of the sages, (Viswamitra), was speaking with him. 


23. First of all Rama saluted his father, and then the two honorable sages, 
he next saluted the Brahmanas, and then his relations, and lastly his elders and 
well-wishing friends. 


24. He then received and returned the salutations of the chiefs and princes, 
bowing to him with graceful motion of their heads and respectful addresses. 


25. Rama of god-like beauty and equanimity of mind, approached the 
sacred presence of his father, with the blessings of the two sages. 


26. During the act of his saluting the feet of his father, the lord of the earth 
repeatedly kissed his head and face, and embraced him with fondness. 


27. At the same time, he, the destroyer of his enemies, embraced 
Lakshmana and Satrughna, with as intense an affection as the swan embracing 
the lotus flowers. 


28. “Be you seated my son upon my lap,” said the king to Rama, who 
however, took his seat on a fine piece of cloth spread on the floor by his 
servants. 


29. The king said, “O my son and receptacle of blessings, you have attained 
the age of discretion, so put not yourself to that state of self-mortification, as 
the dull-headed do from their crazy understandings. 


30. “Know that it is by following the course of his elders, guides and 
Brahmanas, that one attains to meritoriousness, and not by his persistence in 
error. 


31. “So long will the train of our misfortunes lie at a distance, as we do not 
allow the seeds of error to have access to us.” 


32. Vasishtha said, Oh strong armed prince! you are truly heroic to have 
conquered your worldly appetites, which are at once as difficult to be 
eradicated as they are fierce in their action. 


33. Why do you allow yourself like the unlearned, to be drowned in this 
rolling sea of errors, causing such dull inactivity in you? 


34. Viswamitra said, “why are your eyes so unsteady (with doubts) as the 
tremulous clusters of blue lotuses. You ought to do away with this 
unsteadiness, and tell us what is that grief (which rankles) in your mind. 


35. “What are these thoughts, and what are their names and natures, their 
number and causes, that infest your mind like its maladies, (in the same 
manner) as the mice undermine a fabric.” 


36. “I am disposed to think, that you are not the person to be troubled with 
those evils and distempers, to which the base and vile alone are subject. 


37. “Tell me the craving of your heart, O sinless Rama! and they will be 
requited in a manner, as will prevent their recurrence to you. 


38. Rama, — the standard of Raghu’s race having listened to the 
reasonable and graceful speech of the good-intentioned sage, shook off his 
sorrowing, like the peacock at the roaring of a cloud, in the hope of gaining 
his object. 


CHAPTER XII. 
Réma’s Reply. 


Valmiki related: — Being thus asked with soothing words by the chief of the 
sages, Rama made his answer in a soft and graceful speech replete with good 
sense. 


2. Rama said, Oh venerable sage! I will tell thee in truth, untutored though I 
am, all the particulars as asked by thee; for who would disobey the bidding of 
the wise? 


3. Since I was born in this mansion of my father, I have all along remained, 
grown up and received my education (in this very place). 


4. Then, O leader of sages! being desirous to learn good usages (of 
mankind), I set out to travel to holy places all over this sea-girt earth. 


5. It was by this time that there arose a train of reflections in my mind of 
the following nature which shook my confidence in worldly objects. 


6. My mind was employed in the discrimination of the nature of things 
which led me gradually to discard all thoughts of sensual enjoyments. 


7. What are these worldly pleasures good for, (thought I), and what means 
the multiplication (of our species) on earth? Men are born to die, and they die 
to be born again. 


8. There is no stability in the tendencies of beings whether movable or 
immovable. They all tend to vice, decay and danger; and all our possessions 
are the grounds of our penury. 


9. All objects (of sense) are detached from each other as iron rods or 
needles from one another; it is imagination alone which attaches them to our 
minds. 


10. It is the mind that pictures the existence of the world as a reality, but 
the deceptiveness of the mind, (being known), we are safe from such 
deception. 


11. If the world is an unreality, it is a pity that ignorant men should be 


allured by it, like the deer tempted by a distant mirage (appearing) as water. 


12. We are sold by none (to any one), and yet we remain as if enslaved to 
the world; and knowing this well, we are spellbound to riches, as it were by 
the magic wand of Sambara. 


13. What are the enjoyments in this quintessence (of the world) but misery; 
and yet we are foolishly caught in its thoughts, as if clogged in honey (like 
bees). 


14. Ah! I perceive after long that we have insensibly fallen into errors, like 
senseless stags falling into caverns in the wilderness. 


15. Of what use is royalty and these enjoyments to me? What am I and 
whence are all these things? They are but vanities, and let them continue as 
such without any good or loss to anybody. 


16. Reasoning in this manner, Oh Brahman, I came to be disgusted with the 
world, like a traveller in (his journey through) a desert. 


17. Now tell me, O venerable Sir! whether this world is advancing to its 
dissolution, or continued reproduction, or is it in course of its endless 
progression. 


18. If there is any progress here, it is that of the appearance and 
disappearance of old age and decease, of prosperity and adversity by turns. 


19. Behold how the variety of our trifling enjoyments hastens our decay, 
they are like hurricanes shattering the mountain trees. 


20. Men continue in vain to breathe their vital breath as hollow-bamboo 
wind-pipes having no sense. 


21. How is (human) misery to be alleviated, is the (only) thought that 
consumes me like wild fire in the hollow of a withered tree. 


22. The weight of worldly miseries sits heavy on my heart as a rock, and 
obstructs my lungs to breathe out. I have a mind to weep, but am prevented 
from shedding my tears for fear of my people. 


23. My tearless weeping and speechless mouth, give no indication of my 
inward sorrow to anybody, except my consciousness the silent witness in my 
solitude. 


24. I wait to think on the positive and negative states (of worldly bliss), as a 
ruined man bewails to reflect on his former state of affluence (and present 
indigence). 


25. I take prosperity to be a seducing cheat, for its deluding the mind, 


impairing the good qualities (of men), and spreading the net of our miseries. 


26. To me, like one fallen into great difficulties, no riches, offspring, 
consorts or home afford any delight, but they seem to be (so many sources of) 
misery. 


27. I, like a wild elephant in chains, find no rest in my mind, by reflecting 
on the various evils of the world, and by thinking on the causes of our 
frailties. 


28. There are wicked passions prying at all times, under the dark mist of 
the night of our ignorance; and there are hundreds of objects, which like so 
many cunning rogues, are about all men in broad day-light, and lurking on all 
sides to rob us of our reason. What mighty champions can we delegate (now) 
to fight with these than our knowledge of truth? 


CHAPTER XIII. 
Vituperation of Riches. 


Rama said: — It is opulence, Oh sage! that is reckoned a blessing here; it is 
even she that is the cause of our troubles and errors. 


2. She bears away as a river in the rainy season, all high-spirited simpletons 
overpowered by its current. 


3. Her daughters are anxieties fostered by many a malpractice, like the 
waves of a stream raised by the winds. 


4. She can never stand steady on her legs anywhere, but like a wretched 
woman who has burnt her feet, she limps from one place to another. 


5. Fortune like a lamp both burns and blackens its possessor, until it is 
extinguished by its own inflammation. 


6. She is unapproachable as princes and fools, and likewise as favourable 
as they to her adherents, without scanning their merits or faults. 


7. She begets only evils in them by their various acts (of profligacy), as 
good milk given to serpents, serves but to increase the poignancy of their 
poison. 


8. Men (by nature), are gentle and kind hearted to friends and strangers, 
until they are hard-heartened by their riches, which like blasts of wind, serve 
to stiffen (the liquid) frost. 


9. As brilliant gems are soiled by dust, so are the learned, the brave, the 
grateful, the mild and gentle, corrupted by riches. 


10. Riches do not conduce to one’s happiness, but redound to his woe and 
destruction, as the plant aconite, when fostered, hides in itself the fatal poison. 


11. A rich man without blemish, a brave man devoid of vanity, and a 
master wanting partiality, are the three rarities on earth. 


12. The rich are as inaccessible as the dark cavern of a dragon, and as 
unapproachable as the deep wilderness of the Vindhyé mountain inhabited by 


fierce elephants. 


13. Riches like the shadow of night, overcast the good qualities of men, and 
like moon-beams brings to bloom the buds of their misery. They blow away 
the brightness of a fair prospect as a hurricane, and resemble a sea with huge 
surges (of disquiet). 


14. They bring upon us a cloud of fear and error, increase the poison of 
despondence and regret, and are like the dreadful snakes in the field of our 
choice. 


15. Fortune is (as a killing) frost to the bondsmen of asceticism, and as the 
night to the owls of libertinism; she is an eclipse to the moonlight of reason, 
and as moonbeams to the bloom of the lilies of folly. 


16. She is as transitory as the Iris, and alike pleasant to view by the play of 
her colours; she is as fickle as the lightning, which vanishes no sooner it 
appears to sight. Hence none but the ignorant have reliance in her. 


17. She is as unsteady as a well born damsel following a base-born man to 
the words; and like a (deceptive) mirage, that tempts the run-aways to fall to it 
as the doe. 


18. Unsteady as the wave, she is never steady in any place, (but is ever 
wavering to all sides), like the flickering flame of a lamp. So her leaning is 
known to nobody. 


19. She like the lioness is ever prompt in fighting, and like the leader of 
elephants favourable to her partizans. She is as sharp as the blade of a sword 
(to cut off all obstacles), and is the patroness of sharp-witted sharpers. 


20. I see no felicity in uncivil prosperity, which is full of treachery, and 
replete with every kind of danger and trouble. 


21. It is pity that prosperity, like a shameless wench will again lay hold on 
a man, after being abandoned by him in his association with (her rival) 
Poverty. 


22. What is she with all her loveliness and attraction of human hearts, but 
momentary thing obtained by all manner of evil means, and resembling at best 
a flower shrub, growing out of a cave inhabited by a snake, and beset by 
reptiles all about its stem. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
Depreciation of Human Life. 


Human life is as frail as a pendant drop of water tripling on the tip of a leaflet, 
and as irrepressible as a raving madman, that breaks loose from its bodily 
imprisonment out of its proper season. 


2. Again the lives of those whose minds are infected by the poison of 
worldly affairs, and who are incapable of judging for themselves, are (verily) 
but causes of their torment. 


3. Those knowing the knowable, and resting in the all-pervading spirit, and 
acquiescing alike to their wants and gains, enjoy lives of perfect tranquility. 


4. We that have certain belief of our being but limited beings, can have no 
enjoyment in our transient lives, which are but flashes of lightnings amidst the 
cloudy sky of the world. 


5. It is as impossible to keep the winds in confinement, to tear asunder the 
sky to pieces, and wreathe the waves to a chaplet, as to place any reliance in 
our lives. 


6. Fast as the fleeting clouds in autumn, and short as the light of an oilless 
lamp, our lives appear to pass away as evanescent as the rolling waves in the 
sea. 


7. Rather attempt to lay hold on the shadow of the moon in the waves, the 
fleeting lightnings in the sky, and the ideal lotus blossoms in the ether, than 
ever place any reliance upon this unsteady life. 


8. Men of restless minds, desiring to prolong their useless and toilsome 
lives, resemble the she-mule conceiving by a horse, (which causes her 
destruction, abortion, or unfructification). 


9. This world (Sansdra) is as a whirlpool amidst the ocean of creation, and 
every individual body is as (evanescent) as a foam or froth or bubble, which 
can give me no relish in this life. 


10. That is called true living, which gains what is worth gaining, which has 


no cause of sorrow or remorse, and which is a state of transcendental 
tranquility. 


11. There is a vegetable life in plants, and an animal life in beasts, and 
birds; man leads a thinking life, but true life is above (the succession of) 
thoughts. 


12. All those living beings are said to have lived well in this earth, who 
being once born herein have no more to return to it. The rest are no better than 
old asses (of burthen). 


13. Knowledge is an encumbrance to the unthinking, and wisdom is 
cumbersome to the passionate; intellect, — is a heavy load to the restless, and 
the body is a ponderous burden to one ignorant of his soul. 


14. A goodly person possessed of life, mind, intellect and _ self- 
consciousness and its occupations, is of no avail to the unwise, but seem to be 
his over-loadings as those upon a porter. 


15. The discontented mind is the great arena of all evils, and the nestling 
place of diseases which alight upon it like birds of the air; such a life is the 
abode of toil and misery. 


16. As a house is slowly dilapidated by the mice continually burrowing 
under it, so is the body of the living gradually corroded by the (pernicious) 
teeth of time boring within it. 


17. Deadly diseases bred within the body, feed upon our vital breath, as 
poisonous snakes born in caves of the woods consume the meadow air. 


18. As the withered tree is perforated by minutest worms residing in them, 
so are our bodies continually wasted by many inborn diseases and noxious 
secretions. 


19. Death is incessantly staring and growling at our face, as a cat looks and 
purrs at the mouse in order to devour it. 


20. Old age wastes us as soon as a glutton digests his food, and it reduces 
one to weakness as an old harlot, by no other charm than her paint and 
perfumes. 


21. Youth forsakes us as soon, as a good man abandons his wicked friend 
in disgust, after his foibles come to be known to him in a few days. 


22. Death, the lover of destruction, and friend of old age and ruin, likes the 
sensual man, as a lecher likes a beauty. 


23. Thus there is nothing so worthless in the world as this life, which is 


devoid of every good quality and ever subject to death, unless it is attended by 
the permanent felicity of emancipation. 


CHAPTER XV. 
Obloquy on Egoism. 


Rama continued: — 


Egoism springs from false conceit, and it is vanity, (or vain glory), which 
fosters it; I am much afraid of this baneful egotism which is an enemy (to 
human kind). 


2. It is under the influence of egotism that all men in this diversified world, 
and even the very poorest of them, fall into the dungeon of evils, and 
misdeeds. 


3. All accidents, anxieties, troubles, and wicked exertions proceed from 
egoism or self-confidence, hence I deem egoism as a disease. 


4. Being subject to that everlasting arch-enemy, — the cynic egoism, I have 
refrained from my food and drink. What other enjoyment is there for me to 
partake of? 


5. This world resembles a long continuous night, in which our egoism like 
a hunter, spreads the snare of affections (to entrap us in it). 


6. All our great and intolerable miseries, growing as rank as the thorny 
plants of the catechu, are but results of our egoism. 


7. It overcasts the equanimity of mind as an eclipse overshadows the moon, 
it destroys our virtues as a frost destroys the lotus flowers, it dispels the peace 
of men as the autumn drives away the clouds. I must therefore get rid of this 
egoistic feeling. 


8. I am not Rama the prince, I have no desire nor should I wish for 
affluence, but I wish to have the peace of my mind and remain as the self- 
satisfied old sage Jina. 


9. All that I have eaten, done or offered in sacrifice under the influence of 
egoism, have gone for nothing, it is the absence of egoism which (I call) to be 
real good. 


10. So long, O Brahman! as there is (the feeling of) egoism in one, he is 


subject to sorrow at his difficulties, but being devoid of it, he becomes happy, 
hence it is better to be without it. 


11. I am free from anxiety, O sage! ever since I have got the tranquility of 
my mind after giving up my (sense of) egoism, and known the transitoriness 
of all enjoyments. 


12. As long, O Brahman! as the cloud of egoism overspreads (the region of 
our minds), so long our desires expand themselves like the buds of kurchi 
plants (in the rains). 


13. But when the cloud of egoism is dispersed, the lightning of avarice 
vanishes away, just as the lamp being extinguished, its light immediately 
disappears. 


14. The mind vaunts with egoism, like a furious elephant in the Vindhyan 
hills, when it hears the thunder-claps in the clouds. 


15. Again, egoism residing like a lion in the vast forest of all human bodies, 
ranges about at large throughout the whole extent of this earth. 


16. The self-conceited are decorated with a string of pearls about their 
necks, of which avarice forms the thread, and repeated births, — the pearls. 


17. Our inveterate enemy of egoism, has (like a magician), spread about us 
the enchantments of our wives, friends and children, whose spells it is hard to 
break. 


18. As soon as the (impression of the) word (ego) is effaced from the mind, 
all our anxieties and troubles are wiped out of it. 


19. The cloud of egoism being dispelled from the sky of our minds, the 
mist of error which it spreads to destroy our peace, will be dispersed also. 


20. I have given up my (sense of) egoism, yet is my mind stupified with 
sorrow by my ignorance. Tell me, O Brahman! what thou thinkest right for 
me under these circumstances. 


21. I have with much ado given up this egoism, and like no more to resort 
to this source of all evils and perturbation. It retains its seat in the breast for 
our annoyance only, and without benefiting us by any good quality of its own. 
Direct me now, you men of great understandings! (to what is right). 


CHAPTER XVI. 
The Ungovernableness of the Mind. 


Our minds are infested by evil passions and faults, and fluctuate in their 
observance of duty and service to superiors, as the plumes of a peacock 
fluttering at the breeze. 


2. They rove about at random with ardour and without rest from one place 
to another, like the poor village dog running afar and wide in quest of food. 


3. It seldom finds anything anywhere, and happening even to get a good 
store somewhere, it is as little content with it as a wicker vessel filled with 
water. 


4. The vacant mind, Oh sage! is ever entrapped in its evil desires, and is 
never at rest with itself, but roves at large as a stray deer separated from its 
herd. 


5. Human mind is of the nature of the unsteady wave, and as light as the 
minutest particle. It can therefore, have no rest in spite of (the fickleness and 
levity of) its nature. 


6. Disturbed by its thoughts, the mind is tossed in all directions, like the 
waters of the milk-white ocean when churned by the Mandara mountain. 


7. I cannot curb my mind, resembling the vast ocean (in its course), and 
running with its huge surges (of the passions), with whirlpools (of error), and 
beset by the whales of delusion. 


8. Our minds run afar, O Brahman! after sensual enjoyments, like the deer 
running towards the tender blades of grass, and unmindful of falling into the 
pits (hid under them). 


9. The mind can never get rid of its wavering state, owing to the habitual 
fickleness of its nature, resembling the restlessness of the sea. 


10. The mind with its natural fickleness and restless thoughts, finds no 
repose at any place, as a lion (has no rest) in his prison-house. 


11. The mind seated in the car of delusion, absorbs the sweet, peaceful, and 


undisturbed rest of the body, like the gander sucking up pure milk from 
amidst the water. 


12. O chief of sages! I grieve much to find the faculties of the mind lying 
dormant upon the bed of imaginary delights, from which it is hard to waken 
them. 


13. I am caught, O Brahman! like a bird in the net by the knots (of my 
egoism), and held fast in it by the thread of my avarice. 


14. I burn in my mind, O sage, like the dried hay on fire, by the flame of 
my anxieties and under the spreading fumes of my impatience. 


15. Iam devoured, O Brahman! like a clod of cold meat, by the cruelty and 
greediness of my heart, as a carcass is swallowed by a hungry dog and its 
greedy mate. 


16. Iam borne away, O sage! by the current of my heart, as a tree on the 
bank is carried away by the waters and waves beating upon it. 


17. I am led afar by my (greedy) mind, like a straw carried off by the 
hurricane, either to flutter in the air or fall upon the ground. 


18. My earthly mindedness has put a stop to my desire of crossing over the 
ocean of the world, as an embankment stops the course of the waters (of a 
stream). 


19. I am lifted up and let down again by the baseness of my heart, like a log 
of wood tied to a rope dragging it in and out of a well. 


20. As a child is seized by the false apparition of a demon, so I find myself 
in the grasp of my wicked mind, representing falsities as true. 


21. It is hard to repress the mind, which is hotter than fire, more 
inaccessible than a hill, and stronger than a thunder bolt. 


22. The mind is attracted to its objects as a bird to its prey, and has no 
respite for a moment as a boy from his play. 


23. My mind resembling the sea both in its dullness as well as restlessness, 
in its extent and fulness with whirlpools and dragons, keeps me far from 
advancing towards it. 


24. It is more difficult to subdue the mind than to drink off the ocean, or to 
upset the Sumeru mountain. It is ever harder than the hardest thing. 


25. The mind is the cause of all exertions, and the sensorium of the three 
worlds. Its weakness weakens all worldliness, and requires to be cured with 
care. 


26. It is the mind from which arise our pains and pleasures by hundreds, as 
the woods growing in groups upon a hill; but no sooner is the scythe of reason 
applied to them, than they fall off one by one. 


27. I am ready to subdue my mind which is my greatest enemy in this 
world, for the purpose of mastering all the virtues, which the learned say 
depend upon it. My want of desires has made me averse to wealth and the 
gross pleasures it yields, which are as tints of clouds tainting the (clear disk of 
the) moon (of our mind). 


CHAPTER XVII. 
On Cupidity. 


I SEE our vices like a flock of owls flying about in the region of our minds, 
under the darkness of our affections, and in the lonesome night of our avarice. 


2. lam parched by my anxieties like the wet clay under solar rays, infusing 
an inward heat in it by extraction of its soft moisture. 


3. My mind is like a vast and lonesome wilderness, covered under the mist 
of errors, and infested by the terrible fiend of desire is continually floundering 
about it. 


4. My wailings and tears serve only to expand and mature my anxiety, as 
the dews of night open and ripen the blossoms of beans and give them a bright 
golden hue. 


5. Avarice by raising expectations in men, serves only to whirl them about, 
as the vortex of the sea wallows the marine animals in it. 


6. The stream of worldly avarice flows like a rapid current within the rock 
of my body, with precipitate force (in my actions), and loud resounding waves 
(of my speech). 


7. Our minds are driven by foul avarice from one place to another, as the 
dusty dry hays are borne away by the winds, and as the Chdtakas are impelled 
by thirst to fly about (for drink). 


8. It is avarice which destroys all the good qualities and grace which we 
adopted to ourselves in good faith, just as the mischievous mouse severs the 
wires (of a musical instrument). 


9. We turn about upon the wheel of our cares, like withered leaves 
(floating) upon the water, and like dry grass uplifted by the wind, and as 
autumnal clouds (moving) in the sky. 


10. Being over powered by avarice, we are disable to reach the goal (of 
perfection), as a bird entangled in the snare, is kept from its flight. 


11. I am so greatly burnt by the flame of avarice, that I doubt whether this 


inflammation may be assuaged even by administration of nectar itself. 


12. Avarice, like a heated-mare, takes me far and farther still from my 
place, and brings me back to it again and again. Thus it hurries me up and 
down and to and fro in all directions forever. 


13. We are pulled up and cast down again like a bucket in the well, by the 
string of avarice (tied about our necks). 


14. Man is led about like a bullock of burthen by his avarice, which bends 
his heart as fast as the string does the beast, and which it is hard for him to 
break. 


15. As the huntress spreads her net to catch birds in it, so does our affection 
for our friends, wives, and children stretch these snares to entrap us every day. 


16. Avarice like a dark night terrifies even the wise, blindfolds the keen- 
sighted, and depresses the spirit of the happiest of men. 


17. Our appetite is as heinous as a serpent, soft to feel, but full of deadly 
poison, and bites us as soon as it is felt. 


18. It is also like a black sorceress that deludes men by her magic, but 
pierces him in his heart, and exposes him to danger afterwards. 


19. This body of ours shattered by our avarice is like a worn-out lute, 
fastened by arteries resembling the wires, but emitting no pleasing sound. 


20. Our avarice is like the long fibered, dark and juicy poisonous creeper 
called Kaduka, that grows in the caverns of mountains, and maddens men by 
its flavour. 


21. Avarice is as vain and inane, fruitless and aspiring, unpleasant and 
perilous, as the dry twig of a tree, which (bears no fruit or flower) but is 
hurtful with its prickly point. 


22. Venality is like a churlish old woman, who from the incontinence of her 
heart, courts the company of every man, without gaining the object of her 
desire. 


23. Greediness as an old actress plays her various parts in the vast theatre 
of the world, in order to please the different tastes of her audience. 


24. Parsimony is as a poisonous plant growing in the wide wilderness of 
the world, bearing old age and infirmity as its flowers, and producing our 
troubles as its fruits. 


25. Our churlishnesss resembles an aged actress, attempting a manly feat 
she has not the strength to perform, yet keeping up the dance without pleasing 


(herself or anybody). 


26. Our fleeting thoughts are as fickle as pea-hens, soaring over 
inaccessible heights under the clouds (of ignorance), but ceasing to fly in the 
day light (of reason). 


27. Avarice is like a river in the rains, rising for a time with its rolling 
waves, and afterwards lying low in its empty bed. (Such are the avaricious by 
the flux and reflux of their fortunes). 


28. Avarice is as inconstant as a female bird, which changes her mates at 
times, and quits the arbor that no longer bears any fruit. 


29. The greedy are as unsteady as the flouncing monkey, which is never 
restive at any place, but moves to places impassable by others, and craving for 
fruits even when satiate. 


30. The acts of avarice are as inconstant as those of chance, both of which 
are ever on the alert, but never attended with their sequence. 


31. Our venality is like a black-bee sitting upon the lotus of our hearts, and 
thence making its rambles above, below, and all about us in a moment. 


32. Of all worldly evils, avarice is the source of the longest woe. She 
exposes to peril even the most secluded man. 


33. Avarice like a group of clouds, is fraught with a thick mist of error, 
obstructing the light of heaven, and causing a dull insensibility (in its 
possessor). 


34. Penury, which seems to gird the breasts of worldly people with chains 
of gems and jewels, binds them as beasts with halters about the necks. 


35. Covetousness stretches itself long and wide and presents to us a variety 
of hues as the rainbow. It is equally unsubstantial and without any property as 
the iris, resting in vapour and vacuum and being but a shadow itself. 


36. It burns away our good qualities as electric fire does the hay; it numbs 
our good sense as the frost freezes the lotus; it grows our evils as autumn does 
the grass; and it increases our ignorance as the winter prolongs the night. 


37. Greediness is as an actress in the stage of the world; she is as a bird 
flying out of the nest of our houses; as a deer running about in the desert of 
our hearts; and as a lute making us sing and dance at its tune. 


38. Our desires, like billows, toss us about in the ocean of our earthly cares; 
they bind us fast to delusion as fetters do the elephant. Like the ficus indicus 
they produce the roots of our regeneration, and like moon beams they put our 


budding woes to bloom. 


39. Avarice, like (Pandora’s) box, is filled with miseries, decrepitude and 
death, and is full of disorder and disasters like a mad bacchanal. 


40. Our wishes are sometimes as pure as light and at others as foul as 
darkness, now they are as clear as the milky way, and again as obscure as 
thickest mists. 


41. All our bodily troubles are avoided by our abstaining from avarice, as 
we are freed from fear of night goblins at the dispersion of darkness. 


42. So long do men remain in their state of (dead like) dumbness and 
mental delirium, as they are subject to the poisonous cholic of avarice. 


43. Men may get rid of their misery by their being freed from anxieties. It 
is the abandonment of cares which is said to be the best remedy of avarice. 


44. As the fishes in a pond fondly grasp the bait in expectation of a sop, so 
do the avaricious lay hold on anything, be it wood or stone or even a straw. 


45. Avarice, like an acute pain, excites even the gravest of men to motion, 
just as the rays of the sun raise the lotus blossoms (above the water). 


46. It is compared with the bamboo in its length, hollowness, hard knots, 
and thorny prickles, and yet it is entertained in expectation of its yielding the 
manna and a pearly substance. 


47. Yet it is a wonder that high-minded men, have been able to cut off this 
almost unseverable knot of avarice, by the glittering sword of reason. 


48. As neither the edge of the sword, nor the fire of lightning, nor the 
sparks of the red-hot iron, are sharp enough to sever the keen avarice seated in 
our hearts. 


49. It is like the flame of a lamp which is bright but blackening and acutely 
burning at its end. It is fed by the oily wicks (of years), is vivid in all, but 
never handled by anybody. 


50. Penury has the power of bemeaning the best of men to (the baseness of) 
straws in a moment, notwithstanding their wisdom, heroism and gravity in 
other respects. 


51. Avarice is like the great valley of the Vindhya hills, that is beset with 
deserts and impenetrable forests, is terrible and full of snares laid by the 
hunters, and filled with the dust and mist (of delusion). 


52. One single avarice has everything in the world for its object, and 
though seated in the breast, it is imperceptible to all. It is as the undulating 


Milky ocean in this fluctuating world, sweeping all things yet regaling 
mankind with its odorous waves. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
Obloquy of the Body. 


This body of ours that struts about on earth, is but a mass of humid entrails 
and tendons, tending to decay and disease, and to our torment alone. 


2. It is neither quiescent nor wholly sentient, neither ignorant nor quite 
intelligent. Its inherent soul is a wonder, and it is reason, (and its absence), 
that makes it graceful or otherwise. 


3. The sceptic is doubtful of its inertness and intellection, and the 
unreasonable and ignorant people are ever subject to error and illusion. 


4. The body is as easily gratified with a little, as it is exhausted in an 
instant, hence there is nothing so pitiable, abject and worthless as our bodies. 


5. The face is as frail as a fading flower: now it shoots forth its teeth like 
filaments, and now it dresses itself with blooming and blushing smiles as 
blossoms. 


6. The body is as a tree, having its arms resembling the branches, the 
shoulder-blades like stems, the teeth as rows of birds, the eye-holes like its 
hollows, and the head as a big fruit. 


7. The ears are as two wood-peckers, the fingers of both hands and feet as 
so many leaves of the branches, the diseases as (parasite) plants, and the acts 
of the body are as axes felling this tree, which is the seat of the two birds the 
soul and intelligence. 


8. This shady arbor of the body, is but the temporary resort of the passing 
soul, what then whether it be akin to or apart from anybody, or whether one 
would rely in it or not. 


9. What man is there, O venerable fathers! that would stoop to reflect 
within himself, that this body is repeatedly assumed only to serve him as a 
boat to pass over the sea of the world. 


10. Who can rely any confidence in his body, which is as a forest full of 
holes, and abounds in hairs resembling its trees? 


11. The body composed of flesh, nerves, and bones, resembles a drum 
without any musical sound, and yet I sit watching it as a cat (for the squeaking 
of mice). 


12. Our bodies are as trees growing in the forest of the world, bearing the 
flowers of anxiety, and perforated by the worms of woe and misery, and 
mounted upon by the apish mind. 


13. The body with its smiling face appears a goodly plant, bearing the fruits 
both of good and evil, but it has become the abode of the dragon of avarice, 
and a rookery of the ravens of anger. 


14. Our arms are as the boughs of trees, and our open palms like beautiful 
clusters of flowers, the other limbs are as twigs and leaves, and are continually 
shaken by the breath of life. 


15. The two legs are the erect stems (of the arbor of the body), and the 
organs are the seats of the birds of sense. Its youthful bloom is a shade for the 
passing traveller of love. 


16. The hanging hairs of the head resemble the long grass growing on the 
tree (of the body), and egoism like a vulture (in hollow), cracks the ear with 
its hideous shrieks. 


17. Our various desires, like the pendant roots and fibres of the fig tree, 
seem to support its trunk of the body, though it is worn out by labour to 
unpleasantness. 


18. The body is the big abode of its owner’s egoism, and therefore it is of 
no interest to me whether it lasts or falls (for egoism is the bane of happiness). 


19. This body which is linked with its limbs like beasts of burthen labour, 
and is the abode of its mistress Avarice, — painted over by her taints of 
passions, affords me no delight whatever. 


20. This abode of the body which is built by the frame-work of the back- 
bone and ribs, and composed of cellular vessels, tied together by ropes of the 
entrails, is no way desirable to me. 


21. This mansion of the body, which is tied with strings of the tendons, and 
built with the clay of blood and moisture, and plastered white with old age, is 
no way suited to my liking. 


22. The mind is the architect and master of this bodily dwelling, and our 
activities are its supports and servants; it is filled with errors and delusions 
which I do not like. 


23. I do not like this dwelling of the body with its bed of pleasure on one 
side, and the cries of pain as those of its children on the other, and where our 
evil desires are at work like its bawling hand-maids. 


24. I cannot like this body, which like a pot of filth, is full of the foulness of 
worldly affairs, and mouldering under the rust of our ignorance. 


25. It is a hovel standing on the two props of our heels, and supported by 
the two posts of our legs. 


26. It is no lovely house where the external organs are playing their parts, 
while its mistress the understanding sits inside with her brood of anxieties. 


27. It is a hut which is thatched over with the hairs on the head, decorated 
with the turrets of the ears, and adorned with jewels on the crest, which I do 
not like. 


28. This house of the body is walled about by all its members, and beset by 
hairs growing like ears of corn on it. It has an empty space of the belly within 
(which is never full), and which I do not like. 


29. This body with its nails as those of spiders, and its entrails growling 
within like barking dogs, and the internal winds emitting fearful sounds, is 
never delightsome to me. 


30. What is this body but a passage for the ceaseless inhaling and breathing 
out of the vital air? Its eyes are as two windows which are continually opened 
and closed by the eyelids. I do not like such a mansion as this. 


31. This mansion of the body with its formidable (wide-open) door of the 
mouth, and (ever-moving), bolt of the tongue and bars of the teeth, is not 
pleasant to me. 


32. This house of the body, having the white-wash of ointments on the 
outer skin, and the machinery of the limbs in continued motion, and the 
restless mind burrowing its base like the mischievous mouse, is not liked by 
me. 


33. Sweet smiles like shining lamps, serve to lighten this house of the body 
for a moment, but it is soon darkened by a cloud of melancholy, wherefore, I 
cannot be pleased with it. 


34. This body which is the abode of diseases, and subject to wrinkles and 
decay, and all kinds of pain, is a mansion wherewith I am not pleased. 


35. I do not like this wilderness of the body, which is infested by the bears 
of the senses. It is empty and hollow within, with dark groves (of entrails) in 


the inside. 


36. Iam unable, O chief of sages! to drag my domicile of the body, just as 
a weak elephant is incapable to draw out another immerged in a muddy pit. 


37. Of what good is affluence or royalty, this body and all its efforts to one, 
when the hand of time must destroy them all in a few days. 


38. Tell me, O sage! what is charming in this body, that is only a 
composition of flesh and blood both within and without it and frail in its 
nature. 


39. The body does not follow the soul upon death, tell me Sir, what regard 
should the learned have for such an ungrateful thing as this. 


40. It is as unsteady as the ears of an infuriate elephant, and as fickle as 
drops of water that trickle on their tips. I should like, therefore, to abandon it, 
before it comes to abandon me. 


41. It is as tremulous as the leaves of a tree shaken by the breeze, and 
oppressed by diseases and fluctuations of pleasure and pain. I have no relish in 
its pungency and bitterness. 


42. With all its food and drink for evermore, it is as tender as a leaflet and 
is reduced to leanness in spite of all our cares, and runs fast towards its 
dissolution. 


43. It is repeatedly subjected to pleasure and pain, and to the succession of 
affluence and destitution, without being ashamed of itself as the shameless 
vulgar herd (at their ups and downs). 


44. Why nourish this body any longer, when it acquires no excellence nor 
durability of its state, after its enjoyment of prosperity and exercise of 
authority for a length of time. 


45. The bodies of the rich as well as those of the poor, are alike subject to 
decay and death at their appointed times. 


46. The body lies as a tortoise in the cave of avarice amidst the ocean of the 
world. It remains there in the mud in a mute and torpid state, without an effort 
for its liberation. 


47. Our bodies floating as heaps of wood on the waves of the world, serve 
at last for the fuel of funeral fire (on the pile), except a few of these which 
pass for human bodies in the sight of the wise. 


48. The wise have little to do with this tree of the body, which is beset by 
evils like noxious orchids about it, and produces the fruit of perdition. 


49. The body like a frog, lies merged in the mire of mortality, where it 
perishes no sooner it is known to have lived and gone. 


50. Our bodies are as empty and fleeting as gusts of wind, passing over a 
dusty ground, where nobody knows whence they come, and whither they go. 


51. We know not the course of our bodies, (their transmigrations), as we do 
not know those of the winds, light and our thoughts, they all come and go, but 
from where and whither, we know nothing of. 


52. Fie and shame to them, that are so giddy with the ebriety of their error, 
as to rely on any state or durability of their bodies. 


53. They are the best of men, O sage! whose minds are at rest with the 
thought, that their ego does not subsist in their bodies, nor are the bodies 
theirs at the end (of their lives). 


54. Those mistaken men that have a high sense of honor and fear dishonor, 
and take a pleasure in the excess of their gains, are verily the killers both of 
their bodies and souls. 


55. We are deceived by the delusion of egoism, which like a female fiend, 
(sorceress), lies hid within the cavity of the body with all her sorcery. 


56. Our reason unaided (by religion) is kept in bondage like a female slave 
within the prison of our bodies, by the malicious fiend of false knowledge (or 
sophistry). 


57. It is certain that whatever we see here is unreal, and yet it is a wonder, 
that the mass of men are led to deception by the vile body, which has injured 
the cause of the soul. 


58. Our bodies are as fleeting as the drops of a water-fall, and they fall off 
in a few days like the withered leaves of trees. 


59. They are as quickly dissolved as bubbles in the ocean, it is in vain 
therefore that it should hurl about in the whirlpool of business. 


60. I have not a moment’s reliance in this body, which is ever hastening to 
decay, and I regard its changeful delusions as a state of dreaming. 


61. Let those who have any faith in the stability of the lightning, of the 
autumn clouds, and in glacial castles, place their reliance in this body. 


62. It has outdone all other things that are doomed to destruction in its 
instability and perishableness. It is moreover subject to very many evils, 
wherefore, I have set it at naught as a straw, and thereby obtained my repose. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
Blemishes of Boyhood. 


One receiving his birth in the unstable ocean of the world, which is disturbed 
by the billows of the bustle of business, has to pass his boyhood in sufferings 
only. 


2. Want of strength and sense, and subjection to diseases and dangers, 
muteness and appetence, joined with longings and helplessness, are the 
concomitants of infancy. 


3. Childhood is chained to fretting and crying, to fits of anger, craving and 
every kind of incapacity, as an elephant when tied to the post by its shackles. 


4. The vexations which tease the infant breast, are far greater than those 
which trouble us in youth and old age, or disturb one in disease, danger or at 
the approach of death. 


5. The acts of a boy are as those of young animals, that are always restless 
and snubbed by everybody. Hence boyhood is more intolerable than death 
itself. 


6. How can boyhood be pleasing to anybody, when it is but a semblance of 
gross ignorance, and full of whims and hobbies, and ever subject to 
miscarriages. 


7. It is this silly boyhood which is in constant dread of dangers arising at 
every step from fire, water, and air, and which rarely betide us in other states 
of life. 


8. Boys are liable to very many errors in their plays and wicked frolics, and 
in all their wishes and attempts beyond their capacities, hence boyhood is the 
most perilous state (of life). 


9. Boys are engaged in false pursuits and wicked sports, and are subject to 
all foolish puerilities. Hence, boyhood is fit for the rod and not for rest. 


10. All faults, misconduct, transgressions, and heart-aches, lie hidden in 
boyhood like owls in hollow caves. 


11. Fie to those ignorant and foolish people, who are falsely led to imagine 
boyhood as the most pleasant period of life. 


12. How can boyhood appear pleasing to any one, when the mind swings 
like a cradle towards every object of desire, however wrong it is deemed to be 
in both worlds. 


13. The minds of all living beings are ever restless, but those of young 
people are ten times more at unrest. 


14. The mind is naturally unsteady, and so is boyhood also. Say what can 
save us from that state of life, when both these vagrant things combine to our 
destruction. 


15. The glances of women, the flashes of lightning, the flame of fire, and 
the ever-rolling waves, have all imitated the fickleness of boyhood. 


16. Minority seems to be a twin brother to the mind, and resembles it in the 
unsteadiness and frailty of all its purposes. 


17. All kinds of miseries, misdeeds and miscarriages await on boyhood, as 
all sorts of men hang upon the rich (for their supportance). 


18. Boys are fond of fresh things at all times, and on their failing to get the 
same, they fall to a fainting fit, as if from the effect of poison. 


19. A boy like a dog, is as easily tamed as he is irritated at a little, and he is 
as glad to lie in the dust, as to play with dirt. 


20. A foolish fretful boy with his body daubed in mire with the tears in his 
eyes, appears as a heap of dry clay soiled by a shower of rain. 


21. Boys are subject to fear and voracity, they are helpless but fond of 
everything they have seen or heard, and equally fickle in their bodies and 
mind. Hence boyhood is a source of troubles only. 


22. The foolish and helpless child, becomes as sad and sour when he fails 
to get the object of his fancy, as when he is thwarted from the thing desired. 


23. Children have much difficulty to get at the things they want, and which 
they can ask only by indistinct words. Hence no one suffers so much as boys. 


24. A boy is as much irritated by the eagerness of his whimsical desires, as 
a patch of ground in the desert is parched by the summer heat. 


25. A boy on entering his school, is subjected to corrections, which are as 
painful to him as the goading and fetters to the elephant. 


26. A great many whims and hobbies, and a variety of false fancies, tend 


continually to afflict boyhood, which is ever fond of toys and trifles. 


27. How can senseless childhood be said to be a happy state of life, when 
the child is led by its ignorance to swallow everything in the world, and to 
wish to lay hold on the moon in the sky. 


28. Say great sage! what difference is there between a child and a tree, both 
of which have sensitiveness, but unable to defend themselves from heat and 
cold. 


29. Boys are of the nature of birds, being both subject to fear and hunger, 
and ready to fly about when impelled by them. 


30. Again, boyhood is the abode of fear from all sides, such as from the 
tutor, father, mother, elder brother and elderly boys, and from everybody 
besides. 


31. Hence the hopeless state of childhood, which is full of faults and errors, 
and addicted to sports and thoughtlessness, cannot be satisfactory to anybody. 


CHAPTER XxX. 
Vituperation of Youth. 


Rama continued: — 


The boy having passed his state of blemishes, gladly steps to his youth with 
hopes of gaining his objects that tend only to his ruin. 


2. The insensible youth feels at this time the wanton inclinations of his 
loose mind, and goes on falling from one tribulation to another. 


3. He is overcome as one subdued by the power of delusive Cupid, lying 
hidden in the cavity of the heart, (hence called Manoja). 


4. His ungoverned mind gives rise to loose thoughts like those of 
voluptuous women, and these serve to beguile him like the magic collyrium 
(in the hand) of boys (called Siddhanjana). 


5. Vices of the most heinous kind betake persons of such (perverse) minds 
in their youth, and lead them to their ruin. 


6. The paths of youth lead them to the gate of hell through a maze of errors. 
Those that have been left uncorrupt by their youth, are not to be corrupted by 
anything else. 


7. Whoso has passed the dreadfully enchanted coast of youth, fraught with 
various flavours and wonders, are said to be truly wise. 


8. I take no delight in our unwelcome youth, which appears to us in the 
form of a momentary flash of lightning, and soon succeeded by the loud 
roaring of the clouds (of manhood). 


9. Youth like rich wine is sweet and delicious (at first), but becomes bitter, 
insipid and noxious in a short time. Hence it is not delectable to me. 


10. Youth appearing (at first) as a reality, is found to be a false, transient 
thing, as deceptive as a fairy dream by night. Hence, I like it not. 


11. It is the most charming of all things to men, but its charm is soon lost 
and fled. Therefore, the phantasmagoria of youth is not pleasing to me. 


12. Youth as an arrow-shot is pleasant to see, but painful to feel its smart. 
Hence, I do not like youth that produces blood heat (in the veins). 


13. Youth as a harlot is charming at first sight, but turning heartless soon 
after. Hence it is not to my liking. 


14. As the efforts of a dying man are all for his torment, so the exertions of 
the young are portentous of his destruction. 


15. Puberty advances as a dark night spreading the shadow of destruction. 
It darkens the heart and mind by its hideous appearance, and intimidates even 
the god (Siva himself). 


16. Errors growing in youth, cause copious mistakes in life, by upsetting 
good sense and setting at naught the approved good manners (of society). 


17. The raging fire in the hearts of the young, caused by separation of their 
mates, burns them down like trees by a wild fire. 


18. As a clear, sacred, and wide stream, becomes muddy in the rains, so 
doth the mind of man however clear, pure, and expanded it may be, gets 
polluted in his youth. 


19. It is possible for one to cross over a river made terrible by its waves, 
but no way possible to him to get over the boisterous expanse of his youthful 
desires. 


20. O how (lamentably) is one’s youth worn out with the thoughts of his 
mistress, her swollen breasts, her beautiful face, and her sweet caresses. 


21. The young man afflicted with the pain of soft desire, is regarded by the 
wise in no better light than a fragment of (useless) straw. 


22. Youth is the stake of haughty self-esteem, as the rack is for the 
immolation of the elephant giddy with its frontal pearl. 


23. Youth is a lamentable forest, where the mind as the root of all, gives 
growth to jungles of (love sick) groans and sighs, and tears of sorrow. The 
vices of this time, are as venomous snakes of the forest. 


24. Know youthful bloom of the person to resemble the blooming lotus of 
the lake, — the one is full of affections, bad desires and evil intents, as the 
other is fraught with bees, filaments, petals and leaves. 


25. The new bloom of youth is the resort of anxiety and disease, which like 
two birds with their (black and white) plumage of vice and virtue, frequent the 
fountain of the young man’s heart. 


26. Early youth resembles a deep sea, disturbed by the waves of 


numberless amusements, transgressing all bounds, and regardless of death and 
disease. 


27. Youth is like a furious gust of wind, over-loaded with the dust of pride 
and vanity, and sweeps away every trace of the good qualities (early acquired 
by one). 


28. The rude dust of the passions of youths, disfigures their face, and the 
hurricane of their sensualities cover their good qualities, (as flying leaves 
overspread the ground). 


29. Youthful vigour awakens a series of faults, and destroys a group of 
good qualities, by increasing the vice of pleasures. 


30. Youthful bloom confines the fickle mind to some beauteous person, as 
the bright moon-beams serve to shut the flitting bee in the dust of the closing 
lotus. 


31. Youth like a delightsome cluster of flowers, growing in the arbour of 
human body, attracts the mind as the bee to it, and makes it giddy (with its 
sweets). 


32. The human mind anxious to derive pleasure from the youthfulness of 
the body, falls into the cave of sensuality, as a deer running after the mirage of 
desert heat, falls down into a pit. 


33. I take no delight in moony youth, which guilds the dark body with its 
beams, and resembles the stern mane of the leonine mind. It is a surge in the 
ocean of our lives (that tosses us all about). 


34. There is no reliance in youth, which fades away as soon as summer 
flowers in this desert of the body. 


35. Youth is as a bird, and as soon flies away from our bodily cage as the 
philosopher’s stone, which quickly disappears from the hands of the 
unfortunate. 


36. As youth advances to its highest pitch, so the feverish passions wax 
stronger for our destruction only. 


37. As long as the night (delusion) of youth does not come to its end, so 
long the fiends of our passion do not cease to rage in the desert of the body. 


38. Pity me, O sage! in this state of youth, which is so full of perturbations, 
as to have deprived me of the sight (light) of reason. O pity me as thou 
wouldst for thy dying son. 


39. The foolish man who ignorantly rejoices at his transient youth, is 


considered as a human beast. 


40. The foolish fellow who is fond of his youth which is flushed with pride 
and fraught with errors, comes to repent (of his folly) in a short time. 


41. Those great minded men are honoured on earth, who have safely passed 
over the perils of youth. 


42. One crosses over with ease the wide ocean which is the horrible 
habitation of huge whales, but it is hard to pass over our youth, that is so full 
of vices and the billows (of our passions). 


43. It is very rare to have that happy youth which is fraught with humility, 
and spent in the company of respectable men, which is distinguished by 
feelings of sympathy, and is joined with good qualities and virtues. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
Vituperation of women. 


Rama added: — 


What beauty is there in the person of a woman, composed of nerves, bones, 
and joints? She is a mere statue of flesh, and a frame of moving machinery 
with her ribs and limbs. 


2. Can you find anything beautiful in the female form, separated from its 
(component parts of the) flesh, skin, blood and water, that is worth beholding? 
Why then dote upon it? 


3. This fairy frame consisting of hairs in one part and blood in the other, 
cannot engage the attention of a high-minded man to its blemishes. 


4. The bodies of females, that are so covered with clothing and repeatedly 
besmeared with paints and perfumes, are (at last), devoured by carnivorous 
(beasts and worms). 


5. The breasts of women decorated with strings of pearl, appear as 
charming as the pinnacles of Sumeru, washed by the waters of Ganges falling 
upon them. 


6. Look at these very breasts of the woman becoming at last a lump of 
food, to be devoured by dogs in cemeteries and on the naked ground. 


7. There is no difference between a woman and a young elephant that lives 
in the jungle, both of them being made of blood, flesh and bones. Then why 
hunt after her. 


8. A woman is charming only for a short time, and does not long last to be 
so. I look upon her merely as a cause of delusion. 


9. There is no difference between wine and a woman, both of them tending 
equally to produce high-flown mirth and jollity, and creating revelry and lust. 


10. Uxorious men are like chained elephants among mankind, that will 
never come to sense however goaded by the hooks of reason. 


11. Women are the flames of vice, their black-dyed eye and hairs are as 
their smoke and soot. They are as intangible as fire, though pleasing to the 
sight. They burn the man as fire consumes the straw. 


12. They burn from afar (more than fire), and are as dry as bones (in their 
hearts), though appearing as soft and juicy to sight. They serve as fuel to the 
fire of hell, and are dangerous with their charmingness. 


13. The woman resembles a moon-light night, veiled over by her loosened 
locks, and looking through her starry eyes. She shows her moon-like face 
amidst her flowery smiles. 


14. Her soft dalliance destroys all manly energy, and her caresses 
overpower the good sense of men, as the shade of night does the sleeping 
(world). 


15. The woman is as lovely as a creeper in its flowering time. Her palm are 
the leaves and her eyes as the black-bees (on the flower). Her breasts are as 
the uplifted tops of the plant. 


16. The lovely damsel is like a poisonous creeper, fair as the filament of a 
flower but destructive of life, by causing inebriation and insensibility. 


17. As the snake-catcher entices the snake by his breath and brings it out of 
its hole, so does the woman allure the man by her officious civilities, and gets 
him under her control. 


18. Concupiscence as a huntsman, has spread his nets in the forms of 
women, for the purpose of ensnaring the persons of deluded men like silly 
birds. 


19. The mind of man though as fierce as that of a furious elephant, is tied 
fast by the chain of love to the fulcrum of women, just as an elephant is 
fastened (by his leg) to the post, where he remains dull and dumb forever. 


20. Human life is as a pool in which the mind moves about in its mud and 
mire (as a fish). Here it is caught by the bait of woman, and dragged along by 
the thread of its impure desires. 


21. The beauteous-eyed damsel is a bondage to man, as the stable is to the 
horse, the fastening post to the elephant, and as spells are to the snakes. 


22. This wondrous world, with all its delights and enjoyments, began with 
woman and depends on women for its continuance. 


23. A woman is the casket of all gems of vice, (Pandora’s box), she is the 
cause of the chain of our everlasting misery, and is of no use to me. 


24. What shall I do with her breasts, her eyes, her loins, her eyebrows, the 
substance of which is but flesh, and which therefore is altogether 
unsubstantial. 


25. Here and there, O Brahman! her flesh and blood and bones undergo a 
change for the worse in course of a few days. 


26. You see Sir, those dearly beloved mistresses, who are so much fondled 
by foolish men, lying at last in the cemetery, and the members of their bodies 
all mangled and falling off from their places. 


27. O Brahman! those dear objects of love, — the faces of damsels, so 
fondly decorated by their lovers with paints and pastes, are at last to be singed 
on the piles (by those very hands). 


28. Their braided hairs now hang as flappers of chouri on the arbors of the 
cemetery, and their whitened bones are strewn about as shining stars after a 
few days. 


29. Behold their blood sucked in by the dust of the earth, voracious beasts 
and worms feeding upon their flesh, jackals tearing their skin, and their vital 
air wafted in the vacuum. 


30. This is the state to which the members of the female body must shortly 
come to pass, you say all existence to be delusion, tell me therefore, why do 
you allow yourselves to fall into error? 


31. A woman is no other than a form composed of the five elements, then 
why should intelligent men be fondly attached to her (at the risk of their ruin)? 


32. Men’s longing for women is likened to the creeper called Suta, which 
stretches its sprigs to a great length, but bears plenty of bitter and sour fruits. 


33. A man blinded by avarice, (for the supportance of his mate), is as a 
stray deer from its herd, and not knowing which way to go, is lost in the maze 
of illusion. 


34. A young man under the control of a young woman, is as much 
lamentable as an elephant fallen into a pit of the Vindhya mountain in pursuit 
of his mate. 


35. He that has a wife, has an appetite for enjoyment on earth, but one 
without her has no object of desire. Abandonment of the wife amounts to the 
abandoning of the world, and forsaking the world is the path to true 
happiness. 


36. I am not content, O Brahman! with these unmanageable enjoyments 


which are as flickering as the wings of bees, and are as soon at an end as they 
are born (like the ephemerids of a day). I long only for the state of supreme 
bliss, from my fear of repeated-births, (transmigration), decay and death. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
Obloquy of Old Age. 


Boyhood has scarcely lost its boyishness when it is overtaken by youth, which 
is soon followed by a ruthless old age, devouring the other two. 


2. Old age withers the body like a frost freezing the lake of lilies. It drives 
away the beauty of the person as a storm does the autumnal clouds, and it 
pulls down the body, as a current carries away a tree on the bank. 


3. The old man with his limbs slackened and worn out by age, and his body 
weakened by infirmity, is treated by women as a useless beast. 


4. Old age drives a man’s good sense, as a good wife is driven away by her 
step dame. 


5. A man in his state of tottering old age, is scoffed at as a dotard by his 
own sons and servants, and even by his wife, and all his friends and relations. 


6. Insatiable avarice, like a greedy vulture, alights on the heads of the aged, 
when their appearance grows uncouth, and their bodies become helpless, and 
devoid of all manly qualities and powers. 


7. Appetite, the constant companion of my youth, is thriving along with my 
age, accompanied with her evils of indigence, and heart-burning cares and 
restlessness. 


8. Ah me! what must I do to remove my present and future pains? It is this 
fear which increases with old age, and finds no remedy. 


9. What am I that am brought to this extremity of senselessness, what can I 
do in this state. I must remain dumb and silent. Under these reflections there is 
an increased sense of helplessness in old age. 


10. How and when and what shall I eat, and what is sweet to taste? These 
are the thoughts which trouble the mind of one when old age comes upon him. 


11. There is an insatiable desire for enjoyments, but the powers to enjoy 
them are lacking. It is the want of strength which afflicts the heart in old age. 


12. Hoary old age sits and shrieks as a heron on the top of the tree of this 
body, which is infested within it by the serpents of sickness. 


13. As the grave owl, — the bird of night, appears unexpectedly to our 
sight soon as the evening shades cover the landscape, so does the solemn 
appearance of death overtake us in the eve of our life. 


14. As darkness prevails over the world at the eve of the day, so doth death 
overtake the body at the eve of the life. 


15. Death overtakes a man in his hoary old age, just as an ape alights on a 
tree covered with pearly flowers. 


16. Even a deserted city, a leafless tree and parched up land may present a 
fair aspect, but never does the body look well that is pulled down by hoary 
age. 


17. Old age with its hooping cough lays hold on a man, just as a vulture 
seizes its prey with loud shrieks in order to devour it. 


18. As a girl eagerly lays hold on a lotus flower whenever she meets with 
one, and then plucks it from its stalk and tears it to pieces, so does old age 
overtake the body of a person and break it down at last. 


19. As the chill blast of winter shakes a tree and covers its leaves with dust, 
so does old age seize the body with a tremor and fill all its limbs with the rust 
of diseases. 


20. The body overtaken by old age becomes as pale and battered, as a lotus 
flower beaten by frost becomes withered and shattered. 


21. As moon-beams contribute to the growth of Kumuda flowers on the top 
of mountains, so does old age produce grey hairs resembling casla flowers on 
the heads of men, (with inward phlegm and gout). 


22. Death, the lord of all beings, views the grey head of a man as a ripe 
pumpkin seasoned with the salt of old age, and devours it with zest. 


23. As the Ganges upsets a neighbouring tree by its rapid course, so does 
old age destroy the body, as the current of our life runs fast to decay. 


24. Old age which preys on the flesh of the human body, takes as much 
delight in devouring its youthful bloom as a cat does in feeding upon a mouse. 


25. Decrepitude raises its ominous hoarse sound of hiccough in the body, 
as the jackal sends forth her hideous cry amidst the forest. 


26. Dotage as an inward flame consumes the living body as a wet log of 
wood, which thereupon emits its hissing sounds of hiccough and hard 


breathing, and sends up the gloomy fumes of woe and sighs. 


27. The body like a flowering creeper, bends down under the pressure of 
age, turns to grey like the fading leaves of a plant, and becomes as lean and 
thin as a plant after its flowering time is over. 


28. As the infuriate elephant upsets the white plantain tree in a moment, so 
does old age destroy the body that becomes as white as camphor all over. 


29. Senility, O sage! is as the standard bearer of the king of death, flapping 
his chouri of grey hairs before him, and bringing in his train an army of 
diseases and troubles. 


30. The monster of old age, will even overcome those that were never 
defeated in wars by their enemies, and those that hide themselves in the 
inaccessible caverns of mountains. 


31. As infants cannot play in a room that has become cold with snow, so 
the senses can have no play in the body that is stricken with age. 


32. Old age, like a juggling girl, struts on three legs at the sound of 
coughing and whiffing, beating as a tymbal on both sides. 


33. The tuft of grey hairs on the head of the aged body, represents a white 
flapper, (chouri), fastened to the top of a handle of white sandal wood, to 
welcome the despot of death. 


34. As hoary age makes his advance like moon-light on the site of the 
body, he calls forth the hidden death to come out of it, as the moon-light 
makes the nilumbium to unfold its buds. 


35. Again as the white wash of old age whitens the outer body, so debility, 
diseases and dangers become its inmates in the inner apartment. 


36. It is the extinction of being that is preceded by old age, therefore, I as a 
man of little understanding, can have no reliance in old age, (though extolled 
by some). 


37. What then is the good of this miserable life, which lives under the 
subjection of old age? Senility is irresistible in this world, and defies all efforts 
to avoid or overcome it. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
Vicissitudes of Times. 


Men of little understandings are found to fall into grave errors in this pit of the 
world, by their much idle talk, ever doubting scepticism, and schisms (in 
religion). 

2. Good people can have no more confidence in the network of their ribs, 


than little children may have a liking for fruits reflected in a mirror. 


3. Time is a rat that cuts off the threads of all thoughts (prospects), which 
men may entertain here about the contemptible pleasures of this world. 


4. There is nothing in this world which the all-devouring time will spare. 
He devours all things as the sub-marine fire consumes the over-flowing sea. 


5. Time is the sovran lord of all, and equally terrible to all things. He is 
ever ready to devour all visible beings. 


6. Time as master of all, spares not even the greatest of us for a moment. 
He swallows the universe within himself, whence he is known as the universal 
soul. 


7. Time pervades all things, but has no perceptible feature of his own, 
except that he is imperfectly known by the names of years, ages, and kalpas, 
(millenniums). 


8. All that was fair and good, and as great as the mount of Meru, have gone 
down in the womb of eternity, as the snakes are gorged by the greedy Garuda. 


9. There was no one ever so unkind, hard-hearted, cruel, harsh or miserly, 
whom time has not devoured. 


10. Time is ever greedy, although he should devour the mountains. This 
great gourmand is not satiated with gorging everything in all the worlds. 


11. Time, like an actor plays many parts on the stage of the world. He 
abstracts and kills, produces, and devours and at last destroys everything. 


12. Time is incessantly picking up the seeds of all the four kinds of living 


beings from this unreal world, as a parrot picks up the seeds from under the 
cracked shell of a pomegranate. (Namely, the ovipari, vivipari, vegetables and 
the ephemerids). 


13. Time like a wild elephant uproots all proud living beings in this world, 
as the other pulls up the trees of the forest with their tusks. 


14. This creation of God is like a forest, having Brahma for its foundation 
and its trees full of the great fruits of gods. Time commands it throughout its 
length and breadth. 


15. Time glides along incessantly as a creeping plant, composed of years 
and ages as its parts, and the sable nights as black bees chasing after them. 


16. Time, O sage, is the subtlest of all things. It is divided though 
indivisible, it is consumed though incombustible, it is perceived though 
imperceptible in its nature. 


17. Time like the mind is strong enough to create and demolish anything in 
a trice, and its province is equally extensive with it. 


18. Time is a whirlpool to men, and being accompanied with desire his 
insatiable and ungovernable mistress and delighting in illicit enjoyments, he 
makes them do and undo the same thing over and again. 


19. Time is prompted by his rapacity to appropriate everything to himself, 
from the meanest straw, dust, leaves and worms, to the greatest Indra and the 
mount Meru itself. 


20. Time is the source of all malice and greediness, and the spring of all 
misfortunes, and intolerable fluctuations of our states. 


21. As boys with their balls play about their play-ground, so does time in 
his arena of the sky, play with his two balls of the sun and moon. 


22. Time at the expiration of the Kalpa age, will dance about with a long 
chain of the bones of the dead hanging from his neck to the feet. 


23. The gale of desolation rising from the body of this desolator of the 
world at the end of a Kalpa age, causes the fragments of mount Meru to fly 
about in the air like the rinds of the bhoja-petera tree. 


24. Time then assumes his terrific form of fire (wera), to dissolve the 
world in empty space, when the gods Brahma and Indra and all others cease to 
exist. 


25. As the sea shows himself in a continued series of waves rising and 
falling one after another, so it is time that creates and dissolves the world, and 


appears to rise and fall in the rotation of days and nights. 


26. Time plucks the gods and demi-gods as ripe fruits, from their great 
arbor of existence, at the end of the world (to make them his food). 


27. Time resembles a large fig tree, (Ficus religiosus), studded with all the 
worlds as its fruits, and resonant with the noise of living beings like the 
hissing of gnats about them. 


28. Time accompanied by Action as his mate, regales himself in the garden 
of the world, blossoming with the moon-beams of the Divine Spirit. 


29. As the high and huge rock supports its body upon the basis of the earth, 
so does time rest itself in endless and interminable eternity. 


30. Time assumes to himself various hues of black, white and red (at night, 
day and midday), which serve for his vestures. 


31. As the earth is the great support of hills which are fixed upon it, so is 
Time the support of all the innumerable ponderous worlds that constitute the 
universe. 


32. Hundreds of great Kalpa ages (of the creation and dissolution of the 
world) may pass away, yet there is nothing that can move eternity to pity or 
concern, or stop or expedite his course. It neither sets nor rises (as time). 


33. Time is never proud to think, that it is he who without the least sense of 
pain and labor, brings this world into play and makes it to exist. 


34. Time is like a reservoir in which the nights are as mud, the days as 
lotuses, and the clouds as bees. 


35. As a covetous man, with worn out broom sticks in hand, sweeps over a 
mountain to gather the particles of gold strewn over it, so does time with his 
sweeping course of days and nights, collect in one mass of the dead all living 
beings in the world. 


36. As a miserly man trims and lights a lamp with his own fingers, to look 
into his stores at each corner of the room, so does time light the lamps of the 
sun and moon to look into the living beings in every nook and corner of the 
world. 


37. As one ripens the raw fruits in sun and fire in order to devour them, so 
does time ripen men by their sun and fire worship, to bring them under his 
jaws at last. 


38. The world is a dilapidated cottage, and men of parts are rare gems in it. 
Time hides them in the casket of his belly, as a miser keeps his treasure in a 


coffer. 


39. Good men are like a chaplet of gems, which time puts on his head for a 
time with fondness, and then tears and tramples it down (under his feet). 


40. Strings of days, nights and stars, resembling beads and bracelets of 
white and black lotuses, are continually turning round the arm of Time. 


41. Time (as a vulture), looks upon the world as (the carcass of) a ram, with 
its mountains, seas, sky and earth as its four horns, and the stars as its drops of 
blood which it drinks day by day. 


42. Time destroys youth as the moon shuts the petals of the lotus. It 
destroys life as the lion kills the elephant; there is nothing however 
insignificant that time steals not away. 


43. Time after sporting for a Kalpa period in the act of killing and crushing 
of all living beings, comes to lose its own existence and becomes extinct in 
the eternity of the Spirit of spirits. 


44. Time, after a short rest and respite, reappears as the creator, preserver, 
destroyer and remembrancer of all. He shows the shapes of all things whether 
good or bad, keeping his own nature beyond the knowledge of all. Thus, doth 
time expand and preserve and finally dissolve all things by way of sport. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
Ravages of Time. 


Rama rejoined: — Time is a self-willed sportsman as a prince, who is 
inaccessible to dangers and whose powers are unlimited. 


2. This world is as it were a forest and sporting ground of time, wherein the 
poor deluded worldlings are caught in his snare like a body of wounded stags. 


3. The ocean of universal deluge is a pleasure-pond of time, and the sub- 
marine fires bursting therein as lotus flowers (serve to beautify that dismal 
scene). 


4. Time makes his breakfast of this vapid and stale earth, flavoured with the 
milk and curd of the seas of those names. 


5. His wife Chandi, (Hecate), with her train of Matris, (furies), ranges all 
about this wide world as a ferocious tigress (with horrid devastation). 


6. The earth with her waters is like a bowl of wine in the hand of Time, 
dressed and flavoured with all sorts of lilies and lotuses. 


7. The lion with his huge body and startling mane, his loud roaring and 
tremendous groans, seems as a caged bird of sport in the hand of Time. 


8. The Mahakala like a playful young Kokila, (cuckoo), appears in the 
figure of the blue autumnal sky, and warbling as sweet as the notes of a lute of 
gourd (in the music of the spheres). 


9. The restless bow of death is found flinging its woeful arrows, (darts of 
death), with ceaseless thunder claps on all sides. 


10. This world is like a forest, wherein sorrows are ranging about as playful 
apes, and Time like a sportive prince in this forest, is now roving, now 
walking, now playing and now killing his games. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
Sports of Death. 


Time stands the foremost of all deceitful players in this world. He acts the 
double parts of creation and destruction, and of action and fate, (utility and 
fatality). 


2. Time has no other character but those of action and motion by which his 
existence is known to us, and which bind all beings (in the succession of 
thoughts and acts). 


3. Fate is that which frustrates (the necessary consequences of) the acts of 
all created beings, as the solar heat serves to dissolve the conglomeration of 
snows. 


4. This wide world is the stage wherein the giddy mob dance about (in their 
appointed times). 


5. Time has a third name of a terrifying nature known as Kritdntah, (Fate), 
who in the form of a Kdpdlika, (one holding human skulls in his hand), dances 
about in the world. 


6. This dancing and loving Kritdntah, (Fate), is accompanied by his consort 
called Destiny to whom he is greatly attached (as his colleague). 


7. Time, (as Siva), wears on his bosom of the world, the triplicate white 
and holy thread composed of the serpent named Ananta and the stream of 
Ganges, and the digit of the moon on his forehead (to measure his course). 
(Viz: — the Zodiacal belt; the milky way, and the lunar mansions). 


8. The sun and the moon are the golden armlets of Time, who holds in his 
palm the mundane world as the paltry plaything of a nosegay. 


9. The firmament with its stars appears like a garment with coloured spots 
in it, the clouds called Pushkara and Avarta are as the skirts of that garment, 
which are washed by Time in the waters of the universal deluge. 


10. Before him, dances his beloved Destiny with all her arts forever, to 
beguile the living that are fond of worldly enjoyments. 


11. People hurry up and down to witness the dance of Destiny, whose 
unrestrained motion keeps them at work, and causes their repeated births and 
deaths. 


12. The people of all the worlds are studded about her person as her 
ornaments, and the sky stretching from the heaven of gods to the infernal 
regions, serves for the veil on her head. 


13. Her feet are planted in the infernal regions, and the hell-pits ring at her 
feet like trinkets, tied by the string of evil deeds or sins (of men). 


14. She is painted all over from head to foot by the god Chitra Gupta with 
ornamental marks prepared by her attendants, (the deeds of men), and 
perfumed with the essence of those deeds. 


15. She dances and reels at the nod of her husband at the end of the Kalpas, 
and makes the mountains crack and crash at her foot-falls. 


16. Behind her dance the peacocks of the god Kumara; and Kala the god of 
death staring with his three wide open eyes, utters his hideous cries (of 
destruction). 


17. Death dances about in the form of the five headed Hara, with the 
loosened braids of hair upon him, while Destiny in the form of Gauri, and her 
locks adorned with Mandara flowers keeps her pace with him. 


18. This Destiny in her war-dance, bears a capacious gourd representing 
her big belly, and her body is adorned with hundreds of hollow human skulls 
jingling like the alms-pots of the Kapali mendicants. 


19. She has filled (reached) the sky with the emaciated skeleton of her 
body, and gets terrified at her all-destructive figure. 


20. The skulls of the dead of various shapes adorn her body like a beautiful 
garland of lotuses, which keep hanging to and fro during her dance at the end 
of a Kalpa age. 


21. The horrible roaring of the giddy clouds, Pushkara and Avarta, at the 
end of the Kalpa, serves to represent the beating of her Damaru drum, and put 
to flight the heavenly choir of Tumburu. 


22. As death dances along, the moon appears like his ear-ring, and the 
moon-beams and stars appear like his crest made of peacocks’ feathers. 


23. The snow-capt Himalaya, appears like a circlet of bones in the upper 
loop of his right ear, and the mount Meru as a golden areola in that of the left. 


24. Under their lobes are suspended the moon and the sun, as pendant ear- 


rings glittering over his cheeks. The mountain ranges called the lokaloka are 
fastened like chains around his waist. 


25. The lightnings are the bracelets and armlets of Destiny, which move to 
and fro as she dances along. The clouds are her wrappers that fly about her in 
the air. 


26. Death is furnished with many weapons, as clubs, axes, missiles, spears, 
shovels, mallets, and sharp swords, all of which are sure weapons of 
destruction. 


27. Mundane enjoyments are no other than long ropes dropped down by the 
hand of death, and keeping all mankind fast bound to the world, while the 
great thread of infinity, (ananta), is worn by him as his wreath of flowers. 


28. The belts of the seven oceans are worn about the arms of Death as his 
bracelets resplendent with the living sea-animals, and the bright gems 
contained in their depths. 


29. The great vortices of customs, the successions of joy and grief, the 
excess of pride and the darkness of passions, form the streaks of hair on his 
body. 


30. After the end of the world, he ceases to dance, and creates anew all 
things from the lowest animal that lives in the earth, to the highest Brahma 
and Siva, (when he resumes his dance). 


31. Destiny as an actress, acts by turns her parts of creation and destruction, 
diversified by scenes of old age, sorrow and misery. 


32. Time repeatedly creates the worlds and their woods, with the different 
abodes and localities teeming with population. He forms the moveable and 
immovable substances, establishes customs and again dissolves them, as boys 
make their dolls of clay and break them soon afterwards. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
The Acts of Destiny. 


Rama said: — Such being the all-destructive conduct of time and others, (as 
already described), what confidence, O great sage, can men like me, have 
upon them? 


2. We all remain here, O sage! as slaves sold to Fate and Destiny, and are 
deceived by their allurements as beasts of the forest. 


3. This Fate whose conduct is so very inhuman, is always up to devour all 
beings, and is incessantly throwing men into the sea of troubles. 


4. He is led by his malicious attempts to inflame the mind with inordinary 
desires, as the fire raises its flames to burn down a habitation. 


5. Destiny, the faithful and obedient wife of Fate, is naturally fickle on 
account of her being a female, and is always bent on mischief and disturbing 
the patience, (even of the wisest of men). 


6. As the heinous serpent feeds upon the air, so does cruel Death ever 
swallow the living. He ripens the body with old age to create his zest, and 
then devours all animals warm with life. 


7. Death is called a relentless tyrant, having no pity even for the sick and 
weak, nor any regard for any one in any state of life. 


8. Everyone in this world is fond of affluence and pleasures, not knowing 
that these are only calculated to lead him to his ruin. 


9. Life is very unsteady. Death is very cruel. Youth is very frail and fickle, 
and boyhood is full of dullness and insensibility. 


10. Man is defiled by his worldliness, his friends are ties to the world, his 
enjoyments are the greatest of his diseases in life, and his avarice and 
ambition are the mirage that always allures him (to ruin). 


11. Our very senses are our enemies, before which even truth appears as 
falsehood; the mind is the enemy of the mind, and self is the enemy of self. 
(i.e., They are all deceptive). 


12. Self-esteem is stained (with the name of selfishness), intelligence is 
blamed for its fallaciousness, our actions are attended with bad results, and 
our pleasures tend only to effeminacy. 


13. All our desires are directed to enjoyments, our love of truth is lost, our 
women are the ensigns of vice, and all that were once so sweet, have become 
tasteless and vapid. 


14. Things that are not real, are believed as real, and have become the cause 
of our pride, by hardening us in untruth, and keeping us from the light of 
truth. 


15. My mind is at a loss to think what to do, it regrets at its increased 
appetite for pleasure, and for want of that self-denial (which I require). 


16. My sight is dimmed by the dust of sensuality, the darkness of self- 
esteem prevails upon me, the purity of mind is never reached to, and truth is 
far off from me. 


17. Life is become uncertain, and death is always advancing nigh; my 
patience is disturbed, and there is an increased appetite for whatever is false. 


18. The mind is soiled by dullness, and the body is cloyed with surfeit and 
ready to fall; old age exults over the body, and sins are conspicuous at every 
step. 


19. Youth flies fast away with all our care to preserve it; the company of 
the good is at a distance; the light of truth shines from nowhere; and I can 
have recourse to nothing in this world. 


20. The mind is stupified within itself, and its contentment has fled from it; 
there is no rise of enlightened sentiments in it, and meanness makes its 
advance to it from a distance. 


21. Patience is converted into impatience; man is liable to the states of birth 
and death; good company is rare, but bad company is ever within the reach of 
everybody. 


22. All individual existences are liable to appear and disappear; all desires 
are chains to the world, and all worldly beings are ever seen to be led away 
perforce where nobody can tell. 


23. What reliance can there be on human life, when the points of the 
compass become indistinct and undiscernible; when the countries and places 
change their positions and names, and when mountains even are liable to be 
dilapidated? 


24. What reliance can there be on man, when the heavens are swallowed in 
infinity, when this world is absorbed in nothingness, and the very earth loses 
her stability? 


25. What reliance can there be on men like ourselves, when the very seas 
are liable to be dried up, when the stars are doomed to fade away and 
disappear, and when the most perfect of beings are liable to dissolution? 


26. What reliance can there be on men like us, when even the demi-gods 
are liable to destruction, when the polar star is known to change its place, and 
when the immortal gods are doomed to mortality? 


27. What reliance can there be on men like us, when Indra is doomed to be 
defeated by demons; when even death is hindered from his aim, and when the 
current air ceases to breathe? 


28. What reliance can there be on men like us, when the very moon is to 
vanish with the sky, when the very sun is to be split into pieces, and when fire 
itself is to become frigid and cold? 


29. What reliance can there be on men like us, when the very Hari and 
Brahma are to be absorbed into the Great One, and when Siva himself is to be 
no more. 


30. What reliance can there be on men like us, when the duration of time 
comes to be counted, when Destiny is destined to her final destiny, and when 
all vacuity loses itself in infinity? 


31. That which is inaudible, unspeakable, invisible, and unknowable in his 
real form, displays to us these wondrous worlds by some fallacy (in our 
conceptions). 


32. No one conscious of himself, (his egoism), can disown his subjection to 
that Being, that dwells in the hearts of everyone. 


33. This sun, — the lord of worlds, is impelled (by that power) to run over 
hills, rocks and fields, like an inert piece of stone, hurled down from a 
mountain and borne away by a current stream. 


34. This globe of earth, the seat of all the Suras and Asuras, and surrounded 
by the luminous sphere in the manner of a walnut covered by its hard crust, 
subsists under His command. 


35. The gods in the heavens, the men on earth, and the serpents in the 
nether world, are brought into existence and led to decay by His will only. 


36. Kama, (Cupid), that is arbitrarily powerful, and has forcibly 


overpowered on all the living world, has derived his unconquerable might 
from the Lord of worlds. 


37. As the heated elephant regales the air with his spirituous exudation, so 
does the spring perfume the air with his profusion of flowers, unsettling the 
minds of men (at the will of the Almighty). 


38. So are the loose glances of loving damsels directed to inflict deep 
wounds in the heart of man, which his best reason is unable to heal. 


39. One whose best endeavour is always to do good to others, and who 
feels for others’ woes, is really intelligent and happy under the influence of his 
cool judgment. 


40. Who can count the number of beings resembling the waves of the 
ocean, and on whom death has been darting the sub-marine fire of destruction. 


41. All mankind are deluded to entrap themselves in the snare of avarice, 
and to be afflicted with all evils in life, as the deer entangled in the thickets of 
a jungle. 


42. The term of human life in this world, is decreased in each generation in 
proportion to (the increase of their wicked acts). The desire of fruition is as 
vain as the expectation of reaping fruits from a creeper growing in the sky, yet 
I know not why men of reason would not understand this truth. 


43. This is a day of festivity, a season of joy and a time of procession. Here 
are our friends, here the pleasures and here the variety of our entertainments. 
Thus do men of vacant minds amuse themselves with weaving the web of 
their desires, until they become extinct. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 
Vanity of the world. 


Rama said: — O sage! this seemingly pleasing but actually unpleasant world, 
has nothing in it that is productive of such a thing as can afford tranquility to 
the soul. 


2. After the playful boyhood is over, the mind wastes itself in the society of 
women like the deer fallen in a cavern, then the body bends down under old 
age, and the man has only to grieve (for his folly). 


3. As the body is stricken with the frost of old age, its beauty flies afar from 
it like the bloom of the fading lotus, and then the fountain of man’s 
worldliness is at once dried up. 


4. As the body gets towards its decline, so much doth death rejoice in it. 
The body grows lean with grey hairs upon the head, just as a creeper fades 
away with the flowers upon it. 


5. All living creatures are borne away by the stream of avarice, which 
upsets the tree of contentment growing on the bank and flows on forever in 
this world. 


6. The human body is like a vessel covered with skin, and glides over the 
ocean of the world (without its helmsman of reason). It is tossed about by 
sensual pleasures, and goes down under the water by the pressure of its whale- 
like passions. 


7. The world is a wilderness abounding in creepers of avarice and trees of 
sensuality, with hundreds of desires as their branches. Our minds, like 
monkeys, pass their time in roving about this forest without getting the fruits 
(they seek). 


8. Those that do not yield to grief in troubles, that are not elated with 
prosperity, nor smitten at heart by women, are rare in this world. 


9. Those who fight boldly in the battle fields and withstand the war- 
elephants, are not so very brave in my opinion, as those who withstand the 
surges of the mind amidst the streams of carnal appetites. 


10. I see no such deeds in the world which endure to the last (or final 
emancipation) of men. Actions proceeding from a desire of fruition in fools, 
serve only for their restlessness on earth. 


11. Such men are rare in the world, that have filled the corners of the world 
with their fame and valour, who have filled their houses with true riches 
acquired by honest means and an unwavering patience. 


12. Good and bad fortune always overtake a man, even if he were living in 
an aperture of the rock or within the walls of mountains, or even if he were 
enclosed within an iron-built closet. 


13. Our sons and riches are mere objects of delight to us. It is as erroneous 
to suppose them to be of any good to us at the end, as to expect any benefit 
from the decoction of poison. 


14. Old people being reduced to calamitous circumstances at the pitiable 
state of the decay of their bodies and decline of life, have greatly to be 
tormented at the thoughts of the impious deeds (of their past lives). 


15. Men having passed their early days in the gratification of their desires 
and other worldly pursuits at the expense of the acts of virtue and piety, are as 
much troubled with anxieties at the end, that their minds are seized with a 
tremor like that of the plumage of a peacock shaken by the breeze. How then 
can a man attain to tranquility at any time? 


16. Wealth, whether forthcoming or unattainable, whether got by labour or 
given by fortune, is all as deceitful to the worldly minded, as the high waters 
of rivers (swelling only to subside). 


17. That such and such desirable acts are to be done, are the constant 
thoughts of men, who desire to please their sons and wives, until they are 
worn out with age and become crazy in their minds. 


18. Like leaves on trees that grow to fall, and falling make room for others 
to shoot forth, are those men, who devoid of reason, die away daily to be born 
again. 


19. Men having travelled here and there and far and near, return to their 
homes at the end of the day, but none of them can have rest by day or night, 
except the virtuous few that live by honest dealings. 


20. After quelling his enemies and getting enough of riches in his clutches, 
the rich man just sits down to enjoy his gains, when death comes upon him, 
and interrupts his joy. 


21. Seeing the vile trash of worldly gains earned and accumulated by the 


basest means to be but transitory, the infatuated mob do not perceive their 
approaching dissolution. 


22. Men loving their own lives, and making mouths at the demise of others, 
are like a herd of sheep bound to the stake, and staring at the slaughter of their 
fellows, yet feeding themselves to fall as fattened victims to death. 


23. The multitude of people on earth, is ever seen to appear in and 
disappear from it as fast as the passing waves of the sea, but who can tell 
whence they come and whither they return. 


24. Women are as delicate as poisonous creepers, that with their red petaled 
lips and garments, and their eyes as busy as fluttering bees, are killers of 
mankind and stealers of their ravished hearts. 


25. Men are as passengers in a procession, repairing from this side and that 
to join at the place of their meeting. Such is the delusive union of our wives 
and friends here, (for our meeting in the next world). 


26. As the burning and extinguishing of the lamp depend on the wick and 
its moistening oil, so does our course in this transitory world (depend on our 
acts and affections only). Nobody knows the true cause of this mysterious 
existence. 


27. The revolution of the world is comparable with that of the potter’s 
wheel and the floating bubbles of rain water that appear to be lasting to the 
ignorant observer only. 


28. The blooming beauty and graces (of youth), are destined to be snatched 
away at the approach of old age. The youthful hopes also of men fly at a 
distance like the bloom of lotus buds in winter. 


29. The tree which is ordained to be useful to mankind by the loads of 
fruits and flowers that it bears upon its body, is fated also to be hewn down by 
the cruel axe at last. How then can beneficent men expect to avoid the cruel 
hand of death. 


30. Society with relatives is, (of all others), as perilous as that of a 
poisonous plant; it is pleasant for its domestic affections, which are in reality 
but delusions of the soul. 


31. What is that thing in the world, which has no fault in it; and what is that 
which does not afflict or grieve us; what being is born that is not subjected to 
death, and what are those acts that are free from deceit? 


32. Those living a Kalpa age are reckoned as short-lived, compared with 
those living for many Kalpas, and they again are so in respect to Brahma. 


Hence the parts of time being all finite, the ideas of their length or shortness 
are altogether false. 


33. Things that are called mountains are made of rocks, those that are 
called trees are made of wood, and those that are made of flesh are called 
animals, and man is the best of them. But they are all made of matter, and 
doomed to death and decay. 


34. Many things appear to be endued with intelligence, and the heavenly 
bodies seem to be full of water, but physicists have found out by analysis that, 
there is no other thing anywhere except (minutiz of) matter. 


35. It is no wonder that this (unreal world) should appear a miraculous 
(reality) to the wise, and seem marvelously striking in the minds of mankind, 
since the visions in our dreams also appear so very fascinating to everyone in 
their state of dreaming. 


36. Those that are corrupted in their greediness (after worldly enjoyments), 
will not even in their old age, receive the sermons on their eternal concerns, 
which they think to be false chimeras as those of a flower or a creeper 
growing in the sky. 


37. People are still deluded in their minds in wishing to attain the state of 
their superiors, but they fall down still lower like beasts, (goats), from the top 
of a hill, in wishing to lay hold on the fruits of a verdant creeper out of their 
reach. 


38. Young men spending their wealth in personal gratifications, are as 
useless as plants growing in the bowels of a deep and inaccessible cavern, 
which spread their fruits and flowers, leaves and branches, and their shades to 
the use of nobody. 


39. Men are found to resemble the black antelopes (in their wanderings), 
some of them roving about the sweet, soft and beautiful sceneries of the 
country, and others roaming in sterile tracts and parts of boundless forests. 
(i.e., Some living in the society of men, and others as recluses from it). 


40. The daily and diversified acts of nature are all pernicious in their 
nature; they appear pleasant and ravishing to the heart for a time, but are 
attained with pain in the end, and fill the mind of the wise with dismay. 


41. Man is addicted to greediness, and is prone to a variety of wicked shifts 
and plots; a good man is not now to be seen even in a dream, and there is no 
act which is free from difficulty. I know not how to pass this state of human 
life. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 
Mutability of the world. 


Rama said: — 


Whatever we see of all moveable or immovable things in this world, they 
are all as evanescent as things viewed in a dream. 


2. The hollow desert that appears as the dried bed of a sea today, will be 
found tomorrow to be a running flood by the accumulation of rain-water in it. 


3. What is today a mountain reaching the sky and with extensive forests on 
it, is in course of time levelled to the ground, and is afterwards dug into pit. 


4. The body that is clothed today with garments of silk, and decorated with 
garlands and fragrance, is to be cast away naked into a ditch tomorrow. 


5. What is seen to be a city today, and busy with the bustle of various 
occupations, passes in course of a few days into the condition of an 
uninhabited wilderness. 


6. The man who is very powerful today and presides over principalities, is 
reduced in a few days to a heap of ashes. 


7. The very forest which is so formidable today and appears as blue as the 
azure skies, turns to be a city in the course of time, with its banners hoisted in 
the air. 


8. What is (today) a formidable jungle of thick forests, turns in time to be a 
table-land as on the mount Meru. 


9. Water becomes land and land becomes water. Thus the world composed 
of wood, grass, and water, becomes otherwise with all its contents in course of 
time. 


10. Our boyhood and youth, bodies and possessions, are all but transient 
things, and they change from one state to another, as the ever-fluctuating 
waves of the ocean. 


11. Our lives in this (mortal) world, are as unsteady as the flame of a lamp 


placed at the window, and the splendour of all the objects in the three worlds, 
is as flickering as the flashing of the lightning. 


12. As a granary stored with heaps of grains is exhausted by its continued 
waste, so is the stock of life spent away by its repeated respirations. 


13. The mind of man is as fluctuating as a flag waving in the air and filled 
with the dust of sin, to indicate its wavering between the paths of heaven and 
hell. 


14. The existence of this delusive world, is as the appearance of an actress 
on the stage, shuffling her vests as she trudges along in her dancing. 


15. It’s scenes are as changeful and fascinating as those of a magic city, 
and its dealings as bewitching and momentary as the glances of a juggling 
girl. 


16. The stage of the world presents us a scene of continued dancing (of the 
sorceress of deception), and the deceptive glances of her eyes resembling the 
fleeting flashes of lightning. 


17. The days, the great men, their hey-days and deeds (that are past and 
gone), are now retained in our memory only, and such must be our cases also 
in a short time. 


18. Many things are going to decay and many coming anew day by day, 
and there is yet no end of this accursed course of events in this ever-changeful 
world. 


19. Men degenerate into lower animals, and those again rise to humanity, 
(by metempsychosis), gods become no-gods, and there is nothing that remains 
the same. 


20. The sun displays everything to light by his rays, and watches over the 
rotations of days and nights, to witness, like time, the dissolution of all things. 


21. The gods Brahma, Vishnu and Siva and all material productions, are 
reduced to nothingness, like the sub-marine fire subsiding under the waters of 
the deep. 


22. The heaven, the earth, the air, the sky, the mountains, the rivers, and all 
the quarters of the globe, are subject to destruction like the dry fuel by the all- 
destroying fire of the last day. 


23. Riches and relatives, friends, servants and affluence, are of no pleasure 
to him who is in constant dread of death. 


24. All these are so long delightful to a sensible man, as the monster of 


death does not appear before the eye of his mind. 


25. We have prosperity at one moment, succeeded by adversity at another, 
so we have health at one time, followed by sickness soon after. 


26. What intelligent being is there, that is not misled by these delusions of 
the world, which represent things otherwise than what they are, and serve to 
bewilder the mind? 


27. (The world is as varying) as the face of the skies; it is now as black as 
dark clay, and in the next moment bright with the golden hues of fair light. 


28. It is now over-cast by azure clouds resembling the blue lotuses of the 
lake, and roaring loudly for a time and then being dumb and silent on a 
sudden. 


29. Now studded with stars, and now glowing with the glory of the sun, 
then graced by the pleasant moonbeams, and at last without any light at all. 


30. Who is there so sedate and firm, that is not terrified at these sudden 
appearances and their disappearance, and the momentary durations and final 
dissolution of worldly things? 


31. What is the nature of this world, where we are overtaken by adversity at 
one moment, and elated by prosperity at another, where one is born at a time, 
and dies away at another? 


32. One that was something else before, is born as a man in this life, and is 
changed to another state in course of a few days, thus there is no being that 
remains steadily in the same state. 


33. A pot is made of clay, and cloth is made of cotton, and they are still the 
same dull materials of which they are composed, thus there is nothing new in 
this world that was not seen or known before, and that changes not its form. 
(i.e., Allis but a formal and no material change). 


34. The acts of creation and destruction, of diffusion, production, and 
sustentation follow one another, as the revolution of day and night to man. 


35. It happens sometimes, that an impotent man slays a hero, and that 
hundreds are killed by one individual, so also a commoner becomes a noble 
man, and thus everything is changeful in this varying world. 


36. These bodies of men that are always changing their states, are as bodies 
of waters rising and falling in waves by motion of the winds. 


37. Boyhood lasts but a few days, and then it is succeeded by youth which 
is as quickly followed by old age, thus there being no identity of the same 


person, how can one rely on the uniformity of external objects? 


38. The mind that gets delighted in a moment and becomes dejected in the 
next, and assumes likewise its equanimity at another, is indeed as changeful as 
an actor. 


39. The creator who is ever turning one thing into another in his work of 
creation, is like a child who makes and breaks his doll without concern. 


40. The actions of producing and collecting (of grains), of feeding (one’s 
self) and destroying (others), come by turns to mankind like the rotation of 
day and night. 


41. Neither adversity nor prosperity is of long continuance in the case of 
worldly people, but they are ever subject to appearance and disappearance by 
turns. 


42. Time is a skilful player and plays many parts with ease, but he is chiefly 
skilled in tragedy, and often plays his tragic part in the affairs of men. 


43. All beings are produced as fruits in the great forest of the universe, by 
virtue of their good and bad acts (of past lives), and Time, like a gust of wind, 
blasts them day by day before their maturity. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
Unreliableness of worldly things. 


Thus is my heart consumed by the wild-fire of those great worldly evils, and 
there rises in me no desire of enjoying them, as there rises no mirage from a 
lake. 


2. My existence upon earth gets bitter day by day, and though I have got 
some experience in it, yet its associations have made me as sour as the Nimba 
plant by its immersion in water. 


3. I see wickedness on the increase, and righteousness on the decline in the 
mind of man, which like the sour Karanja, (crab) fruit, becomes sourer every 
day. 


4. I see honour is eaten up every day by mutual altercations of men, using 
harsh words to each other as they crack the nuts under their teeth. 


5. Too much eagerness for royalty and worldly enjoyments, is equally 
prejudicial to our welfare, as we loose our future prospects by the former, and 
our present happiness by the latter. 


6. I take no delight in my gardens nor have any pleasure in women; I feel 
no joy at the prospect of riches, but enjoy my solace in my own heart and 
mind. 


7. Frail are the pleasures of the world, and avarice is altogether intolerable, 
the bustle of business has broken down my heart, and (I know not) where to 
have my tranquility. 

8. Neither do I hail death nor am I in love with my life, but remain as I do, 


devoid of all anxiety and care. 


9. What have I to do with a kingdom and with all its enjoyments? Of what 
avail are riches to me, and what is the end of all our exertions? All these are 
but requirements of self-love, from which I am entirely free. 


10. The chain of (repeated) births is a bond that binds fast all men by its 
strong knots of the senses; those striving to break loose from this bondage for 


their liberation, are (said to be) the best of men. 


11. These haughty damsels whom the god of love employs to ravage the 
hearts of men, resemble a group of elephants subverting a lotus bed under 
their feet. 


12. The treatment of the mind with pure reason being neglected now (in 
youth), it is hard to heal it afterwards (in age), when it admits of no cure. 


13. It is the worldliness of man that is his true poison, while real poison is 
no poison to him. It is the poison of worldliness which destroys his future life, 
while real poison is only locally injurious to him (in his present state). 


14. Neither pleasure nor pain, nor friends nor relatives, nor even life and 
death, can enchain (affect) the mind that has received the light of truth. 


15. Teach me, Oh Brahman! that art the best of the learned in the mysteries 
of the past and future, teach me so that I may soon become like one devoid of 
grief and fear and worldly troubles, and may have the light of truth beaming 
upon me. 


16. The forest of ignorance is laid over with the snare of desire, it is full of 
the thorns of misery, and is the dreadful seat of destruction and the danger (of 
repeated births and deaths). 


17. I can rather suffer myself to be put under the jaws of death with his 
rows of teeth like saws, but cannot bear the dreadful pains of worldly cares 
and anxieties. 


18. It is a gloomy error in this world to think that I have this and have not 
the other; it serves to toss about our minds as a gust of wind disperses the dust 
of the earth. 


19. It is the thread of avarice that links together all living beings like a 
chaplet of pearls; the mind serves to twirl about this chain, but pure 
consciousness sits quiet to observe its rotation. 


20. I, who am devoid of desires, would like to break this ornamental chain 
of worldliness, hanging about me as a deadly serpent, in the same manner, as 
a lion breaks asunder the net (which is laid to ensnare him). 


21. Do you now, O most learned sage, scatter the mist which has 
overspread the forest of my heart, and the darkness which has overcast my 
mind, by the light of true knowledge. 


22. There are no anxieties, O sage! which cannot be put to an end by the 
society of good minded men; the darkness of night can be well removed by 


moon-beams. 


23. Life is as fickle as a drop of water pending on a mass of clouds blown 
away by the winds. Our enjoyments are as unsteady as the lightning that 
flickers in the midst of clouds. The pleasures of youth are as slippery as water. 
With these reflections in my mind, I have subdued them all under the province 
of peace and tranquility. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
Self-disparagement. 


Seeing the world thus ingulfed amidst the abyss of hundreds of rising dangers 
and difficulties, my mind is immerged in the mire of anxieties. 


2. My mind is wandering everywhere and I am struck with fear at 
everything; my limbs are shaking with fear like the leaves of a withered tree. 


3. My mind is bewildered by impatience for its want of true contentment, 
just as a young woman is afraid in a desert for want of the company of her 
strong handed husband. 


4. The thoughts of my mind are entangled in my desire for worldly 
enjoyments, as stags are caught in the pit strewn with grass over it. 


5. The senses of an unreasonable man, ever run astray to the wrong and 
never turn to the right way; so the eyes of a blind man lead him but to fall into 
the pit. 


6. Human thoughts are linked to the animal soul as consorts to their lords. 
They can neither sit idle nor ramble at liberty, but must remain as wives under 
the control of their husbands. 


7. My patience is almost worn out, like that of a creeper under the winter 
frost. It is decayed, and neither lives nor perishes at once. 


8. Our minds are partly settled in worldly things, and partly fixed in their 
giver, (the Supreme soul). This divided state of the mind is termed its half 
waking condition. 


9. My mind is in a state of suspense, being unable to ascertain the real 
nature of my soul. I am like one in the dark, who is deceived by the stump of a 
fallen tree at a distance, to think it a human figure. 


10. Our minds are naturally fickle and wandering all about the earth. They 
cannot forsake their restlessness, as the vital airs cannot subsist without their 
motion. 


11. Tell me, Oh sage, what is that state of life which is dignified above 


others, which is unassociated with the troubles (incident to birth and death), 
unqualified by the conditions of humanity, and apart from errors, and wherein 
griefs are unknown. 


12. (Tell me also) how Janaka and the other good men, who are 
conspicuous for their ceremonious acts, and distinguished for their good 
conduct, have acquired their excellence (in holy knowledge). 


13. (Tell me likewise), Oh source of my honor, how a man, who is 
besmeared all over his body with the dirt of worldliness, may yet be cleansed 
and get rid of it. 


14. Tell me what is that knowledge, by resorting to which, the serpents of 
worldliness, may be freed from their worldly crookedness, and become 
straight in their conduct. 


15. Tell me how the foulness of my heart may regain its clearness, after it is 
so much soiled by errors and tainted with evils, like a lake disturbed by 
elephants and polluted with dirt. 


16. How is it possible for one engaged in the affairs of the world, to be 
untainted with its blemishes, and remain as pure and intact as a drop of water 
on the lotus leaf. 


17. How may one attain his excellence by dealing with others as with 
himself, and minding the goods of others as straws, and by remaining aloof 
from love. 


18. Who is that great man that has got over the great ocean of the world, 
whose exemplary conduct, (if followed), exempts one from misery. 


19. What is the best of things that ought to be pursued after, and what is 
that fruit which is worth obtaining? Which is the best course of life in this 
inconsistent world. 


20. Tell me the manner by which I may have a knowledge of the past and 
future events of the world, and the nature of the unsteady works of its creator. 


21. Do so, that my mind which is as the moon in the sky of my heart, may 
be cleared of its impurities. 


22. Tell me what thing is most delectable to the mind, and what most 
abominable to it, as also how this fickle and inconstant mind may get its 
fixedness like that of a rock. 


23. Tell me what is that holy charm, which can remove this cholic pain of 
worldliness, that is attended with numberless troubles. 


24. Tell me how can I entertain within my heart, the blossoms of the arbor 
of heavenly happiness, that sheds about it the coolness of the full-moon 
beams. 


25. Oh ye good men! that are present and learned in divine knowledge, 
teach me so that I may obtain the fullness of my heart, and may not come to 
grief and sorrow any more. 


26. My mind is devoid of that tranquility which results chiefly from holy 
happiness, and is perplexed with endless doubts, that disturb my peace as the 
dogs molest smaller animals in the desert. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
Queries of Rama. 


Rama said: — I have no reliance on the durability of life, which is as transient 
as a drop of water that sticks to the point of a shaking leaf on a lofty tree, and 
as short as the cusp of the moon on Siva’s forehead. 


2. [have no credit in the durability of life, which is transient as the swelling 
that take place in the pouch of a frog while it croaks in the meadow. Nor have 
I any trust in the company of friends, which are as dangerous as the 
treacherous snare of hunters. 


3. What can we do under the misty cloud of error (overhanging our minds), 
and raising our tempestuous desires which flash forth in lightnings of 
ambition, and burst out in the thunder claps of selfishness? 


4. How shall we save ourselves from the temptations of our desires dancing 
like peacocks (and displaying their gaudy train) around us, and from the 
bustle of the world breaking in upon us as thickly as the blossoms of the 
Kurchi plant. 


5. How can we fly from the clutches of cruel Fate, who like a cat kills the 
living as poor mice, and falls unwearied and unexpectedly upon his prey in 
the twinkling of an eye. 


6. What expedient, what course, what reflections, and what refuge must we 
have recourse to, in order to avoid the unknown tracks of future lives? 


7. There is nothing so trifling in this earth below, or in the heavens above, 
which ye gifted men cannot raise to consequence. 


8. How can this accursed, troublesome, and vapid world, be relished by one 
unless he is infatuated by ignorance? 


9. It is the fusion of desires, which produces the milky beverage of 
contentment, and fills the earth with delights as the spring adorns it with 
flowers. 


10. Tell me, O sage, how the mist of our desires, which darkens the moon 


of our intellects, is to be dispelled from our minds, so as to make it shine forth 
in its full brightness. 


11. How are we to deal in this wilderness of the world, knowing well that it 
is destructive both of our present and future interest? 


12. What man is there that moves about in this ocean of the earth, who has 
not to buffet in the waves of his passions and diseases, and the currents of his 
enjoyments and prosperity. 


13. Tell me, O thou best of sages, how one may escape unburnt like 
mercury (in its chemical process), when fallen upon the furnace of the earth. 


14. (How can one get rid of the world) when it is impossible for him to 
avoid dealing in it, in the same manner as it is not possible for aquatic animals 
to live without their native element. 


15. Our good deeds even are not devoid (of their motives) of affection and 
hatred, pleasure and pain, similarly, as no flame of fire is unaccompanied by 
its power of burning. 


16. As it is not possible to restrain the mind from thinking on worldly 
matters, without the process of right reasoning, deign to communicate to me 
therefore, the dictates of sound reason for my guidance. 


17. Give me the best instruction for warding off the miseries (of the world), 
either by my dealing with or renouncing (the affairs of life). 


18. Tell me of that man of enlightened understanding who had attained to 
the highest state of holiness and tranquility of his mind of yore, and the deeds 
and manner by which he achieved the same. 


19. Tell me good Sir, how the saints (of old) fled out of the reach of misery, 
that I may learn the same for suppression of my erroneous conceptions. 


20. Or if there be no such precept, (as I am in need of) in existence, or 
being in esse, it is not to be revealed to me by anybody. 


21. And should I fail of myself (by intuition) to attain that highest state of 
tranquility, then I must remain inactive (as I am), and avoid my sense of 
egoism altogether. 


22. I will refrain from eating and drinking, even of water, and from 
clothing myself with apparels; I will cease from all my actions of bathing and 
making my offerings, as also from my diet and the like. 


23. I will attend to no duty, nor care about prosperity or calamity. I will be 
free from all desires except that of the abandonment of this body. 


24. I must remain aloof from all fears and sympathies, from selfish feelings 
and emulation, and continue to sit quietly as a figure in painting. 


25. I will gradually do away with the inspiration and respiration of my 
breath and outward sensations, till I part with this trifle, — the seat all of 
troubles, — this the so-called body. 


26. I do not belong to this body, nor does it belong to me, nor is anything 
else mine; I shall be null and void like the oil-less lamp, and abandon 
everything with this body. 


27. Valmiki said: — Then Rama, who was as lovely as the moon, and 
whose mind was well fraught with reasoning, became silent before the 
assemblage of the eminent men, as the peacock ceases from his screaming 
before the gathering clouds in awe. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
Praises on Rama’s Speech. 


Valmiki said: — When the prince Rama, (having his eyes resembling the 
petals of a lotus), had concluded his speech, calculated to remove all 
ignorance from the mind. 


2. All the men in the assembly had their eyes beaming forth with wonder, 
and the hairs on their bodies stood erect and pierced through their garments, 
as if wishing to hear the speech. 


3. The assembly seemed for a moment to have lost their worldly desires in 
their eagerness after a stoic indifference, and to be rolling in the sea of nectar. 


4. The audience remained (motionless), as the figures in a painting, being 
enraptured with internal delight at hearing the sweet words of the fortunate 
Rama. 


5. There were Vasishtha and Viswamitra with other sages, and the prime 
minister Jayanta and other counsellors (of the king) then seated in that 
assembly. 


6. There were also king Dasaratha and his subordinate rajas, with the 
citizens and foreign delegates, the chieftains and princes, together with 
Brahmans and men learned in the Vedas and divine knowledge. 


7. These accompanied by their friends and allies, with the birds in the cages 
and the royal antelopes and steeds of sport (about the palace), listened to 
Rama with fixed and mute attention. 


8. There were likewise the queen Kausalya and other ladies adorned with 
their best jewels, and seated at the windows, all mute and motionless. 


9. Besides these, the birds on the trees and creepers of the princely pleasure 
garden, were listening to Rama without fluttering their wings or making any 
motion or sound. 


10. There were the Siddhas and erial beings, and the tribes of Gandharvas 
and Kinnaras, together with Narada, Vyasa, and Pulapa the chiefs of sages 


(present at that place). 


11. There were also some of the gods and chiefs of gods, Vidyadharas and 
the Nagas, who heard the speech of Rama which was full of meaning and 
clearness. 


12. As Rama whose eyes were beautiful as the lotus, whose face was as 
lovely as the moon, and who likened the nocturnal luminary in the atmosphere 
of Raghu’s family, held his silence. 


13. Flowers were cast upon him from heaven in showers by the hands of 
the divine personages with their loud cheers and blessings. 


14. The people in the assembly were highly regaled with the sweet scent 
and beauty of these flowers of paradise fraught with humming bees in their 
cells. 


15. These flowers when blown in the air by the breeze of heaven, appeared 
as they were clusters of stars, which after their fall brightened the ground with 
their beauty as with the beaming smiles of heavenly maids. 


16. They appeared in the form of rain drops falling from the clouds, and 
blazing by the light of mute lightnings, and scattering about like balls of fresh 
butter. 


17. They resembled also as particles of snow-balls, or as the grains of a 
necklace of pearls or as beams of moon-light, or as the little billows of the sea 
of milk, or like drops of ice-cream. 


18. There were also borne by the loose and sweet winds of heaven, some 
lotuses with long filaments, and attended by clusters of bees humming and 
flying about them. 


19. There were also to be seen heaps of Ketaki and Kairava, Kunda and 
blue lotus flowers, falling and shining brightly among them. 


20. These flowers covered the court hall and the roofs of houses and their 
courtyards. The men and women in the city raised their heads to behold them 
falling. 


21. The sky was quite unclouded when the flowers fell incessantly from 
above. A sight like this that was never seen before, struck the people with 
wonder. 


22. The shower of flowers fell for quarter of an hour, but the Siddhas from 
whose hands they fell were unseen all the while. 


23. The falling of the flowers having ceased after the assembly was covered 


with them, they heard the following words, coming to them from the divine 
personages in the sky. 


24. “We have been travelling everywhere in whole bodies of the Siddhas 
from the beginning of creation, but never have we heard anywhere so sweet a 
speech as this. 


25. “Such a magnanimous speech of indifference as has been just now 
spoken by Rama, — the moon of Raghu’s race, was never heard even by gods 
like ourselves. 


26. “We account ourselves truly blessed to hear this highly charming and 
wondrous speech from the mouth of Rama himself today. 


27. “Indeed, we are awakened and edified by attending diligently to this 
truly excellent speech, delivered by Rama on the ambrosial bliss of 
asceticism, and leading to the highest felicity of men.” 


CHAPTER XXXlIiII. 
Association of Aerial and Earthly Beings. 


The Siddhas said: — 


It behoves us to hear the decision of the great sages, in reply to the holy 
sermon, already delivered by the chief of Raghu’s race. 


2. Come forward you great chiefs of the sages, you Narada, Vyasa, Pulaha 
and all ye great sages, and be ready (to hear). 


3. Let us descend to the full open court of Dasaratha, which is as bright as 
gold and free from stain, in the manner of bees alighting on the aureate and 
immaculate lotus. 


4. Valmiki said: — 


So saying, the whole company of divine sages alighted themselves in that 
court from their aerial abode. 


5. There, Narada the chief of sages, sat foremost playing on his lute, and in 
the midst was Vyasa, with his dark blue complexion resembling a rainy cloud. 


6. It was more over adorned with the presence of the chief sages Bhrigu, 
Angiras, Pulastya and others, with Chyavana, Uddalaka, Usira, Saraloman and 
many more about them. 


7. Their garments of deer skins hang loosely down as they embraced one 
another. Their beads of rudrdksha moved in one hand, and their water pots 
shook in the other. 


8. Their bodies shed a lustre in the Court-hall, resembling the yellow light 
of the stars in the sky, and like the beams of so many suns blazing upon one 
another. 


9. They appeared as a shower of moon beams or as a halo about the full 
moon, or as a circle about the orb of the sun out of its season. 


10. They looked like a circlet of gems of varied colors, or like a belt of 
pearls of great lustre. 


11. Vyasa appeared at the place where he sat, to be as a dark cloud amidst 
the stars, and Narada was beheld upon his seat as the white orb of the moon 
amongst the starry group. 


12. Here Pulastya shone as Indra among the gods, and there Angira blazed 
as the sun amidst the heavenly bodies. 


13. On seeing the body of Siddhas descending from the sky on earth, the 
whole court of king Dasaratha rose up (to greet them). 


14. There was a promiscuous assemblage of the aerial and earthly sages, 
whose commingled glory spread a lustre to the ten sides of the Court. 


15. Some of them held bamboo sticks in their hands, and others had lotuses 
in theirs. Some had put the sacred grass in their crests, while others had 
inserted some gems to the braids of their hair. 


16. Some had matted and tawny brown hairs on their heads, and others 
wore garlands of flowers on theirs. Some had strings of beads for their 
bracelets, and others wore wristlets made of the jasmine flowers. 


17. Some were clothed in tatters, and others wore garments made of bark, 
while there were others who wore raiments of silk. Some were girt with 
girdles of grass and skin about their waists, and others wore waist bands with 
pendant strings of pearl. 


18. Vasishtha and Viswadmitra honoured the aerials one by one, with 
respectful offerings and water and courteous address. 


19. The great body of the etherials also honored Vasishtha and Viswamitra 
in their turn, with water and offerings worthy of them and with polite 
speeches. 


20. The king also honoured the gods and the body of the Siddhas, who in 
return greeted the monarch with inquiries about his welfare. 


21. Then the heavenly and earthly saints interchanged their greetings with 
one another with cordial welcomes and gestures, and were all seated 
afterwards on seats made of the kusa grass. 


22. They next honoured Rama, who lay bowing before them, with gentle 
words and congratulations accompanied with shedding of flowers. 


23. There were seated in that assembly the sages: — Viswamitra, 
Vasishtha, Vama Deva and the ministers of state. 


24. There were also Narada, the son of Brahma, Vyasa the greatest of 
sages, Marichi, Durvasa and Angira. 


25. There were Kratu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Saraloma, the great sage 
Vatsayana, Bharadwaja, Valmiki the great bard and sage. 


26. There were also Uddalaka, Richika, Sarjati as well as Chyavana. 


27. These and many others versed in the Vedas and their branches, and 
knowing all things worth knowing, were the leading members (of the 
assembly). 


28. Then Narada and others joined with Viswamitra and Vasishtha in 
addressing Rama, who was sitting silent with his face turned downwards, and 
said: — 


29. We admire the blest and graceful speech of the prince which is 
dignified with the spirit of stoicism that breathes through the whole of it. 


30. It is full of thought, perspicuous, elegant, clear, dignified, sweet and 
worthy of noble-minded men, by its lucid style and wants of faults. 


31. Who is there that is not struck with admiration at the speech of Rama? 
It is well expressive of his thoughts, correct in its diction, plain and sweet and 
agreeable to all. 


32. It is rare to find one man among a hundred who is so eloquent as to 
combine dignity and force with a clearness and sweetness, that may command 
the admiration of all. 


33. Who has such a clear head as our prince, a head which is as penetrating 
as the best pointed arrow, and as fruitful and beauteous as the creeping plant. 


34. He is truly a man whose intellectual light like that of Rama’s, burns as 
the flame of a lamp within himself and enlightens all about him. 


35. Man’s blood, flesh, and bones with other (parts of his body), serve as 
machines to supply him with sensations of external objects, but there is no 
intelligence in them. 


36. Life and death, old age and troubles, repeatedly overtake every man, 
but they are beasts who are so infatuated as never to think of these. 


37. There is scarcely any man to be seen, who is of so clear an 
understanding as Rama, (the destroyer of his enemies), who is able to judge of 
the future by the past. 


38. Rama is the most excellent, admirable, useful, and well-shaped person 
amongst men, as is the mango tree (in the vegetable world). 


39. It is only today that we see that a man of Rama’s age has acquired so 
much experience of the world, and such extraordinarily mature an 


understanding. 


40. There are many such trees found growing in every place as are 
beautiful to see, easy of ascent, abundant in flowers and leaves, but there is no 
tree of paradise growing on earth. 


41. There may grow in every forest, trees with goodly flowers and leaves, 
but the extraordinary and fair clove tree is not always to be met with. 


42. Rama has displayed the wonder of his knowledge, as the moon displays 
her cooling beams and good trees their clusters of blossoms, and as the 
flowers diffuse their fragrance all about. 


43. It is very difficult to get the essence of true knowledge in this accursed 
world, which is constructed by the ungovernable and dominant predestination 
(of our past acts for misleading us to error and misery). 


44. Those only are reckoned the best of men, and leaders of the good, who 
try their best to gain the essence of truth, and whose minds are fixed on glory 
as their best treasure. 


45. We do not see any one in all this world, who is equal to Rama in 
discrimination and magnanimity, nor shall there be one like him in future. 
This is our firm conviction. 


46. If this speech of Rama, which has filled everyone here with admiration, 
fails to get its reply to the satisfaction of Rama’s mind, it is certain that all of 
us here, must pass for senseless sages (on earth). 


BOOK II. 
MUMUKSHU KHANDA 
OR 
THE MEANS OF FINAL 
LIBERATION. 


CHAPTER I. Liberation of Sukadeva. 


After Rama had delivered his speech in an audible voice before the assembly, 
he was tenderly accosted by the sage Viswaémitra who sat before him, saying: 


2. Rama! thou art the best of the most intelligent, and hast nothing more to 
learn besides all that thou hast come to know by thy nice observation. 


3. Thou hast an understanding, clear as the mirror, by its own nature, 
(reflecting every image within itself); and yet thy queries about the same, 
serve as the cleansing of the reflector (in order to refract its light to others). 


4. Thou hast a mind like that of Suka, — the son of the great Vyasa, who 
knowing the knowable by intuition, was yet in need of some precepts for 
confirmation of his belief. 


5. Rama said: — How was it Sir, that Suka, — the son of the great Vy4sa, 
— who did not rest assured at first of his knowledge of the knowable, came to 
be settled in his belief afterwards? 


6. Viswamitra answered: — “Hear me relate to thee Rama, the narrative of 
Sukadeva, whose case was exactly like thine, and the narration of which is a 
preventive of future births (in this world).” 


7. There is the great Vyasa sitting on his seat of gold by thy father’s side, 
swarthy in his complexion like a coal-black hill, but blazing as the burning 
sun (by his brilliancy). 


8. His son was named Suka, a boy of great learning and wisdom, of a 
moon-like countenance, and a stature sedate as the sacrificial altar. 


9. He reflected in his mind the vanity of worldly affairs like thyself, and 
became equally indifferent to all its concerns. 


10. It was then that this great minded youth was led by his own 
discriminative understanding to a long inquiry after what was true, which he 
found out at last by his own investigation. 


11. Having obtained the highest truth, he was still unsettled in his mind, 


and could not come to the belief of the certainty of his knowledge. 


12. His mind grew indifferent to its perceptions of the transitory 
enjoyments of the world, and like the Chdtaka, thirsted only after the dew 
drops of heavenly bliss. 


13. Once upon a time the clear-sighted Suka, finding his father the sage 
Krishna-Dwaipayana, — Vyasa, sitting quietly alone by himself, he asked 
him with reverence, saying: — 


14. Tell me, O sage! whence this commotion of the world had its rise, and 
how it may subside. What is its cause, how far is it to extend, and where is it 
to end? 


15. The sage Vyasa, who knew the nature of the soul, being thus asked by 
his son, explained to him clearly all that was to be said (on the subject). 


16. Suka thought that he already knew all this by his good understanding, 
and did not therefore think much of his father’s instructions. 


17. Vyasa, understanding the thoughts of his son, replied to him saying 
that, he knew no better the true nature of these things. 


18. But that there was a prince named Janaka in this land, who well knew 
the knowledge of the knowable, and from whom Suka could learn everything. 


19. Suka being thus directed by his father, repaired to the city of Videha at 
the foot of mount Sumeru, which was under the rule of Janaka. 


20. The club-bearer, (door keeper), informed the high minded Janaka of his 
coming, telling him that Suka the son of Vyasa was waiting at the gate. 


21. Janaka who understood that Suka had come to learn from him, gave no 
heed to the informant, but held his silence for seven days afterwards. 


22. The prince then ordered him to be brought in the outer compound, 
where he had to remain in the vexation of his spirit for seven days more as 
before. 


23. Suka was then commanded to enter the inner apartment, where he 
continued a week more without seeing the prince. 


24. Here Janaka entertained the moon-faced Suka with abundance of 
eatables, perfumeries, and lusty damsels. 


25. But neither those vexations nor these entertainments could affect the 
tenor of Suka’s mind, which remained firm as a rock at the blasts of wind. 


26. He remained there as the full moon (without any wane or increase), 


tranquil in his desires, silent and contented in his mind. 


27. The prince Janaka having thus known the (unalterable) disposition of 
Suka’s mind, had him introduced to his presence, where seeing the 
complacency of his soul, he rose up and bowed down to him. 


28. Janaka said: — “You have accomplished to the full all your duties in 
this world, and obtained the object of your heart’s desire to its utmost extent, 
what is it that you now desire for which you are welcome at mine.” 


29. Suka said: — “Tell me my guide, whence sprang all this bustle (of 
worldly life), and tell me also how it may soon come to its subsidence.” 


30. Viswamitra said: — Being thus asked by Suka, Janaka spoke to him the 
same things which he had learned from his great souled father. 


31. Suka then said: — “All this I have come to know long before by my 
own intuition, and then from the speech of my father in answer to my query. 


32. “You Sir, who are the most eloquent of all, have spoken to the same 
purport, and the same is found to be the true sense of the Sdstras. 


33. “That the world is a creation of volition, and loses itself with the 
absence of our desires, and that it is an accursed and unsubstantial world after 
all, is the conclusion arrived at by all sages. 


34. “Now tell me truly, you long armed prince, what you think this world to 
be (whether a reality or unreality), that my mind may be set at rest by you 
from its wandering all about the world (in search of truth).” 


35. Janaka replied: — “There is nothing more certain, O sage! than what 
you have known by yourself and heard from your father. 


36. “There is but one undivided intelligent spirit known as the universal 
soul and nothing besides; it becomes confined by its desires, and freed by its 
want of them. 


37. “You have truly come to the knowledge of the knowable, whereby your 
great soul has desisted from its attachment to objects of enjoyment and vision. 


38. “You must be a hero to have overcome your desire in the lengthening 
chain of attractive enjoyments from your early youth. What more do you want 
to hear? 


39. “Even your father, with all his learning in every science, and 
devotedness to austerities, has not arrived to the state of perfection like you. 


40. “I am a pupil of Vyasa, and you are his son, but you are greater than 
both of us, by your abandonment of the taste for the enjoyments of life. 


41. “You have obtained whatever is obtainable by the comprehensiveness 
of your mind, and as you take no interest in the outer and visible world, you 
are liberated from it, and have nothing to doubt of.” 


42. Being thus advised by the magnanimous Janaka, Suka remained silent 
with his mind fixed in the purely supreme object. 


43. Then being devoid of sorrow and fear, and released from all efforts, 
exertions and doubts, he repaired to a peaceful summit of the mount Meru to 
obtain his final absorption. 


44. There he passed ten thousands of rains in a state of unalterable 
meditation, till at last he broke his mortal coil, and was extinguished in the 
supreme soul like a lamp without oil. 


45. Thus purified from the stain of transmigration, by abstaining from 
earthly desires, the great souled Suka sank into the holy state of the Supreme 
Spirit, as a drop of water mixes with the waters or merges into the depth of the 
ocean. 


CHAPTER II. 
Speech of Viswamitra. 


Viswamitra said: — 


Rama! it now becomes you to have your mind properly purified from its 
doubts, as it was done in the case of the son of Vyasa. 


2. You see, O great sages! how perfectly the knowable is known to Rama, 
whose good understanding has learnt to feel a distaste for worldly enjoyments, 
as if they were diseases unto him. 


3. You well know that the fixed principle in the mind of one knowing the 
knowable, is to have an aversion to all the enjoyments of life. 


4. It is the desire of fruition that chains down a man fastly to the earth, but 
the knowledge of the frailties here serves to dispel his darkness. 


5. Know Rama that it is the curtailing of desires which the wise call liberty, 
and the fastening of our desires to earthly objects, is what is termed our 
confinement here. 


6. Spiritual knowledge is easily obtainable by most men here, but a distaste 
to (pleasurable) objects is hard to be had, (however painful it is to procure 
them). 


7. He who fully comprehends a thing, is said to know it, and who so knows 
what is knowable, is called a learned man; no earthly enjoyments can be 
delectable to such high-minded men. 


8. The mind that has no zest for earthly pleasures, except the glory of 
disinterested deeds, is said to be liberated even in the present life. 


9. As there grows no vegetable in a sterile soil, so there grows no 
disinclination to worldliness, until one comes to know the knowable reality, 
(i.e., to say: — neither the godly can be worldly, nor the worldly be godly). 


10. Hence know this supporter of Raghu’s race to have verily known the 
knowable, which has made him disgusted with his princely enjoyments. 


11. I tell you great sages that, whatever Rama has come to know by his 
intuition, requires to be confirmed by Vasishtha for the tranquility of his mind. 


12. It is only a reliance in the Unity, that Rama now requires for his repose, 
just as the beauty of autumn depends on the clearness of the firmament. 


13. Let the venerable Vasishtha then reason with the high minded Rama, 
and restore the peace of his mind. 


14. For he is the master and family preceptor of the whole race of the 
Raghus, besides he is all knowing and all seeing, and has a clear insight (into 
all things) of the three times, (present, past, and future). 


15. Then addressing himself to Vasishtha he said: — you well remember 
Sir, the instruction given us of old, for pacifying our mutual enmity, and 
promoting the welfare of the high-minded sages. 


16. When our lord the lotus-born Brahma, seated on the table land of 
Nishadha mountain, and shaded by the Sarala trees, delivered his wise 
lectures to us and the sages. 


17. It is by means of that knowledge of liberation that our worldly desires 
are dispelled like the darkness of night by sun-beams. 


18. Please now, O Brahman, to communicate that rational knowledge of the 
knowable to your pupil Rama, whereby he may gain the peace of his mind. 


19. It will be no difficult task for you to teach the spotless Rama, whose 
mirror-like mind is quite clear to take the reflection. 


20. The wisdom of the holy, their learning of the Sdstras, and the 
scholarship of the learned, are then only praiseworthy, when they are 
communicated to a good student, and those who are disgusted with the world. 


21. But instruction given to one who is no student nor disgusted with the 
world, becomes as polluted as milk put in a hide vessel. 


22. Again, the instruction imparted by one devoid of passions and 
affections, fear and anger, pride and sin, serves to infuse tranquility into the 
mind. 


23. At these words of Viswaémitra the son of Gadhi, the assembled sages, 
Vyasa, Narada and others, honoured his saying with the exclamation, “bravo,” 
“well said,” etc. 


24. Then the venerable Vasishtha, brilliant as Brahma his father, and seated 
by the side of the king, spoke in reply: — 


25. O sage, I will perform without fail, what you have commanded me to 


do, for who, though mighty, can refuse to perform the behests of the good and 
wise? 


26. I will destroy the mental darkness of the princes Rama and others by 
the light of knowledge, as we dispel the gloom of night by the light of a lamp. 


27. I well remember the instructions which were given of yore, by the 
lotus-born Brahma on the Nishadha mountain, for dispelling the errors of the 
world. 


28. Having said so, the high-minded Vasishtha made up his mind as one 
girds up his loins, to deliver his lecture to Rama for dispelling his ignorance, 
and showing him the state of supreme felicity. 


CHAPTER III. 
On the repeated creations of the world. 


Vasishtha said: — 


“T will now expound to you Rama! the knowledge that was imparted of old 
by our lord the lotus-born (Brahma), after the creation of the world, for the 
peace of mankind.” 


2. Rama said: — I know Sir, you will expound to me the subject of 
liberation in full length, but remove first my fallacy about the frailty of this 
world. 


3. And how it was that, the great sage Vyasa, — the father and guide of 
Suka, did not attain to disembodied emancipation (after his death) with all his 
omniscience, while his son did so. 


4. Vasishtha said: — (Hear me Rama), there is no counting of the atoms 
proceeding from the spirit and forming the three worlds both before and after 
the birth of the glorious sun. 


5. There is nobody even who can count the millions of orbs which at 
present form the three worlds. 


6. Nor can anyone say by calculation, what numbers of creation will rise 
from the (unlimited) ocean of divine existence, like its interminable waves 
(forever). 


7. Rama said: — It is needless to talk of worlds gone by or yet to come, say 
what you will of the present (state of existence). 


8. Vasishtha said: — This world consists of brute, human, and heavenly 
beings, whose lives when they are said to perish in any part of it are really 
existent in the same part. 


9. The mind is called to be ever-fluctuating, and gives rise to (all things in) 
the three worlds in itself. It resides in vacuity in the form of the heart, and the 
increate (God) also residing in the vacuous soul (gives the mind the power to 
realize the latent ideas of the soul). 


10. The millions of beings that are dead, those that are dying, and will die 
hereafter, are all to be reborn here according to the different desires in their 
minds. 


11. The external world appearing as a reality, is in truth but a creation of 
our desires; it is an ideal castle in the air, and a magic view spread before us. 


12. It is as false as an earthquake in a fit of delirium, as a hobgoblin that is 
shown to terrify children, as a string of pearls in the clear firmament, and as 
the moving trees on the bank to a passenger in the boat. 


13. It is an illusion as the phantom of a city in a dream, and as untrue as the 
imagination of a flower growing in the air. The unreality of the world best 
appears to one at the point of and after his death. 


14. But this knowledge of (the unreality of the world) becomes darkened 
upon one’s being reborn on earth, when the shadow of this world falls again 
on the mirror of his sentient soul. 


15. Thus there is a struggle for repeated births and deaths here, and a fancy 
for the next world after one’s death. 


16. After one’s shuffling off his body, he assumes another, and then another 
form, and thus the world is as unstable as a stool made of plantain leaves and 
its coatings. 


17. The dead have no sensation of the earth and other elementary bodies, 
nor of the course of the world, but they fall again to these errors upon their 
being reborn here. 


18. There is an interminable ignorance resembling an immense river 
enveloping the face of creation, and breaking into streamlets of unfordable 
ignorance. 


19. The Divinity, like a sea, shoots forth in the various waves of creation, 
which rise incessantly and plentifully one after the other. 


20. All beings here are but the waves of this sea, of which some are alike to 
one another in their minds and natures, while others are half alike, and some 
quite different from the rest. 


21. I reckon yonder sagely Vyasa as one of the thirty two of these waves, 
on account of his vast knowledge, and good looking appearance. 


22. There were twelve of them possessed of a lesser understanding, they 
were the patriarchs of men, and endued with equal energy. Ten of them were 
men of subdued spirits, and the rest were adepts in their family duties. 


23. There will be born again other Vydsas and Valmikis, and likewise, 
some other Bhrigus and Angiras, as well as other Pulastyas and others in 
different forms. 


24. All other men, Asuras and gods with all their hosts are repeatedly born 
and destroyed either in their former or different shapes. 


25. Like this, there are seventy two Tretd cycles in a Kalpa age of Brahma, 
some of which have passed by and others to follow. Thus will there be other 
people like those that have gone by, and as I understand, another Rama and 
Vasishtha like ourselves (by the eternal rotation of ideas in the Divine mind). 


26. There have been ten successive incarnations of this Vydsa, who has 
done such wondrous acts, and is famed for his vast knowledge. 


27. Myself and Valmiki have been contemporaries many a time, as also 
born in different ages and very many times. 


28. We have been many times, and there were others also like myself, and 
so was I born also in many forms (in many ages). 


29. This Vyasa will again be born eight times hereafter, and again will he 
write his Mahabharata and the Purana histories. 


30. He having divided the Vedas and described the acts of Bharata’s race 
(in the Mahabharata), and established the knowledge of Brahm (in the 
Vedanta), is to attain to his disembodied liberation (after his final 
termination). 


31. This Vyasa, who is devoid of fear and sorrow, and has become tranquil 
and emancipate in himself after subduing his mind and discarding the worldly 
desires, is said to be liberated even in his present life time. 


32. The living emancipate may sometimes be associated by his relatives 
and estates, his acts and duties, his knowledge and wisdom, and all his 
exertions like other men’s, or he may forsake them all at once. 


33. These beings are either reborn a hundred times in some age or never at 
all, (as in the case of divine incarnations), and depending on the inscrutable 
will, (Mdyd), of God. 


34. There souls undergo the like changes by repetition, as a bushel of grain, 
which is collected to be sown repeatedly, and to be reaped again and again, (in 
the same or some other field). 


35. As the sea heaves its incessant surges of different shapes, so are all 
beings born incessantly in various forms in the vast ocean of time. 


36. The wise man who is liberated in his life time, lives with his internal 
belief (of God) in a state of tranquility, without any doubt in his mind, and 
quite content with the ambrosia of equanimity. 


CHAPTER IV. 
Praise of Acts and Exertions. 


Vasishtha said: — 


I know gentle Rama that, liberation of the soul, whether in its embodied or 
disembodied state is both alike, as the sea-water and its waves are the same 
liquid substance. 


2. The liberation, whether of embodied or disembodied spirits, consists in 
their detachment from the objects of sense, hence the soul unattached to 
sensual gratification, is (said to be) liberated, having no idea of sensible 
objects. 


3. And though we see before us the living liberated sage, (Vyasa), as an 
embodied person, yet we have no doubt of the detachment of his inward soul 
from the (mortal coil of his) body. 


4. The difference between the embodied and disembodied souls, when they 
are equally enlightened and liberated, is like that of the sea-water in its calm 
and billowy states. 


5. There is no more difference between bodily and unembodied liberation 
than there is betwixt the air in motion and at rest. 


6. Liberation whether with or without the body, is productive of 
unselfishness, we have lost our selfishness ever since we have come to the 
knowledge of an undivided unity (of the soul). 


7. Now therefore, attend to the true doctrine that I am going to deliver to 
you, which will be a jewel to your ears as it will dispel the darkness of 
ignorance (from your mind). 


8. Know, O son of Raghu, that everything in this world is obtainable by our 
efforts being properly employed (to our purposes). 


9. This (knowledge of truth) rises as the moon (in the human mind), and 
sheds its cooling and delightsome influence to the heart, that there is no other 
way to gain the fruits of our exertions but by our efforts. 


10. We evidently see the results of the exercise of our efforts, and nothing 
coming out from what the dull and mistaken call as chance or fate. 


11. An effort when directed according to the counsel and conduct of the 
good in the exercise of the action of the body and mind, it is attended with 
success, otherwise it is as vain as the freak of a madman. 


12. Thus he who wishes to acquire riches, and perseveres in its acquisition, 
surely succeeds in gaining them, or else he stops short in the midway. 


13. It was by means of the exertion of their efforts that some particular 
persons have obtained the paramount dominion of Indra over the three worlds. 


14. It is by the exertion of one’s efforts that he attains to the rank of the 
lotus-born (Brahma), and some even gain the inward joy of the state of Brahm 
by it. 


15. It was by virtue of his self-exertion that somebody has become the best 
among men, even as he who bears the ensign of the eagle, (Vishnu among the 
gods). 


16. It was by the exertion of one’s efforts that some persons succeeded to 
obtain the form of Siva accompanied by his female power, and adorned by the 
semi-circle of the moon in his crest. 


17. Know our actions to be of two kinds, namely, those of former and 
present lives, and that acts of the present life generally supersede those of the 
past. 


18. Know also that energy joined with constant practice, and supported by 
wisdom and some stimulating force, is able to break down the mount of Meru, 
and the demerits of acts in the former lives of men. 


19. The exertions of a man proceeding from his good efforts and 
countenanced by the law, lead to his success, or else they either go for nothing 
or turn to his disadvantage. 


20. So a man laid up in a state of disability, is unable to twist his fingers in 
order to hold a little water in the hollow of his palm for drink, while there is 
another who, (by his well-directed efforts), gets the possession of seas and 
islands, mountains and cities for himself, supports all his dependents and 
relations, and does not think this earth too great for him. 


CHAPTER V. 
Necessity of Activity. 


Vasishtha said: — 


It is the will or inclination that is the prime instrument of all actions done 
even according to the rules of law and Sdstras, as it is the reflection of light 
that gives various hues to things. 


2. Whoever wishes to do anything desirable to him by unlawful acts, it 
becomes as fruitless as the endeavours of a madman. 


3. As you try so you get both of good and evil, and fortune and exertion are 
the joint causes of acts according to fatalists. 


4. Human exertions are either lawful or unlawful, the former leading to 
success, and the latter to dangerous consequences. 


5. Fortune and exertions contend with each other like two rams of unequal 
strength, wherein the mightier overcomes the other. 


6. Therefore, should man apply himself diligently (to his duties), and 
employ his skill and promptness after them in such a way, as his today may 
overcome the morrow, (i.e., do the works of tomorrow today). 


7. When two unequal forces (of two persons) contend with one another like 
two rams, the stronger force whether of this or that man, overcomes the other. 


8. When one incurs a failure or danger, even by his lawful exertions, he 
should know it to be the result of his misapplied exertions. 


9. One by his utmost exertion in the right way, as by the gnashing of his 
teeth (and the like), can overcome his misfortune and so does his bad luck 
sometimes baffle his exertions. 


10. When one finds himself to be led astray by the demerit of his acts of a 
former state of existence, he must attempt to subdue the same by greater 
energy of his present state. 


11. So far, should one diligently endeavour to exercise his exertions, as he 


may be able to beat down the evils resulting from his bad fortune (or 
predestination). 


12. The evils of bad fortune are undoubtedly removed by the meritorious 
acts of the present life, as the bad consequence of an act of yesterday is 
averted by its remedy of today. 


13. Having trampled over an unfavorable fortune by one’s reliance on his 
continuous energy, he must attempt to secure to himself every good for his 
well-being in his present life. 


14. Know that tranquility is not to be found by the effortlessness of dull 
ass-like men, it is the lawful energy of men which is said to secure his welfare 
in both worlds. 


15. And that one should make his way out of the pit of this world by force 
of his energy and diligence, just as the lion breaks out from his cage. 


16. One must ponder in himself every day that his body is subject to 
corruption, his beastly acts must be kept backward and man-like acts put 
forward. 


17. It is our good exertions that are attended by good results as the bad ones 
are followed by bad consequences. Chance is a mere meaningless word. 


18. Do not make your bloom of youth useless as ashes by sitting idly at 
home and enjoying the bliss of the harem like a worm in the sore. 


19. He who has no reliance on present objects, but depends upon 
suppositions of the past, is as a man flying for fear of his own hands 
supposing them as snakes. 


20. It is a pleasure to men of perverted understandings to think themselves 
guided by their fortunes, prosperity flies away far off from such men who 
depend on their fortunes. 


21. Therefore let a man diligently apply himself first to (the cultivation of) 
his reason, and then investigate into the works of abstruse spiritual 
knowledge. 


22. Those who do not set their hearts to acts according to the dictates of the 
Sdstras, but exert themselves otherwise to gain (their ends), are accursed as 
mad men for their vain attempts. 


23. Thinking there is no end of exertions, one declines to take the pains 
(after anything), and says that, no pains can bring out a gem from a stone (or 
oil from water). 


24. Know that there is a limitation both of human lot and exertion, as of all 
other things as a pot or picture having a (limited capacity and length). 


25. And that it is by means of good conduct derived from best precepts and 
the company of the good, that one succeeds to his object, and a disposition 
that breaks loose of these (bounds), is sure to fall to the contrary (extreme of) 
ruin. 


26. Again, any man who conducts himself in the right course of action, 
never fails in his attempts at any time. 


27. Some among the best of men, who had been reduced to misery by their 
poverty and helplessness, have again risen to the eminence of Indra by 
exertion of their manhood. 


28. By learning the Sdstras well from boyhood, by keeping company with 
the good, and by possession of good qualities, as also by diligent application, 
a man is sure to gain his object. 


29. It has been seen, known, heard, and experienced (by us) that acts are 
rewarded with success, and they are dull-headed who think of obtaining it 
from fortune or by chance. 


30. Had there not been the folly of idleness in this world, what man would 
fail either to be rich or learned? It is by reason of idleness that this earth is 
filled to its utmost limit of the sea with indigent and beastly men. 


31. Let a man after passing his childhood, and getting rid of its false and 
idle playfulness, and when he has attained the age of youthful vigour, apply 
himself diligently to the company of wise men, and to the cultivation of his 
understanding by a knowledge of the Sdstras and their meanings, and by 
scanning well his own faults and qualities. 


32. Valmiki said: — After the sage had said these sayings, the day passed 
away, and the sages went to bathe after taking leave of the assembly, where 
they joined again with the rising beams of the sun dispelling the gloom of 
night. 


CHAPTER VI. 
Refutation of Fatalism. 


Vasishtha resumed, saying: — 


Now fate being no other than the result of our actions of the former state of 
our existence, it is possible to leave it at a distance, and to extricate one’s self 
(from its fetters) by betaking himself to good company and study of moral 
Sdstras. 


2. Whatever one attempts to do, he readily meets with its reward, this being 
the effect of exertion. Fate is no other but the same thing. 


3. Men laboring hard, are heard to exclaim, — “O how painful it is,” so 
men suffering under fate cry out, “O hard is fate!” (so the one is as bad as the 
other). 


4. Thus then fate being no other than a name for our past actions, it is as 
easily overcome (by present acts), as a boy (is subdued) by an adult youth. 


5. As some bad conduct of yesterday is corrected by proper behaviour of 
the present day, so the anterior fate is removed by (posterior) acts. 


6. Those carnal minded libertines who do not try the means (of reforming 
their fate), but depend upon the favor of fortune, are perverted in their nature 
and marked for misery. 


7. Thus, if the acts of manliness are capable of forefending one’s 
misfortunes, it must be acknowledged that manliness which destroys the 
other, is the mightier of the two. 


8. As of two fruits growing on the same fore-stalk, the one is found to be 
empty within and the other full of juice, so the fruit of fate is rendered 
abortive by that of manliness. 


9. Seeing the decay of the best things in the world, we must own the 
predominant power of the cause of this decay. 


10. Like two rams our fate and exertions are fighting with one another, 
wherein the victory is always on the side of the stronger. 


11. In the case of the royal elephant’s taking up a beggar boy for being 
made the ruler (of a country), its cause is to be attributed more to the vote of 
the country-men and citizens (than to chance or fortune). 


12. As a man takes his food and grinds it under his teeth, so is one 
(depending on fate), crushed by the stronger party relying on his exertions. 


13. Inferior servants are thus employed like clods of earth by their more 
active masters in any work they like. 


14. Silly and impotent men seeing the strong thriving by their exertions, 
whether apparent or unseen, are apt to attribute it to their good fortune 
(instead of their diligence). 


15. The strong efforts of men truly constitute their presiding fortune, and 
these two are viewed alike by the wise. 


16. In the case of the (aforesaid) beggar boy’s installation to the ruling and 
protection of the people of a realm, the unanimous concurrence of the law and 
ministers, of the elephant and citizens, (is to be taken as the chief cause). 


17. Should the beggar boy be ever elected for a ruler by the royal elephant 
itself, (without the assent of men), in that case it is to be attributed to the boy’s 
good fortune only, (because there was no sensible exertion on his side). 


18. Present acts destroy those of the past life and so also the vice-versa 
comes to pass, but the exertions of a man are undoubtedly successful (at all 
times). 


19. Of these two powers, that of the present state is manifestly superior to 
the other, hence it is as possible to overcome the past by the present, as to 
overpower a boy by an adult. 


20. As a hail shower lays waste the cultivation of a whole year, so also doth 
the predominant fate sometimes overpower the attempts of this life. 


21. However, it does not behoove us to be sorry at the loss of our long- 
earned treasure, (as of the harvest), for what avails our sorrow at what is 
beyond our control. 


22. If I should sorrow for what I have not the power to prevent, I must then 
weep all the days of my life because I am not to be spared by death. 


23. All our acts are subject to their proper time and place, and to the modes 
of their operation and combination according to the course of nature, hence it 
is that the more diligent are the most successful (everywhere). 


24. We ought therefore to rely in our exertions and clearness of 


understanding by the help of Sdstras and association with the wise, for 
fording over the ocean of this world. 


25. Actions of the past and present lives, are the two fruit trees growing in 
the garden of humanity, of which the one that is cultivated best, thrives and 
fructifies the most. 


26. He who is unable to overcome his false fate by his best exertions (in 
this life), is no better than an ignorant beast that has no power over its pain or 
pleasure. 


27. He who thinks of going to heaven or hell by the will of the Maker, is 
also a slave to destiny and no better than a beast. 


28. The man of a noble mind and one employed in acts of goodness, breaks 
off from the errors of the world as a lion from its cage. 


29. Those who vainly imagine themselves to be led about by some 
(supernatural power), and so slight their necessary duties, are to be shunned at 
a distance as the mean and base. 


30. There are thousands of acts that are attended with gain or loss to their 
doers, but it is the duty of man to do what is right whether they are pleasant or 
painful. 


31. He who does not transgress the bounds of law, nor forsake the duties 
(of his race), is attended by every blessing abundant as the pearls in the sea. 


32. Devoted diligence in acts leading to one’s object, is termed to be his 
manliness by the wise, and that being guided by the Sdstra leads to his 
success. 


33. An act accompanied by exertion, is of itself the accomplisher of one’s 
object, and the company of the wise and study of good books serve to raise a 
man by brightening his understanding. 


34. The infinite happiness or a tranquil spirit is known as the Summum 
bonum by the wise, and those good works are fit for study which lead to that 
state. 


35. The acts of our former lives constitute what we call our destiny, and 
they return to us from the region of the gods, for our good in both worlds. 


36. We blame the fate which is a creation of the fancy of the ignorant, who 
by their adoration of the same come to meet their destruction. 


37. One benefits himself always by his activity in both worlds, as his good 
acts of today gives a grace to those of yesterday. 


38. Whoso therefore applies himself with diligence to his acts, reaps their 
fruits like that of an Amalaki in his palm, which though it is within his grasp, 
yet it could not be obtained without the cost of some labour. 


39. It is the ignorant only that depart from the beaten path, and fall into the 
error of fatalism. Therefore, give up that false faith in an unreal fate, which is 
a mere creation of the imagination and devoid of any cause or effect, and 
apply to your manly exertions. 


40. The fruit of following the Sdstras and observing the good customs and 
local usages, is long known (to be wholesome), as exciting the heart and the 
exertion of the limbs to action. This it is what they called, “manly activity.” 


41. All wise men after discussion of the subject of fate and acts, have 
applied themselves to activity by utter rejection of fatality, and accomplished 
their ends by attendance on the good and wise. 


42. Knowing the efficacy of activity, everyone should betake himself to his 
personal exertions, and attain to his highest perfection by attending to good 
Sdstras and the wise counsels of learned men. 


43. And knowing the bondage of our births to be full of pain, let people 
strive for the exercise of their activities, and obtain the true and sweet blessing 
of tranquility by their attendance on the wise. 


CHAPTER VII. 
On the Necessity of Activity. 


Having obtained a body free from disease and a mind free from trouble, one 
should try to know the knowable to prevent his further birth (in this world). 


2. Whoso wishes to avert his destiny by means of his activity, obtains the 
acme of his wishes both in this world as well as in the next. 


3. But whoever is averse to assiduity and relies in his luck, he is an enemy 
to his own soul, and sacrifices all his virtues, riches and hopes (to his 
idleness). 


4. It is the exercise of our sensuous and mental faculties as also of the 
members of the body, which are the different modes of our exertions, that 
leads us to success. 


5. Our perceptions are the cause of our mental activity, and this actuates the 
body to action, whereby we obtain the fruits of our desire. 


6. In whatever case there is some act (enjoined in the Sdstras), it points us 
to our exertions and never to destiny. Even children are well aware of this. 


7. It was by the exercise of their exertions that Divaspati (Jupiter) became 
the lord of gods, and Sukra obtained the preceptorship of demons. 


8. There have been many weak, poor, and miserable men, who have by 
means of their manly exertions become equal to Indra himself. 


9. So also there have been many great men on earth, who after enjoyment 
of a great many extraordinary things and luxuries here, have become guests in 
hell for want of the exercise of their manly virtues. 


10. In this manner have all beings evaded the effects of their various states 
of want and opulence by means of their own exertions (in the right way). 


11. There are three-fold benefits derived from the study of books, from 
lectures of a preceptor, and from one’s own industry, all of which are 
attendant on our exertions and not destiny. 


12. This is the long and short of all the Sdstras, that diligence preserves our 
minds from all evils, by employing them to whatever is good and right. 


13. To apply with diligence to whatever is excellent, not low or mean and 
not liable to loss or decay, is the precept of parents and preceptors to their 
sons and pupils. 


14. I get the immediate fruit of my labour in proportion to my exertion, 
hence I say, I enjoy the fruit of my labour and not of fortune. 


15. Activity gives us success and it is this that elevates the intelligent. But 
men of little understandings rely only in fortune in their miserable state. 


16. We have ocular evidence (of the efficacy) of activity every day, in the 
instances of men travelling in distant countries (for the sake of gain). 


17. He that eats becomes satiate and not who starves, so he who walks is 
said to proceed and not one who rests, and in like manner whoso speaks is 
called a speaker and not the silent man, thus action makes the man. 


18. Wise men escape from great difficulties by means of their exertions, but 
not so the mistaken fatalist by his fruitless inertness. 


19. Whoso acts in any manner, gets his reward accordingly, but the restive 
man has nothing to expect anywhere. 


20. By well-directed industry, a man reaps the best reward, as he meets 
with its reverse by his misapplied labour, think upon this, O Rama! and do as 
you like. 


21. The reward of industry which a man meets with sooner or later at any 
time or place, the same is said by the wise to be his fortune. 


22. No one can see his fortune, nor has anybody ever seen the same, nor is 
there such a thing to be found in any world, it is but the merit of our acts here 
which they place in the other world. 


23. A man is born on earth to grow up and decay in his time, and no destiny 
is seen therein in the same way as his childhood, youth, and old age. 


24. One’s application to diligence and action for the attainment of an 
object, is known by the term exertion by the wise, whereby all things are 
accomplished (and which is no destiny). 


25. One’s going from one place to another, his holding a thing in the hand, 
and the movement of his limbs, are all the acts of his exertion and not his 
destiny. 


26. There is another kind of propensity to acts productive of evil, this sort 


of action is likened to the attempt of a mad man which yields no good. 


27. Men of acute understandings raise themselves to elevation, by their 
association with the virtuous, study of good works and active employment to 
duties tending to their own good. 


28. The boundless joy arising from equanimity, is said to constitute one’s 
Summum bonum (upon earth). This blessing also results from a man’s 
diligent application to the Sdstras (and not from his destiny). 


29. It is the understanding that leads to the knowledge of the Sdstras, as it 
is the other that tends to our right understanding of things. Just so does the 
lotus serve to beautify a lake, as it is the lake which lends its grace to the 
lotus. (i.e., They serve mutually to assist each other). 


30. It is also by virtue of one’s deep study and good company in youth, that 
a man attains his desirable objects afterwards (which are the results of his 
exertions). 


31. It was by means of his activity that Vishnu had conquered the demons, 
and established the order of the world. It was by this that he created the 
worlds none of which could be the work of fate. 


32. Now, O lord of Raghu’s race! employ your efforts to the exertion of 
your manly activities in such a way in this earth, that you may live free from 
fear of being bitten by the serpentine people in this arbor of the world, (i.e., 
crush the malice of your enemies). 


CHAPTER VIII. 
Invalidation of Destiny. 


Vasishtha continued saying that: — 


What does destiny mean, which has no form, nor act, no motion nor might, 
but is a false notion rooted in the (minds) of the ignorant. 


2. It is a word that has come into vogue from the idea of the future 
retribution of one’s past actions, (or retributive justice), and the like, which is 
designated, “destiny.” 


3. From this the ignorant are led to believe that there is a thing as destiny, 
the inscrutability of which has led them to the fallacy as that of the 
supposition of a snake in a rope. 


4. As a past misdeed of yesterday is rectified by a good action of the 
following day, let this day, therefore, supercede the past, and employ yourself 
today to action. 


5. The perverted understanding that believes in a destiny grounded on its 
erroneous conception, may well enter into the fire from his conviction that it 
will not burn him unless it is so destined. 


6. If destiny is the sole cause of everything, why then should a man betake 
himself to his actions of bathing and making his offerings, sitting and walking, 
all of which may be done by his destiny. 


7. What then is the necessity of one’s advising another to do a thing when 
destiny is the director of all? Let then all be silent and say nothing to nobody. 


8. There is no one to be seen on earth that is motionless except the bodies 
of the dead, and if it is action that produces anything, it is useless to believe in 
destiny. 


9. Nor is there any co-operative power of the invisible destiny perceptible 
in the actions of men, whence it is but a meaningless word. 


10. Two things as the implements and members of the body being joined 
together, have each their several action, (as that of the pen and razor and the 


hand in writing and shaving), but the hand being wanted, nothing can be done 
by destiny (with its having those tools). 


11. There is no such clear idea of a destiny like those of the mind and 
intellect, even in the (illiterate) cow-herd or in the (learned) pandit. Hence it is 
a mere non-entity. 


12. If the concept of destiny be other (than that of an agent), it must mean 
something else, or if it be the same thing (with the agent), why then give it a 
different name (as destiny)? If it be proved to be an imaginary term, then why 
not imagine your exertion to be agent (of your action)? 


13. The immaterial destiny like vacuity has no connection with the material 
body. If it had a form or figure it would be visible (to someone or other), 
hence destiny is a nullity. 


14. If destiny is the main spring of the movements of all beings in the three 
worlds, then let all creatures rest at ease (with the assurance) that destiny will 
perform their parts. 


15. The belief that we are guided by destiny and do as we are led to do, is a 
deception and an allegation (of self excuse), in fact there is no such thing as 
destiny. 


16. It is the fool that fancies to himself a destiny and relies on it to his own 
disadvantage, while the intelligent raise themselves to better states by means 
of their exertion. 


17. Say, who is there among the mighty and brave, the intelligent and 
learned, that looks or waits upon destiny in this world? 


18. Destiny may be said good, if it can have the power of saving a man 
from being beheaded, whom fortune-tellers had pronounced by their 
calculation to be long lived. 


19. Again, O Raghava, should one who is foretold by his fortune-teller to 
become a learned man, attain his learning without being taught in it, then may 
we believe fortune to be true. 


20. Mark, O Rama! how the sage Viswamitra has cast away his destiny at a 
distance, and attained to Brahmahood by his own exertions. 


21. Look at us and others who have become sages, that it was by our 
industry we became aeronauts or wanderers in the ethereal regions. 


22. Remember, O Rama, how the chiefs of the Ddnava race, have 
established their empires on earth by their prowess, and by discarding their 


destinies altogether. 


23. Look again how the chiefs of gods have wrested the extensive earth 
from those demons by their valourous deeds of slaying and harassing them (in 
battle). 


24. See Rama! how they make handsome wicker vessels (of bamboo work) 
for the holding of water by their own industry, and without the aid of any 
destiny to the completion of the same. 


25. In all our works of giving and receiving, walking, resting and the like, 
we see no causality of destiny in their completion, as we see of medicines (in 
healing diseases). 


26. Therefore, O Rama, give up this destiny of your mistaken fancy, which 
is in reality devoid of its cause or effect, and is a false and ideal nullity, and 
betake yourself to your best exertions. 


CHAPTER IX. 
Investigation of Acts. 


Rama asked: — 


“Will you Sir, that art versed in all knowledge, kindly explain the true 
sense of destiny in popular use.” 


2. Vasishtha replied: — It is a man’s activity and no other, O Raghava, that 
is the cause of all his actions, and the recipient of their consequence, wherein 
destiny has nothing to do. 


3. Destiny is a mere imaginary thing, which neither exists nor acts nor feels 
(their effects). It is neither seen nor regarded (by anybody). 


4. The good or bad result which proceeds from the accomplished acts of 
successful activity, is expressed by the word destiny. 


5. The wished for and unwished for consequences resulting from the good 
and bad deeds of human activity, are termed the effects of destiny by people. 


6. Human activity, which is the only cause of some unavoidable future 
consequence, is called as destiny by the majority of mankind. 


7. Truly, O Raghava! destiny though void as vacuity, appears as real to 
somebody who thinks it to be an active agent, while others know it to be 
inactive. 


8. Again destiny is a mere saying uttered by men upon the result of some 
good or bad effect of their actual exertion, that, “it is this which has produced 
the other.” 


9. It is my belief, and I have known it for certain that, destiny is no more 
than the word uttered by people upon their attainment of the object of their 
exertions. 


10. Destiny is that word of consolation which is uttered by men, as 
significant of the good or evil which they meet with and which they call to be 
the effect of the other. 


11. Rama asked: — How is it Sir, that you who are all wise, do now 
contradict your own assertion that destiny is the result of the stock of our 
former acts (of past life)? 


12. Vasishtha answered, saying: — Well said, O Rama! you know 
everything, but hear me tell you the whole of it, whereby you will have a firm 
belief in the nullity of destiny. 


13. All the various desires which men may have entertained in their minds 
before, even those come to be accounted as his deeds (or mental actions) at 
last. 


14. All animals are seen also to act according to their desires, and to do 
nothing to which an inclination was wanting in their natures. 


15. As the villager goes to his village and the townsman comes to the town, 
so it is the nature of the desire that leads men to their particular acts. 


16. The keen and firm resolution with which an act was done in the former 
state of life, that verily is termed destiny in the successive births, or 
generations of living beings. 


17. Thus are the acts of all active beings conformable with their natures, 
and the actions of men are in accordance to their desires, the desire is no other 
than the mind itself, and the mind is self-same with the human soul. 


18. The mind is the soul and cause of all acts which they call the doings of 
destiny, certainly there is no other thing as destiny beside the mind. 


19. This mind is verily the living soul, which acts as it desires, and enjoys 
accordingly the fruits thereof, and is same with destiny. 


20. Know, Rama, that the mind, the heart, desire, action and destiny are 
synonymous terms, and applied by the virtuous to the unascertainable soul 
(evolved in these forms). 


21. Now whatever the so named soul undertakes to do continually and with 
a firm resolution, it obtains the fruit thereof accordingly. 


22. It is by means of the activity or exertion of this soul, and by no other 
means, O support of Raghu’s race, that it obtains everything, and may it lead 
you to your good only. 


23. Rama said: — Being caught in the net of my pre-existent desire, I 
remain a captive to them and do as they lead me to. Say then, O sage what 
else I can do. 


24. Vasishtha replied: — So then, O Rama, you will be able to reach to 


your lasting good, if you will but exert your activity for it, without which 
there is no other way to it. 


25. These desires are of two kinds, some leading to good and others to evil. 
Hence the desire of one’s prior state must have been of one kind or other. 


26. If you will be guided now by the pure desires (of your nature), you will 
be gradually led by means of your good acts to attain the state of your lasting 
welfare. 


27. But if your wrong inclinations tend to lead you to difficulties, you must 
try your best to overcome such propensities perforce. 


28. You Rama are wise and perfectly intelligent, and not composed of a 
dull (material) body only, now if you should be in need of another’s guidance 
to waken your intellect, say where lies your own intelligence. 


29. If you would have one to enlighten your understanding, say where is 
that another to illumine him, and who is the other to illuminate him also. 
Hence as no one is wholly devoid of understanding, let him improve it 
himself. 


30. The current of our desires is flowing betwixt the two channels of good 
and evil, it must be by exertion of our activity that we must turn it to the right 
course. 


31. You who are the mightiest of the mighty, must exert the force of your 
activity to turn your mind to a profitable course from its direction to the 
profitless. 


32. By directing the mind to the right way from the wrong, it will take the 
right course and so the vice versa. But as the human mind is as (tender as) a 
child, it must not be employed by force (but gentle measures). 


33. The training of the child, like that of the mind, is effected slowly by 
gentleness and indulgence, and not by force and hurry. 


34. You have already by your constant practice, got a mastery over all your 
good and bad desires, you have hence forward to direct your tendencies to 
good only. 


35. O victorious Rama! When by your pristine habits you have an aptitude 
to do what is good, learn that it is the result of your good nature. 


36. O sinless Rama, your desires are at present lying dormant in your mind, 
and require some practice to be employed only to the doing of good. 


37. If you will not exert yourself at present to improve your dormant 


desires by constant practice, you can never expect to be happy. 


38. When it is doubtful (to know the nature of the innate propensity), do 
you incline to what is good, and as you thrive in this, you shall have no evil to 
fear. 


39. Whatever one practices, he becomes perfect in that in time, as studying 
from childhood makes the learned free from error. 


40. When you have the good will in you, you must accomplish your 
purpose, by means of your activity and subjection of the organs of your body. 


41. So long as your mind is imperfect and unacquainted with the state of 
divine truth, you must attend to your teacher, books and reasoning, and act 
according to their directions (in the paths of truth). 


42. Having first finished your acts and known the truth, you must abandon 
even your meritorious deeds, and all your desires with them. 


43. Having known by your good understanding, that the virtuous course led 
by honorable men is truly good, give particular attention to know the nature of 
God, then forsake even that (enquiry), and remain (silent) as a saint, (muni). 


CHAPTER X. 
Descension of Knowledge. 


Vasishtha resumed: — 


This thing called destiny is as true as the reality of God. It is the cause of 
causes and effect of effects. (It is an attribute of God). 


2. Now attend to my words and depend on your exertions, and intently 
apply your ever confident mind to the attainment of your chief good. 


3. Try your exertions to turn to your subjection the misleading senses from 
pursuing their objects. 


4. I will now propound to you a code containing of the essence of the best 
means of liberation, which will confer the fruits of your exertions and lead 
you to your welfare in both worlds. 


5. Let them that have great minds, forsake their worldly desires in order to 
avoid their future births, and attend to these lectures with calm contentment 
(in their minds). 


6. Weigh well the meanings of the antecedent and subsequent propositions, 
repress your mind from its worldly cares, and dispose yourself to equanimity 
for its inquiry after truth. 


7. Hear me relate to you Rama, the way to emancipation, which will 
remove your feelings of pain and pleasure, and become the surest means to 
lead you to supreme happiness. 


8. On hearing this lecture on liberation in the company of all those 
reasonable men, you will know that highest state which is free from pain, and 
of which there is no termination. 


9. This was spoken of old in a former Kalpa age by Brahma abiding in the 
Supreme spirit. It is the remover of all anxiety and giver of all comfort to the 
soul. 


10. Rama asked, saying: — Say, O Brahman, — that art my guide, what 
cause moved Brahma himself of old to reveal this knowledge, and in what 


manner was it obtained by you. 


11. Vasishtha replied: — The supreme soul of infinite manifestations exists 
by itself, it passes through and supports the whole in the form of vacuity and 
understanding, and as light to all living beings. 


12. From him, who remains the same, (unaltered being), in his rest and 
motion, the great Vishnu was born, like a moving wave on the quiet waters of 
the sea. 


13. Then was Brahma produced from the lotus of his heart, having the 
mount Meru for its pericarp, and the points of the compass for its petals, and 
the stars for its pistils. 


14. He being beset by gods and sages acquainted with the Vedas and their 
significations, created all the worlds and the minds with their various 
thoughts. 


15. He then created the groups of men in the Bharata division, (India), in a 
corner of Jambudwipa, (Asia), and subjected them to all manner of diseases 
and afflictions. 


16. They are also troubled with the possession and want of many things, 
and their subjection to dangers and diseases. Here all species of created beings 
are subjected to a variety of tribulations and afflictions. 


17. The lord and creator of worlds, seeing the misery of these people, felt 
compassion for them, as a father does for his children. 


18. He then pondered within himself for a moment with intensity of 
thought and for the good of all creatures, how to exterminate the misery of 
these beings who were subjected to death and despair. 


19. With this thought the lord god, (Brahma), established himself the rules 
of austerity, piety, charity, veracity and pilgrimage. 


20. Having established these, the lord and creator again thought within 
himself, how to make an end of the many miseries of the men he had created. 


21. He thought upon self-extinction as the Supreme bliss, which was 
obtainable only through a knowledge of the Deity, and whereby man might be 
exempted from repeated births and deaths. 


22. It was divine knowledge, he thought, the only means of men’s crossing 
over (the ocean) of this world, but austerity, charity and pilgrimage were no 
means to it, (But mere preparatives to knowledge). 


23. Upon this, said he, “I will immediately make a new and sure bridge for 


the salvation of men and for their liberation from pain.” 


24. Having thought so, the lord Brahma sitting on the lotus, meditated in 
his mind, and produced me from himself. 


25. Being thus produced, I stood forthwith in the presence of my 
progenitor, as a wave rising from the sea leans towards it. 


26. I then bowed down to the god who held a water-pot in one hand and a 
rosary in the other, with a pitcher and a bead of seeds in my either hand, and 
was thus addressed by him. 


27. Come my son, said he, and then holding me with his hand, made me sit 
on the northern petal of his lotus of truth, which shone as bright as the moon 
amidst the silvery clouds. 


28. Wearing the skin of an antelope, Brahma my father, spoke to me who 
was in the like habit, with the voice of a gander addressing a stork, (i.e., a 
talkative person addressing a mute one). 


29. He said, — “I will for a moment overpower thy fickle-mindedness 
under a mist of insensibility, as a dark cloud overshadows the disk of the 
moon.” 


30. It was under this imprecation that I lost my reason and forgot 
everything, even the clear idea I had of God. 


31. I then became as helpless as one out of his wits, and came to be 
afflicted with distress and sorrow like an indigent person. 


32. Ah woeful is this world! said I, and how came evil to dwell in it? With 
these thoughts I remained in silence (pondering on the origin of evil). 


33. Then he my father spoke to me saying: — Ah my son, why art thou so 
afflicted? Ask of me the remedy for thy affliction, and thou shalt become 


happy. 
34. Then the lord creator of all peoples was asked by me, seated as I had 


been on the gold-coloured leaflet of the lotus, about the medicine of worldly 
woes. 


35. How came, — said I, — O my lord, this world to be so full of misery, 
and how can people get rid of it, is what I ask of thee (to know). 


36. I then learnt the most holy wisdom, which Brahman my father 
delivered to me, and following his advice, I became quite composed (in my 
mind). 


37. Then the Creator of the world and revealer of all causes, seeing me 


knowing the knowable and restored to my own natural state, said: — 


38. I had turned thee to insanity my son, by an illusion, in order to make 
thee an enquirer into the essence of true knowledge for the welfare of 
mankind. 


39. Now art thou released from the curse of illusion, and arrived to thy 
highest state of understanding. Thou hast become as one soul (with the 
Supreme), and art as pure gold (after its purification from dross). 


40. Now shut thy heart against the world, and proceed to the land of 
Bharata on the surface of the earth for the good of mankind. 


41. There employ thyself to ceremonial duties to the best of thy knowledge, 
and advise others to ritual acts in their proper order (of exoteric faith). 


42. But such as are disgusted (with the world) in their hearts, and are 
rational with their elevated understandings, are to be counseled to esoteric 
knowledge which confers true felicity (to man). 


43. Being thus appointed by him who was born in the lotus, I continue to 
abide herein throughout the succession of beings. (i.e., for ages). 


44. I have no duty to perform here, but live while I have to live free from 
all cares. I do my acts always with as tranquil a mind as it were in a state of 
sleep; I do my works with the body, but I do nothing here with my soul 
(which is fixed in God). 


CHAPTER XI. 
On the Qualifications of the Inquirer and Lecturer. 


Vasishtha continued: — 


I have thus related to you fully about the descent of knowledge on earth, 
with the reason of my birth and the intention of the lotus born Brahma (in 
making me his apostle). 


2. Now Rama, as you are eager to learn the transcendental knowledge, and 
feel so great an anxiety for it in your mind, it must be the effect of your 
pristine merit. 


3. Rama said: — How was it Sir, that the Supreme lord felt a desire to send 
down knowledge on earth after his creation of it (and not along with it?) 


4. Vasishtha replied: — This Brahma is in his own nature the same with the 
Supreme Brahm, and is born in him, as a billow is born of the waters of the 
deep. (The co-eternal logos). 


5. This great lord saw the imperfection of his creation, and saw its whole 
course (at one view) in times past, present, and future. (The perversion of 
mankind subsequent to their fall). 


6. He saw the decay of ceremonial rites after the end of the Satya, (golden), 
and other ages, and considering the error to which men were to fall afterward, 
he felt pity for their states (for want of sacrifices). 


7. Then the Lord thought of endowing me with true knowledge, and sent 
me on the surface of the earth for dispelling the ignorance of mankind. 


8. Like me he has sent also some other great sages here, as Sanat Kumara, 
Narada and many others also. 


9. He has sent them all for the redemption of mankind from the fetters of 
their ignorance by a series of meritorious acts, and their progress in divine 
knowledge also. 


10. These great sages, seeing at the end of the past golden age the gradual 
decay of the holy ritualistic rites on earth, 


11. They created the rulers of earth at different divisions of the land, for 
regulating the course of duties, and observing their proper limits (of action). 


12. They have made many works on the traditional law and sacrificial rules 
to be observed on earth, and many appropriate provisions for the 
accomplishment of religious and temporal duties (in the smritis). 


13. But in the revolution of time, all these duties became slack in their 
course, and men have no other thought except that of seeking their daily 
maintenance. 


14. Every day, disputes are rising among the land-owners on account of 
their estates and properties, and the people are subjected to various penalties 
in large numbers. 


15. In such a state, it is not possible for the rulers to rule over their states 
without fighting with one another, when they with their subjects are inevitably 
reduced to wretchedness (by warfare). 


16. In order to remove the impotence (of such princes), and to lead them to 
a comprehensive view of things, we have prescribed to them many excellent 
precepts of knowledge. 


17. It was the spiritual knowledge which had been at first propounded to 
princes, but it came afterwards to be known under the title of royal science, 


(polity). 


18. This royal science is of a recondite nature, and is also the best kind of 
spiritual knowledge. Many kings have been set beyond the reach of calamity 
by a knowledge of this science. 


19. It is after many such fair-famed princes that have gone by, that your 
mighty self was begotten by the present king Dasaratha. 


20. O slayer of your enemies, I find a very agreeable and holy kind of 
apathy growing spontaneously in your most clear understanding. 


21. There is another kind of cold-heartedness, O Rama, which is caused (by 
some sorrow) in the minds of the virtuous and reasonable men, that is styled 
their casual indifference. 


22. But your unprecedented and astonishing apathy, which is produced 
without any cause and by your reason only, is called real stoicism by the wise. 


23. Seeing the obnoxiousness of worldly things, what man will not grow 
averse to them? The best displacency to them, is what rises in the mind of one 
from his own judgment. 


24. They are reckoned as great men and greatly wise also, whose 
indifference springs without any cause (of detestation to the world), and 
whose minds are clear (of all gloomy thoughts). 


25. One whose mind feels a disgust (to the world) from its own judgement 
and nice discrimination (of things), is as graceful to see as the youthful 
bridegroom adorned with chaplets of flowers. 


26. They are esteemed as the best of men, who betake themselves to 
indifference after judicious consideration of the worldly troubles. 


27. It must be by one’s repeated and judicious examination of the inward 
and outward illusions (of this world), that he should forcibly withdraw himself 
from them. 


28. Who is there that feels not an aversion to worldliness at the doleful 
sight of a funeral event? It is that aversion however, which is born of itself 
that is highly commendable. 


29. I see you are sincerely indifferent, and reaching the acme of true 
greatness. You are worthy of the best knowledge as is the moist earth of 
receiving the seeds. 


30. It is by the grace of the Lord God and Supreme spirit, that a lucky 
understanding like yours, naturally inclines to reason. 


31. It is by performance of ritual duties and observance of the prescribed 
rules, that the demerits of former births are expunged. 


32. Upon expurgation of former demerits, the understanding turns of itself 
to take cognizance of spiritual matters, like the simultaneous flight of the crow 
towards the falling fruit of the palm. 


33. But those that are devoted only to ritual acts, are like persons plunged 
in an eddy, wherein they are whirled up and down until they come to perceive 
the state of supreme (felicity). 


34. Seeing this (illusory) state of the world, a man must shake off the 
delusion of his worldly-mindedness, just as the elephant breaks loose from his 
fetters. 


35. It is too intricate, O Rama! to understand the course of this boundless 
world, and not even the greatest of embodied beings (as man) can know it 
without true knowledge. 


36. Know, O support of Raghu’s race! that men of great understandings 
have got over the unfordable ocean of the world by means of the raft of their 


knowledge and reason. 


37. Now hear with attention and steadiness of your mind, this rational 
knowledge for your deliverance from the flood of this world. 


38. The unceasing excitements of the senses and the fears and miseries of 
the world, will continually disturb the mind, without the remedy of right 
reason. 


39. There is naught beside rational knowledge, that can enable holy men to 
endure the afflictions of the opposite extremes of heat and cold and wind and 
rain. 


40. The incessant cares and miseries which befall to men at every step, 
serve sometimes to torment the ignorant mind as a flame of fire burns away 
the straw. 


41. But the troubles of this world cannot afflict the wise man, who knows 
the knowable, and discerns all things (in their true light), just as it is 
impossible for the flame of fire to burn down a wood drenched by the rains. 


42. The man knowing the truth resembles the firm arbor of the oak, 
(Kalpa), which no whirlwind of disease or distress, raised by the hot winds of 
this desert of the world, has the power to upset. 


43. The intelligent man who has a mind to know the truth, must diligently 
serve his wise preceptor with loving regard. 


44. The sayings of the well-minded preceptor who is asked about anything, 
must be carefully preserved in the mind, as a piece of fine muslin receives the 
dye (with which it is dyed). 


45. O best of the eloquent, you must not receive the instruction of one 
unacquainted with truth himself, whoever asks him anything is the greatest of 
fools. 


46. Whoever does not carefully attend to the words of the truth-telling 
preceptor who is asked about anything, is the basest of men. 


47. He is the best inquirer who makes his enquiry of one after ascertaining 
by his deeds whether he knows the knowable or not. 


48. But he is reckoned a vile inquirer and incapable of knowing great 
things, who makes a boyish query without ascertaining the lecturer’s 
(qualifications). 


49. The wise man when asked, will reply to him who is able to comprehend 
the antecedent and subsequent propositions, and is possessed of a good 


understanding, but he should make no answer to a vile brutish being. 


50. The preceptor who gives his lecture without examining the capacity of 
the inquirer to grasp his meaning, is pronounced unwise by the learned. 


51. O delight of Raghu’s race! this our meeting is a very congenial one and 
well adapted to each other, wherein you as inquirer are an admirer of virtue, 
and I the speaker, am well acquainted (with the subject). 


52. You that understand the meaning of words, should well consider all 
what I tell you, and take them to your heart. 


53. You are truly great and disgusted with the world, and know the truth 
among mankind; whatever is spoken to you must be impressed in your mind 
as the red dye on muslin. 


54. You by your attention to what I say and discrimination of spiritual 
matters, can make your understanding receive my instruction as the waters 
reflect the sun-light. 


55. Receive all that I say and store them diligently in your mind, or else it 
is useless to ask me anything. 


56. The mind, O Rama! is as fickle as an ape in the forest, correct it 
carefully and attend to spiritual instruction. 


57. Keep yourself always from the injudicious and ignorant, and those 
addicted to the company of wicked people, and honour the virtuous. 


58. It is by association with good people that we can gain wisdom, which 
resembles a tree yielding the fruits both of enjoyment and liberation, (ie., 
both of worldly and future good). 


59. There are four guards said to keep watch at the gate of Liberation, 
namely, peace, judgment, contentment and the society of the good. 


60. All these or three or two of them are to be attended with care, because 
they shall open to you the door leading to the abode of liberation. 


61. Or at last one of them is to be resorted to with diligence and even at the 
expense of one’s life, because by securing one of these a man can reconcile 
and gain all the four (to his favour). 


62. The wise man is the receptacle of all Sdstras and Srutis, of all 
knowledge and austerity, and is a gem on earth, as the sun is the receptacle of 
light (and gem of heaven). 


63. The dull understanding of the senseless man becomes as stiff as a 
(motionless) block, and like the frozen water becoming as hard as stone. 


64. Your good nature and good qualities, O Rama! and the counsels of the 
learned in the Sdstras, have made you sit here with a heart blooming like lotus 
at the rising sun. 


65. Your lifted ears to hear these wise lectures, have enabled you to repress 
your thoughts, as the music of the lute attracts the mind of the deer. 


66. Now secure, O Rama! the treasures of peace and good nature by your 
practice of indifference of which there is no decay. 


67. Your knowledge of the attainment of liberation will be increased by 
your attending to the Sdstras and the society of good men, as also by your 
practice of austerity and self subjection. 


68. You must know that, it is the study of divine knowledge with a clear 
understanding, that is a sure remedy against ignorance. 


69. Know this world to be a poisonous plant and seat of dangers. It infects 
the ignorant at all times, unless one will take the pains to dispel his darkness. 


70. Avarice accompanied by ignorance moves within the heart in a 
serpentine course, and expands and contracts it by turns like the bellows of a 
blacksmith. 


71. The true light of things dawns only in the minds of the wise, as the 
gentle moon appears to sight only in the clear and cloudless sky. 


72. He is truly called a man who can judge (the truth) by the major and 
minor propositions, whose mind is expanded and fraught with brilliant 
ingenuity. 


73. Rama! the clear wisdom of your mind, makes you shine as the full 
moon dispelling the darkness of the cloudless sky by her cooling and 
translucent beams. 


CHAPTER XII. 
Greatness of True Knowledge. 


Vasishtha said: — 


Rama! I honor you as one of a perfect mind. You know what to ask, and 
understand what is spoken to you. I will therefore go on speaking respectfully 
to you. 


2. Be still to attend to knowledge by keeping your mind fixed in yourself, 
and being freed from pride and passions, incline yourself to pure truth. 


3. You are possessed of all the qualities of an enquirer, and I those of the 
speaker, in as much as there are gems in the ocean. 


4. You have gained my son, the insouciance, which is cognate with reason, 
like the humidity of the moonstone bearing its correlation with the gentle 
beams of the moon. 


5. Rama! your long and early practiced pure virtues and good qualities, 
have raised your fame, as the long stretching white fibers of the stalk exalt the 
spotless lotus. 


6. Now hear the words I tell you Rama, for you alone are fit to receive 
them, as the moon only is able to open the Kumuda petals. 


7. Whatever business or investigation is undertaken by any body, it must be 
brought to a happy close, tending to his peace and tranquility (or to his rest 
and quiet). 


8. Had not there been the solace of philosophy for men of good 
understanding, what rational being could dare to bear the misery brought on in 
this world by ignorance. 


9. All the faculties of the mind are absorbed in the contemplation of the 
Supreme, like the dissolution of the rocks of boundary mountains by the solar 
heat at the end of the (Kalpa) world. 


10. Rama! the intolerable cholic pain caused by this venomous world, is 
healed only by Yoga meditation, as the poison of snake-biting is removed by 


Garuda incantations. 


11. The capacity of Yoga is obtained by discussion of the Sdstras in the 
company of good people, which alone can furnish us with the great charm of 
spiritual knowledge. 


12. It must be owned that we lessen our woes by acting with reason, 
therefore, reasonable men are never to be looked upon with disregard. 


13. The reasoning man gets released from his worldly sickness, and quits 
his frame which is full of diseases, as a snake casts off his time worn slough, 
and looks with a placid mind and calm composure upon the magic scenes of 
the world. Hence the fully wise man is not subject to the misery of the 
imperfectly wise. 


14. The rough and uneven pleasure of the world is but a disease to men, 
and stings them like a snake. It cuts them as a sword, and pierces them as a 
spear. It binds them fast as by a rope, and burns them as with the fire, and 
blindfolds their understanding as in the darkness of the night. It makes them 
as prostrate and dull as a slab of stone. It destroys one’s prudence and lowers 
his position. It casts them into the pit of error, and torments them with avarice. 
Thus there is almost no kind of trouble which does not betide worldly minded 
men. 


15. Worldliness is as dangerous a disease as cholera, which unless it is 
healed in time, is sure to trouble its patient with the torments of hell. 


16. Such as those caused by the eating of stones, wounds of swords and 
spears, being pelted with stones, burnt by fire, and numbed by frost, loosing of 
limbs, besmearing the body with blood as with sandal paste, by being bored 
by worms as worm-eaten trees, and pricked in the body by pikes and 
broomsticks, or pierced by the fiery shafts and bolts continually falling in 
battle. By toiling and moiling in the sun and working in cold and rain as in a 
summer fountain house, or remaining dumb and deaf and without rest or 
sleep, and finally by loosing the head (in war or penalty). 


17. Under thousands of such intolerable pangs of worldly life, no one 
should remain negligent of his release from this state, but ought to think that it 
is his reflection in the Sdstras only, that can produce his real good. 


18. Look here Rama! on these great sages and Rishis, these Brahmans and 
princes, who having fortified themselves by the armour of wisdom, and being 
liable to no pain or grief, have yet engaged themselves to the arduous affairs 
of this world with minds as placid as yours. 


19. Moreover, there are many of the best of men, who with their spiritual 


light and pure understandings, reside in this world as the gods Hari, Hara and 
Brahma, who were above all concerns and fluctuating desires of life. 


20. The journey of this world is delightful to one, who after the removal of 
his errors and dispersion of the cloud of his ignorance, has come to the 
knowledge of truth. 


21. That the serenity of the mind and calm repose of the heart being 
secured, all the senses are subjected to peace, and everything is viewed in an 
equal light, and this knowledge of the truth gives a delight to our journey in 
this world. 


22. Know also that, this body of ours is the car, and these organs are its 
horses, our breathings are the winds blowing upon it, and the mind is the 
driver that feels the delight of driving; the atomic soul is the rider who is 
conscious of wandering about the world. The knowledge of this truth makes 
our earthly journey a pleasant one. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
On Peace and Tranquility of Mind. 


Intelligent men that have seen the spirit, fix their sight upon it, and rove about 
in the world as persons of great and elevated souls. 


2. They (that are liberated in this life), neither grieve nor wish nor ask for 
aught of good or evil (in this world). They do their works as if doing nothing, 
(i.e., with indifference). 


3. Those that rely on themselves, remain both quietly, as well as act their 
parts with a calm serenity (of their minds), and take no concern either for 
what is noxious or delectable to them. 


4. Their coming and not coming, going and not going, doing or not doing, 
and speaking or not speaking, are alike indifferent to them. 


5. Whatever acts or sights may appear pleasant or disgusting to anybody, 
cease to affect them in any way after they have come to know their God (as 
the Author of all good). 


6. The mind getting rid of its desires, feels a sweet composure associated 
with a bliss as if descending from the heavenly orb of the moon all about it. 


7. By being unmindful of worldly affairs and regardless of all its 
excitements, the soul is filled with a felicity resembling the ambrosial waters 
in the moon. 


8. He who ceases to act his magical parts (in this playground of the earth), 
and desists from following his inclinations and childish pranks, shines forth in 
his spiritual light. 


9. Such are the powers gained from spiritual knowledge, and by no other 
means whatever. 


10. Therefore, should a man try to seek and know and adore the Supreme 
soul, by means of his reasoning powers during life. 


11. It is the concordance of one’s belief with the precepts of the Sdstra and 
his instructor, joined with his constant meditation, that can give him a full 


view of the Supreme spirit. 


12. The fool slighting the Sdstra and its instructions, and disregarding the 
counsels of great men, are exposed to difficulties and dangers from which they 
can have no release. 


13. There is no disease nor poison, nor trouble nor affliction, so painful to 
one in this earth, as the ignorance which is bred in himself. 


14. Those whose intellects are a little purified, will find this work to be of 
greater efficacy to dispel their ignorance than any other Sdstra. 


15. This Sdstra with its beautiful examples and pleasing lessons and want 
of discordance, should be diligently attended to by everybody who is a friend 
to good sayings and their senses. 


16. Want of dignity, inextricable difficulties, baseness and degeneracy, are 
all offsprings of ignorance, as the thorns are the offshoots of the prickly Ketaki 
plant. 


17. It is far better, O Rama! to rove about a begging with a pot in hand to 
the abodes of the vile Chandalas, than lead a life deadened by ignorance. 


18. Rather dwell in dark dismal cells or dry dreary wells, and in the hollow 
of trees, or remain as solitary blind worms (under the ground), than labour 
under the miseries of ignorance. 


19. The man receiving the light leading to his liberation, will never fall into 
the darkness of error or gloom of death. 


20. So long will chill frost of penury continue to contract the lotus of 
humanity, as the clear light of reason does not shine upon the mind like the 
sun. 


21. One must know the true nature of the soul both from his preceptor and 
the evidence of the Sdstras, as also from friends like ourselves, for the sake of 
liberating himself from the misery of the world. 


22. Try O Rama! to imitate those that are liberated in their life time, who 
are free to roam about like the gods Hari, Hara, and others, and as the holy 
sages among Brahmans. 


23. Here (on earth), our miseries are as endless as atoms, and our happiness 
as little as a drop of water on the stalk of a straw, therefore, do not fix your 
sight upon that little happiness which is beset by misery. 


24. But let the intelligent man diligently apply himself to the attainment of 
that state of endless happiness, which is free from pain and constitutes his 


highest consummation. 


25. They are reckoned the best of men and deserving of consummation, 
whose minds are freed from the fever (of worldly cares), and attached to the 
transcendental state (of ultimate beatitude). 


26. Those base minded mortals that are satisfied with their enjoyments, 
eating and drinking, and the pleasures of their worldly possessions, are 
reckoned as stark-blind frogs (in a well). 


27. All who are attached to the company of imposters and wicked men, as 
of those that are addicted to the practice of evil deeds, and are enemies in the 
garb of friendship, and are given up to gluttony, 


28. Such foolish men of mistaken and stupid minds fall into the hardest of 
hardships, to the misery of miseries, and the horror of horrors, and the hell of 
hells. 


29. Happiness and misery destroy and succeed each other by turns, and are 
as fleeting as flashes of lightnings. Hence it is impossible to be happy forever. 


30. Those great souls who are indifferent and well judging like yourself, are 
known as the most honourable of men, and worthy alike both of temporal 
enjoyments and spiritual emancipation. 


31. By reliance upon right reasoning joined with a habit of 
dispassionateness, men are enabled to get over the dark and dangerous 
torrents of this world. 


32. No man of reason should allow himself to sleep (in negligence) amidst 
the illusions of the world, well knowing their noxious property to derange the 
understanding. 


33. Whoso remains neglectful in his worldliness, resembles a man sleeping 
negligent on a grassy bed when his house is on fire. 


34. What being arrived at, there is no returning from it, and what being 
gained, there is no cause of sorrowing, that state is undoubtedly attainable by 
divine knowledge only, and is a certain truth. 


35. Should there be no such future state, yet there is no harm to believe in 
it, but if there be such a state, its belief will save you from the (dreadful) 
ocean of this world. 


36. Whenever a man is inclined to think on the means of his salvation, he is 
sure to be soon entitled to his liberation. 


37. The undecaying, unerring and fearless state of tranquility, is nowhere to 


be had in the three worlds, without one’s union (with the Supreme). 


38. Having gained that best of gains, no one is liable to the pain from which 
no wealth, friend or relation can save anybody. 


39. Neither the actions of one’s hands and feet in his offerings and 
pilgrimage to distant lands, nor the bodily pains of asceticism, nor his refuge 
in a holy place, can serve his salvation. 


40. It is only by means of one’s best exertions and the fixing of his mind to 
one object, as also by the subjection of his desires, that the ultimate state (of 
bliss) can be arrived at. 


41. So it is by means of discrimination, reasoning, and ultimate 
ascertainment of truth, that a man may avoid the snares of misery, and attain 
his best state. 


42. One sitting at ease in his seat and meditating within himself (the nature 
of the soul), attains the blissful state, which is free from sorrow and future 
birth. 


43. All holy men are known to be situated beyond the bounds of the frail 
pleasures (of this life), their optimum quiescence is reckoned the ultimate 
bliss. 


44. They have given up all thoughts both of humanity and heaven (i.e., of 
both worlds), which are devoid of true felicity as the mirage is void of water. 


45. Therefore should one think of subduing his mind, and resort to peace 
and contentment as the means (to happiness), these joined with an unbounded 
equanimity produce true happiness. 


46. It is not to be had by sitting (quietly at home), or going up and down 
(from place to place), and neither by wandering (in pilgrimage), nor 
prostrating (before the altar). It is not to be acquired by the Rdkshasas, 
demons, deities or ignorant-men. 


47. That ultimate felicity is born of and obtainable from the peace of mind; 
it is the fruit of the high arbor of reason from its blossom of peace. 


48. Those that are engaged in worldliness but do not mix in it like the all- 
illumining sun, are known as the best of men. 


49. The mind that is at peace and rest, that is clear and free from errors, and 
without any attempt or desire, doth neither forsake nor wish for the world. 


50. Hear me tell you of the warders at the gate of salvation in their order, 
some one of which being secured, one may have his entrance into it. 


51. Thirst after pleasure is a state of protracted disease, and this world is 
full of mirage (all parched and dry). It is equanimity alone that can cool this 
dryness as the moistening beams of the moon. 


52. It is quiescence which leads to all good and is reckoned the best state of 
being. Quietism is felicity, it is peace and the preventive of error. 


53. The man who lives content with his quiet and a calm clearness of his 
soul, with a mind fraught with stoicism, makes friends of his enemies. 


54. Those whose minds are adorned with the moon light of quietism, feel a 
flux of the beams of purity rising in them like the hoary waves of the milky 
ocean. 


55. Those holy men who have the lotus-like flower of quietism growing in 
the lotiform receptacle of their hearts, are said to have a secondary heart like 
the two pericardiums of the god Hari, (holding Brahma in one of them). 


56. They whose untainted faces shine as the moon with the lustre of 
quiescence, are to be honoured as the luminaries of their families, and 
ravishers of the senses of others by the charming beauty of their countenance. 


57. Whatever is beautiful in the three worlds, and in the shape of imperial 
prosperity and grandeur, there is nothing in them that can afford a happiness 
equal to that of quietism. 


58. Whatever misery, anxiety, and intolerable difficulty (may overtake a 
man), they are lost in the tranquil mind like darkness in the sun. 


59. The mind of no living being is so delighted with moon beams, as that of 
the peaceful man from his heart-felt joy. 


60. The virtuous man that is calm and quiet, and friendly to all living 
beings, feels the benign influence of highest truths appearing of themselves in 
his mind. 


61. As all children, whether good or bad, have a strict faith in their mother, 
so all beings here have a reliance on the man of an even disposition. 


62. Neither does a cooling ambrosial draught nor the kind embrace of 
prosperity, afford such gratification to the soul, as one’s inward satisfaction of 
the mind. 


63. Whether afflicted by diseases or disasters, or dragged by the rope of 
avarice, do you bear up yourself, O Rama, by the equanimity of your mind. 


64. Whatever thou dost and eatest with the calm coolness of thy mind, all 
that is sweeter far to the soul than anything sweet to taste. 


65. The mind that is overpowered by the ambrosial flavour of quietism and 
desists from activity, may have the body lacerated (for a time), but it will be 
filled up shortly. 


66. Neither imps nor goblins, demons or enemies, nor tigers nor snakes, 
ever annoy a peaceful man. 


67. He who has his mind and body well-guarded by the invulnerable 
armour of meekness, can never be pierced by the shafts of adversity, but 
remains as the thunder-stone impenetrable by arrows. 


68. The king seated in his palace is not so graceful to sight, as the quiet 
peaceful man is graced by his equanimity and clearness of understanding. 


69. No one is so delighted at seeing a thing dearer than his life, as by the 
satisfaction which he feels at the sight of a contented and peaceful man. 


70. He who lives a holy life with his gentle and peaceful conduct, is said to 
be truly living in this world and no other. 


71. The sober minded, meek and honest man pleases every one by all that 
he does, and as it were captivates all beings to himself. 


72. He is called the meek who neither feels pleasure or pain at the sight, 
touch or hearing and tasting of anything good or bad (to the senses). 


73. He who is indifferent to all objects, and neither leaves nor longs for 
anything, but keeps his senses and appetites under subjection, is called a saint. 


74. Whoso knowing all things both internally as well as externally with a 
clear understanding, attends and looks to his own concerns, he is verily said to 
be a saint. 


75. He whose mind is as calm as moon beams both at the approach of a 
feast or fighting, and even at the moment of death, is said to be a saint. 


76. Who though present at a place, neither rejoices nor murmurs at 
anything, but remains as if he were absent from it, and conducts himself as 
quietly as if he were fast asleep, such a one is called a saint. 


77. He whose complaisant look casts a graceful nectarious radiance on all 
around him, is said to be a saint. 


78. Who feels a cool calmness within himself, and is not disturbed or 
immerged in any state of life, and who though a layman is not worldly 
minded, such a man is termed a saint. 


79. He who takes not to his mind the tribulations of this life, however long 
or great they may be, nor thinks this base (bodily frame) to be himself, is 


known to be a saint. 


80. The man of the world who has a mind clear as the firmament, and not 
tainted (by worldliness), is said to be a saint. 


81. The quiet Platonic shines forth among sages and ascetics, among priests 
and princes, and among the mighty and learned. 


82. Great and meritorious men, whose minds are attached to Quietism, feel 
a rest rising in their souls like the cooling beams of the moon. 


83. Quietism is the utmost limit of the assemblage of virtues, and the best 
decoration of manliness, it shines resplendent in all dangers and difficulties. 


84. Do you now, O Rama! follow for your perfection in the way in which 
high-minded men have attained their perfect state, by holding fast on quietism 
as an imperishable virtue, preserved by the respectable, and never to be lost or 
stolen by any. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
On the Ascertainment of an Argument. 


It must be the duty of one, whose understanding is cleared and purified by a 
knowledge of the Sdstras, to argue incessantly with a guide knowing how to 
reason aright. 


2. The understanding, when sharpened by reasoning, comes to view the 
transcendent state. It is reasoning which is the only best medicine for the 
chronic disease of worldliness. 


3. The world is of the form of a wood of troubles, shooting in sprouts of 
endless desires which being once felled under the saw of reason, will 
germinate no more. 


4. O wise Rama! our understandings are shrouded under unconsciousness 
at the loss of our friends, at times of danger, and even of quiet. It is reason that 
is our only companion (at these times). 


5. There is no expedient for the learned and wise except reason; it is by 
means of reason that the minds of good people can avoid evil and secure their 
good. 


6. All our strength and understanding, our valour and renown, and the ends 
of our actions, result from our reasoning with the intelligent. 


7. Reason is the lamp to show us the right and wrong, and the instrument 
for accomplishment of our desires; by reliance on right reason, one crosses 
over easily the wide ocean of the world. 


8. Pure reasoning, like a strong lion, tears asunder the elephants of great 
error, which ravage the lotus beds of the mind (or mental faculties). 


9. If ignorant men have at any time attained a better state in life, it was all 
owing to the light of the lamp of their reasoning. 


10. Know, O Raghava, that, dominion and fair prosperity, together with our 
enjoyments and eternal salvation, are all but fruits of the celestial Kalpa plant 
of reasoning. 


11. The minds of great men, which are expanded by reasoning here, are 
never liable to be immerged under the currents of calamity, (but float above 
them), like gourds upon water. 


12. Those who conduct themselves with their intellects shining forth with 
reason, become the recipients of its most liberal gifts. 


13. Want of reason is like the thorny and sour plant of Karanja sprouting 
forth with blossoms of woe, and growing in the brakes of ignorant minds in 
order to shut out their hopes and prospects. 


14. Do you, O Raghava! shake off the lethargy caused by your neglect of 
reasoning. This torpor darkens your vision, as it were, by the inky powder of 
collyrium, and maddens your mind as it were, by the ebriety of wine. 


15. The man of right judgment is not liable to fall into the long and 
dangerous maze of error (like others), but remains as a blaze of light amidst 
the gloom (of ignorance). 


16. The reasoning faculties shine, as a bed of lotuses in the limpid lake of 
the mind; whoso has such a reasoning mind, exalts his head as high as the 
Himalayan height. 


17. The man having a dull mind and incapable of reasoning (of reason) as a 
flash of lightning, and like boys, sees false apparitions about him. 


18. Rama, you must shun at a distance the base unreasonable man, who 
grows as plump as a Khanda cane to cause sorrow, and resembles the spring 
season to grow fresh weeds of evil. 


19. Whatever misdeeds, misconducts and mischances present themselves to 
man, they are all the effects of his want of the light of reason, and lay hold on 
him like ghosts appearing in the dark. 


20. O support of Raghu’s race, do you shun at a distance the unreasonable 
man of the nature of a solitary wild tree, which comes to no good use (to 
mankind). 


21. The mind that is fraught with reason and devoid of the impatience 
attendant on worldly desires, feels the light of transcendent quietism shining 
in the soul with the full lustre of the moon. 


22. When the light of reason shines in any person, it imparts the coolness 
and good grace of moon-beams to all things around him. 


23. The reasoning power of man accompanied with the flag of divine 
knowledge and the silvery flapper of good understanding, shines as moon- 


light in the darkness of night. 


24. Men with the good grace of their reason, throw a radiance like that of 
the sun on all sides about them, and dispel the gloom of worldliness. 


25. Reasoning serves to destroy the false apparitions of errors which 
present themselves to the minds of boys like ghosts in the sky at night. 


26. All things in the world appear as charming, (as if they were realities), 
but they are, (in fact), but unrealities, and liken the clods of earth that are 
broken (to pieces) by the hammering stone of reason. 


27. Men are themselves tormenters by the false imagination of their own 
minds; it is reason alone that can drive away this inveterate spectre from the 
mind. 


28. Know the fruit of the high arbor of reason, to be the even, unobstructed, 
interminable, and independent happiness called Kaivalya. 


29. It is by means of reason and its evident influence on the deprivation of 
(physical) gratifications, that there rises an unshaken and_ exalted 
disinterestedness in the mind, like the cooling beams of the moon. 


30. When the saint has reached his perfection by means of the elixir of 
judgment seated in his mind, he neither desires for more nor leaves (what he 
has). 


31. The mind relying on that state of equanimity and perceiving the clear 
light (of truth within itself), has neither its fall nor elevation, but enjoys its 
inward expansion as that of vacuum forever. 


32. One unconcerned with the world, neither gives nor receives anything, 
nor feels himself elated or depressed at any event, but views everything as an 
indifferent spectator. 


33. He is neither torpidly cold nor does he dwell on anything internally or 
externally. He is neither inactive nor merged in activity. 


34. He slights the loss of anything, and lives content with what he has, he is 
neither depressed nor elevated, but remains as full as the (tideless) sea. 


35. It is in this manner that the high-souled and high-aspiring Yogis conduct 
themselves in this world, with their fullness (of joy) and living as they are 
liberated in this life. 


36. These saintly sages having lived as long as they like (in this earth), 
abandon it at last, and gain their ae eternal unity (after death). 


37. The sapient man should intently consider within himself, who and 


whose he is, what is his family and by whom he is surrounded, and think on 
the remedy (of his worldliness). 


38. It is the king, O Rama! who well knows the difficult and doubtful state 
of the business (before him), and his success or failure depends solely on his 
right judgment and on nothing else. 


39. It is the dicta and data established by the Veda and Vedanta that form 
the grounds of our evidence, and these are to be ascertained by our reason as 
by the help of a lamp in the gloom of night. 


40. The bright eye-sight of reason, is neither blinded by the darkness (of 
night), nor dimmed by the full blaze (of the day), even when it has to view 
things (situated) at a distance. 


41. He who is blind to reason is as one born blind, and a demented man is 
an object of universal pity, but the man with a reasoning soul is said to be 
possessed of divine eye-sight, and becomes victorious in all things (he 
undertakes). 


42. The miraculous power of reason is acknowledged to be a divine 
attribute and an instrument to highest felicity, wherefore, it is not to be lost 
sight of for a moment. 


43. The man graced by reason is loved even by the great, as the delicious 
and ripe mango fruit is delectable to all. 


44. Men with their minds illumed by the light of reason, are like travellers 
acquainted with their way, and are not liable to pit falls of incessant danger 
and misery. 


45. Neither doth the sick man nor one beset by a hundred evils wail so 
bitterly, as the ignorant man whose soul is deprived of reason. 


46. Rather leap as a frog in the mud, or creep as a worm in the dirt, rather 
lie as a snake in a dark cell or crawl on the ground, than walk as a man devoid 
of reason. 


47. Therefore, get rid of unreasonableness which is the abode of all your 
dangers, is reprobated by the wise (as the bane of mankind), and is the 
terminus of all your calamities. 


48. Great men must always be in full possession of their reasoning, because 
those unsupported by their reason are liable to fall into the pits of darkness. 


49. Let everyone keep his soul under the control (of his own reason), and 
by this means, deliver the fawn of his mind from falling into the mirage of this 


world. 


50. It is the province of reasoning to consider logically in one’s self, 
whence the evil, known as worldliness, had its rise. 


51. The thick mist of error is only for the continued misery of man, and it 
prevails on the stony minds of those that are demented by the loss of reason. 


52. The wise that hold fast on the truth and forsake all untruth in this world, 
are yet unable to discern their true natures without the aid of reason. 


53. It is by means of reason that one comes to the knowledge of truth, and 
by means of truth that he gets the peace of his mind, and it is the tranquility of 
the mind that dispels the misery of men. 


54. Now Rama, do you take delight in such acts as may be productive of 
utility to the world, and whereby you may arrive to perfection. Weigh all 
things with the clear eye of reason, which will make you blessed forever. 


CHAPTER XV. 
On Contentment. 


Vasishtha continued: — Contentment is the chief good; contentment is called 
the (true) enjoyment; and the contented man, O thou destroyer of enemies, 
gets the best repose. 


2. Those who are happy with their prosperity of contentment, and possess 
the calm repose of their souls, are as holy saints, and think a sovereignty no 
better than a bit of rotten straw. 


3. Whoever retains a contented mind amidst all the affairs of the world, he 
is never disturbed, O Rama, in adverse circumstances nor ever dejected (in his 
spirit). 


4. The saints that are satisfied with the ambrosial draught of contentment, 
think the highest affluence and enjoyments (of the rich) but poison (to their 
souls). 


5. Even the waves of liquid nectar fail to afford that pleasure, which the 
sweetest taste of contentment, — the healer of all evils, gives to its possessor. 


6. Abandonment of unfruitful desires and calmness in those that are 
obtained, feeling no pain at, and having no sense of pleasure (in anything), 
constitute what is called contentment here below. 


7. Until the mind can enjoy the contentment rising spontaneously in the 
soul of itself, so long will troubles continue to grow in it as briars and 
brambles in a bog. 


8. The mind cooled by calm contentment, and purified by the light of 
philosophy, is always in its full bloom as the lotus under sun-beams. 


9. The ungoverned mind which is under the subjection of desires and 
devoid of contentment, does not receive the light of knowledge, as a soiled 
mirror takes no reflection of the face. 


10. The man whose mind is always bright with the sunshine of 
contentment, does not shrivel itself like the lotus in the dark night of 


ignorance (or adversity). 


11. A man, though poor, enjoys the happiness of sovereignty, who is 
devoid of diseases and anxieties, and whose mind is contented. 


12. He is called a contented man, who does not long after what he is not 
possessed of, and enjoys what he has in its right manner, and is always 
graceful in his manners. 


13. There is a beauty shining in the face of one, whose mind has the 
satisfaction of contentment, the fulness of magnanimity and the purity of 
thoughts like that of the milky ocean in it. 


14. Let a man entertain his self-possession within himself, and abandon his 
craving of all things, by reliance on his manly exertions. 


15. He whose mind is full with the ambrosia of contentment and a calm and 
cool understanding, acquires a perpetual composure within himself, as it were 
by the cooling beams of the moon. 


16. All great fortunes wait on him whose mind is strengthened by 
contentment, as if they were his servants, and as they remain in attendance 
upon a king. 


17. One remaining content and composed in himself, quells all his anxieties 
and cares, as the rains set down the dust of the earth. 


18. Rama! a man shines by the contentment of his mind and the purity of 
his conduct, as the cooling and spotless moon when she is full. 


19. No one receives so much delight from his accumulation of wealth, as he 
derives from the sight of the beautiful placid countenance (of a contented 
person). 


20. Know, O thou delight of Raghu’s race! that the best of men who are 
decorated with grace of equanimity, (the only quality that adorns the wise), 
are more honoured both by gods and sages than any. 


CHAPTER XVI. 
On Good Conduct. 


Vasishtha resumed, saying: — 


Know, O highly intelligent Rama! that the company of the virtuous is 
everywhere of the greatest benefit to men for their crossing over the ocean of 
the world. 


2. It is the arbour of virtuous company that produces the fresh blossom of 
discrimination, which being cherished by high-souled men, yields to them its 
fruits of prosperity. 


3. The society of the learned makes solitude appear as company, and the 
evil of death as good as a festivity, and converts a difficulty to ease. 


4. It is the society of the virtuous which wards off all disasters, that like the 
frost, invade the lotus beds of our hearts, and baffle the icy breath of ignorance 
(which deadens our souls). 


5. Know the society of the virtuous to be the best improver of the 
understanding, the destroyer of the tree of ignorance, and remover of all our 
mental diseases. 


6. The society of the virtuous produces the light of reason, which is as 
charmingly fair as a cluster of flowers after its being washed by rain-water. 


7. It is the influence of virtuous company that teaches us the best mode of 
life, which is never impaired or obstructed by anything, and is ever-full in 
itself. 


8. Let no man ever keep himself from the association of the virtuous, 
though he is involved in utmost distress, and cast in irremediable 
circumstances. 


9. The society of the virtuous, lends a light to the right path. It destroys the 
internal darkness of man, by the rays of the sun of knowledge. 


10. Whoever has bathed in the cold and clear stream of good company is 
not in need of the merit derived from acts of charity, pilgrimage, austerity, and 


sacrifice. 


11. Whoever has the society of virtuous men, and whose lives are free from 
passions and sins, and doubts and the knots (of scruples in their hearts), of 
what use is (the observance of) austerity, or (performance of) pilgrimage (to 
him)? 


12. Blessed are the peaceful in their minds, who are viewed with as great 
an ardour by people, as poor men fondly dote upon gems and jewels. 


13. The intelligent mind with its gracefulness derived from good company, 
shines always as the goddess of riches in the company of fairy nymphs. 


14. Therefore that blessed man is renowned as having attained the crown of 
a clear understanding, who never abstains himself from the company of the 
holy. 


15. Hence all unscrupulous believers, holy men, and those who are revered 
by people, are to be served by all means for crossing over the ocean of the 
world. 


16. Surely do they serve as dry fuel to hell-fire, who neglect the company 
of the saints, which is known as rain water to extinguish the flames of hell. 


17. The medicine of holy association, serves to allay entirely all the 
afflictions consequent to poverty and death and tribulations of worldly affairs. 


18. Contentment, society of the virtuous, ratiocination and quietism, are the 
several means for crossing over the ocean of the world by mankind. 


19. Contentment is reckoned as the best gain, good company the right 
course, reasoning the true knowledge, and quietism the highest bliss (of man). 


20. These are the four surest means to break off the trammels of the world, 
and whoever is practiced in these, has surely passed over the erroneous waters 
of the terrestrial sea. 


21. Learn, O best of the intelligent! that the practice of some one of these 
pure virtues, leads to an assuetude of all the four (cardinal virtues). 


22. Every one of these separately is a leader to the others, wherefore 
diligently apply yourself to one of these for your success in getting them all. 


23. Association with the good, contentment, right reasoning, and good 
judgment, joined with peace and tranquility, serve as cargo-ships in the ocean 
of the world. 


24. All prosperity attends on him who is possessed of reason, contentment, 
quietism, and the habit of keeping good company, like the fruits of the Kalpa 


tree, (satisfying every desire). 


25. The man possessed of reasoning, contentment, quietude, and a 
proclivity to keep good company, is attended by every grace, as all the digits 
unite in the full moon. 


26. The happy mind which is fraught with contentment, quietness, 
reasoning power, and a tendency to good company, meets with the prosperity 
and success, as they attend on kings (who are) guided by (the counsels of) 
good ministers. 


27. Therefore, O delight of Raghu’s race! do you bravely govern your 
mind, and always practise with diligence some one of these virtues (for your 
conduct in life). 


28. Exert your best manliness to subdue your elephantine mind, and know 
that until you have mastered one of these cardinal virtues, you can make no 
progress (in holiness). 


29. It must be, O Rama! that you shall have to set your heart to work by the 
exertion of your manliness and the gnashing of your teeth, for your success in 
meritorious deeds. 


30. For whether you be a god or Yaksha or a man or an arbor, you cannot, 
O long-armed Rama! have a better course till then, (i.e., before mastering one 
of these qualities). 


31. As soon as one of these virtues is strengthened and made fruitful in 
you, it will serve to weaken the force of the faults of your ungovernable mind. 


32. The cultivation of virtues leads to their full growth and suppression of 
vice, but the fostering of vice will, (on the other hand), conduce to the 
increase of vices and suppression of good qualities. 


33. The mind is a wilderness of errors, in which the stream of our desires is 
running with full force, amidst its two banks of good and evil whereon we 
hold our stand. 


34. It bears away and throws the man on that bank which he strives to reach 
by his own exertion, therefore, O Rama, do as you like to reach to either 
shore. 


35. Now try by degrees with all the exertion of your manly force, to turn 
the course of your desires towards the happy shore in the forest of your mind, 
and know, O high-minded Rama, that one’s own disposition is as a rapid 
current to him, which must not be permitted to bear him away (to the perilous 
coast). 


CHAPTER XVII. 
On the Contents of the Work. 


Thus, O progeny of Raghu! it is the reasoning soul that is worthy of attending 
to the words of wisdom, as a prince (is inclined to listen) to a discourse on 
polity. 

2. The clear and high-minded man, who has renounced the company of 
stupid folks, is capable of fair reasoning, as the clear sky has the capacity of 
receiving the moon-light. 


3. You who are replete with the entire grace of this quality, should now 
attend to the words that I say to remove the errors of your mind. 


4. He, the arbour of whose merits is bending down with the load of its 
fruits, feels a desire to hear these words for the sake of his salvation. 


5. It is the noble minded only and not the base, that are receptacles of grand 
and holy sermons conferring the knowledge of their future state. 


6. This collection consisting of thirty-two thousand stanzas, is deemed as 
containing the essence of the means conducing to liberation, and conferring 
the final annihilation (of our being). 


7. As a lighted lamp presents its light to every waking man, so does this 
work effect the ultimate extinction of every person, whether he would like it 
or not. 


8. One’s knowledge of this work whether by his own perusal or hearing of 
it from the rehearsal of others, tends to the immediate obliteration of his errors 
and augmentation of his delight, as it is done by the holy river of heaven, (the 
Ganges). 


9. As the fallacy of a snake in the rope is removed by examining it, so the 
fallacy of the reality of the world is removed by perusal of this work, which 
gives peace to one who is vexed with and tired of the world. 


10. It contains six books all fraught with sentences full of reason, and each 
distinct from the other in its import. It has many verses containing chosen 


examples on all subjects. 


11. The first book treats of Indifference, and causes the growth of apathy 
(in the mind) like that of a tree in the desert soil. 


12. It contains one thousand and five hundred stanzas, which being well 
considered in the mind, must impart a purity to it like the lustre of a gem after 
its polish. 


13. The next book dwells on the conduct of one longing after his liberation, 
and contains a thousand slokas arranged in judicious order. 


14. It describes the nature of men desiring their liberation. Then follows the 
book on the creation of the world, and filled with narratives and examples (of 
various kinds). 


15. It has seven thousand stanzas teaching sound philosophy about the 
spectator and spectacle of the world in the forms of, — J and thou, designated 
the ego and non-ego. 


16. It contains a description of the production of the world from its state of 
non-existence. A diligent attention to this chapter will convey a full 
knowledge of this world into the mind of the hearer. 


17. This ego and non-ego, and this vast expanse with all the worlds, space, 
and mountains, are (to be viewed) as having no form nor foundation, and as 
there are no such things (in reality). 


18. There are no elements as the earth and others which exist in our fancy 
only, and are like phantoms appearing in a dream, or as aerial castles and 
chimeras of the mind. 


20. They resemble the moving hills on the shore to one passing in a boat, 
without any actual movement in them, or liken the hobgoblins appearing to an 
unsound mind. Such is the appearance of the world without any seed or source 
or origin of its own. 


21. It is as the impression of a tale in the mind, or the sight of a chain of 
pearls in the sky, or taking a bracelet for its gold or a wave for the water. (i.e., 
Taking the appearance for its cause, or the phenomena for the noumena). 


22. Or as the blueness of the sky is always apparent to sight without its 
reality, and ever-charming to behold without the existence of any colour in it. 


23. Thus, whatever unreal wonders always appear to us in our dreams or in 
the sky, they are but the resemblances of a fire in a picture, which seems to be 
burning without having any fire in it. 


24. The word “jagat’ or passing, is appropriately applied to the transitory 
world, which passes like the sea with its heaving waves, appearing as a chain 
of lotus flowers in dancing. 


25. It is (as false) as one’s imagination of a body of waters at a spot, from 
the sound of the ruddy geese (that live by rivers), and (as useless) as a 
withered forest in autumn, when the leaves and fruits fall off, and yield neither 
shade nor luscious nutriment, (to the traveller). 


26. It is full with delirious cravings as of men at the point of death, and as 
dark as caverns in the mountains. Hence the efforts of men are but acts of their 
phrensy. 


27. It is better to dwell in the clear sky of the autumnal (atmosphere of) 
philosophy, after subsidence of the frost of ignorance, than to view at this 
world, which is no more than an image at a post or a picture upon the wall. 


28. Know all sensible and insensible things to be made of dust (to be 
reduced to dust again). Next follows the book on Existence. 


29. It contains three thousand stanzas full of explanations and narratives, 
showing the existence of the world to be a form, (or development), of the 
essence of the Ego (in a subjective light). 


30. It treats of the manner in which the spectator, (Ego), is manifest as the 
spectacle, (non-ego), and how the ten-sided sphere of the arbour of the world 
is manifest both as the subjective and objective (at the same time). 


31. It has thus arrived at its development which is said to be everlasting. 
Next follows the book on quietude consisting of five thousand stanzas. 


32. The fifth is styled the book on holiness, containing a series of excellent 
lectures, and shewing the erroneous conception of the world, as I, thou, and 
he, (as distinct existences). 


33. It is the suppression of this error, which forms the subject of this book, 
and the hearing of the chapter on quietude, serves to put an end to our 
transmigration in this world. 


34. After suppression of the train of errors, there still remain slight vestiges 
of it to a hundredth part, as the dispersed troops in a picture afford us some 
faint idea of them. 


35. Aiming at the object of another person is as vain as looking at the 
beauty of an imaginary city, and sitting in expectation of an unattainable 
object. It is as a noisy fighting for something in sleep. 


36. It is as vain as a man of unsubdued desires, bursting into a roaring like 
that of the loud and tremendous thunder-claps, and as the raising of a city on 
the model of one’s effaced impressions in a dream. 


37. It is as vain as a would-be city, with its garden and flowers and fruits 
growing in it, and as a sterile woman bragging of the valorous deeds of her 
unborn and would-be sons. 


38. Or when a painter is about to draw the picture of an imaginary city on 
the ground work of a chart, by forgetting to sketch a plan of it beforehand. 


39. It is as vain as to expect evergreen herbage and fruitage of all seasons, 
and the breeze of an ungrown arbour, or to it in a future flowery parterre, 
pleasant with the sweets of spring. 


40. Then follows the sixth book entitled annihilation, which is as clear as 
the waters of a river after subsidence of its billows within itself. 


41. It contains the remaining number of slokas, (i.e., 14500 Stanzas of the 
aggregate number of 32000 Slokas composing the entire work), a knowledge 
of these is pregnant with great meanings, and the understanding of them leads 
to the chief good of utter extinction and pacification of desires. 


42. The intellect being abstracted from all its objects, presents the 
manifestation of the soul, which is full of intelligence and free from all 
impurity. It is enveloped in the sheath of infinite vacuity, and is wholly pure 
and devoid of worldly errors. 


43. Having finished its journey through the world and performed its duties 
here, the soul assumes a calmness as that of the adamantine column of the 
sky, reflecting the images of the tumultuous world (without changing itself). 


44. It rejoices exceedingly at its being delivered from the innumerable 
snares of the world, and becomes as light as air by being freed from its desire 
of looking after the endless objects (of its enjoyments). 


45. The soul that takes no notice of the cause or effect or doing of anything, 
as also of what is to be avoided or accepted, (i.e., which remains totally 
indifferent to everything), is said to be disembodied, though encumbered with 
a body, and to become unworldly in its worldly state. 


46. The intelligent soul is compared to a solid rock, compact and without 
any gap in it. It is the sun of intelligence which enlightens all people, and 
dispels the darkness of ignorance. 


47. (This soul) though so very luminous, has become grossly darkened (in 
its nature), by being confined to the vile fooleries of the world, and wasted by 


the malady of its cravings. 


48. When freed from the chimera of its egoism, it becomes incorporeal 
even in its embodied state, and beholds (the glory of) the whole world as it 
was placed at the point of one of the myriads of hairs (on its body), or like a 
bee sitting on a flower upon the Sumeru mountain. 


49. The intelligent and vacuous soul contains and beholds in its sphere a 
thousand glories of the world, shining in each atom, as it was in a mirror. 


50. It is not even possible to thousands of Haris, Haras and Brahmas, to 
equal the great minded sage in the extent of his comprehensive soul, because 
the liberated have their chief good (of internal joy) stretched to a far greater 
limit than any. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
Ascertainment of the Example Or Major 
Proposition. 


Vasishtha said: — 


The several parts of this work, as already related, give rise to the 
understanding, as seeds sown in a good field never fail to produce good fruit. 


2. Even human compositions are acceptable when they are instructive of 
good sense, otherwise, the Vedas also are to be renounced (as unreliable), 
because men are required always to abide by reason. 


3. Words conformable with reason are to be received even if spoken by 
boys, otherwise, they are to be rejected as straws though pronounced by the 
lotus-born (Brahma himself). 


4. Whoever drinks from a well by reason of its being dug by his ancestors, 
and rejects the holy water of the Ganges even when placed before him, is an 
incorrigible simpleton. 


5. As early dawn is invariably accompanied by its train of light, so is good 
judgment an inevitable attendant on the perusal of this work. 


6. Whether these lessons are heard from the mouth of the learned, or well- 
studied by one’s self, they will gradually make their impressions upon the 
mind by one’s constant reflection on their sense. 


7. They will first furnish (to the learner) a variety of Sanskrit expressions, 
and then spread before him a series of holy and judicious maxims, like so 
many ornamental creepers to decorate the hall. 


8. They will produce a cleverness joined with such qualifications and 
greatness, as to engage the good grace of gods and kings. 


9. They are called the intelligent who know the cause and effect of things, 
and are likened to a torch-bearer who is clear sighted in the darkness of the 
night. (Like the stoa of the Stoics). 


10. All their erroneous and covetous thoughts become weaker by degrees, 
as the regions of the sky are cleared of their mists at the approach of autumn. 


11. Your thoughts require only the guidance of reason (to hit the right), as 
every action needs be duly performed to make it successful. 


12. The intellect becomes (by culture) as clear as a great lake in autumn, 
and it gets its calmness (by reason), like that of the sea after its churning by 
the Mandara mountain. 


13. Like the flame of a chandelier cleansed of its sootiness and dispelling 
the shroud of darkness, the refined intellect shines forth in full brightness, and 
distinguishes (the different natures of) things. 


14. The evils of penury and poverty cannot overpower them, whose strong 
sight can discern the evils of their opposites, (wealth and riches), as no dart 
can pierce the mortal parts of a soldier clad in full armour. 


15. No worldly fears can daunt the heart of the wise man, however near 
they may approach to him. Just as no arrow can pierce through a huge solid 
stone. 


16. Such doubts as, “whether it is destiny or our own merit that is the cause 
of our births and actions,” are removed (by learning), as darkness is dispelled 
by day-light. 


17. There is a calm tranquility attending upon the wise at all times and in 
all conditions (of life), so also does the light of reason like solar rays, follow 
the dark night of error. 


18. The man of right judgment has a soul as deep as the ocean and as firm 
as a mountain, and a cool serenity always shines within him like that of moon- 
light. 


19. It is he who arrives slowly at what is called, “living-liberation,” who 
remains calm amidst the endless turmoils (of the world), and is quite aloof 
from common talk (i.e., unnoticed by the world). 


20. His mind is calm and cool at everything, it is pure and full of heavenly 
light, shining serenely as the autumnal night with the radiance of moon- 
beams. 


21. When the sun of reason illumines the cloudless region of the mind, no 
portentous comet of evil can make its appearance (within its sphere). 


22. All desires are at rest with the elevated, they are pure with the steady, 
and indifferent to the inert, like the body of light clouds in autumn. 


23. The slanders of envious ill-wishers are put out of countenance (by the 
wise), as the frolics of goblins disappear at the approach of day. 


24. The mind that is fixed on the firm basis of virtue, and placed under the 
burthen of patience, is not to be shaken by accidents, but remains as a plant in 
a painting (unmoved by winds). 


25. The knowing man does not fall into the pit-falls lying all about the 
affairs of this world, for who that knows the way will run into the ditch? 


26. The minds of the wise are as much delighted in acting conformably to 
the precepts of good books and the examples of the virtuous, as chaste women 
are fond of keeping themselves within the bounds of the inner apartments. 


27. Of the innumerable millions of atoms which compose this universe, 
every one of them is viewed in the light of a world in the mind of the 
abstracted philosopher. 


28. The man whose mind is purified by a knowledge of the precepts of 
liberation, neither repines nor rejoices at the loss or gain of the objects of 
enjoyment. 


29. Men of unfettered minds look upon the appearance and disappearance 
of every atomic world, as the fluctuating wave of the sea. 


30. They neither grieve at unwished-for occurrences nor pine for their 
wished-for chances, and knowing well all accidents to be the consequences of 
their actions, they remain as unconscious as trees (totally insensible of them). 


31. These (holy men) appear as common people, and live upon what they 
get, whether they meet with aught of welcome or unwelcome to them, their 
minds remain unconquered. 


32. They having understood the whole of this Sdstra, and having read and 
considered it well, as well as pondered (on its purport), hold their silence as in 
the case of a curse or blessing (which is never uttered by saints). 


33. This Sdstra is easy to be understood, and is ornamented with figures (of 
speech). It is a poem full of flavours and embellished with beautiful similes. 


34. One may be self-taught in it who has a slight knowledge of words and 
their senses, but he who does not understand the purport well, should learn it 
from a pandit. 


35. After hearing, thinking and understanding this work, one has no more 
need of practising austerities, or of meditation and repeating the Mantras and 
other rites, and a man requires nothing else in this world for the attainment of 


his liberation. 


36. By deep study of this work and its repeated perusal, a man attains to an 
uncommon scholarship next to the purification of his soul. 


37. The ego and the non-ego, that is, the viewer and the view, are both but 
chimeras of the imagination, and it is their annihilation alone, that leads 
insensibly to the vision of the soul. 


38. The error of the reality of ego and the perceptible world, will vanish 
away as visions in a dream, for who, that knows the falsehood of dreams, will 
fall into the error (of taking them for truth?) 


39. As an imaginary palace gives no joy or grief to anybody, so it is in the 
case of the erroneous conception of the world. 


40. As nobody is afraid of a serpent that he sees in a painting, so the sight 
of a living serpent neither terrifies nor pleases one who knows it. 


41. And as it is our knowledge of the painted serpent that removes our fear 
of it as a serpent, so our conviction of the unreality of the world, must 
disperse our mistake of its existence. 


42. Even the plucking of a flower or tearing of its (tender) leaflet, is 
attended with a little exertion (of the nails and fingers), but no (bodily) 
exertion whatever is required to gain the blessed state (of Yoga meditation). 


43. There is an action of the members of body, accompanied with the act of 
plucking or pulling off a flower; but in the other case (of Yoga), you have only 
to fix your mind, and make no exertion of your body. 


44. It is practicable with ease by any one sitting on his easy seat and fed 
with his usual food, and not addicted to gross pleasures, nor trespassing the 
rules of good conduct. 


45. You can derive happiness at each place and time, from your own 
observations, as also from your association with the good wherever it is 
available. This is an optional rule. 


46. These are the means of gaining a knowledge of the highest wisdom, 
conferring peace in this world, and saving us from the pain of being reborn in 
the womb. 


47. But such as are afraid of this course, and are addicted to the vicious 
pleasures of the world, are to be reckoned as too base, and no better than 
faeces and worms of their mother’s bowels. 


48. Attend now, Rama, to what I am going to say with regard to the 


advancement of knowledge, and improvement of the understanding in another 
way. 


49. Hear now the recent method in which this Sdstra is learnt (by people), 
and its true sense interpreted to them by means of its Exposition. 


50. That thing which serves to explain the unapparent meaning (of a 
passage), by its illustration by something that is well known, and which may 
be useful to help the understanding (of the passage) is called a simile or 
Example. 


51. It is hard to understand the meaning given before without an instance, 
just as it is useless to have a lampstick at home without setting a lamp on it at 
night. 


52. Whatever similes and examples I have used to make you understand 
(the precepts), are all derived from some cause or other, but they lead to 
knowledge of the uncaused Brahma. 


53. Wherever the comparisons and compared objects are used as expressive 
of the cause and effect, they apply to all cases except Brahma, (who is without 
a cause). 


54. The examples that are given to explain the nature of Brahma, are to be 
taken in their partial (and not general) sense. 


55. Whatever examples are given here as explanatory of divine nature, they 
are to be understood as appertaining to a world seen in a dream. 


56. In such cases, no corporeal instance can apply to the incorporeal 
Brahma, nor optional and ambiguous expressions give a definite idea of Him. 


57. Those who find fault with instances of an imperfect or contradictory 
nature, cannot blame our comparison of the appearance of the world to a 
vision in dream. 


58. A prior and posterior non-entity is considered as existent at the present 
moment, (as is the visible world which was not, nor will be afterwards). So, 
the waking and dreaming states are known to be alike from our boyhood. 


59. The simile of the existence of the world with the dreaming state is exact 
in all instances, as our desires, thoughts, our pleasures and displeasures, and 
all other acts are alike in both states. 


60. Both this work and others which have been composed by other authors 
on the means of salvation, have all pursued the same plan in their explanation 
of the knowable. 


61. The resemblance of the world to a dream is found also in the Srutis or 
Vedanta. It is not to be explained in a word, but requires a continued course of 
lectures (on the subject). 


62. The comparison of the world to an imagery in the dream or an 
imaginary Utopia of the mind, is also adduced in examples of this kind in 
preference to others. 


63. Whenever a causality is shown by a simile of something which is no 
cause, there the simile is applied in some particular and not all its general 
attributes. 


64. The partial similitude of this comparison with some property of the 
compared object, is unhesitatingly acknowledged by the learned in all their 
illustrations. 


65. The light of the sense (of something) is compared with a lamp in its 
brightness only, in disregard of its stand or stick, the oil or the wick. 


66. The compared object is to be understood in its capacity of admitting a 
partial comparison (of the properties), as in the instance of sense and light, the 
simile consists in the brightness of both. 


67. When the knowledge of the knowable thing is derived from some 
particular property of the comparison, it is granted as a suitable simile, in 
understanding the sense of some great saying (passage in the scriptures). 


68. We must not overshadow our intellect by bad logic, nor set at naught 
our common sense by an unholy scepticism. 


69. We have by our reasoning well weighed the verbosity of our 
opinionative adversaries, and never set aside the holy sayings of the Vedas, 
even when they are at variance with the opinions of our families. 


70. O Rama! we have stored in our minds the truths resulting from the 
unanimous voice of all the Sdstras, whereby it will be evident that we have 
attained the object of our belief, apart from the fabricated systems of heretical 
Sdstras. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
Ascertainment of True Evidence. 


It is the similarity of some particular property, (of one thing to that of 
another), which constitutes a simile, whereas a complete similitude between 
the comparison and compared object, destroys their difference (and makes 
them the one and same thing). 


2. From the knowledge of parables, follows the cognition of the one soul 
treated of in the Sdstras, (Vedanta), and the peace which attends on the 
meditation of the Holy Word, is styled Extinction. 


3. It is therefore useless to talk of either (the complete or partial) agreement 
(of the properties) of the example and the exemplar, it is enough to the 
purpose to comprehend the purport of the holy word in some way or other. 


4. Know your peace to be the chief good, and be diligent to secure the 
same. When you have got the food for your eating, it is useless to talk about 
how you came by it. 


5. A cause is compared with (or shewn for its explication by) something 
which is no cause at all, so is a comparison given to express its partial 
agreement in some respect with the compared object. 


6. We must not be so absorbed in the pleasures of the world as to be devoid 
of all sensibility, like some blind frogs which are generated and grow fat 
amidst the stones. 


7. Be attentive to these parables and learn your best state from them, all 
reasonable men should abide by the lessons of religious works for their 
internal peace. 


8. As also by the precepts of the Sdstras, by the rules of humanity, 
prudence and spiritual knowledge, and also by the continued practice of the 
acts of religious merit. 


9. Let the wise continue their inquiries until they can obtain their internal 
peace, and until they may arrive at the fourth stage, (turya), of felicity known 
by the name of indestructible tranquility. 


10. Whoso has gained this fourth state of tranquil felicity, he has really 
passed beyond the limits of the ocean of the world, whether he is alive or not, 
or a house-holder or an ascetic. 


11. Such a man remains steady at his place like the calm sea undisturbed by 
the Mandara mountain, whether he has performed his duties according to the 
Srutis and Smritis or not. 


12. When there is a partial agreement of the comparison with the nature of 
the compared object, it is to be considered maturely for the well 
understanding of the point in question, and not to be made a matter of 
controversy. 


13. From every form of argument, you are to understand the intelligible 
(that is explained to you), but the confounded disputant is blind both to right 
and false reasoning. 


14. The notion of self, (soul or God), being clear, (self-evident), in the 
sphere of our consciousness within the mind. Anyone who prattles 
meaninglessly about this truth, is said to be defective in his understanding, 
(i.e., our consciousness of self-existence according to the maxim, “Ego sum 
qui cogito,” is an undeniable truth). 


15. It is partly by pride and partly by their doubts, that the ignorant are led 
to altercate about their cognitions, and thereby they obscure the region of their 
inward understanding, as the clouds overshadow the clear firmament. 


16. Of all sorts of proofs it is the evidence of perception which forms their 
fountain-head, as the sea is the mainspring of all its waters. It is this alone 
which is used in this place as you shall learn below. 


17. The substance of all sensations is said to be the supersensible 
apprehension (or inward knowledge of things) by the wise, and it is verily 
their right concept which is meant by their perception. 


18. Thus the notion, knowledge and certainty (of things) as derived from 
words, are styled the triplicate perception as we have of the living soul. 


19. This soul is consciousness and egoism, and is of the masculine 
termination, and the cognition of the object whereby it is manifested to us, is 
called a category. (Namely, samvid, samvitti and paddrtha). 


20. It becomes manifest in the form of the passing world by the 
multifarious acts and shifts of its volition and option, as the water exhibits 
itself in the shape of its waves and bubbles. 


21. It was uncausal before, and then developed itself as the cause of all in 


its act of creating at the beginning of creation, and became perceptible by 
itself. 


22. The causality was a product of the discrimination of the living soul, that 
was in a state of inexistence (before), until it became manifest as existent in 
the form of the material world. 


23. Reason says, that the self-same being destroys the body which was 
produced of itself, and manifests itself in its transcendental magnitude (of 
intelligence). 


24. When the reasoning man comes to know the soul, he finds by his reason 
the presence of the indescribable being, before him. 


25. The mind being free from desire, the organs of sense are relieved from 
their action, the soul becomes devoid of the results of its past actions as of 
those it has left undone. 


26. The mind being set at ease and freed from its desires, the organs of 
action are restrained from their acts, as an engine when stopped in its motion. 


27. It is sensuousness which is reckoned as the cause that puts the 
machinery of the mind to work, just as the rope tied to the log and fastened 
about the neck of a ram, propels him to fighting. 


28. The sight of external objects and the purposes of the internal mind, set 
all men at play, as the inward force of the air puts the winds to motion. 


29. All spiritual knowledge is holy wherever it is found in any one, it adds 
a lustre to the body and mind like that of the expanded region of the sky. 


30. He sees the appearances of all visible objects, and maintains his own 
position among them. He views the spirit in the same light in which it presents 
itself in any place. 


31. Wherever the universal soul appears itself in any light, it remains there 
and then in the same form in which it exhibits itself unto us. 


32. The universal soul, being alike in all, the looker and the object seen are 
both the same being. The looker and the looked being one, their appearance as 
otherwise is all unreal. 


33. Hence the world is without a cause, (because it is an unreality and not 
caused by any one). All existence is evidently Brahma himself, the perceptible 
cause of all. Hence, perception, (pratyaxa), is the basis of evidence, and 
inference and others as analogy and verbal testimony are but parts of it, 
(anumadna, upamd, sdbdah). 


34. Now let the worshippers of fate who apply the term destiny to all their 
exertions, cast off their false faith, and let the brave exert their manliness to 
attain their highest state. 


35. Continue, O Rama, to consider the true and lucid doctrines of the 
successive teachers (of mankind), until you can arrive to a clear conception of 
the infinitely Supreme being in your own mind. 


CHAPTER XxX. 
On Good Conduct. 


It is the society of the respectable and reasoning with them, that leads most 
efficiently to the improvement of the understanding, and next to the making of 
a great man, with all the characteristics of greatness. 


2. Whatever man excels in any quality here, he becomes distinguished by 
it, therefore, learn it from him, and improve your understanding by the same. 


3. True greatness consists in quietness and other virtues, without a 
knowledge of which it is impossible, O Rama! to be successful in anything. 


4. Learning produces quiet and other qualities, and increases the virtues of 
good people, all which are praised by their good effects on the mind, as the 
rain is hailed for its growing the new sprouts of plants. 


5. The qualities of quietude and other virtues serve to increase the best 
knowledge (of men), as sacrifice with rice serves to produce felicitous rains 
for the harvest. 


6. As learning produces the qualities of quiet and the like, so do these 
qualities give rise to learning, thus they serve to grow each other, as the lake 
and lotuses contribute to their mutual benefit, (excellence). 


7. Learning is produced by right conduct as good conduct results from 
learning, thus wisdom and morality are natural helps to one another. 


8. The intelligent man who is possessed of quietude, meekness, and good 
conduct, should practise wisdom, and follow the ways of good people. 


9. Unless one should bring to practice his wisdom and good conduct in an 
equal degree, he will never be successful in either of them. 


10. Both of these should be conjoined together like the song united with 
percussion, as it is done by the husbandman and his wife in sowing the seeds 
and driving away the (seed-picking) birds from their fields of grain. 


11. It is by practice of wisdom and right conduct (as causes of one another), 
that good people are enabled to acquire both of them in an equal degree. 


12. I have already expounded to you, O Rama, the rule of good conduct, 
and will now explain to you fully the way of gaining learning. 


13. Learning conduces to renown, long life and to the acquisition of the 
object of your exertion, therefore, should the intelligent learn the good 
sciences from those who have studied and mastered them. 


14. By hearing (these lectures) with a clear understanding, you will surely 
attain the state of perfection, as dirty water is purified by infusion of the Kata 
fruits. 


15. The sage who has known the knowable, has his mind drawn insensibly 
to the blissful state, and that highest state of unbounded felicity being once 
known and felt (in the mind), it is hard to loose its impression at any time. 


BOOK UI. 
UTPATTI-KHANDA. 
EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER I. 
CAUSES OF BONDAGE TO IT. 


SECTION I. 
Exordium (Bhtmika.) 


It is both by means of words and lights, (Vagbhdbhis, i.e., the words of the 
scripture and the lights of nature and reason), that the knower of the Great 
God, (Brahmavid), perceives the spirit of Brahma appearing within himself as 
in a dream. And he also knows him as such, who understands him according 
to the purport of the holy text. “What this is, that is the self.” (.e., He is all in 
all). 


2. This passage shows in short, the visible world to reside in the vacuous 
bosom of Brahma at its creation, it is now to be known in length, what this 
creation is, whence it takes its rise, and wherein it becomes extinct at last. 


3. Hear me, O intelligent Rama! now expound to you all things according 
to my best knowledge of them, and agreeably to their nature and substance in 
the order of creation. 


4. One conscious of himself as a spiritual and intelligent being, views the 
passing world as a Somnum, (swapnam), dream, and this dreaming simile of 
the passing world, applies equally to our knowledge of ego, and tu, or non- 
ego, (which is as false as our cognitions in a dream). 


5. Next to the book describing the conduct of the seekers of liberation, 
(mumukshu-vyavahdra), then follows the book of evolution, (utpatti), which I 
am now going to propound to you. 


SECTION II. 
Worldly Bondage. 


6. Bondage consists in our belief of the reality of the visible world (and our 
relation with its phenomena. — Gloss). So our release depends on the 
negation of phenomenals. Now hear me tell you how to get rid of the visible 
(fetters of our minds). 


7. Whoever is born in this world, continues to progress, till at last he 
obtains his final liberation, (his ultimum and optimum perfection), or rises 
towards heaven or falls into hell (under the subjection of his righteous and 
unrighteous actions. — Gloss). 


8. I shall therefore expound for your understanding everything relating to 
the production and continuance of things, and their prior states as they were. 


9. Hear me Rama now give you an abstract of this book in brief, and I will 
here-after dilate upon it, as you may wish to know more of this (theory of 
production). 


SECTION III. 
Phases of the Spirit. 


10. Whatever appears either as moving or unmoving in this world, know 
them all as appearances in a dream in a state of sound sleep, (susupti), which 
become extinct at the end of a Kalpa-age. (The events of a Kalpa or day of 
Brahma are as his day dream). 


11. Then there remains a nameless and undeveloped something, in a state 
of deep, dark, and dank abyss, without any light or thick-spread, (nebulae) 
over it. (The Teo and Beo of Moses, the tama = teom of Manu and Veda, and 
the Moisture of Thales). 


12. This great self-existence is afterwards attributed with the titles of 
Reality (Rita), self (Atma), Supreme (Param), Immense (Brahma), Truth 
(Satyam) and so forth by the wise, as expressions for the Great Spirit, 
(mahdtman), for popular use. (Vide Gloss for definitions of these terms). 


13. This self-same spirit next shows itself in another form, which is called 
the living soul, (Jivdtmd), and comes afterwards to be understood in the 
limited sense of life. (Jiva, Jiv, Zeu or Zeus; Ji and Jan; Zoa Protozoa, etc.). 
(But it is the undivided and universal soul of which the divided, individual, 
and particular souls are but parts and particles. — Gloss). 


14. This inert living principle, (Jiva-Life or the Protozoa), becomes 


according to its literal signification the moving spirit, (dkuldtma), which 
afterwards with its power of thinking, (manana), becomes the Mind, and 
lastly the embodied soul, (Bhutatma). (So says the Sruti: — Etasmdt Jdyate 
prdnah, manah, sarvendriydnicha, Kham, Vdyurup, Prithivi, etc., (i.e., From 
Him, — the Spirit, is derived the life, mind and the organs of sense or body, 
whence he is styled the Living, Thinking and All acting Deity). 


15. Thus the mind is produced and changed from the quiescent nature of 
the Great Supreme Spirit to a state of restlessness, (asthirdkdra), like that of a 
surge, heaving itself in the (Pacific) Ocean, (i.e., the restful spirit of God- 
Brahma is transformed to the restless state of the Mind, personified as Brahma 
or Hiranyagarbha, called the Atmabhu, — the son of the spirit of God or God 
the Son, Demiurge). 


16. The mind soon evolves itself as a self-volitive power which exercises 
its desires at all times whereby this extensive magic scene of the world is 
displayed to our view. This scene is figured as Virdjmurti, or manifestation of 
the desires of the will of Divine mind, and represented as the offspring of 
Brahma in the Indian Theogony. (Vide Manu on Genesis, chap I). 


17. As the word golden bracelet signifies no other thing than a bracelet 
made of gold, so the meaning of the word world is not different from its 
source, — the Divine will. (The difference is formal and not material, and 
consists in form and not in the substance, the divine will being the substratum 
of the formal world). 


18. Again, as the word gold bears the idea of the substance of which the 
bracelet is made, so the word Brahma conveys the meaning of immensity 
which contains the world in it, but the word world contains no idea of Brahma 
nor bracelet that of gold. (The substance contains the form as a stone does the 
statue, but the form does not contain the substance, as the statue may be of 
earth or metal or of wood). 


19. The unreality of the world appears as a reality, just as the heat of the 
sun presents the unreal mirage in the moving sands of the desert as real waves 
of the sea. (So the phantasm of the mind-Brahma, presents the 
phantasmagoria of the world, (Viswartipa), as a sober reality). 


20. It is this phantasy (of the reality of the unreal world), which the learned 
in all things, designate as ignorance, — avidyd, nature, — sansriti, bondage, 
— bandha, illusion, — mdyd, error-moha, and darkness, — tamas. (To denote 
our mental delusion and deception of senses. — Gloss). 


SECTION IV. 
Nature of Bondage. 


21. Now hear me relate to you, O moon-faced Rama! about the nature of 
this bondage, whereby you will be able to know the mode and manner of our 
liberation from it, (as the diagnosis of a disease being known, it is not difficult 
to heal it). 


22. The intimate relation of the spectator with the spectacle is called his 
bondage to the same, because the looker’s mind is fast bound to the object of 
his sight. It is the absence of the visible objects, therefore, from the mirror of 
the mind, which is the only means of his liberation. (So also is the removal of 
the objects of the other senses from the mind). 


23. The knowledge of the world, ego and tu (as separate existences), is said 
to be an erroneous view of the soul, (which is one and the same in all), and 
there can be no liberation of one, as long as he labours under this blunder of 
bheda-jndna or knowledge of individualities. (This is called savikalpa-jndna 
or cognition of biplicity, which cannot lead to Kaivalya mukti or the felicity 
derived from a knowledge of universal unity). 


24. To say that the soul is neither this nor that, (nedam-nedam), is but false 
logomachy, which cannot come to an end. The discrimination of alternatives 
serves only to increase the ardour for the visibles. (i.e., The ardour of 
induction spreads the infection of materialism. The idle neti-neti and tanna- 
tanna of Vedanta Philosophy is mere amphilogy and prevarication of both, as 
idem et non idem). 


25. It is not to be obtained by sophists by the chopping of logic or by 
pilgrimage or ceremonial acts, any more than by a belief in the reality of the 
phenomenal world. (All these are observances of the esoteric faith and blind 
persuasion, but do not appertain to the science of esoteric spiritualism. — 
Gloss). 


26. It is hard to avoid the sight of the phenomenal world, and to repress 
one’s ardour for the same. But it is certain that, the visibles cannot lead us to 
the Reality, nor the Real mislead us to unreality, (Ze., the spiritual and 
physical knowledge are mutually repugnant to each other). 


27. Wherever the invisible, inconceivable, and intelligent spirit is existent, 
there the beholder views the visible beauty of God shining even in the midst 
of atoms. (i.e., Every particle of matter manifests the beauty of its maker, 


unless there be a dull material object to intercept the sight of the intelligent 
soul). 


28. The phenomenal world has its rise from Him, yet those ignorant people 
that depart from Him to the adoration of others, resemble fools, that forsake 
rice to feed upon gruel. (i.e., They take the shadow for the substance). 


29. Although this visible world is apparent to sight, yet O Rama! it is but a 
shadow of that Being, who resides alike in the smallest atom as in the mirror 
of the mind, that receives the image of the largest as well as minutest things. 
(Compare: — As full and perfect in a hair as heart. — Pope.) 


30. The spirit is reflected in everything like a figure in the mirror, and it 
shines equally in rocks and seas, in the land and water, as it does in the mirror 
of the mind. (Compare: — Wherever I cast my eyes, thy beauty shines). 


31. The visible world is the scene of incessant woes, births, decay and 
death, and the states of waking, dreaming and sound sleep, are presenting by 
turns the gross, subtle and evanescent forms of things for our delusion. 


32. Here I sit in my meditative mood, (anirudha), having wiped off the 
impressions of the visibles from my mind, but my meditation is disturbed by 
the recurrence of my remembrance of the visibles, and this is the cause of the 
endless transmigrations of the soul. (i.e., The reminiscence of the past is the 
cause of our everlasting bondage in life). 


33. It is hard to have a fixed (nirtidha) and unalterable (nirvikalpa) 
meditation (samddhi), when the sight of the visible world is present before our 
bodily and mental vision. Even the fourth stage of insensible samddhi called 
the turiya, in the state of sound sleep, (susupti), is soon succeeded by one’s 
self-consciousness and external intelligence. 


34. On rising from this state of deep meditation, one finds himself as roused 
from his sound sleep, in order to view the world full of all its woes and 
imperfections opening wide before him. (Compare: — “I wake to a sea of 
troubles, how happy they who wake no more.” — Young). 


35. What then, O Rama! is the good of this transient bliss which one attains 
by his temporary abstraction, (Dhydna), when he has to fall again to his sense 
of the sufferings to which the world is subject as a vale of tears. (Compare: — 
“When the cock crowed, I wept etc.” — Young’s Night Thoughts). 


36. But if one can attain to a state of unalterable abstraction of his thoughts 
from all worldly objects, as he has in his state of sound sleep, (susupti), he is 
then said to have reached the highest pitch of his holiness on earth. (For it is 
the entire oblivion of the world that is necessary for our spiritual perfection, as 


it is said, — “forget the present for the future.’’) 


37. Nobody has ever earned aught of reality in the scene of unreal vanities, 
for whenever his thoughts come in contact with any outward thing, he finds it 
inseparable from the blemishes of existence. (“Vanity of vanities, the world is 
vanity.” — Ecclesiastes.) 


38. Should any body (in the practice of the fixedness of his attention), fix 
his sight for a while on a stone, by forcibly withdrawing it from visible 
objects, he is sure to be carried away afterwards by the visibles pressing upon 
his sight. 


39. It is well known to all that an unflinching meditation, having even the 
firmness of a rock, can have no durability, in the practice of the Yogi owing to 
his worldly propensities. 


40. Even the nirtidha or steadfast meditation which has attained the 
fixedness of a rock, cannot advance one step towards the attainment of that 
tranquillity which has no bounds to it. (i.e., The everlasting bliss of liberation 
or moksha). 


41. Thus the sight of phenomena being altogether irrepressible, it is a 
foolish supposition of its being suppressed by practices of Jap-tap or prayers 
and austerities and the like acts of devotion. 


42. The idea of the phenomena, (drisyadhi), is as inherent in the mind of 
the spectator of the visible world, as the seeds of the lotus flower are 
contained in the inner cells of the pericarp. 


43. The ideal of the phenomenal world, (drisyadhi), lies as hidden in the 
minds of the spectators of the outer world, as are the in-born flavour and 
moisture of fruits, the oil of sesamum seeds, and the innate sweet scent of 
flowers. 


44. As the fragrance of camphor and other odoriferous substances inheres 
in their nature, so the reflexion of the visible world resides in the bosom of the 
intellect. 


45. As your dreams and desires rise and subside of themselves under the 
province of your intellect, so the notions of things always recur to your mind 
from the original ideas of them impressed in the seat of the visibles, (the 
mind). 


46. The mental apparition of the visible world, deludes its beholder in the 
same manner, as the visual appearance of a spectre or hobgoblin, misleads a 
child (to its destruction). 


47. The notion of the visible world gradually expands itself, as the germ of 
the seed shoots forth in time, and spreads itself afterwards in the form of a 
plant. 


48. As the minute germs and animalcules, which are contained within the 
bosoms of fruits and embryos of animals, expand themselves to wonderfully 
beauteous forms afterwards, so the seed of this world, (originally), lying hid 
in the Divine Mind, unfolds itself in wonderful forms of the visible 


phenomena in nature. 


CHAPTER II. 
Description of the First Cause. 


SECTION I. 
Narrative of the air-born and aeriform Brahman. 


Vasishtha resumed: — Hear me Rama now relate to you the narrative of one 
Akdsaja or air-born Brahman, which will be a jewel to your ears, and enable 
you the better to understand the drift of the book of Genesis. 


2. There lived a Brahman, Akdsaja by name, who sat always reclined in his 
meditation, and was ever inclined to the doing of good to all creatures. 


3. Finding him long-lived, Death thought within himself, saying: — It is I 
alone that am imperishable, and devour all things one by one. 


4. How is it that I cannot cram myself with this air-born, wherein I find my 
teeth as blunt in him, as the edge of a sword is put to the bluff by the solid 
rock. 


5. So saying, he proceeded to the abode of the Brahman, intent upon 
making an end of him, for who is of so dull a nature as is not alert in his 
practice. 


6. But as he was about to enter the house, he was opposed by a gorgeous 
flame of fire, like the conflagration of final destruction on the last day of the 
dissolution of the world. 


7. He pierced the ambient flame and entered the dwelling, where seeing the 
Brahman before him, he stretched his hand to lay hold on him with all avidity. 


8. He was unable even with his hundred hands, (i.e., with all his might), to 
grasp the Brahman, as it is impossible for the strongest to withstand the 
resolute man in his wonted course. 


9. He then had recourse to Yama, — his lord to clear his doubt, and to learn 
why he could not devour the air-born (being). 


10. Yama replied, saying: — Death, trust not too far thy own might, that 


makes thee mighty to destroy the living. It is the act of the dying person that is 
the chief cause of his death and naught otherwise. 


11. Therefore, do thou be diligent to find out the acts of the person thou 
intendest to kill, because it is by their assistance only that thou canst seize thy 


prey. 
12. Hereupon Death betook himself gladly to wander about in all places 


under the horizon. He roved over the habitable parts, as also throughout the 
lacunal and fluvial districts. 


13. He traversed the forests and jungles, marshy and rocky grounds and 
maritime coasts, and passed to foreign lands and islands, and pried through 
their wildernesses, cities and towns. 


14. He searched through kingdoms and countries, villages and deserts, and 
surveyed the whole earth to find out some act of the Brahman in any part of it. 


15. At last Death, with all his search and effort, came to find the acts of the 
air-born Brahman, to be as nil as the offspring of a barren woman, and his 
mind as transfixed (in meditation) as if it were a rock. 


16. He then returned from his reconnoitering to his all-knowing master 
Yama, and besought his advice, as servants do in matters of doubt and 
difficulty (how to proceed). 


17. Death addressed him, saying: — “Tell me my lord, where the acts of 
the Air-born Brahman are to be found,” to which Yama after a long head- 
work, replied as follows. 


SECTION II. 
State of the Soul. 


18. Know, O Death! that this air-born seer has no acts whatever, for as he is 
born of empty air so his doings are all null and void. (@e., The bodiless spirit 
or mind is devoid of acts requiring physical means and appliances). 


19. Whoso is born of air, is as pure as air itself, and has no combination of 
cause or acts like all embodied (beings). 


20. He has no relation with acts of his prior existence. He is nil as the child 
of an unprolific woman, and as one unborn, uncreated, and unbegotten. 


21. Want of causes has made him a pure vacuous being, and the privation 


of prior acts has made him as nil as an ethereal arbor. 


22. His mind is not ruffled as those of others, by reason of the privation of 
his former acts, nor is there any such act of his present state, whereby he may 
become a morsel to death. 


23. Such is the soul seated in the sheath of vacuity, and remaining forever 
as the simple form of its own causality, (kdranadeha), and not guided by any 
extraneous causation whatever. 


24. It has no prior deed, nor does it do anything at present, (i.e., neither led 
by predestination, nor actuated by present efforts), but continues as something 
in the shape of aeriform intelligence. 


25. Our inference of the actions of breathing and motion by the agency of 
the soul, is a mere supposition, because the soul is devoid of every thought of 
or tendency to action. 


26. It sits meditating on itself as inseparable from the Supreme Intelligence, 
just as the images (in painting and statuary), are inseparable from the mind of 
the painter and sculptor. 


27. The self-born Brahman is as intimately connected with the objects of 
his thought, as fluidity is associated with water and vacuity with the 
firmament. 


28. His soul is as immanent in the supreme, as motion is inherent in the 
winds. It has neither the accumulated acts of past lives, nor those of its present 
state. (i.e., It is neither a passive nor active agent of prior or present acts, but 
is an indifferent witness of the acts of the body and mind). 


29. It is produced without the co-operation of accompanying causes, and 
being free from prior motives, it is not subjected to the vicissitudes 
concomitant with human life. 


30. It is found to be no other than its own cause, and having no other cause 
for itself, it is said to be self-produced. 


31. Say, how can you lay hold on that being that has done no act before, 
nor is in the act of doing anything at present? It is then only subjected to thee 
when it thinks itself mortal. (But he that knows his soul to be immortal is not 
subject to death). 


32. Whoso believes his soul to be of this earth, and thinks himself to be an 
earthly being, he may be easily overtaken by thee, (whose power extends over 
earth-born mortals only). 


33. This Brahman is a formless being, by reason of his disowning the 
material body. Hence it is as hard for thee to enthral him, as to entwine the air 
with a rope. 


34. Death rejoined, saying: — Tell me my lord! how may the unborn Aja or 
the self-born swayambhu, be produced out of vacuum, and how can an earthly 
or other elemental body be and not be (at the same time). 


35. Yama replied: — This Brahman is neither born nor is nil at any time, 
but remains forever the same, as the light of intelligence of which there is no 
decay. 


36. There remains nothing at the event of the great Doomsday, except the 
tranquil, imperishable and infinite Brahman himself in his spiritual form. 


37. This is the nature of the everlasting vacuum, too subtle in its essence, 
and devoid of all attributes; but viewing present before its mind, the 
stupendous cosmos in the form of a huge mountain in the beginning of 
recreation. (The mind is the noumenon-Brahma, and the phenomena of the 
world is the gigantic macrocosm known as Virdjmurti.) 


38. Being of the nature of intelligence it is imperishable, but those who 
view the spirit in the form of any phenomenal body, are liable to perish with it 
like all embodied beings. 


39. Thus this Brahman remained in the womb of vacuity in the beginning, 
in his state of unalterable, vacuous intelligence. 


40. It is purely of the nature of the inane understanding, and of the form of 
a vast expanse of omniscience, having neither body nor organism, no acts nor 
agency, nor desire of any kind in itself. 


41. That which is simply of the form of vacuum and pure light, is never 
beset by the snare of pristine desires, as a corporeal being. 


42. It has nothing to know or see without itself, (i.e., beyond its self- 
consciousness). The only conception that we have of it, is what resembles an 
extended intelligence, (i.e., an all-diffusive omniscience). 


43. Under these circumstances, how is it susceptible of any earthly or other 
external form? Therefore, O Death! desist from thy attempt to lay hold on the 
same. 


44. Hearing these words of Yama, Death thought upon the impracticability 
of laying hold on empty vacuity by anybody, and sorrowfully returned to his 
own abode. 


45. Rama said: — you said Sir, that Brahma is your great grand-sire, I think 
it is he that you mean to say as the unborn, self-born, universal soul and 
intelligence. 


46. So is this Brahma, Rama! as I have spoken to you, and it was with 
regard to the same, that the aforesaid discussion was held of yore, between 
Death and Yama (Pluto). 


47. Again when Death had made an end of all living beings at the interval 
of a manwantard, he thought himself strong enough to make an attempt to 
bear down upon the lotus-born Brahma also. 


48. It was then that he was admonished by Yama, saying: — It is your habit 
that makes you go on your wonted course of killing. 


49. But the super-ethereal form of Brahma too is beyond your reach, it 
being simply of the nature of the mind having connection with its thoughts 
only, and no concern with the actual forms of things. 


50. It is of the form of the wonderfully vacuous intellect, having the faculty 
of cognition in it. Thus, the intellect being but vacuum, has neither any cause 
for it, nor any effect produced by it. 


51. As the aeriform volitive principle in men, manifests itself without being 
connected with material forms, so is the self-born (Brahma) manifest to all in 
his own immaterial nature. 


52. Like strings of pearl appearing to view in the clear firmament, and 
forms of cities seen in a dream, the self-born (Brahma) is manifest of himself 
without relation to external objects. 


53. As there is no beholder nor any thing beholden of the solitary Supreme 
spirit which is the intellect itself, so is the mind manifest of itself, (without its 
looking at or being looked upon by anybody). 


54. It is the volitive mind which is called Brahma, and volition being a 
spiritual faculty, has no connection with any material substance. 


55. As the mind of the painter is fraught with images of various things, so 
is the mind of Brahma full of figures of all created beings. 


56. The self-born Brahma is manifest in his own mind as Brahma is 
manifested in the vacuous sphere of his intellect. He is without beginning, 
middle, and end, and appears to have a figure like that of a male being, while 
in reality he has no body, as the offspring of a barren woman. 


CHAPTER III. 
Causes of Bondage in the Body. 


Rama said: — It is even so as you have said, that the mind is a pure essence, 
and has no connection with the earth and other material substances, and that it 
is verily Brahma itself. 


2. Now tell me, O Brahman! Why the remembrance of his former states, (in 
the past and previous Kalpas), is not (to be reckoned as) the cause of his birth, 
as it is in the case of mine and yours and of all other beings. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Whoever had a former body, accompanied with the 
acts of his prior existence, retains of course its reminiscence, which is the 
cause of his being (reborn on earth). 


4. But when Brahma is known to have no prior acts, how is it possible for 
him to have his reminiscence of anything? 


5. Therefore, he exists without any other cause except the causation of his 
own mind. It is by his own causality that the Divine spirit is self-born, and is 
himself his own spirit. 


6. He is everlasting, and his body is born of itself from the self-existent 
Brahma. This unborn or self-born Brahma has no material body whatever, 
except his subtle dtivahika or linga deha. 


7. Rama said: — The everlasting body is one thing, (called the Sukshma 
sarira or subtle or immaterial body), and the mortal body is another, (called 
the sthuladeha or the gross and material frame). Now tell me Sir, whether all 
created beings have a subtle body also as that of Brahma? 


8. Vasishtha replied: — All created beings that are produced of a cause, 
have two bodies, (the sikshma and the sthiila, or the subtle and the gross). But 
the unborn being which is without a cause, has one body only, (which is 
called the dtivahika or the everlasting spiritual body). 


9. The increate Brahma is the cause of all created beings, but the uncreated 
spirit having no cause for itself, has one body for it. 


10. The prime lord of creatures has no material body, but manifests himself 
in the vacuous form of his spiritual body. 


11. His body is composed of the mind alone, and has no connection with 
the earth or any other material substance. He is the first lord of creatures, that 
stretched the creation from his vacuous body (or spiritual essence). 


12. All these are but forms of the images or ideas in his vacuous mind, and 
having no other patterns or originals in their nature. And that everything is of 
the same nature with its cause, is a truth well known to all, (from the identity 
of the effect and its material cause). 


13. He is an inexistent being and of the manner of perfect intelligence. He 
is purely of the form of the mind, and has an intellectual and no material 
entity. 


14. He is prime (cause) of all material productions in the physical world, 
and is born of himself with his prime mobile force in the form of the mind. 


15. It was by the first impulse given by the prime moving power, that this 
expanse of creation came to be spread in the same ratio, as the currents of air 
and water, (or the velocity of winds and tides), are in proportion to the 
impetus given to them. 


16. This creation shining so bright to our sight, has caught its light from the 
luminous mind of the formless Brahma, and appears as real to our 
conceptions, (as they are ideal in the Divine mind). 


17. Our vision in a dream is the best illustration of this (unreality of 
worldly things), as that of the enjoyment of connubial bliss in dreaming. It is 
then that an unreal object of desire, presents itself as an actual gain to our fond 
and false imagination. 


18. The vacuous, immaterial, and formless spirit, is now represented as the 
self-born and corporeal lord of creatures in the form of the first male. 
(Protogonus or the only begotten son of God). 


19. He remains undiscerned in his state of pure intelligence, but becomes 
manifest to all by the evolution of his volition. He is indiscernible in his 
absolute state (of inaction), but becomes conspicuous to us in the display of 
his nature (in creation). 


20. Brahma is the divine power of volition (or the will of God). He is 
personified as the first male agent of creation, but devoid of a corporeal body. 
He is only of the spiritual form of the mind, and the sole cause of the 
existence of the triple world. 


21. It is his volition that makes the self-born (Brahma) to exert his energies, 
as human desires impel all mankind to action, and the vacuous mind manifests 
itself as a mountain of desires. 


22. It then forgets its everlasting and incorporeal nature, and assumes to 
itself the solid material body, and shows itself in the shape of a delusive 
apparition (in his creation). 


23. But Brahma, who is of an unsullied understanding, is not involved in 
oblivion of himself, by the transformation of his unknowable nature to the 
known state of volition, (or change of the nirguna to saguna). 


24. Being unborn of material substance, he sees no apparition like others, 
who are exposed by their ignorance to the misleading errors of falsehood, 
appearing in the shape of a mirage before them. 


25. As Brahma is merely of the form of the mind, and not composed of any 
material substance, so the world being the product of the eternal mind, is of 
the same nature with its original archetype. 


26. Again, as the uncreated Brahma is without any accompanying causality 
with himself, so his creation has no other cause beside himself, (i.e., There is 
no secondary cause of the universe). 


27. Hence, there is no difference in the product from its producer, because 
it is certain, that the work must be as perfect as its author, (so says the Sruti: 
— Pirnat pirnam, etc.). 


28. But there is nothing as a cause and effect to be found in this creation, 
because the three worlds are but the prototypes of the archetype of the divine 
mind. 


29. The world is stretched out in the model of the Divine mind, and not 
formed by any other holy spirit. It is as immanent in the mind of God, as 
fluidity is inherent in water. 


30. It is the mind which spreads out this extended unreality of the world, 
like castles in the air, and builds Utopian cities (by its imagination only). 


31. There is no such thing as materiality, which is as false a conception as 
that of a snake in a rope. Hence it is no way possible for Brahma and other 
beings to exist as individual bodies. 


32. Even spiritual bodies are inexistent to enlightened understandings. As 
for the material body, it has no room in existence. (Matter or a corporeal 
substance or an unseen substratum is a non-entity. — Berkeley). 


33. Man, (manu), who derives his name from his mind, (mana), is a form of 
the volitive soul called Verinchi, (Latin, vir, — inchoare, the inchoative spirit 
of Brahma), and has for his dominion the mental or intellectual world mano- 
rajyam, (Latin, mentis regio vel regnum), where all things are situated in the 
form of realities. 


34. The mind is the creative Brahma called Verinchitvas, (Latin, 
Virinchoativus), by the exercise of its inherent sankalpa or the volition of 
incipience or creation, — sisriksha, and displays itself in the form of the 
visible universe by development of its own essence. 


35. This Virinchi or the creative power is of the form of the mind, manas, 
as the mind itself is of the form of Virinchi also. It has no connection with any 
material substance, which is a mere creation of the imagination. (That is to 
say, matter is an imaginary substance or substratum of qualities only). 


36. All visible things are contained in the bosom of the mind, as the lotus- 
bud and blossom reside in the seed of the lotus. Hence there is no difference 
between the mental and visible appearances of things, nor has anyone ever 
doubted of it anywhere. 


37. Whatever things you see in a dream, whatever desires you have at heart 
and all the ideals of your fancy, together with your ideas, notions, and 
impressions of the visibles, know your mind to be the receptacle of them all. 


38. But the visible objects relating to the option of the mind, (i.e., which are 
desirable, to every one), are as baneful to their beholder, as an apparition is to 
a child, (i.e., they are equally tempting and misleading to all). 


39. The ideal of the phenomenal drisyadhi, develops itself as the germ 
contained in the seed and becomes in its proper time and place a large tree, 
(comparable with the great arbor of the world known as sansdramahi ruha or 
Vriksha). 


40. If there is no rest with what is real, there can be no peace with the 
phenomenals which are full of troubles, and give no solace to the mind. It is 
impossible that the feeling of the perception of visibles will be ever lost to 
their perceiver, (observer), though its subsidence only is said to constitute 
liberation. 


CHAPTER IV. 


SECTION I. 
Description of the Night-fall. 


Valmiki related: — 


While Vasishtha, — the leading sage, was thus going on with his lecture 
without interruption, the whole assembly was intent upon listening to it with a 
fixed tone and tenor of their minds. 


2. The string of bells (tied to the waists of warriors) ceased to jingle, 
everyone was motionless, and even the parrots in the cages ceased to warble 
and flutter. 


3. The ladies forgot their dalliance and were quietly attentive to the sermon, 
and all in the royal hall, were fixed in attention as they were paintings and 
statues. 


4. There remained but an hour to the closing of the day, and the sun-beams 
became agreeable to all. The busy bustle of the world was dwindling away 
with the glimmering light of the setting sun. 


5. The beds of full-blown lotuses exhaled their fragrance all around, and 
soft Zephyrs were playing about, as if to attend the audience. 


6. The sun glided away from his diurnal course, and advanced to the top of 
his solitary setting mountain, as if he meant to reflect on all that he had heard. 


7. The shades of night began to cover the landscape, and the frost to 
overspread the forest-lands, as if they were cooled by the cooling lectures on 
philosophy. 


8. Now failed the concourse of the people in all directions, as if they had 
availed themselves of the instructions of the sage to abate the fervour of their 
exertions. 


9. All objects on earth cast their lengthened shadows, as if they stretched 
their necks to hear the preaching of Vasishtha. 


10. The chamberlain then advanced slowly to the monarch of the earth, and 
begged to inform, that the time for evening ablution and service, was about to 
expire. 


11. Upon this the sage Vasishtha, curbed his sweet speech and said: — Let 
thus far, mighty king! be your hearing of this day, and I will resume my 
lecture, and speak of other things tomorrow. 


12. Here the sage held his silence, when the king responded, “Be it so as 
you will,” and rose from his seat. 


13. He honoured for his own good, that godly sage and the other seers and 
Brahmans, with due respects and offerings of flowers, water, worthy 
honorariums, fees, gifts, and homage. 


14. Then rose the whole assembly with the king and the assemblage of 
sages, and the gems and jewels that decked the persons of the princes and 
people, shed their lustres on the faces of all. 


15. There was a commingled tinkling of the bracelets and armlets of the 
throng caused by the collision of their bodies (in their egress), and mixed 
flashing of the necklaces and brocades that decorated their persons. 


16. The jewels attached to the tufts and crests of hair on the tops of their 
heads, emitted a jingling sound resembling the humming of bees amidst their 
flowery braids. 


17. The face of the sky on all sides, that shone with a purple hue reflected 
by the golden ornaments on their persons, seemed as it was pleased with the 
wise sayings and sense of the sage. 


18. The aerial visitants vanished in the air, and the earthly guests repaired 
to their respective habitations on earth where they all performed their daily 
(evening) services in their own residences. 


19. In the meantime, sable night made her appearance on earth, and like a 
bashful young lady, withdrew to the closet apart from the rest of mankind. 


20. The lord of the day passed to other lands to shine upon them, for verily 
it is the avowed duty of every good person to give the benefit of equal light to 
all. 


21. The shade of evening veiled all sides, and uplifted the canopy of the 
starry sphere on high, which like the vernal atmosphere, was emblazoned with 
the starlike flowers of Kinsuka. 


22. The birds of air took to their repose in the hollows of mango trees, or 


on the tops of Kddamba arbours, as honest people of fair dealing, find their 
rest in the purity of their minds, and contriteness of their inward hearts. 


23. The skirts of the clouds tinged with red by the slanting beams of the 
setting sun, and with a shade of yellow hue upon them, decorated the western 
hills with vests of yellow garb, while the sky crowned their heads with 
gemming wreaths of starry groups. 


24. The Goddess of evening, (Vespera), having departed after receiving her 
homage (by the vespers of mankind), was followed by her train of dark night 
shades, appearing as black-bodied fiends, — Vetdlas, (night roving nisdcharas 
of deserts). 


25. A gentle and cooling breeze was blowing softened by the dew drops of 
night, and opening the petals of the Kumuda flowers (nylumbium), and 
bearing their fragrance all around. 


26. A thick gloom covered the face of nature, and the stars were hid under 
the mists of night, and all the quarters of the skies, seemed with their 
overhanging loose and hairy mists, as the faces of widows shrouded by the 
dark dishevelled hair of mourning (for their departed lord the sun). 


27. Now appeared the moist orb of the moon in her ambrosial form in the 
milky ocean of the sky, to moisten the mundane heat with her milk-white 
beams, (sudhd-subhra-didhiti). 


28. On her rising, the thick mists of darkness fled from the eastern 
hemisphere, and became invisible in the air, as the darkness of ignorance is 
put to flight from the minds of monarchs, by their attendance to the sayings of 
wisdom. 


29. Then the sages and seers, the rulers and priests of the people, took their 
rest in their respective beds, as the words of Vasishtha which were full of 
meaning, reposed in the recesses of their hearts. 


30. As the thick darkness of night, resembling the dark complexion of 
death, receded from the arena of the skies, there followed close on its foot- 
steps the dewy dawn of the day with her slow moving pace. 


31. The twinkling stars now disappeared from the sky, as the flowers on the 
trees were blown away by the breeze, and strewn on the ground as the fallen 
stars of heaven. 


32. The sun became visible to the eyes, which his rays had roused from 
their sleep, as the new-rising faculty of reason becomes conspicuous in the 
minds of enlightened great souls. 


33. Fragments of clouds shining with solar gleams, spread a yellow mantle 
over the eastern hills, which were still decorated with strings of stars, pendant 
on the crests of their lofty heads, (like strings of pearls suspended to the 
crowns of kings). 


34. All the terrestrial and celestial congress assembled again at the royal 
hall, in the order and manner (of their meeting) of the day before, after the 
performance of their morning services. (Originally prdtastanah matins or 
matutinal ceremonies). 


35. The whole assemblage took their seats as on the previous day, and sat 
unmoved in their places, as a lotus-lake in its calmness after a storm. 


SECTION II. 
Nature of the Mind. 


36. Then Rama addressed the most eloquent of sages, Vasishtha, with his 
mellifluent words regarding the subject under investigation, (the nature of the 
mind). 


37. He said: — Tell me plainly, O venerable Sir! about the form of the 
mind, which developed itself in all things of the universe, as they were 
offshoots of it, (or manifestations of the mind). 


38. Vasishtha replied: — Rama! there is no form whatever of the mind, that 
may be seen by anybody. It has nothing substantial besides its name as that of 
the formless and irremovable vacuity, (with which it is compared in its all- 
comprehensiveness, all-diffusiveness and all-pervasiveness). 


39. The mind as an ens or entity (sat), is not situated in the outer body (or 
any part of it), nor is it confined in the cavity of the inward heart or brain. But 
know it, O Rama, to be situated everywhere, as the all-encompassing vacuum. 
(Being all-pervading and all-diffusive in its nature as vacuity itself). 


40. This world is produced from it, and likens to the waters of the mirage. 
It manifests itself in the forms of its fleeting thoughts, which are as false as the 
appearance of secondary moons in the vapours. 


41. The thinking principle is generally believed as something intermediate 
between the positive and negative, or real and unreal, you must know it as 
such and no other, (i.e., neither material as the body, nor immaterial as the 
soul, but a faculty appertaining to the nature of both). 


42. That which is the representative of all objects is called the mind, there 
is nothing besides to which the term mind is applicable. 


43. Know volition to be the same as the mind, which is nothing different 
from the will, just as fluidity is the same with water, and as there is no 
difference between the air and its motion in the wind. (The inseparable 
property answering for its substance). 


44. For wherever there is any will, there is that attribute of the mind also 
and nobody has ever taken the will and the mind for different things. 


45. The representation of any object whether it is real or unreal is mind, 
and that is to be known as Brahma, the great father of all. 


46. The incorporeal soul in the body is called the mind, as having the 
sensuous knowledge or everlasting ideas of the corporeal world in itself. (i.e., 
The sentient and thinking soul is the same with mind). 


47. The learned have given the several names of ignorance, intellect, mind, 
bondage, sin and darkness, to the visible appearance of creation. 


48. The mind has no other image than that (of a receptacle and reflector of 
the ideas) of the visible world, which, I repeat to say, is no new creation, (but 
a reflexion of the mind). 


49. The visible world is situated in an atom of the great mind, in the same 
manner, as the germ of the lotus plant is contained within its seed. 


50. The visible world is as innate in the all-knowing mind, as the light is 
inherent in the sun-beams, and velocity and fluidity are inborn in the winds 
and liquids. 


51. But the visionary ideas of the visibles are as false and fleeting in the 
minds of their observers, as the form of a jewel in gold, and water in the 
mirage, and as wrong as the foundation of a castle in the air, and the view of a 
city in a dream. 


SECTION III. 
Kaivalya or Mental Abstraction. 


52. But as the phenomenals appear as no other than real to their observer, I 
will, O Rama! cleanse them now from thy mind as they do the soil from a 
mirror. 


53. As the disappearance of an appearance makes the observer no observer 
of it, know such to be the state of the abstraction of the mind from whatever is 
real or unreal in the world. (This is called Kevalibhdva or non-chalance of all 
things). 


54. This state being arrived, all the passions of the soul, and the desires of 
the mind, will be at rest, as torrents of rivers at the calm ensuing upon the 
stillness of the wind. 


55. It is impossible that things having the forms of space, earth, and air, 
(i.e., material objects), will present the same features in the clear light (of 
induction), as they do to our open sight. 


56. Thus when the observer comes to know the unreality of the phenomena 
of the three worlds, as well as of his own entity, it is then that his pure soul 
attains to the knowledge of Kaivalya or soliety of divine existence. 


57. It is such a mind that reflects the image of God in itself as in a mirror, 
while all others are as blocks of stone, and incapable of receiving any 
reflexion at all. 


58. After suppression of the sense of ego and tu, (or both the subjective and 
objective knowledge), and the error of the reality of the outer world the 
beholder becomes abstracted and remains without vision of external things in 
his sitting posture. 


59. Rama rejoined: — If the perception of entity is not to be put down, nor 
an entity become a non-entity, nor when I cannot view the visibles, (which are 
the causes of our error), as non-entities, 


60. Then tell me O Brahman! how to uproot this disease of our eagerness 
for the visibles from the mind, which bewilders the understanding, and afflicts 
us with a train of troubles. 


61. Vasishtha replied: — Now hear my advice, Rama, for the suppression 
of this phantom of phenomenon, whereby it will surely die away and become 
utterly extinct. 


62. Know, Rama, that nothing that is, can ever be destroyed or become 
extinct, and though you remove it, yet it will leave its seed or trace in the 
mind. 


63. This seed is the memory of such things, which reopens the ideas of the 
visibles in the mind, expanding themselves in the fallacious notions of the 
forms of big worlds and skies, mountains and oceans. 


64. These (wrong notions) called doshas or faults and defects of 


understanding, are obstacles in the way to liberation, but they do not affect the 
sages who are found to be liberated. 


65. Again if the world and all other things are real existences (as the 
Sankhyas maintain), yet they cannot confer liberation on any one, because the 
visibles, whether they are situated within or without us are perishable 
themselves. 


66. Learn, therefore, this dreadful proposition, (solemn truth), which will 
be fully explained to you in the subsequent parts of this work. (Note: — A 
dreadful dogma it is to physicists and “ddivddis” or asserters of the 
encipientes mundi or beginning of the world). 


67. That all things appearing in the forms of vacuity, elementary bodies, the 
world, and ego et tu, are non-entities, and have no meanings in them. 


68. Whatever is seen apparent before us, is no other but the supreme 
Brahma himself, and his undecaying and imperishable essence. 


69. The plenitude of creation is an expansion of his plenum, and the quiet 
of the universe rests in his quietude. It is his beom which is the substance of 
vacuum, and it is his immensity that is the substratum of the immense cosmos. 


70. Nothing visible is real, and there is neither any spectator nor spectacle 
here. There is nothing as vacuity or solidity in nature, but all this is but a piece 
of extended Intelligence. 


71. Rama rejoined: — The adages relating the grinding of stones by the son 
of a barren woman, the horns of a hare, and the dancing of a hill with its 
extended arms, 


72. And the oozing of oil from sand, the reading (of books) by dolls of 
marble, and the roaring of clouds in a painting, and such others are applicable 
to your words (of the reality of an unreal essence of God). 


73. I see this world to be full of diseases, deaths and troubles, mountains, 
vacuities and other things, and how is it Sir, that you tell me of their non- 
existence? 


74. Tell me Sir, how you call this world to be unsubstantial, unproduced, 
and inexistent, that I may be certain of this truth. 


75. Vasishtha replied: — Know, Rama, that I am no inconsistent speaker, 
and hear me explain to you how the unreality appears as real, as the son of a 
barren woman has come to rumour. 


76. All this was unproduced before, and did not exist in the beginning of 


creation. It comes to appearance from the mind like that of a city in a dream. 
(i.e., They are all but creations of the mind and fancy). 


77. The mind also was not produced in the beginning of creation and was 
an unreality itself. Hear me tell you, therefore, how we come to a notion of it. 


78. This unreal mind spreads by itself the false and changing scenes of the 
visible world, just as we dream of changeful unrealities as true in a state of 
dreaming. (Here the dreaming philosopher sees dreams in his dream). 


79. It then exerts its volition in the fabrication of the body and spreads far 
and wide the magic scene of the phenomenal world. 


80. The mind by its potentiality of vacillation has many actions of its own, 
as those of expansion, saltation, and motion, of craving, roving, diving, and 
seizing, and many other voluntary efforts, (the causes of physical operations). 


CHAPTER V. 
On the Original Cause. (Mula-Karana). 


Rama said: — Tell me, O chief of the sages! what cause is it that leads to our 
misconception of the mind, how it is produced, and what is the source of its 
illusion. 


2. Tell me Sir, in brief of the first production (of the mind), and then, O 
best of the eloquent, you may tell the rest that is to be said on the subject. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Incident to the universal dissolution, when all 
things were reduced to nothing, this infinity of visible objects remained in a 
state of calm and quiet before their creation. 


4. There was then the only great God in existence, who is increate and 
undecaying, who is the creator of all at all times, who is all in all, and 
supreme soul of all, and resembling the sun that never sets. 


5. He whom language fails to describe, and who is known to the liberated 
alone, who is termed the soul by fiction only, and not by his real nature 
(which is unknowable). 


6. Who is the prime Male of Sankhya philosophers, and the Brahma of 
Vedanta followers, who is the Intelligence of gnostics and who is wholly pure 
and apart from all (personalities). 


7. Who is known as vacuum by vacuists, who is the enlightener of solar 
light, who is truth itself, and the power of speech and thought and vision, and 
all action and passion for ever. 


8. Who though ever existent everywhere appears as inexistent to the world, 
and though situated in all bodies, seems to be far from them. He is the 
enlightener of our understanding as the solar light (of the world). 


9. From whom the gods Vishnu and others are produced as solar rays from 
the sun, and from whom infinite worlds have come into existence like bubbles 
of the sea. 


10. Unto whom these multitudes of visible creations return as the waters of 


the earth to the sea, and who like a lamp enlightens the souls and bodies (of 
all immaterial and material beings). 


11. Who is present alike in heaven as in earth and the nether worlds, and 
who abides equally in all bodies whether of the mineral, vegetable, or animal 
creation. He resides alike in each particle of dust as in the high and huge 
mountain ranges, and rides as swift on the wings of winds, as he sleeps in the 
depths of the main. 


12. He who appoints the eight internal and external organs, (Paryashtakas), 
of sense and action to their several functions, and who has made the dull and 
dumb creatures as inert as stones, and as mute as they are sitting in their 
meditative mood. 


13. He who has filled the skies with vacuity and the rocks with solidity, 
who has dissolved the waters to fluidity, and concentrated all light and heat in 
the sun. 


14. He who has spread these wonderful scenes of the world, as the clouds 
sprinkle the charming showers of rain, both as endless and incessant, as they 
are charming and dulcet to sight. 


15. He who causes the appearance and disappearance of worlds in the 
sphere of his infinity like waves in the ocean, and in whom these phenomena 
rise and set like the running sands in the desert. 


16. His spirit, the indestructible soul, resides as the germ of decay and 
destruction in the interior (vitals) of animals. It is as minute as to lie hid in the 
body, and as magnified as to fill all existence. 


17. His nature, (Prakriti), spreads herself like a magic creeper, (mdyd latd), 
all over the space of vacuity, and produces the fair fruit in the form of the 
mundane egg (Brahmdnda), while the outward organs of bodies, resembling 
the branches of this plant, keep dancing about the stem, (the intelligent soul), 
shaken by the breeze of life which is ever-fleeting. 


18. It is He, that shines as the gem of intelligence in the heart of the human 
body, and it is he from whom, the luminous orbs constituting the universe, 
continually derive their lustre. 


19. It is that colossus of intelligence, which like a cloud sheds ambrosial 
draughts of delight to soothe our souls, and showers forth innumerable beings 
as rain drops on all sides. It bursts into incessant flashes showing the prospects 
of repeated creations which are as (momentary as) flashes of lightnings. 


20. It is his wondrous light which displays the worlds to our wondering 


sight, and it is from his entity that both what is real and unreal, have derived 
their reality and unreality. 


21. It is the insensible and ungodly soul, that turns to the attractions of 
others against its purpose, while the tranquil soul rests in itself, (as in the spirit 
of God). 


22. He who transcends all existences, and by whom all existent beings are 
bound to their destined actions in their proper times and places, and also to 
their free actions and motions and exertions of all kinds. 


23. It is he who from his personality of pure consciousness, became of the 
form of vacuum, (pervading all nature), and then by means of his vacuous 
mind and empty thoughts filled it with substances, wherein his soul was to 
reside, and whereon his spirit had to preside. 


24. Having thus made the infinite hosts of worlds in the immense sphere of 
the universe, he is yet neither the agent of any action nor the author of any act 
in it, but remains ever the same as the sole one alone, in his unchangeable and 
unimpairing state of self-consciousness, and without any fluctuation, 
evolution or inhesion of himself, as he is quite unconcerned with the world. 


CHAPTER VI. 
Admonition for Attempt to Liberation. 


Mumukshu Pratyopadesa. 


Vasishtha said: — It is by the knowledge of this transcendent supreme spirit 
and God of gods, that one may become an adept (in divine service), and not 
by the rigour of religious austerities and practices. (Proficiency by theoretic 

knowledge). 


2. Here, nothing is needed than the culture and practice of divine 
knowledge, and thereby the truth being known, one views the errors of the 
world, as a satiate traveller looks at a mirage in a clear light. 


3. He, (God), is not far from nor too near us, nor is he obtainable by what 
he is not, (as the adoration of images and ceremonial acts). He is the image of 
light and felicity, and is perceivable in ourselves. 


4. Here, austerities and charities, religious vows and observances, are of no 
good whatever. It is the calm quietude of one’s own nature only that is 
serviceable to him in his services to God. 


5. Fondness for the society of the righteous and devotedness to the study of 
good books, are the best means of divine knowledge, while ritual services and 
practices, serve only to strengthen the snare of our in-born delusions, which 
true knowledge alone can sever. 


6. No sooner one has known this inward light of his as the very God, than 
he gets rid of his miseries, and becomes liberated in this his living state. 


7. Rama said: — Having known the Self in himself, one is no more 
exposed to the evils of life and even to death itself. 


8. But say how is this great God of gods to be attained from such great 
distance, (as we are placed from him), and what rigorous austerities and 
amount of pains are necessary for it. 


9. Vasishtha replied: — He is to be known by means of your manly 
exertions (in knowledge and faith), and by the aid of a clear understanding 


and right reasoning, and never by the practice of austerities and ablutions, nor 
by acts attended with bodily pain of any kind. (Hence the mistake of Hatha 
Yoga.) 


10. For know, O Rama! all your austerities and charities, your painstaking 
and mortification are of no efficacy, unless you wholly renounce your passions 
and enmity, your anger and pride, your selfishness and your envy and 
jealousy. 


11. For whoever is liberal of any money which he has earned by defrauding 
others, and with a heart full of vile passions, the merit of such liberality 
accrues to the rightful owner of the property and not to its professed donor. 


12. And whoever observes any vow or rite with a mind actuated by 
passions, he passes for a hypocrite and reaps no benefit of his acts. 


13. Therefore, try your manly exertions in securing the best remedies of 
good precepts and good company, for putting down the diseases and 
disturbances of the world. 


14. No other course of action, except that of the exertion of one’s 
manliness, is conducive to the allaying of all the miseries and troubles of this 
life. 


15. Now learn the nature of this manliness for your attainment to wisdom, 
and annihilation of the maladies of passions and affections and animosity of 
your nature. 


16. True manliness consists in your continuance in an honest calling 
conformable with the law and good usage of your country, and in a contented 
mind which shrinks from smelling the enjoyments of life. 


17. It consists in the exertion of one’s energies to the utmost of his power, 
without bearing any murmur or grief in his soul, and in one’s devotedness to 
the society of the good and perusal of good works and the Sdstras. 


18. He is styled the truly brave who is quite content with what he gets, and 
spurns at what is unlawful for him to take, who is attached to good company, 
and ready at the study of unblamable works. 


19. And they who are of great minds, and have known their own natures 
and those of all others by their right reasoning, are honoured by the gods 
Brahma, Vishnu, Indra, and Siva. 


20. He who is called a righteous man by the majority of the good people of 
the place, is to be resorted to with all diligence as the best and most upright of 
men. 


21. Those religious works are said to compose the best Sdstra, which treat 
chiefly of Spiritual knowledge, and one who constantly meditates on them, is 
surely liberated (from the bonds of this world). 


22. It is by means of right discrimination derived from the keeping of good 
company and study of holy works, that our understanding is cleared of its 
ignorance, as dirty water is purified by Kata seeds, and as the minds of men 
are expurgated by the Yoga philosophy. 


CHAPTER VII. 
Recognition of the Nihility of the Phenomenal 
World. 


(Drisydsattd Pratijndnam). 


Rama said: — 


Tell me, O Brahman! where is this God situated and how can I know him, 
of whom you spoke all this, and whose knowledge you said, leads to our 
liberation. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — This God of whom I spoke, is not at a distance 
from us. He is situated in these our bodies, and is known to be of the form of 
mere Intellect, (chinmdtra), to us. (So says Fichte: — The Infinite Reason, 
(chit), alone exists in himself, — the finite in him. Lewis vol. II. p. 563.) 


3. He is all in all, though all this world is not the omnipresent Himself. He 
is one alone and is not termed the all that is visible (to us). (So says Fichte: — 
God is infinite and embraces the finite, but the finite cannot encompass the 
Infinite. Lewis vol. II. p. 573.) 


4. It is this Intellect which is in Siva, that wears the cusp of the moon in his 
crest, the same is in Vishnu that rides on his eagle Garuda, and in Brahma that 
is born of the lotus. The sun also is a particle of this Intellect, (but they are not 
the self-same Intellect themselves). 


5. Rama rejoined: — So it is, and even boys say this also, that if the whole 
world is mere Intelligence, (chetana mdtrakam), then why call it by another 
name (as the world), and what is the use of giving admonition of it to anybody 
(when everyone is full of intelligence). 


6. Vasishtha replied: — If you have known the mere Intellect, 
(Chinmdtram), to be the same with the intelligent world, (chetana viswa), you 
have then known nothing for getting rid of this world. 


7. The world is verily intelligent, O Rama, (with the mundane soul), but the 
animal soul (Jiva) is called pasu or brutish observer of things, pasyati, on 


account of its looking after sensual gratifications only as brutes, and giving 
rise only to the fears of disease, decay and death (from its love of itself, and 
care for self-preservation). 


8. The animal soul, (Jiva), though an incorporeal substance, is an ignorant 
thing and subject to pain and sorrow. The mind, manas, also, though it is 
capable of intelligence, — chetaniyam, has become the root of all evils. (i.e., 
With its power of intellection and nature of intelligence, (chetanam), it is yet 
ever inclined to the wrong side by itself). 


9. Intellectual liberation, (chetya mukta), from thoughts of the world, is one 
state (of the soul), and unintelligent gazing, (unmukhata), at it, is another. He 
who knows the better of these two the states of the soul, has no cause of 
sorrow, (i.e., the rational from the irrational soul). 


10. He who has seen the all surpassing Supreme Being, has his heartstrings 
all cut asunder, and the doubts of his mind all driven away. The sequences of 
his acts are washed away (and leave no fear of his transmigration). 


11. The longing after perceptibles, (Chetyas), does not cease, unless the 
perception of the visibles is effaced from the mind. 


12. How then is this perception to be effaced? How is it possible to have a 
longing after the unintelligible Intelligence, without suppression of our 
longing for the visibles? It is only to be effected by avoiding the external 
perceptions of the mind. 


13. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, where and how is that vacuous soul called 
pasu, by the knowledge of which no one can get rid of his transmigration, 
(i.e., the worshippers of the jivdtmd or animal soul called jivavddis, are not 
entitled to their final liberation, — mukti). 


14. Tell me also, who is that man, who by his company with the good and 
study of good works, has gone over the ocean of the world, and beholds the 
Supreme soul in himself. 


15. Vasishtha replied: — Whatever animal souls being cast in the 
wilderness of this life, long after this intelligent soul, (chetandtman), they are 
truly wise, and know him (in themselves). 


16. Whoso believes the animal soul as the life of the world (or mundane 
soul), and thinks (the knowledge of the) Intelligence to be attended with pain 
only, he can never know Him anywhere (in this world). 


17. If the Supreme soul be known to us, O Rama! the string of our woes is 
put to an end, like the fatal cholera after termination of its cholic pain or 


extraction of its poison. 


18. Rama said: — Tell me, O Brahman! the true form of the Supreme soul, 
by light of which the mind may escape from all its errors. 


19. Vasishtha replied: — The Supreme soul is seen in the same way in 
ourselves and within our bodies, as we are conscious of our minds to be 
seated within us, after its flight to distant countries. 


20. Our notion of the Supreme spirit is often lost in the depth of our minds, 
in the same way, as the existence of the outer world, (objective knowledge), 
becomes extinct in our consciousness in Yoga meditation. 


21. It is He in whose knowledge we lose our sense of the beholder and 
visibles, and who is an invacuous vacuum or a substantive vacuity himself. 
(i.e., Who being known, we forget our knowledge both of the subjective and 
objective, and view his unity as the only to on or substratum of all). (So says 
Fichte: — In thee, the Incomprehensible, does my own existence, and that of 
the world, become comprehensible to me. Lewis. Phil. vol. II. P. 563). 


22. He whose substance appears as the vacuum, and in whom subsists the 
vacuous plenum of the universe, and who appears as vacuity itself, 
notwithstanding the plenitude of his creation subsisting in him, is verily the 
form of the Supreme soul (that you want to know). 


23. Who though full of intelligence, appears to stand as an unconscious 
huge rock before us, and who though quite subtle in his nature, seems as some 
gross body to our conception, such is the form of the Supreme soul (that you 
want to know). 


24. That which encompasses the inside and outside of everything, and 
assumes the name and nature of the very thing to itself, is verily the form of 
the Supreme (that you want to know). 


25. As light is connected with sunshine, and vacuity with the firmament, 
and as Omnipresence is present with everything and everywhere, such is the 
form of the Supreme spirit (that you want to know). 


26. Rama asked: — But how are we to understand that He who bears the 
name and nature of absolute and infinite reality should yet be compressed 
within anything visible in the world, which is quite impossible to believe? 


27. Vasishtha replied: — The erroneous conception of the creation of the 
world, resembles the false impression of colours in the clear sky, wherefore it 
is wrong, O Rama! to take a thing as real, of which there is an absolute 
privation in nature. 


28. It is the knowledge of Brahma that constitutes his form, or else there is 
no act of his whereby he may be known to us, (the universe being but a 
development of himself). He is entirely devoid of any visible form, and 
therefore, there is no better course for any one than to know him as truth. 


29. After an absolute negation of the visibles comes to be known, (i.e., after 
disappearance of the traces of phenomenals from the mind), there remains a 
pre-eminent object of conception, which is inborn and manifest of itself. 


30. This concept (of the Super-eminent) has oftentimes no reflexion, owing 
to its having no visible appearance, and at others it is not without its reflexion 
on the mirror of the mind (which has received its image). 


31. No body has ever conceived this transcendent verity in himself, who 
has not at the same time been convinced of the impossibility of the existence 
of the visible world. (i.e., Conviction of the nullity of the phenomenal alone, 
leads to the perception of the Reality). 


32. Rama rejoined: — Tell me, O sage! how the existence of so many 
extensive worlds composing the visible Universe, can be thought of as unreal, 
or comprised in the chinmdtram, (or minutiae of the divine mind), as the 
mount Meru in the sesamum seed. 


33. Vasishtha replied: — If you will but stay a few days in the company of 
holy men, and study the sacred Sdstras with a steady mind with me, 


34. Then I will purge away this false view of the visibles from your 
understanding, like the delusive mirage from one’s sight. This absence of the 
view will extinguish your sense of being the viewer, and restore you to your 
intelligence alone. 


35. When the viewer is united with the view, and the view with the viewer, 
there then turns out an unity of the duality, and the duality blends into an 
inseparable unity. 


36. Without union of the two, there is no success of either, and this union 
of both the viewer and the view having disappeared at last, there remains an 
only one unity (which is indissoluble). 


37. I will now cleanse away the dross of all your sense of egoism and 
tuism, with that of the world and all other things from the mirror of your 
mind, by bringing you to your consciousness of self, and total negation of 
everything besides. 


38. From nothing never comes a something, nor from something ever 
proceeds a nothing, and there is no difficulty whatever in removing what does 


not exist in nature, (i.e., That a nil is nil is self-evident, and no argument is 
required to prove it so). 


39. This world which appears so very vast and extensive, was not in being 
at the beginning. It resided in the pure spirit of Brahma, and was evolved from 
the mind (Chitta) of Brahma. 


40. The thing called the world was never produced, nor is it in being nor in 
actual appearance. It is as the form of a bracelet in gold, which it is not 
difficult to alter and reduce to its gross metallic state. 


41. I will explain it fully by other reasons, whereby this truth may appear of 
itself, and impress irresistibly in your mind. 


42. How can that be said to have its being, which was not brought into 
being before, and how can there be a rivulet in the mirage, or the ring of an 
eclipse in the moon? 


43. As a barren woman has no son, nor a mirage any water in it, and as the 
firmament has no plant growing in it, so there is no such thing which we 
erroneously call the world. 


44. Whatever you see, O Rama! is the indestructible Brahma himself, this I 
have many times shown you with good reasons, and not in mere words (as my 
ipse dixit only). 


45. It is unreasonable, O intelligent Rama! to disregard what a learned man 
speaks to you with good reasons, because the dull-headed fellow who neglects 
to listen to the words of reason and wisdom, is deemed as a fool, and is 
subject to all sorts of difficulties. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
Nature of Good Sastras. 


Rama asked: — How can it be reasonably shewn and established, that there is 
nothing to be known and seen in this world, although we have evident notions 
of it supported by sense and right reasoning? 


2. Vasishtha answered: — It is from a long time, that this endemic of the 
fallacious knowledge (of the reality of the world), is prevalent (among 
mankind), and it is by means of true knowledge only that this wrong 
application of the word, “world,” can be removed from the mind. 


3. I will tell you a story, Rama! for your success in (the attainment of) this 
knowledge, if you will but attend to it, you will become both intelligent and 
emancipate. 


4. But if from the impatience of your nature like that of brute creatures, you 
get up and go away after hearing half of this (narrative), you shall then reap 
no benefit from it. 


5. Whoever seeks some object and strives after it, he of course succeeds in 
getting the same, but if he become tired of it, he fails therein. 


6. If you will betake yourself, Rama! to the company of the good and study 
of good Sdstras, you will surely arrive at your state of perfection in course of 
a few days or months, according to the degree of your diligence. 


7. Rama said: — O you, that are best acquainted with the Sdstras, tell me 
which is the best Sdstra for the attainment of spiritual knowledge, and a 
conversancy with which may release us from the sorrows of this life. 


8. Vasishtha replied: — Know, O high minded Rama! this work, (the 
Vasishtha Sanhita) to be the best of all others on spiritual knowledge. It is the 
auspicious Great Ramayana and the Sdstra of Sdstras. 


9. The Ramayana is the best of histories, and serves to enlighten the 
understanding. It is known as containing the essence of all histories. 


10. But by hearing these doctrines one easily finds his liberation coming of 


itself to him, wherefore, it is reckoned as the most holy record. 


11. All the existing scenes of the world will vanish away upon their mature 
consideration, as the thoughts occurring in a dream, are dispersed upon the 
knowledge of the dreaming state after waking. 


12. Whatever there is in this work, may be found in others also, but what is 
not found here, cannot be found elsewhere (in other works), and therefore, the 
learned call it the thesaurus, (sanhitd), or store-house (of philosophy). 


13. Whoever attends to these lectures every day, shall have his excellent 
understanding undoubtedly stored with transcendent knowledge of divinity 
day by day. 


14. He who feels this Sdstra disagreeable to his vitiated taste, may take a 
fancy to the perusal of some other Sdstra that is more wordy and eloquent. 


15. One feels himself liberated in this life by the hearing of these lectures, 
just as one finds himself healed of a disease by a potion of some efficacious 
medicine. 


16. The attentive hearer of these sermons, perceives their efficacy in 
himself, in the same way as one feels the effects of the curses or blessings 
pronounced upon him which never go for nothing (but have their full effects 
in time). 


17. All worldly miseries are at an end with him, who considers well these 
spiritual lectures within himself, and which is hard to be effected by charities 
and austerities, or performance of the acts ordained in the srautd or 
ceremonial Vedas, or by hundreds of practices in obedience to the ordinances 
appointed by them. 


CHAPTER IX. 
On the Supreme Cause of All. (Parama Karana). 


Vasishtha continued: — 


They are truly delighted and gratified (in their souls), who are ever devoted 
with all their hearts and minds in holy conversation among themselves. 


2. Those that are devoted to the acquisition of knowledge and investigation 
of spiritual science, enjoy the same bliss of liberation in their living state, as it 
is said to attend on disembodied souls. 


3. Rama said: — Tell me O Brahman! the distinct natures of the living and 
disembodied liberations, that I may try to learn the same, with an 
understanding enlightened by the light of Sdstras, (literally, having the eye- 
sight of Sdstras). 


4. Vasishtha said: — Who ever remains as he is, (ie., without any 
perturbation in his worldly course), and continues intact as vacuity amidst 
society, such a one is called the living liberated, (Jivan mukta). 


5. Who so is employed in his intellection only and seems to be sleeping in 
his waking state, though while conducting his worldly affairs, such a one is 
called the living liberated. 


6. Whose countenance is neither flushed nor dejected in pleasure or pain, 
(in joy or grief and such other reverses), and who remains contented with 
what he gets, such a one is called liberated while he is living. 


7. Whose waking is as a state of sound sleep, and who is not awake to the 
accidents of the waking state, and whose waking state is insensible of the 
desires incident to it, such a one is called liberated in his life. 


8. Who though actuated by the feelings of affection, enmity, fear and the 
like, is at rest, and as clear and undisturbed as vacuity within himself, such a 
one is called liberated while he is alive. 


9. Who has not an air of pride in him, and is not conceited (with a notion of 
his greatness) when he does or refrains to do anything, such a one is called 


self-liberated in his life time. 


10. Who at one glance or winking of his eye, has a full view of the whole 
creation and final destruction of the world, like the Supreme self (to which he 
is assimilated), such a one is said to be liberated in his life time. 


11. Whoever is not feared by nor is afraid of any body, and who is freed 
from the emotions of joy, anger and fear, such a one is liberated in life. 


12. Who is quiet and quietly disposes his business of this world, and who, 
though he stands as an individual in the sight of men, attaches no individuality 
to himself, and who though a sentient being, is insensible to all impressions, 
such is the living liberated soul. 


13. Who being full of all possessions, and having everything present before 
him, remains cold and apathetic to them, as if they were useless to him, such a 
man is liberated in his life. 


14. Now leaving the subject of, “living liberation,” I will tell you what they 
call the “disembodied liberation,” which like a breath of wind enters into the 
soul, after it has fled from the mortal body. 


15. The disembodied free spirit neither rises nor sets (like the sun), nor is it 
subject to wane (like the moon), it is neither manifest nor hidden, it is not at a 
distance, nor is it in me, thee or in any other person. 


16. It shines forth in the form of the sun, and preserves the world in the 
manner of Vishnu. It creates the world in the shape of the lotus-born Brahma, 
and destroys all as Rudra or Siva. 


17. It takes the form of the sky supported on the shoulders of air, which 
supports all living beings, the gods, sages, and demi-gods in the three worlds. 
It takes the form of boundary mountains and separates the different regions (of 
the earth and skies). 


18. It becomes the earth and supports these numerous sets of beings, it 
takes the forms of trees, plants, and grass, and yields fruits and grains for 
support (of all living creatures). 


19. It takes the forms of fire and water and burns and melts in them by 
itself. It sheds ambrosia in the form of the moon, and causes death in the 
shape of poison. 


20. It becomes light wherewith it fills the space of the firmament, and 
spreads darkness in the form of Erebus, (tama or Teom). It becomes vacuum 
(vyom or beom) to leave empty space for all, while in the form of hills it 
obstructs their free passage on earth. 


21. In the form of the fleet mind, it moves the self-moving animals, and in 
that of dull matter it settles the unmoving immovables. It girds the earth by its 
form of the ocean, as a bracelet encircles the arm. 


22. The bodiless spirit takes upon it the great body of the sun, and illumes 
all the worlds with their minute particles, while it remains quiet in itself. 


23. Whatever is shining in this universe or ever was or is to be so, in any of 
the three, — past, present, and future times, know them all, O Rama! as forms 
of the Divine Spirit, (which is free to take any shape it likes). 


24. Rama said: — Tell me, O Brahman! why this view of liberation, 
appears so very difficult to me, as to make me believe it altogether 
incomprehensible to and unattainable by anybody. 


25. Vasishtha replied: — This (disembodied) liberation is called nirvana or 
total extinction of self-consciousness, and is styled Brahma also (in whom the 
human soul is finally absorbed). Attend now to the means of its attainment. 


26. All such visible objects known as I, thou, this, efc., being unproduced, 
(anutpanna), from the eternal sat or entity of God, it is impossible to have any 
conception of them in our minds. 


27. Rama said: — Methinks, O best of them that know the knowable! that 
the bodiless souls of the liberated, when they pass through the bounds of the 
three worlds, have again to be born according to the course of nature. 


28. Vasishtha replied: — Those that retain the reminiscence of the three 
worlds have to move about in them, but such as have lost the idea of their 
existence, are absorbed in infinity. 


29. For how can one derive the knowledge of the unity of God from his 
belief in the duality of the separate existence of the world? Therefore, the 
figurative sense of cosmos as God, (Viswa), cannot give the spiritual and 
infinite idea of Brahma. 


30. He is no other but himself, of the nature of pure intellect, and of the 
form of the clear and tranquil vacuum (that pervades all things). Brahma is 
said to be the world, to signify his manifestation of its unreality as a reality 
unto us. 


31. I have well considered about a golden bracelet, and found nothing as a 
bracelet in it save its gold. (The form is changeable, but the substance is real). 


32. I observed the billows, and found nothing in them but water, and where 
there was no water, I saw no billow to rise. (It is the substance and not its 
shape or shadow that is to be looked into). 


33. I see no oscillation anywhere except in the winds, which are no other 
than this force in motion, and moving all things in the world. (Thus, the spirit 
of God is the fountain or primum mobile of all forces, which are but forms of 
the main force). 


34. As vacuity abides in air, and water appears in the burning deserts, and 
as there is light spread over all creation, so is the spirit of Brahma manifest in 
the three worlds in the forms of the very worlds. 


35. Rama said: — Tell me, O sage! the cause which makes this world with 
its nature of absolute negation or non-existence, to exhibit such distinct 
appearances in its phenomena. 


36. Tell me also, how the viewer and the view (of these worlds), being both 
extinct (as they are equally unreal in their nature), there remains their nirvana 
or absorption in the Deity without their personalities. 


37. Again as it is impossible to conceive the existence of the visible 
objects, say how is it possible to conceive the existence of the invisible 
Brahma in his own nature (of incomprehensibility). 


38. Say by what mode of reasoning this truth may be known and 
ascertained, and this being accomplished, there remains nothing else to be 
inquired into. 


39. Vasishtha replied: — This false knowledge or prejudice of the reality of 
the world, has been long prevalent like a chronic disease (among mankind), 
and requires to be removed by the specific charm, (mantra), of reasoning 
only. 


40. It cannot however be expelled quickly and in a minute, but requires 
length of time, like the ascent and descent of an even sided precipice. 


41. Therefore hearken to what I say, for dispelling your fallacy of the 
world, by means of arguments, logical inferences, and habitual meditation 
(about the nature of God). 


42. Attend now Rama! to a tale that I am to tell you for your attainment of 
this knowledge, and by the hearing of which you will become intelligent, 
wise, and liberated. 


43. I will even now relate to you the subject of the production of the world, 
in order to show you, that all that is produced serves to bind our souls to the 
earth, and that you may live quite free from the same. 


44. I will tell you at present under this topic of creation, that the erroneous 
conception of the world is as unsubstantial as Vacuum itself. (i.e., All this is 


null and void). 


45. Because this world which appears to contain these moving and 
unmoving beings, and abounds in various races of gods, Asura, — giants and 
Kinnaras, — pigmies. 


46. All these together with the Rudras and other demi-gods, become 
invisible and lose themselves in nothing at the ultimate dissolution of the 
world. (This final disappearance, tirobhdva, of all things, proves their present 
appearance, dvirbhdva, to be mere phantoms of our brain. — Gloss). 


47. Then there remains a moist and hollow deep, without light and thick 
spread with mist, all undefinable and undeveloped, save something which is 
Real and lasts forever. 


48. There was no air nor form of anything, no sight nor anything to be seen. 
There were not these multitudes of created and material beings, that appear to 
be endless and everlasting to view. 


49. There was a nameless self, the fullest of the full in its form, it was no 
ens nor non ens, no entity nor non-entity, no reality nor unreality neither. 


50. It was mere intellect without its intellection, infinite without decay, 
auspicious and full of bliss. It was without its beginning, middle, and end, 
eternal and imperishable. 


51. In him this world is manifest as a pearly goose in painting; He is and 
yet is not this (creation), and is the soul of both what is real as well as unreal. 
(Sadasaddtman). 


52. He is without ears, tongue, nose, eyes, and touch, yet he hears, tastes, 
smells, sees and feels everything in all places and at all times. 


53. He is also that (intellectual) light, (chiddloka), whereby the form of that 
real as well as unreal Being, — sadasaddtma is discerned by us in his 
perspective of creation, as one without beginning or end, and presenting a 
representation that is without any colour or shade. 


54. He is that vacuous Soul who views the worlds as clearly, as the Yogi 
beholds Him in the form of ineffable light, with his half closed eyes, and 
fixing his sight to the midst of his eyebrows, (in his khechari mudra or aerial 
mode of meditation). 


55. He is the cause of all, and whose cause is as nil as the horns of a hare, 
and whose works are all these worlds, like so many waves of the sea. 


56. His light is ever shining everywhere, and he has his seat in the human 


heart, and it is from the candle light of his intellect, that all the worlds derive 
their light. 


57. It is He without whose light the sun would dwindle into darkness, and 
whose existence alone gives the world its appearance of a mirage. 


58. It is his pulsation that vibrates throughout the universe, and it is his 
inertia that stops the course of the whole; it is on that pivot that the world has 
its revolution, just as the turning round of a fire brand describes a circle. 


59. His nature is pure and unchangeable; and the works of creation and 
destruction, are mere acts of his volition, (Vildsa), in the persons of Brahma 
and Hara. 


60. It is his inertia and force that gives rest and motion to all things, like the 
ubiquious course of the winds. But this is the common belief that he moves, 
while in reality his nature is free from all mutability, (like the immovable 
rock). 


61. He is always awake in his ever sleeping state, and therefore can neither 
be said to be waking nor sleeping anywhere or at any time, but is both awake 
and asleep everywhere and at all times. 


62. His quiescence is attended with bliss and tranquillity, and his agitation 
puts the world in motion and in its course of action; which is said to remain 
unaltered in both states which unite in him. 


63. He is inherent in all things as fragrance is innate in the flower, and is 
indestructible as its odour at the destruction of the flower. He pervades all 
things, and is yet as intangible as the whiteness of linen. 


64. Who though speechless, is the author of all speech and sound, and who 
though he appears to be as incogitant as a stone, is full of cogitation, (being 
the intellect itself). Who though fully satisfied with his bliss, enjoys all things, 
although he requires nothing for himself. 


65. Who though bodiless actuates all the members of the body, and is 
attributed with a thousand arms and eyes (in the Veda), and who having no 
support for himself, is yet the support of all, and pervades the whole without 
being seated anywhere. 


66. Who having no organs nor organic power, is the organ of organs, and 
performs the functions of innumerable organs, and who without a sensorial 
mind, exhibits endless designs of his Divine mind in the infinity of creation. 


67. It is for want of our (knowledge) of him, that we are in constant dread 
of this delusive world as in that of a dragon or hydra, but it is at his sight, (or 


by our knowledge of him), that all our fears and desires fly away afar from us. 


68. It is in the presence of the clear light of that God of Truth, that all the 
wishes of our minds have a better play, just as actors dance the best as long as 
they have the lights. 


69. It is by him that a hundred series of visible objects (as pots and plates, 
— ghata-patddi), rise every moment to our view, like the ceaseless series of 
waves, billows and surges rising on the surface of the waters. 


70. It is he that exhibits himself otherwise than what he is, in hundreds of 
different shapes to our mistaken minds, as the substance of gold is made to 
appear to our view in the various forms of bracelets, armlets, and a hundred 
other sorts of trinkets. 


71. He who manifests himself as the soul, abiding in me, thee, and in this or 
that person, and is neither myself, thyself, himself, nor itself, is the Supreme 
soul or Self, that is the same with and apart from all. 


72. It is he and the self-same being, whether you view him in one or more 
objects, as it is the same water that heaves itself in this one or the other wave. 
Thus all visible phenomena have their rise from him. 


73. He from whom time has its counting and the visibles have their view, 
by whom the mind exercises its thinking powers, and by whose light the 
world is enlightened, is the Supreme. 


74. Whatever forms, figures and their actions, whatsoever flavours and 
odours, and what sounds, touch, feelings, and perceptions soever, you are 
sensible of, know them all and their cause also to be the Supreme. 


75. You will be able to know your soul, O good Rama! if you will take it in 
the light of the sight or faculty of vision, that lies between the looker and the 
object looked upon. 


76. Know it as increate and indestructible, and without beginning and end. 
It is the eternal and everlasting Brahma and bliss itself. It is immaculate and 
infallible, highly adorable and unblamable in its nature. It is beyond all 
description and a mere void in its form. It is the cause of causes and a notion 
of something that is unknowable. It is the understanding, and the inward 
faculty of the intellect or the mind. (i.e., It is a spiritual substance and must be 
known in the spirit). 


CHAPTER X. 
Description of the Chaotic State. 


Rama said: — That which remains incident to the Universal dissolution, 
(mahd-pralaya), is commonly designated by the term, “formless void.” 


2. How then said you, there was no void, and how could there be no light 
nor darkness neither? 


3. How could it be without the intellect and the living principle, and how 
could the entities of the mind and understanding be wanting in it? 


4. How could there be nothing and not all things? Such like paradoxical 
expressions of yours, have created much confusion in me. 


5. Vasishtha said: — You have raised a difficult extra-question, Rama! but 
I shall have no difficulty to solve it, as the sun is at no pains to dispel the 
nocturnal gloom. 


6. On the occasion or the termination of a great Kalpa age, when there 
remains That Entity, (the Tat sat) of God, it cannot be said to be a void, as I 
will now explain to you. Attend Rama and hear. 


7. Like images carved in bas-relief upon a pillar, was this world situated in 
relievo of That Entity, and cannot be said to have been a void. 


8. Again, when there was the representation of the plenitude under the 
appellation of the world at any place (in the essence of God), and be it real or 
unreal, it could not have been a void and vacuity. 


9. As a pillar with carved or painted figures, cannot be said to be devoid of 
them, so Brahma exhibiting the worlds contained in him, cannot become a 
void. (i.e., As a pillar is not devoid of figures which has carved images on it, 
so Brahma is not a void, having the worlds contained in him. This is a 
negative enthymem). 


10. But the world contained in Brahma, becomes both something and 
nothing, as billows in calm waters may either exist or not exist. (So the 
appearance and disappearance of the worlds in Brahma, like those of the little 


billows in a quiet lake, prove their existence and non-existence at the same 
time, as it is predicated of the Chaos or the Mahdpralaya. — Gloss). 


11. Again it happens that certain figures are marked on some insensible 
trees in some places by the hand of time, which people mistake for images, so 
it comes to pass that certain figures of evanescent matter, occur in the eternal 
mind, which men mistake for the real world. 


12. This comparison of the figured pillar and tree and the world, is a partial 
and not complete simile, the similitude here referring only to the situation of 
the transient world in the substance of the permanent Brahma, (like the 
appearance of false figures in the firmly fixed pillar and on the standing tree). 


13. But this appearance of the world is not caused by another (as in the case 
of the pillar, figures and pictures carved and painted by the hands of the 
statuary and painter). It rises, lasts, and sets spontaneously and of itself in the 
self-same essence of Brahma (as the figures in the tree or the waves of the 
Ocean). It is the property of the divine soul and mind to raise and set such 
imageries in them by turns, like the creations of our imagination. 


14. The meaning of the word void, (stinya), instead of no void, (astinya), or 
existence, is a fiction as false as inanity is a nullity in nature. Something must 
come out of something, and never from a void nothing, and how can nothing 
be reduced to nothing in the end, — mahdpralaya (stinyatd stinyate katham)? 
(Ex nihilo nihil fit, et in nihilum nihil reverti posse). 


15. In answer to your second question, it has been said, “there was darkness 
neither.” Because the divine light of Brahma (which existed before creation), 
was not like the light of a material luminary, (which is followed by darkness). 
The everlasting light was not to be obscured by darkness, like the sunshine, or 
moon-light, or the blazing of fire, or the twinkling of stars, or our eyes. 


16. It is the absence of the light of the great celestial luminaries, that is 
called darkness, and there being no material property in the immaterial 
essence of God, there could be no such light or darkness with him before 
creation. 


17. The light of the vacuous Brahma is an internal perception of the soul, 
and is only felt and perceived within one’s self, and never externally by 
anybody, nor is this spiritual light ever clouded by any mist or darkness of 
temporal objects. 


18. The indestructible Brahma is beyond and free from external and visible 
light and darkness, and is above the region of vacuum which is contained, as it 
were, within his bosom, and contains the universe as sheathed within its 


hollow womb. 


19. As there is no difference between the outside and inside of a fruit, (both 
of which is the same thing), so there is no shade of difference betwixt Brahma 
and the universe, (the one pervading and the other pervaded by his spirit). 


20. As the billow is contained in and composed of the water and the pot of 
the earth, so the world being contained in Brahma, it cannot be said as null 
and void, but full of the spirit of God. 


21. The comparison of earth and water does not agree corporeally with the 
spiritual essence of God, whose vacuous spirit contains and comprises the 
whole, (Visva), within itself, as those elements do their component parts and 
productions. 


22. Now as the sphere of the intellect is clearer and brighter far than the 
spheres of air and empty space, so the sense and idea of the word “world” as 
situated in the divine mind, is clearer in a far greater degree than this visible 
world appears to us. 


23. (In answer to the third question with regard to the want of intellect), it 
is said thus: — As the pungency of pepper is perceived by one who tastes it, 
and not by him who has never tasted it, so the minutiae of the Intellect are 
known in the intellectual sphere by a cultivated intelligence, and by none who 
is without it. 


24. Thus the Intellect appears as no intellect to one who is devoid of 
intelligence in himself, (i.e., one having the Intellect, does not perceive it 
without a cultivated understanding). So this world is seen in the spirit of God 
or otherwise, according as one has cultivated or neglected his spiritual 
knowledge. 


25. The world as it is, is seen either in its outward figure or in a spiritual 
light, as other than or the same with Brahma, (by the materialist and 
spiritualist), but the Yogi views it in its fourth (turiya) state of susupta or utter 
extinction in his unconscious soul. 


26. Therefore, the Yogi, though leading a secular life, remains somnolent, 
(Susupta), in his soul, and tranquil, (Sdnta) in his mind. He lives like Brahma, 
unknown to and unnoticed by others, and though knowing all and full of 
thoughts in himself, he is as a treasury of Knowledge, unknown to the rest of 
mankind. 


27. (In answer to the question how corporeal beings could proceed from the 
incorporeal Brahma). Vasishtha says: — As waves of various shapes rise and 
fall in the still and shapeless breast of the sea, so innumerable worlds of 


various forms, float about in the unaltered and formless vacuity of Brahma’s 
bosom. 


28. From the fullness of the Divine soul, (Brahmdtmd), proceeds the 
fullness of the living soul, (Jivatma), which is formless also, (nirdkriti). This 
aspect of Brahma is said to be owing to the purpose of manifesting himself (as 
living in all living beings). 


29. So the totality of worlds proceeding from the plenum of Brahma, there 
remains the same sum total also as the plenitude of Brahma himself. 


30. Considering the world as synonymous with Brahma in our minds, we 
find their identity (in the same manner), as one finds by taste the pepper and 
its pungency to be the same thing. 


31. Such being the state of the unreality of the mind and its cognizables, 
their reflexions upon each other, (i.e., of the mind upon the object and those of 
the object on the mind), are equally untrue as the shadow of a shadow. (Here 
is an utter negation of perception and perceptibles. There being no material 
substratum, the shadowy scene of the world is a mere mental synthesis. — 
Berkeley). 


32. Know Brahma to be smaller than the smallest atom, and minutest of 
minutest particles. He is purer than air, and more tranquil than the subtle ether 
which is embosomed in him. 


33. Unbounded by space and time, his form is the most extensive of all. He 
is without beginning and end, and an ineffable light without brightness in it. 
(He is the light of lights). 


34. He is of the form of intellect, — chit and life eternal, without the 
conditions and accidents of vitality, — jivatd. The Divine Mind has its will 
eternal, and is devoid of the desires of finite minds, — chittata. 


35. Without the rise of the intellect, (i.e., its development), there is neither 
vitality nor understanding, no intellection nor any organic action or sensation, 
and no mental desire or feeling whatever, (all of which are but products of the 
intellect or Ego). 


36. Hence, the Being that is full of these powers, (and without which no 
power has its display), and who is without decline or decay, is seen by us to 
be seated in his state of tranquil vacuity, and is rarer than the rarefied vacuum 
of the ethereal regions. 


37. Rama said: — Tell me again and more precisely of the form of this 
transcendental Being, who is of the nature of infinite intelligence, and which 


may give more light to my understanding. 


38. Vasishtha said: — I have told you repeatedly, that there is one supreme 
Brahma, the cause of causes, who remains alone by himself, when the 
universe is finally dissolved or absorbed in him. Hear me describe Him fully 
to you. 


39. That which the Yogi sees within himself after forgetting his personality, 
and repressing the faculties and functions of his mind, in his Samadhi, — 
meditation, is verily the form of the unspeakable Being. 


40. As the Yogi who is absorbed in his meditation in absence of the visible 
world, and in privation of the viewer and visibles, and sees the light shining in 
himself, even such is the form of that Being. 


41. Who having forgotten the nature of the living soul, — jiva, and his 
proclivity towards the intelligibles, remains in the pure light and tranquil state 
of his intellect, (as in Yoga), such is the form of the Supreme Spirit. 


42. He who has no feeling of the breathing of the winds, or of the touch or 
pressure of anything upon his body, but lives as a mass of intelligence in this 
life, is verily the form of the Supreme. 


43. Again, that state of the mind, which a man of sense enjoys in his long 
and sound sleep, that is undisturbed by dreams and gnats, is verily the form of 
the Supreme. 


44. That which abides in the hearts of vacuum, air, and stone, and is the 
intellect of all inanimate beings, is the form of the Supreme. 


45. Again, whatever irrational and insensible beings live by nature, as 
without the soul and mind (as vegetables and minerals), the tranquil state of 
their existence is the nature of the Supreme Soul. 


46. That which is seated in the midst of the intellectual light of the soul, 
and what is situated in the midst of the ethereal light of the sun, and that 
which is in the midst of our visual light, is verily the form of the Supreme. 
(This passage admits of an occult interpretation in the Yoga system). 


47. The soul which is the witness of our knowledge, of solar and visual 
lights and darkness, is without beginning and end, and is the form of the 
Supreme. 


48. He who manifests this world to us, and keeps himself hidden from 
view, be he the same with or distinct from the world, is the form of the 
Supreme. 


49. Who though full of activity, is sedate as a rock, and who though not a 
vacuum, (being the plenum of all), appears yet as an empty vacuity, such is 
the form of the Supreme. 


50. He who is the source and terminus of our triple consciousness of the 
knower, known and knowledge, (i.e., from whom they rise and in whom they 
set by turns), is most difficult of attainment. 


51. He who shines forth with the lustre of the triple conditions of the 
knowable, knower and their knowledge, and shows them to us as a large 
insensible mirror, is verily the form of the Supreme, who is here represented 
not as the cause, — nimitta, but as the source, — vivarta of the triple 
category. 


52. The mind that is liberated from bodily activities, (as in the waking 
Jagrat state) from its dreaming, (as in the swapna or sleeping state), and is 
concentrated in the intellect (as in the state of susupti or sound sleep), and 
abides alike in all moving as well as unmoving bodies, (as in the turiya or 
fourth state of the soul), is said to remain in the end of our being. 


53. The intelligent mind which is as fixed as an immovable body, and freed 
from the exercise of its faculties, is comparable with the Divine Mind. 


CHAPTER XI. 
Spiritual View of Creation. 


Rama said: — Tell me, O Brahman, wherein this world abides at its last 
dissolution, when it does not retain its present form, nor this resplendent 
show, (as we see in it now). 


2. Vasishtha answered: — Tell me, Rama, what is the form of the barren 
woman’s son, and wherefrom he comes and where he goes, tell me also from 
where comes the sky-arbour, (aerial castle), and where it remains. 


3. Rama replied: — There never was, nor is, nor ever will be the son of a 
barren woman or an arbour in the sky, why then ask about the form and figure 
of what is nothing? 


4. Vasishtha said: — As there never was a barren woman’s son or a forest 
in the air, so there existed no such scene as that of the world before. 


5. That which has no existence at all, could have neither its production 
before, nor can it have its dissolution afterwards. What shall I then tell you 
regarding its genesis or exit. 


6. Rama rejoined: — The son of a barren woman and a forest in the sky are 
mere fictions, but the visible world is not so, which has both its beginning and 
end. 


7. Vasishtha replied: — It is hard to have a comparison of the compared 
object, agreeing in all respects with what it is compared. The comparison of 
the world, is as a simile of those objects, which admit of no comparison (but 
with themselves). 


8. The appearance of the world, is compared with that of a bracelet, 
because the one is as false as the other, and neither of them is real. 


9. And as there is nothing in the sky except a negative emptiness, so the 
existence of the world in Brahma, is but a negative idea. 


10. As the collyrium is no other than blackness, and as there is no 
difference between frost and its coldness, so the world is not otherwise than 


the great Brahma himself. 


11. As coldness cannot be negatived of the moon and frost, so creation 
cannot be negated of God. (Literally, creation is no negative property of 
Brahma, but essential to his nature). 


12. As there is no water in a sea of the mirage, nor light in the new moon, 
so this world, as it is, does not abide in the pure spirit of God (in its gross 
state). 


13. That which did not exist at first owing to its want of a cause, has neither 
its existence at present, nor can it be destroyed (when it is a nil itself). 


14. How is it possible for a dull material object to have any other cause but 
a material one, just as it is not the light, (but some solid substance), that is the 
cause of a shadow. 


15. But as none of these works, has come into existence without some 
cause, that cause, whatever it is, is situated in these productions of it, (i.e., the 
author is displayed in his works). 


16. Whatever appears as ignorance or delusion (as this world), has some 
appearance of intelligence or truth (of the Divinity) in it, as the delusion of the 
world seen in a dream, is the effect of the intellect within us. (Consciousness 
is awake in our dreams also). 


17. As the illusion of the world in a dream, is not without our inward 
consciousness of it, in like manner Brahma was not unconscious of the 
expansion of the world, at the beginning of creation. 


18. All this that we behold about us, is situated in the divine soul, (in the 
same manner as the visions in our dreams, are but archetypes of our souls), 
there is no other world that rises and sets (but what is imprinted in our minds). 


19. As fluidity is another name for water, and fluctuation the same with 
wind, and as sunshine is no other than light, so the world is naught but 
Brahma (displayed in nature). 


20. As the figure of a city, resides in the inward intellect of one, who is 
conscious of his dreaming, in the same manner, this world is displayed in the 
Supreme soul. 


21. Rama said: — If it is so, then tell me, O Brahman! whence is this our 
belief of its substantiality, and how this unreal and visionary ideal, presents its 
baneful visible aspect unto us. 


22. For the view being in existence, there must be its viewer also, and when 


there is the viewer, there is the view likewise. As long as either of these is in 
existence, there is our bondage, and it is on the disappearance of both, that our 
liberation chiefly depends, (which can hardly take place). 


23. It is entirely impossible to be so, as long as our notion of the view, is 
not lost in our minds, for unless the view is vanished both from the vision of 
the eyes and mind, no one can even form an idea of liberation in his mind. 


24. Again the representation of the view at first, and its obliteration 
afterwards, is not enough for our liberation, because the remembrance of the 
view, is bondage of the soul. 


25. Moreover when the picture of the view, is settled in the soul, and 
reflected in the mirror of the mind, there is no necessity of its recollection, (for 
what is deeply rooted in the soul, comes out of itself). 


26. The intellect which was without the notion of the visibles at first, would 
be entitled to liberation, were it not owing to the nature of the viewer (to 
imbibe the ideas of visibles). 


27. Now Sir, please to remove by your reasoning, my hopelessness of 
liberation, which I ween, is unattainable by any. 


28. Vasishtha said: — Hear me, Rama! explain to you in length, how the 
unreal world with all its contents, appears as real to us. 


29. For unless it is explained to you by my reasoning, and the narratives 
and instances (of the practice of others), this doubt will not subside in your 
breast, as dirt sets down in the lake. 


30. Then Rama, you will be able to conduct yourself on earth, as one under 
assurance of the erroneous conception of the creation and existence of the 
world. 


31. You will then remain as a rock against the impressions of affluence and 
want, and of gain and loss, and your relation with whatever, is fleeting or 
lasting and the like. 


32. Mind, that there is that only one spirit, which is self-existent, and all 
besides is mere fiction. I will now tell you, how the triple world was produced 
and formed. 


33. It was from Him, that all these beings have come to existence, while He 
of himself, is all and everything in it. He likewise appears to us and disappears 
also, both as forms and their appearances, and as the mind and its faculties, 
and as figures and their shapes, and as modes and motions of all things. 


CHAPTER XII. 
The Idealistic Theo-cosmogony of Vedanta. 


Vasishtha said: — 


From the state of perfect quiescence and tranquillity of the supremely Holy 
spirit, the universe rose to being in the manner, which you must hear with 
your best understanding and attention. 


2. As sound sleep displays itself in visionary dreams, so does Brahma 
manifest himself in the works of creation, of which he is the soul and 
receptacle, (i.e., who contains and forms and enlivens the whole). 


3. The world, which of its nature is continually progressive in its course, is 
identic with the essence of that Being, whose form is self-same with the 
ineffable glory of his eternally gemming Intellect, (chin-mani). 


4. This chit or Intellect, then, (i.e., after its inert quiescence), gets of itself 
an intellection, (chetyd), in itself, before assuming to itself consciousness or 
the knowledge of egoism. (This is the first stage of the percipient soul). 


5. Then this thinking Intellect, (chetya-chit), gets the notions, (bodhas), of 
some faint images, (uhita-ripas), which are purer and lighter than air, and 
which have received their names and forms afterwards. (The innate ideas are 
born in it before the embryonic mind or soul). 


6. Afterwards this transcendent essence, (Intellect), becomes an intelligent 
principle, (sacheta), and eager for intelligence, (chetana). It is now worthy of 
its name as Intellect or chit, on account of its attaining to what is called 
intelligence. 


7. Lastly, it takes the form of gross consciousness, (ghana-samvedana), and 
receives the name of the living soul, — jiva. It now loses its divine nature by 
reflecting on itself, (i.e., its own personality). 


8. This living principle, is then involved in thoughts relating to the world 
only, but depends by its nature on the divine essence, (as the fallacy of the 
snake depends on the substance of the rope). 


9. Afterwards there rises a void space into being, called Kham, — vacuum, 
(Arabic Khdviyetun), which is the seed or source of the property of sound, and 
which became expressive of meaning afterwards. (It is called dkdsa or sky- 
light, from kdsa to shine, as light was the first work of God). 


10. Next in order are produced the elements of egoism and duration in the 
living soul, (i.e., the simultaneousness of the ideas of self-entity and duration 
in the living principle). And these two terms, are the roots of the subsistence 
of future worlds. (i.e., The individuality and durability of things). 


11. This ideal knowledge, of the unreal forms of the network of world, in 
divine Spirit, was made to appear as a reality by the Omnipotent power. (i.e., 
The ideal world appeared afterwards as real). 


12. Thus the ideal self-consciousness became the seed, (or root), of the tree 
of desires, which were vacillated by egoism in the form of air. 


13. The intellect in the form of the airy ego, thinks on the element of 
sounds, (sabda tanmdtram), it becomes by degrees denser than the rarefied 
air, and produces the element of mind. 


14. Sound is the seed (or root) of words, which were afterwards diversified 
in the forms of names or nouns and significant terms, and the assemblage of 
words, as shoots of trees, is varied in padas or inflected words, vdkyas, or 
sentences, and the collections of Vedas and Sdstras. 


15. It is from this Supreme spirit, that all these worlds derived their beauty 
afterwards, and the multitude of words (which sprang from the sounds), and 
were full of meaning, became widely spread at last. 


16. The Intellect having such a family as its offspring, is expressed by the 
word, jiva, (zoa), or the living soul, which became afterwards the arbor (or 
source) of all forms of beings, known under a variety of expressions and their 
significations. (i.e., The living god Brahma became the cause of the formal 
world, from the tanmdtra elements produced by Brahma). 


17. The fourteen kinds of living beings, which fill the cells in the bowels of 
all worlds, sprang afterwards from this living soul. (These include all 
vegetable and animal life and all such as increase in bulk and growth). 


18. It was then, that the Intellect by a motion and inflation of itself, and at 
an instantaneous thought, became the element tanmdtra of touch and feeling 
(the air), which was yet without its name and action. (The Spirit breathed 
breathless. Sruti). This breath caused air, which expanded itself and filled all 
bodies, which are objects of touch and feeling. 


19. The air, which is the seed (root) of the tree of tangibles, then developed 
itself into branches, composed of the (49) various kinds of winds, that are the 
causes of the breathings and motions of all beings. 


20. Then the Intellect produced at pleasure and from its idea of light, the 
elemental essence of lustre, which received afterwards its different names 
(from the light of the sun and moon and the stars, as also from those of fire 
and lightning). 


21. Then the sun, fire, lightning and others, which are the seeds (or roots) 
of the tree of light, caused the various colours of bodies that filled the world. 
(That light is the cause of colour, was known to the ancient Rishi). 


22. It reflected on the want of fluidity, and produced the liquid body of 
waters, whose taste constitutes the element, (tanmatra), of flavour. 


23. The desire of the soul for different flavours, (rasas), is the seed of the 
tree of taste, and it is by the relish of a variety of tastes, that the world is to go 
on in its course. 


24. Then the self-willed Brahma, wishing to produce the visible earth, 
caused the property of smell to appertain to it from his own element of it. 


25. He made his elementary solidity, the seed or source of the tree of forms, 
(morphology), as he made his own element of rotundity the substratum of the 
spherical world. 


26. Those elements being all evolved from the Intellect, are again involved 
of themselves in it, as the bubbles of water rise and subside in itself. 


27. In this manner, all those beings remain in their combined states, until 
their final dissolution into their simple and separate forms. 


28. All those things, which are but forms and formations of pure Intellect, 
remain within the sphere of Divine Intelligence, as the germs of the big banian 
tree, reside in the forms of pollen and the seed. 


29. These sprouted forth in time, and burst out into a hundred branches, and 
after having been concealed in an atom, became as big as they were to last 
forever. 


30. Such is the growth and multiplication of things by pervasion of the 
Intellect, until they are put to a stop by its contraction and when weakened in 
their bodies by its desertion, they droop down in the end. 


31. Thus is this class of elementary tanmdtras, produced in the Intellect out 
of its own volition, and are manifested in the form of formless minutiz to 


sight, (trasaranus). 


32. These five-fold elements are verily the only seeds of all things in the 
world. They are the seeds of the primary momentum that was given to them 
(in the beginning). In our notions, they are the seeds of elementary bodies, but 
in their real nature, they are the increate ideal shapes of the Intellect 
replenishing the world. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
On the Production of the Self-Born. 


Vasishtha said: — 


Rama! When the Supreme Brahma remains in his resplendent and tranquil 
state (before creation), there is no essence of ethereal light or heat or even 
darkness produced in the intellectual spirit. (But they lie hidden there as if 
buried in oblivion). 


2. The Sat-God has the attribute of Chetya, — intellectuality at first, and it 
is from the intellection, (Chetana), of his intellectual part, (Chetydnsa), that 
the epithet of mind, (Chitta), is attributed to him. The faculties, (Sakti), of his 
intellect, (Chit), are called its intelligence, (Chetand). 


3. The Chit or intellect has then the attribute of the Living soul, (Jiva), from 
its intelligence, (Chetand), and connection with the Chetya or intelligible 
objects in nature. It is next attributed with the title of mdyd or illusion, from 
the subjection of its Chetya or cognizable objects only to itself, — Aham 
matra. 


4. It has then the attribute of understanding, (buddhi), from the excess of its 
egoism, (ahantd), which is full with the purposes of its mind and the elements 
of sound, efc. (i.e., with a desire for all sensible objects). 


5. This (living, deluded and self-reflecting) ego, is puffed up with thoughts 
of (possessing) all things, and looks upon the great arbour of the visible world 
(as the great garden for its pleasure and gain). 


6. But the living souls, like so many evanescent objects seen in a dream, are 
made to rise and fall one after the other, in this great forest of the world 
surrounded by the skies. 


7. But the world is (as continuous) as the grove of Karajna plants, growing 
from unsown seeds, and its elementary bodies of the water, fire, earth and air, 
have no regard for anybody (that is living or dead). 


8. The intellect, which is the soul of the universe, creates afterwards the 
earth and all other things, as one remembering the objects of his dream 


(recalls them to his memory). 


9. Wherever there is the germ of the world, it develops itself even at that 
place, the live elements are the five-fold seed of the world, but the undecaying 
intellect is the seed of the quintuple, (pancha-bhiita). 


10. As is the seed so is its fruit, hence know the world to be a form and full 
of God, and the spacious firmament to be the reservoir of the quintuple 
elements in the beginning of creation. 


11. The soul like the body, is composed of the powers of the Intellect, and 
does not subsist of itself, but being inflated by the same, it extends its bulk. 


12. But the vacuous form of the intellect, which is seated in the spiritual 
body of the soul, cannot be composed of solid reality (as the primary elements 
of matter). This is not possible, hence nothing can come out from an 
impossibility. 


13. Again that which is changeable in its form, cannot have its sameness at 
all times, hence if the essence of the quintuple elements, be attributed to 
Brahma, from the idea of their being the quintessence of his spirit, there can 
be no immaterial and immutable Brahma. 


14. Therefore, know this quintuple to be the developed Brahma himself, as 
he evolved them in the beginning, and as he is their producer for the creation 
of the world. 


15. Thus He being the prime cause of their production, there is nothing that 
is produced (without) him, and the world is no product of itself. 


16. The unreal appears as real as a city seen in a dream, and as a castle built 
in air by our hopes, so we place the living soul in ourselves, which has its 
foundation in the vacuous spirit of God. 


17. Thus the brilliant spirit, which is situated in the Divine Intellect, being 
no earthly or any other material substance, is styled the living soul, and 
remains in vacuum as a luminous body rising in the sky. 


18. Hear now how this vacuous living soul, comes to be embodied in the 
human body, after its detachment as a spark from the totality of vital spirits, in 
the empty sphere of divine Intellect. 


19. The soul thinks itself as, “a minute particle of light,” at first, and then it 
considers itself as growing in the sphere of its consciousness. 


20. The unreal appearing as real, proves to be unreal at last, as the fictitious 
moon becomes a nullity afterwards, so the soul continues to view itself 


subjectively and objectively both as the viewer and the view. 


21. Thus the single self becomes double as one sees his own death in a 
dream, and thus it waxes into bigness and thinks its vital spark as a star. (This 
is the form of the /ingadeha or sentient soul within the body). 


22. As the soul goes on thinking itself the microcosm of the world, 
(Viswarupa), so it falsely thinks itself as such in reality, as it is expressed by 


99 66 


the dictum, “Soham,” “so am I.” 


23. By thinking himself as such, man comes to believe it as true, as one 
believes himself as a traveller in his dream. So by thinking the soul as a star, 
he views it so within himself. 


24. By continued meditation of his soul as such, he loses his external 
sensations, and views this star in his cranium. 


25. He sees the soul within him though it be without him, just as the mirror 
reflects the distant hill in itself, and the soul remains confined within him, as a 
body is confined in a well, and as a sound is shut up in the hollow of a cave. 


26. The consciousness of our dreams and desires, is but a particle 
(attribute) of the living soul, whose real form is that of a star waking, (keeping 
watch) within us. (Consciousness of external objects in our dream and desire, 
is compared to the reflection of outward images in a glass or bubble of water, 
and to the echo of a distant sound in a hollow cave). 


27. Now this vacuous life, which is composed of the essences of the mind, 
understanding and knowledge, resides in the hollow sheath of the star. (The 
star is supposed to be the eye-sight and residence of life. — Gloss). 


28. It appears to me to take its flight to the sky, to see what is passing there, 
(i.e., the manner in which the mental eye of the Yogi penetrates the regions of 
air). And then it enters the body by two holes, which have the names of the 
external organs (of sight) given them afterwards. (The whole sphere of air is 
thought to teem with life or living souls and spirits, which rove free in the air, 
until they are made to enter and pass out of the body by two unknown holes, 
whether of the nostrils or sockets or glottis, remains undefined and 
undetermined). 


29. The organs by which the embodied living soul is to see (external 
objects), are called the eyes-netras, (from their receiving (nayana) the light of 
the soul). That by which it is to feel, is styled the skin, (twak or touch), and 
those whereby it is to hear, are termed the ears, (Srutis from sru to hear, 
corresponding with suna or shunu in vernaculars and Persian). 


30. The organ of smelling is the nose, — ghrdna from its bearing the scent, 
— ghrdna to the soul, and that of taste is named as tongue, rasand, for its 
conducting the rasa taste or flavour to the spirit. 


31. Then there is the breathing air, (the air of breath or breath of life), 
which actuates the energies of the organs of action. It is this air which is the 
cause, — of vision, and mover of the internal organs of the mind and thought. 


32. This (vital breath) supports the embodied and all supporting soul, 
(ativahika-dehatmé), in the vacuity of the body, and fills and kindles it as the 
air does a spark of fire. 


33. The word Jiva or the living soul, (zoa), is brought under a figurative 
sense, ‘to mean something real in the unreal body’. Hence Brahma is said to 
be the life and soul of the unreal world. 


34. The gross embodied soul, is of the form of vacuum like the mind and 
yet it imagines itself to reside in an ovum in the body, as Brahma is supposed 
to be seated in the mundane egg. (i.e., The soul loses its light airy shape and 
free range, by being confined in the body). 


35. Some view the spirit of God as floating on the surface of the (ante- 
mundane) waters (in the form of Narayana), and others view it in the person 
of the Lord of creatures (Brahma), while there are others, who look at it as 
infused throughout the creation in the figure of Viraj. These are called the 
subtle and gross bodies of the soul, (sthiila and suikshma sariras). 


36. The soul or spirit is the spacious womb of productions, and the means 
of executing its own purposes, and of knowing the proper time and place, and 
the article and the manner of action, (modus operandi). 


37. The mind is the inventor of words, expressive of ideas (in the soul), and 
subjects itself to the arbitary sounds of its own invention. Hence God is 
erroneously said to be embodied in words, (sabda Brahma of Mimansa 
philosophy) in this world of errors. 


38. The unproduced and self-born Brahma, that has risen of himself (and 
represents the mind), is as unreal as the soaring of a man in the sky in his 
dream. 


39. This all supporting-embodied soul, is the prime Lord of creatures, who 
is said to have formed this illusory frame of the world. 


40. But there was nothing formed or born in it (in reality), nor is there any 
substance to be found in the world. It is the same vacuous form of Brahma 
still, whose essence is known to extend as the infinite space itself. 


41. Things appearing as real, are as unreal as an imaginary city, (Utopia), 
which presents a variety (of forms and colours) to the fancy, without being 
built or painted by anybody. (The phenomenal appearance of the world, is 
likened to a phantasmagoria). 


42. Nothing that is unmade or unthought of, can be real, (either in 
substance or idea), and the gods Brahma and others, being freed from their 
avocations at the universal dissolution of existence, could neither resume their 
functions nor have materials for the same. 


43. The self-born Brahma, having then neither his remembrance of the past, 
nor any material appliance at hand, could neither form an ideal or material 
world out of nothing. Therefore, production of Brahma and formation of the 
universe are alike (chimerical). 


44. The earth and all other existences, are but the eternal ideas of the divine 
mind, and they appear to us as objects of a dream in our waking state, (when 
they vanish into airy nothing). 


45. The divine spirit is known to be vacuum only, and so also is the world 
ever known to be, (because the like produces the like). So all waters are alike 
liquid bodies, though they are made to pass under different names. 


46. This creation is everywhere the same in the Supreme Spirit. It is but an 
evolution of the same, (though presenting different aspects to us), and the 
creator is always and everywhere immutable in his nature. 


47. The vacuous universe, under the name of the mundane egg, shines as 
clearly as the Divine Spirit, it is calm in its appearance, and becomes 
disturbed by causes born in itself. (Nature is uniform, but ruffled by 
accidents). 


48. It is supported by the supportless supporter of all, who is one and 
without a second, but devoid of unity in (the variety of his) creation. All this 
is born in his consciousness, and therefore there is nothing that is produced 
anew. 


49. He, who is of the form of unlimited space, and without any vacuity in 
it, (because nature abhors a vacuum), who is transparent yet teeming with 
abundance, who is the whole world (God in nature), without any worldliness 
in him, is verily the substratum of all. 


50. He, who is neither the container nor the contained, nor the view of the 
world, who is neither the world nor its creator, (Brahma), and about whom 
there can be no dispute nor disputant, is verily the unknown God. 


51. He, who is neither the passing world nor any of its passing things, who 
is quite at rest, yet situated in all things, (whether moving or quiescent), is the 
only Brahma that shines of himself in himself (as the soul of and all in all). 


52. As we form in ourselves the image of a whirlpool, by the idea of the 
fluidity of water in our minds, so the sight of the world produces the false 
notion of its reality in the mind. 


53. All unrealities become extinct at the end, as we see the death of our 
frail bodies in dreams. So we find on the contrary the essential part of our 
soul, to be unscathed by its own nature of indestructibility, and remaining in 
the form of everlasting consciousness in the atmosphere of our intellects. 


54. Brahma the prime Lord of creatures, is ever manifest by himself in the 
form of vacuity in the Supreme spirit, and he being of a spiritual form as the 
mind, has no material body formed of earth as all other corporeal beings, and 
is therefore both real and unborn (in his essence). 


CHAPTER XIV. 
Establishment of Brahma. 


Vasishtha added: — 


In this manner the visible world, myself, thyself and all other things are 
nothing, all these being unmade and unborn are inexistent, it is the Supreme 
spirit only that is existent of itself. 


2. The primeval vacuous soul is awakened at first of itself, and by its own 
energy from its quietness, and begins to have a motion in itself like the 
troubled waters of the deep. 


3. It then begins to reflect in itself, as in a dream or in imagination, without 
changing its vacuous form, which is likened to a rock with the inward faculty 
of thought. 


4. The body of the Great Viraj also, is devoid of any material form, either 
of earthly or any other elemental shape, (as it is viewed in the Vedas). It is 
purely a spiritual, intellectual and ethereal form, and as transparent as the 
ether itself. 


5. It is undecaying and steady as a rock, and as airy as a city seen ina 
dream. It is immovable as the line of a regiment represented in a picture. 


6. All other souls are as pictures of dolls and puppets, painted and not 
engraven on the body of Viraj as upon a huge pillar; and he standing as an 
uncarved column in the empty sphere of Brahma, represents all souls, (and not 
bodies), as they are mere pictures on it. 


7. The prime Lord of creatures is said to be self-born at first, and he is 
known as the increate (Brahma), for want of his prior acts to cause his birth. 
(He is coeternal with the eternal Brahma, and is therefore not subject to birth 
and death). 


8. The primeval patriarchs, who obtain their ultimate liberation at the final 
dissolution of the world, have no antecedent cause to be reborn as unliberated 
mortals. (So the emancipate souls of the living and dead, are freed from the 
doom of regeneration.) 


9. Brahma, who is the reflector of all souls, is himself invisible in the 
inward mirror of other souls, (i.e., he reflects all images in himself, but never 
casts his own reflexion upon any). He is neither the view nor the viewer, and 
neither the creation nor the creator himself. (These being the functions of the 
creative and representative powers of Brahma and Viraj). 


10. Though thus negated of all predicates, yet is Brahma the soul of all 
predicables, that may be affirmed or denied of him, (since he is all in all). He 
is the source of these chains of living beings, as light is the cause of a line of 
lighted lamps in illuminations. 


11. The will of the gods, (Brahma and Viraj), proceeding from the volition 
of Brahma, is of that spiritual nature as the other, just as one dream rising in 
another, is equally unsubstantial as the first, (ie., the products of spiritual 
causes, are also spiritual, by the rule of the homogeneity of the cause and 
effect). 


12. Hence all living souls, which are evolved from the breathing of the 
Supreme Spirit, are of the same nature as their origin for want of an auxiliary 
causality. (God made man in his own image, and as perfect as himself, and 
this man is manas the Brahma, or as he is named Adam, corresponding with 
Adima or Adyam purusham, — the first male or Protogonus). 


13. Want of a secondary agency, produces the equality of effects with their 
cause, (as the fruits and flowers of trees are of the same kind with the parent 
tree, unless there rises a difference in them by cause of engraftments). Hence 
the uniformity of created things, proves the conception of their creation by a 
secondary cause, to be wholly erroneous. 


14. Brahma himself is the prime soul of Virdj and self-same with him, and 
Virdj is the soul of creation and identical with it. He is the vacuous vitality of 
all, and it is from him that the unreal earth and other things have their rise. 
(Virdj is the spirit of God diffused in nature). 


15. Rama said: — Tell me, whether the living soul, is a limited thing or an 
unlimited mass of life, or does the unbounded spirit of God, exist in the shape 
of a mountainous heap of living souls, (i.e., whether it is to be taken in a 
collective or integral sense, and whether it forms a totality, — samashti 
existent in the Divinity, of which all individual souls are either as parts vyashti 
or separate existences). 


16. Are these living souls like showers of rain-water falling from above, or 
as the drizzling drops of waves in the vast ocean of creation, or as the sparks 
of fire struck out of a red-hot iron, and from whence they flow, and by whom 
they are emitted. 


17. Tell me Sir, the truth concerning the profusion of living souls, and 
though I have a partial knowledge of it, I require it to be more fully and 
clearly explained by you. 


18. Vasishtha replied: — There being but one living soul of the universe, 
you cannot call it a multitude. Your question therefore, is quite out of place, 
as the query about the horns of hares, (which do not exist in nature). 


19. There are no detached living souls, O Rama, nor are they to be found in 
multitudes anywhere, nor was there a mountainous heap of souls known to 
have existed at any time. 


20. Living soul is but a fictitious word, and it is heaped with many fictions, 
all of which, you must know for certain, do not apply to the soul. 


21. There is but one pure and immaculate Brahma, who is mere Intellect, 
(chinmdtram), and all pervasive. He assumes to himself all attributes by his 
almighty power. (Here Brahma is represented not only as Omniscient and 
Omnipotent, but as saguna also by his assumption of all attributes). 


22. The living soul is viewed by many to evolve itself from the intellect 
into many visible and invisible forms, (murta-miitam), just as a plant is seen 
to develop itself into its fruits and flowers. 


23. They add to their knowledge of the soul the attributes of the living 
principle, understanding, action, motion, mind, and unity and duality, as if 
these appertain to its nature. 


24. But all this is caused by ignorance, while right understanding assigns 
them to Brahma. The ignorant are bewildered by these distinct views (of the 
soul), and will not be awakened to sense. 


25. These different believers are lost (in their various views), as the light is 
lost under darkness. They will never come to the knowledge of truth as it is 
the case with the ignorant. 


26. Know Brahma himself as the living soul without any divisibility or 
distinction. He is without beginning or end. He is omnipotent, and is of the 
form of the great Intellect which forms his essence. 


27. His want of minuteness, (i.e., his fulness), in all places, precludes his 
distinctive appellations everywhere. Whatever attributes are given him (by 
fiction), are all to be understood to mean Brahma himself. 


28. Rama asked: — How comes it, O Brahman? that the totality of the 
living souls in the world, is guided by the will of one universal soul, which 
governs the whole, and to which all others are subject. 


29. Vasishtha replied: — Brahma, the great living soul and Omnipotent 
power, remained from eternity with his volition, (satya sankalpa, — fixed 
determination) of creation, without partition or alteration of himself. 


30. Whatever is wished by that great soul, comes to take place 
immediately. The wish it formed in its unity at first, became a positive duality 
at last. Then its wish, “to be many,” (Aham bahu syam), became the separate 
existences afterwards. 


31. All these dualities of his self-divided powers, (the different living 
souls), had their several routines of action allotted to them, as, “this is for 
that,” meaning, “this being is for that duty, and such action is for such end.” 


32. Thus though there can be no act without exertion (by the general rule as 
in the case of mortals), yet the predominant will of Brahma, is always 
prevailing without its exertion to action, (as in the case of saints whose wills 
are effective of their ends without the aid of action). 


33. Though they that bear the name of living beings, effect their purposes 
by exertion of their energies, yet they can effect nothing without acting 
according to the law appointed by the predominant power. 


34. If the law of the predominant power, is effective of its end, (i.e., the law 
of action for production of acts), then the exertions of the subordinate powers, 
(the living souls), must also be attended with success, (i.e., the attainment of 
the like result of the like action). 


35. Thus Brahma alone is the great living soul that exists for ever and 
without end, and these millions of living beings are no other in the world 
(than agents of the divine energies). 


36. It is with a consciousness of the intellectual soul, (i.e., the inward 
knowledge of the divinity within themselves), that all living souls are born in 
this world, but losing that consciousness, (their knowledge of God) 
afterwards, they became alienated from him. 


37. Hence, men of inferior souls, should pursue the course of conduct led 
by the superior souls, for regaining their spiritual life, dtmajivatwam, as the 
copper becomes transformed into gold (by chemical process). 


38. Thus the whole body of living beings, that had been as inexistent as air 
before, come into existence, and rise resplendent with the wonderful intellect. 


39. Whoso perceives this wondrous intellect in his mind, and gets 
afterwards a body and the consciousness of his egoism, he is then said to be 
an embodied living soul. 


40. The mind that is gratified with intellectual delights, becomes as 
expanded as the intellect itself, and thinks those pleasures to constitute the 
sum total of worldly enjoyments. 


41. The Intellect is said to remain unchanged in all its succeeding stages, 
and though it never changes from that state, yet it wakes, (develops), by a 
power intrinsic in itself. 


42. The uninterrupted activity of the Intellect, indulges itself in the 
amusement of manifesting the intelligibles in the form of the world, (i.e., Of 
evolving the knowables from its own knowledge of them. Or it is the pleasure 
of the intellect to unfold the secrets of nature to view). 


43. The extent of the intellectual faculty, is wider and more rarefied than 
the surrounding air, and yet it perceives its distinct egoism by itself and of its 
own nature. (The subjective knowledge of ego, — self). 


44. Its knowledge of self, springs of itself in itself like the water of a 
fountain, and it perceives itself, (its ego), to be but an atom amidst the endless 
worlds. 


45. It perceives also in itself the beautiful and wondrous world, which is 
amazing to the understanding, and which is thereafter named the universe. 
(i.e., The one existing in the other and not without it, meaning, the soul to be 
the seat of both the subjective and objective knowledge). 


46. Now Rama, our egoism being but a conception of the intellect is a mere 
fiction, (kalpand), and the elementary principles being but creatures of 
egoism, they are also fictions of the intellect. 


47. Again, the living soul being but a resultant of our acts and desires, you 
have to renounce these causes, in order to get rid of your knowledge of ego 
and tu, (i.e., of the existence of yourself and that of others), and then you 
attain to the knowledge of the true one, after discarding the fictions of the real 
and unreal. 


48. As the sky looks as clear as ever, after the shadows of clouds are 
dispersed from it, so does the soul look as bright as it existed at first in the 
intellect, after its overshadowing fictions have been removed. 


49. The universe is a vacuum, and the world is a name for the field of our 
exertions. This vacuity is the abode of the gods, (Viswa and Virdj, both of 
whom are formless). The wonderful frame of plastic nature, is but a form of 
the formless intellect and no other. 


50. What is one’s nature never leaves him at any time, how then can a form 


or figure be given to the formless Divinity? 


51. The divine intellect is exempt from all the names and forms which are 
given to unintelligent worldly things, it being the pervader and enlivener, of 
all that shines in the world. (Intellect is the power of understanding). 


52. The mind, understanding and egoism, with the elements, the hills and 
skies, and all things that compose and support the world, are made of the 
essences proceeding from the intellect. (The intellect from interlegere 
contains all things). 


53. Know the world to compose the mind-chitta of the intellect-chit of 
God, because the mind does not subsist without the world. Want of the world 
would prove the inexistence of the mind and intellect which consist of the 
world. (Hence the identity of the intelligent world with the mind and intellect 
of God). 


54. The intellect like the pepper seed, is possessed of an exquisite property 
within itself, and bears like the flavour of the other, the element of the living 
soul, which is the element of animated nature. 


55. As the mind exerts its power and assumes its sense of egoism, it derives 
the principle of the living soul from the Intellect, which with its breath of life 
and action, is called a living being afterwards. (The mind is what thinks, 
moves and acts). 


56. The intellect, (chit), exhibiting itself as the mind, (chitta), bears the 
name of the purpose it has to accomplish, which being temporary and 
changeable, is different from the chit and a nullity. (The mind being the 
principle of volition, is applied also to the object of the will, as we say, I have 
a mind to play, which is equal to the expression, I have a playful mind, and 
this state of the mind being variable, is said to be null). 


57. The distinction of actor and act, does not consist in the intellect, it being 
eternal, is neither the author or the work itself. But the living soul, which is 
active and productive of acts, is called the purusha or the embodied soul 
residing in the body, — purau-sete. It is action which makes the man- 
purusha, from which is derived his manhood-paurusha. 


58. Life with the action of the mind constitutes the mind of man. The mind 
taking a sensitive form, employs the organs of sense to their different 
functions. (The sensitivity of the mind bears an active and not the passive 
sense of sensitiveness or sensibility). 


59. He, the radiance of the light of whose intellect, is the cause of infinite 
blessings to the world, is both its author and workmanship from all eternity, 


and there is none beside him. (He is the Pratyagdtma the all-pervading soul). 


60. Hence the ego or living soul is indivisible, uninflammable, unsoilable, 
and undriable in its essence, it is everlasting and infinite, (ubiquious), and as 
immovable as a mountain. (The living soul is viewed in the light of the eternal 
soul). 


61. There are many that dispute on this point, as they dispute on other 
matters, in their error, and mislead others into the same, but we are set free 
from all mistake. (The disputants are the dualists, who make a distinction 
between the eternal and created souls. (Jivdtmd-paramdtmd-dvaita-vddis)). 


62. The dualist relying on the phenomena, is deceived by their varying 
appearances, but the believer in the formless unity, relies in the everlasting 
blessed spirit, (which he views in his intellect). 


63. Fondness for intellectual culture, is attended with the vernal blossoms 
of intellect, which are as white as the clear firmament, and as numberless as 
the parts of time. 


64. The intellect exhibits itself in the form of the boundless and wonderful 
mundane egg, and it breathes out the breath of its own spirit in the same egg. 
(The breathing soul is called the siwtrdtma one of the ten hypostases of 
Brahma, the vital air is the first of the elementary bodies, in the order of 
emanation alias creation). 


65. It then showed itself in the wondrous form of the antimundane waters, 
not as they rise from springs or fall into reservoirs, as also in those of the 
substances constituting the bodies of the best of beings. 


66. It next shone forth with its own intellectual light, which shines as bright 
as the humid beams of the full moon. 


67. Then as the intellect rises in full light with its internal knowledge, upon 
disappearance of the visibles from sight, so also it is transformed to dullness 
by dwelling upon gross objects, when it is said to lie dormant. In this state of 
the intellect, it is lowered to and confined in the earth. 


68. The world is in motion by the force of the Intellect, in whose great 
vacuity it is settled, it is lighted by the light of that Intellect, and is therefore 
said to be both existent as well as inexistent by itself. 


69. Like the vacuity of that Intellect, the world is said now to exist and now 
to be inexistent, and like the light of that Intellect, it now appears and now 
disappears from view. 


70. Like the fleeting wind which is breathed by that Intellect, the world is 


now in existence and now inexistent, and like the cloudy and unclouded 
sphere of that Intellect, the world is now in being and now a not being. 


71. Like the broad day light of that Intellect, the world is now in existence, 
and like the disappearance of that light, it now becomes nothing. It is formed 
like collyrium from the particles of the oil of the rajas quality of the Intellect. 


72. It is the intellectual fire that gives warmth to the world, and it is the 
alabaster, (conch), of the intellect that causes its whiteness, the rock of 
intellect gives it hardness, and its water causes its fluidity. 


73. The sweetness of the world, is derived from the sugar of the intellect, 
and its juiciness from the milk in the divine mind, its coldness is from the ice, 
and its heat from the fire contained in the same. (i.e., The divine Intellect is 
the material cause, (updddna kdrana) of the world). 


74. The world is oily by the mustard seeds contained in the Intellect, and 
billowy in the sea of the divine mind. It is dulcet by the honey and aureate by 
the gold contained in the same. 


75. The world is a fruit of the tree of Intellect, and its fragrance is derived 
from the flowers growing in the arbour of the mind. It is the ens of the 
Intellect, that gives the world its entity, and it is the mould of the eternal mind, 
that gives its form. 


76. The difference is, that this world is changeful, while the clear 
atmosphere of the Intellect has no change in it, and the unreal world becomes 
real, when it is seen as full of the Divine spirit. 


77. The invariable self-sameness of the Divine spirit, makes the entity and 
non-entity of the world alike, (because it has no existence of its own, but in 
the Supreme soul). And the words, ‘part and whole,’ are wholly meaningless, 
because both of these are full with the divine spirit. 


78. Fie to them, that deride notions as false talk, because the world with its 
hills, and seas, earth, and rivers, is all untrue without the notion of God’s 
presence in it. (The Buddhists are perceptionalists, and have no faith in 
anything beyond their sensible perceptions, (pratyaksha), but the Vedantic 
Spiritualists, on the contrary, are abstract conceptionalists, and believe nothing 
to be true, of which they have no notion or inward conception). 


79. The intellect being an unity, cannot be mistaken for a part of anything, 
and though it may become as solid as a stone, yet it shines brightly in the 
sphere of its vacuity. 


80. It has a clear vacuous space in its inside, as a transparent crystal, which 


reflects the images of all objects, though it is as clear as the sky. 


81. As the lines on the leaves of trees, are neither the parts of the leaves nor 
distinct from them, so the world situated in the Intellect, is no part of it nor 
separate from it. 


82. No detached soul is of heterogeneous growth, but retains in its nature 
the nature of the intellect, and Brahma is the primary cause of causes. (Hence 
called Hiranyagarbha.) 


83. The mind is of its own nature a causal principle, by reason of its notion 
of the Intellect, but its existence is hard to be proved, when it is insensible and 
unconscious of the intellect. 


84. Whatever is in the root, comes out in the tree, as we see the seed shoot 
forth in plants of its own species. 


85. All the worlds are as void as vacuity, and yet they appear otherwise, as 
they are situated in the Great Intellect. All this is the seat of the Supreme, and 
you must know it by your intellection. 


86. As the Muni spake these words, the day declined to its evening twilight. 
The assembly broke with mutual salutations, to perform their vesperal 
ablutions, and met again at the court hall with the rising sunbeams, after 
dispersion of the nocturnal gloom. 


CHAPTER XV. 
Story of the Temple and its Prince. 


Vasishtha said: — The world is a void and as null as the pearls in the sky 
(seen by optical delusion). It is as unreal as the soul in the vacuity of the 
intellect. 


2. All its objects appear, as unengraven images on the column of the mind, 
which is without any engraving or engraver of it. 


3. As the inter-motion of the waters in the sea, causes the waves to rise of 
themselves, so the visibles as they appear to us, are as waves in the calm spirit 
of the Supreme. (The variety of the waves, with the pearls, shells and froth 
they pour out, resemble the multiformity of worldly productions). 


4. As sun-beams seen under the water, and as water appearing in the sands 
of the desert (mirage), so it is the fancy, that paints the world as true to us, and 
its bulk is like that of an atom, appearing as a hill (when seen through the 
microscope). 


5. The fancied world is no more than a facsimile of the mind of its Maker, 
just as the sun beams under the water, are but reflexions of the light above, 
and no other than a negative notion, (a false idea). 


6. The ideal world is but an aerial castle, and this earth (with its contents), 
is as unreal as a dream, and as false as the objects of our desire. 


7. The earth appearing as solid, is in the light of philosophy, no better than 
the liquid water of a river, in the mirage of a sandy desert, and is never in 
existence. 


8. The illusive forms of the visibles, in this supposed substantial form of 
the world, resemble at least, but aerial castles and rivers in the mirage. 


9. The visionary scenes of the world being taken to the scales, will be 
found when weighed, to be light as air and as hollow as vacuum. 


10. The ignorant that are taken away by the sound of words in disregard of 
sense, will find when they come to sense, that there is no difference between 


the world and Brahma, (the one being but the reflection of the other). 


11. The dull world is the issue of the Intellect, like the beams of the sun in 
the sky. The light of the intellect, is as light as the rarefied rays of the sun, but 
it raises like the other, the huge clouds, to water the shooting seeds of plants. 


12. As a city in a dream, is finer than one seen in the waking state, so this 
visionary world is as subtle as an imaginary one. 


13. Know, therefore, the insensible world to be the inverse of the sensible 
soul, and the substantive world as the reverse of the unsubstantial vacuum. 
The words plenum and vacuum are both as inane as airy breath, because these 
opposites are but different views of the same Intellect. 


14. Know, therefore, this visible world to be no production at all, it is as 
nameless as it is undeveloped, and as inexistent as its seeming existence. 


15. The universe is the sphere of the spirit of God in the infinite space; it 
has no foundation elsewhere except in that Spirit of which it is but a particle, 
and filling a space equal to a bit of infinity. 


16. It is as transparent as the sky, and without any solidity at all; it is as 
empty as empty air, and as a city pictured in imagination. 


17. Attend now to the story of the Temple which is pleasant to hear, and 
which will impress this truth deeply in your mind. 


18. Rama said: — Tell me at once, O Brahman, the long and short of the 
story of the temple, which will help my understanding of these things. 


19. Vasishtha said: — There lived of yore, a prince on the surface of the 
earth, whose name was Padma from his being like the blooming and fragrant 
lotus of his race, and who was equally blessed with wisdom, prosperity and 
good children. 


20. He observed the bounds of his duties, as the sea preserves the 
boundaries of countries, and destroyed the mist of his adversaries, as the sun 
dispels the darkness at night. He was as the moon to his lotus-like queen, and 
as burning fire to the hay of evils and crimes. 


21. He was the asylum of the learned, as the mount Meru was the residence 
of the gods, he was the moon of fair fame risen from the ocean of the earth, 
and was as a lake to the geese of good qualities; and like the sun to the lotuses 
of purity. 


22. He was as a blast to the creepers of his antagonists in warfare, and as a 
lion to the elephants of his mind, (appetites). He was the favourite of all 


learning, and a patron of the learned, and a mine of all admirable qualities. 


23. He stood fixed as the mount Mandara, after it had churned the ocean of 
the demons. He was as the vernal season to the blossoms of joy, and as the 
god of the floral bow to the flowers of blooming prosperity. 


24. He was the gentle breeze to the vacillation of the playful creepers, and 
as the god Hari in his valour and energy. He shone as the moon on the florets 
of good manners, and as wildfire to the brambles of licentiousness. 


25. His consort was the happy Lila, playful as her name implied, and 
fraught with every grace, as if the goddess of prosperity, had appeared in 
person upon earth. 


26. She was gentle with her submissiveness to her lord, and was sweet in 
her speech without art; she was always happy and slow in her movements, and 
ever smiling as the moon. 


27. Her lovely lotus-white face was decorated with painted spots, and her 
fair form which was as fresh as a new blown bud, appeared as a moving bed 
of lotuses. 


28. She was buxom as a playful plant, and bright as a branch of kunda 
flowers, and full of glee and good humour. With her palms red as corals, and 
her fingers white as lilies, she was in her person a congeries of vernal 
beauties. 


29. Her pure form was sacred to touch, and conferred a hilarity to the heart, 
as the holy stream of the Ganges, exhilarates the flock of swans floating upon 
it. 

30. She was as a second Rati, born to serve her lord, who was Kama in 
person on earth to give joy to all souls. 


31. She was sorry at his sorrow, and delighted to see him delightful, and 
was thoughtful to see him pensive. Thus was she an exact picture of her lord, 
except that she was afraid to find him angry. 


CHAPTER XVI. 
Joy and Grief of the Princess. 


This single wived husband, enjoyed the pleasure of an undivided and 
unfeigned love, in company with his only consort, as with an Apsara, (or 
heavenly nymph), on earth. 


(The Apsaras are the Abisares of Ptolemy and Absairs of the Persians, a 
term applied to the fairy race in the watery valley of Cashmere, supposed to 
be the site of Paradise-Firdous, and the scene of innocent attachment). 


2. The seats of their youthful sports were the gardens and groves, the 
arbours of shrubberies, and forests of Tamdla trees. They sported also in the 
pleasant arbours of creepers and delightful alcoves of flowers. 


3. They delighted themselves in the inner apartments, on beds decked with 
fragrant flowers, and on walks strewn over with fresh blossoms. They amused 
in their swinging cradles in their pleasure gardens in spring, and in rowing 
their tow-boats in summer heat. 


4. Hills overgrown with sandal woods and shades of shady forests, the 
alcoves of Nipa and Kadamba trees, and coverts of the Paribhadra or 
Devadaru-cedars, were their favourite resorts in summer. 


5. They sat besides the beds of kunda and Mandara plants, redolent with 
the fragrance of full-blown flowers, and strayed about the vernal green-woods, 
resounding with the melody of kokilas’ notes. 


6. The glossy beds of grassy tufts, the mossy seats of woods and lawns, and 
water-falls flooding the level lands with showers of rain (were also their 
favourite resorts). 


7. Mountain layers overlaid with gems, minerals and richest stones, the 
shrines of gods and saints, holy hermitages and places of pilgrimage, were oft 
visited by them. 


8. Lakes of full-blown lotuses and lilies, smiling Kumudas of various hues, 
and wood-lands darkened by green foliage, or overhung with flowers and 
fruitage, were their frequent haunts. 


9. They passed their time in the amorous dalliances of godlike youths, and 
their personal beauty, was graced by the generous pastimes of their mutual 
fondness and affection. 


10. They amused each other with bon-mots and witticisms and solution of 
riddles, with story-telling and playing the tricks of hold-fists mushti-bandha, 
(purmuthi), and the various games of chess and dice. 


11. They diverted themselves with the reading of dramas and narratives, 
and interpretation of stanzas difficult even to the learned. And sometimes they 
roamed about cities, towns, and villages. 


12. They decorated their persons with wreaths of flowers and ornaments of 
various kinds; fared and feasted on a variety of flavours, and moved about 
with playful negligence. 


13. They chewed betel leaves mixed with moistened mace and camphor, 
and saffron, and hid the love marks on their bodies, under wreaths of flowers 
and corals, with which they were adorned. 


14. They played the frolics of, “hide and find,” (Beng. lukichuri), tossing of 
wreaths and garlands, and swinging one another in cradles bestrewn with 
flowers. 


15. They made their trips in pleasure-boats, and on yokes of elephants and 
tame camels, and sported in their pleasure-ponds by pattering water upon one 
another. 


16. They had their manly and womanly dances, the sprightly tdndava and 
the merry /dsya, and songs of masculine and effeminate voices, the Kald and 
gita. They had symphonious and euphonious music, and played on the lute 
and tabor, (the wired and percussive instruments). 


17. They passed in their flowery conveyances through gardens and 
parterres, by river sides and highways, and amidst their inner apartments and 
royal palaces. 


18. The loving and beloved princess, being thus brought up in pleasure and 
indulgence, thought at one time with a wistful heart within herself: — 


19. “How will this my lord and ruler of earth, who is in the bloom of youth 
and prosperity, and who is dearer to me than my life, be free from old age and 
death. 


20. “And how will I enjoy his company on beds of flowers in the palace, 
possessed of my youth and free-will, for the long long period of hundreds of 
years. 


21. “I will, therefore, endeavour with all my vigilance and prayers, and 
austerities and endeavours, how this moon-faced prince, may become free 
from death and decline. 


22. “I will ask the most knowing, and the most austere and very learned 
Brahmans, how men may evade death.” 


23. She accordingly invited the Brahmans and honoured them with 
presents, and asked them lowly, to tell her how men might become immortal 
on earth. 


24. The Brahmans replied: — “Great queen! holy men may obtain success 
in everything by their austerities, prayers and observance of religious rites, but 
nobody can ever attain to immortality here below.” 


25. Hearing this from the mouths of the Brahmans, she thought again in her 
own mind, and with fear for the demise of her loving lord. 


26. “Should it happen, that I come to die before my lord, I shall then be 
released from all pain of separation from him, and be quite at rest in myself. 


27. “But if my husband happen to die before me, even after a thousand 
years of our lives, I shall so manage it, that his soul, (the immortal part of his 
body), may not depart from the confines of this mansion, (the charnel-house). 


28. “So that the spirit of my lord, will rove about the holy vault in the inner 
apartment, and I shall feel the satisfaction of moving about in his presence at 
all times.” 


29. “I will commence even from this day, to worship Saraswati, — the 
goddess of Intelligence, and offer my prayers to her for this purpose, with 
observance of fasts and other rites to my heart’s content.” 


30. Having determined so, she betook herself to observe the strict 
ceremonials of the Sdstra, and without the knowledge of her lord. 


31. She kept her fasts, and broke them at the end of every third night, and 
then entertained the gods, Brahmans, the priests, and holy people, with feasts 
and due honours. 


32. She was then employed in the performance of her daily ablutions, in her 
act of alms-giving, in the observance of her austerities and in meditation, in 
all of which she was painstaking, an observant of the rules of pious theism. 


33. She attended also to her incognizant husband at stated times, and 
ministered unto him to the utmost, her duties as required by law and usage. 


34. Thus observant of her vows, the young princess passed a hundred of her 


trinoctial ceremony, with resolute and persevering pains-taking and unfailing 
austerities. 


35. The fair goddess of speech, was pleased at the completion of her 
hundredth trinoctial observance, in which she was honoured by her, with all 
outward and spiritual complaisance, and then bespoke to her. 


36. Saraswati said: — “I am pleased my child! with thy continued devotion 
to me, and thy constant devotedness to thy husband. Now ask the boon that 
thou wouldst have of me.” 


37. The princess replied: — “Be victorious, O moon-bright goddess! that 
puttest to an end all the pains of our birth and death, and the troubles, 
afflictions, and evils of this world, and that like the sun, puttest to flight the 
darkness of our affections and afflictions in this life. 


38. “Save me O goddess, and thou parent of the world, and have pity on 
this wretched devotee, and grant her these two boons, that she supplicates of 
thee. 


39. “The one is, that after my husband is dead, his soul may not go beyond 
the precincts of this shrine in the inner apartment. 


40. “The second is, that thou shalt hear my prayer, and appear before me, 
whenever I raise my voice to thee, for having thy sight and blessing.” 


41. Hearing this, the goddess said, “Be it so,” and immediately disappeared 
in the air (whence she came), as the wave subsides in the sea whence it rises 
to view. 


42. The princess being blessed by the presence and good grace of the 
goddess, was as delighted as a doe at the hearing of music. 


43. The wheel of time rolled on its two semicircles of the fort-nights, the 
spikes of months, the arcs of the seasons, the loops of days and nights and the 
orbit of years, the axle composed of fleeting moments, giving incessant 
momentum to the wheel. 


44. The perceptions of the prince, entered into the inner man within the 
body (lingadeha), and he looked in a short time, as dry as a withered leaf 
without its juicy gloss. 


45. The dead body of the warlike prince, being laid over the sepulchre, in 
the inside of the palace, the princess began to fade away at its sight, like a 
lotus flower without its natal water (of the lake). 


46. Her lips grew pale by her hot and poisoned breath of sorrow, and she 


was in the agony of death, as a doe pierced by a dart (in her mortal part). 


47. Her eyes were covered in darkness at the death of her lord, as a house 
becomes dark at the extinction of the light of its lamp. 


48. She became leaner every moment, in her sad melancholy, and turned as 
a dried channel covered with dirt in lieu of its water. 


49. She moved one moment and was then mute as a statue, she was about 
to die of grief, as the ruddy goose at the separation of her mate. 


50. Then the ethereal goddess Saraswati, took pity on the excess of her 
grief, and showed as much compassion for her relief, as the first shower of 
rain does to the dying fishes in a drying pond. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
Story of the Doubtful Realm or Reverie of Lila. 


Saraswati said: — Remove my child, the dead body of thy husband to yonder 
shrine! and strew those flowers over it, and thou shalt have thy husband again. 


2. Never will this body rot or fade as long as the flowers are fresh over it, 
and know thy husband will shortly return to life again. (The strewing of 
flowers over the dead body and the grave, is a practice common in many 
religions). 


3. His living soul which is as pure as air, will never depart from this 
cemetery of thy inner apartment. (The departed soul is believed to hover about 
the crypt or cairn until the day of resurrection). 


4. The black-eyed princess, with her eyebrows resembling a cluster of 
black-bees, heard this consolatory speech of the goddess, and was cheered in 
her spirit, as the lotus-bed on return of the rains. 


5. She placed the corpse of her husband there, and hid it under the flowers, 
and remained in expectation of its rising, as a poor man fosters the hope of 
finding a treasure. 


6. It was at midnight of the very day, when all the members of the family 
had fallen fast asleep, that Lila repaired to the shrine in the inward apartment. 


7. There she meditated on the goddess of knowledge, in the recess of her 
understanding, and called her in earnest in the sorrow of her heart, when she 
heard the divine voice thus addressing to her. 


8. “Why dost thou call me, child, and why art thou so sorrowful in thy 
countenance? The world is full of errors, glaring as false water in a mirage.” 


9. Lilaé answered: — “Tell me goddess, where my husband resides at 
present, and what he has been doing now. Take me to his presence, as I am 
unable to bear the load of my life without him.” 


10. The goddess replied: — “His spirit is now roving in the sky, of which 
there are three kinds: — one the firmament or region of the sensible worlds, 


the other is the region of the mind, the seat of volition and creation, and third 
is the region of Intellect, which contains the two others. 


11. “Your husband’s soul is now in the sheath of the region of Intellect, 
(being withdrawn both from the regions of the visible world and sensuous 
mind). It is now by seeking in the region of the Intellect, that things which are 
inexistent here, are to be found there. 


12. “As in passing from one place to another, you are conscious of standing 
in the mid spot, (which is neither the one nor the other), so you will arrive in 
an instant at the intermediate region of the intellectual world (lying between 
this sensible and spiritual worlds). 


13. “If you will abide in that intellectual world, after forsaking all your 
mental desires, you will certainly come to the knowledge of that spiritual 
Being who comprehends all in himself. 


14. “It is only by your knowledge of the negative existence of the world, 
that you can come to know the positive existence of that Being, as you will 
now be able to do by my grace, and by no other means whatever.” (Forget the 
sensible to get to the Spiritual. — Hafiz). 


15. Vasishtha said: — so saying, the goddess repaired to her heavenly seat, 
and Lila sat gladly in her mood of steadfast meditation. (Platonism). 


16. She quitted in a moment the prison house of her body, and her soul 
broke out of its inner bound of the mind, to fly freely in the air, like a bird 
freed from its cage, (so Plato compares the flight of the parting soul with that 
of a bird from its cage). 


17. She ascended to the airy region of the Intellect, and saw, (by her 
intellectual light), her husband seated there in his seat, amidst a group of 
princes and rulers of the earth (who had received various forms and states 
according to their acts and desires). 


18. He was seated on a throne, and lauded with the loud acclamations of, 
“Long live the king,” and “Be he victorious.” His officers were prompt in the 
discharge of their several duties. 


19. The royal palace and hall were decorated with rows of flags, and there 
was an assemblage of unnumbered sages and saints, Brahmans and Rishis, at 
the eastern entrance of the hall. 


20. There stood a levy of innumerable princes and chiefs of men at the 
southern porch, and a bevy of young ladies standing at the western door-way. 


21. The northern gateway was blocked by lines of horse, carriages, and 


elephants, when a guard advanced and informed the king of a warfare in 
Deccan. 


22. He said that the chief of Karnatic, has made an attack on the eastern 
frontier, and that the chieftain of Surat, has brought to subjection the 
barbarous tribes on the north, and that the ruler of Malwa, has besieged the 
city of Tonkan on the west. 


23. Then there was the reception of the ambassador from Lanka, coming 
from the coast of the southern sea. 


24. There appeared next the Siddhas, coming from the Mahendra 
mountains bordering the eastern main, and traversing the numerous rivers of 
their fluvial districts, as also the ambassador of the Guhyaka or Yaksha tribes, 
inhabiting the shores of the northern sea. 


25. There were likewise the envoys, visiting the shores of the western main, 
and relating the state of affairs of that territory to the king. The whole 
courtyard was filled with lustre by the assemblage of unnumbered chieftains 
from all quarters. 


26. The recitals of Brahmans on sacrificial altars, died away under the 
sound of the timbrels, and the loud shouts of panegyrists, were re-echoed by 
the uproar of elephants. 


27. The vault of heaven, resounding to the sound of the vocal and 
instrumental music, and the dust raised by the procession of elephants and 
chariots, and the trotting of horses’ hoofs, obscured the face of the sky as by a 
cloud. 


28. The air was perfumed by the fragrance of flowers, camphor, and heaps 
of frankincense, and the royal hall was filled with presents sent from different 
provinces. 


29. His fair fame shone forth as a burning hill of white camphor, and raised 
a column of splendour reaching to the sky, and casting into shade the solar 
light. 


30. There were the rulers of districts, who were busily employed in their 
grave and momentous duties, and the great architects who conducted the 
building of many cities. 


31. Then the ardent Lila entered the court-hall of the ruler of men, and 
unseen by any, just as one void mixes with another void, and as air is lost in 
the air. 


32. She wandered about without being seen by anybody there, just as a fair 


figure, formed by false imagination of our fond desire, is not to be perceived 
by anyone without ourselves. 


33. In this manner she continued to walk about the palace unperceived by 
all, as the aerial castle built in one’s mind, is not perceived by another. 


34. She beheld them all assembled in the royal court in their former forms, 
and saw all the cities of the princes, as concentrated in that single city of her 
lord’s. 


35. She viewed the same places, the same dealings, the same concourse of 
boys, and the same sorts of men and women, and the same ministers as 
before. 


36. She saw the same rulers of earth, and the very same Pandits as before, 
the identic courtiers and the self-same servants as ever. 


37. There was the same assemblage of the learned men and friends as 
before, and the like throng of citizens pursuing their former course of 
business. 


38. She saw on a sudden, the flames of wild fire spreading on all sides, 
even in broad midday light, and the sun and moon appearing both at once in 
the sky, and the clouds roaring with a tremendous noise, with the whistling of 
the winds. 


39. She saw the trees, the hills, the rivers and the cities flourishing with 
population, and the many towns, and villages and forests all about. 


40. She beheld her royal consort as a boy of ten years of age after shaking 
off his former frame of old age, sitting amidst the hall with all his former 
retinue, and all the inhabitants of his village. 


SECTION I. 
Description of the Court house and the Cortes. 


41. Lila having seen all these began to reflect within herself, whether the 
inhabitants of this place were living beings or the ghosts of their former living 
souls. 


42. Then having recovered her sense at the removal of her trance, she 
entered into her inner apartment at midnight, and found the inmates fast 
bound in sleep. 


43. She raised, one by one, her sleeping companions, and said she was 
anxious to visit the royal hall. 


44. She wanted to be seated beside the throne of her lord, and to clear her 
doubt by seeing the courtiers all alive. 


45. The royal menials rose up at her call, and obedient to her command, 
they said, “Be it so,” and attended to their respective duties. 


46. A train of club-bearers ran to all sides to call the courtiers from the city, 
and sweepers came and swept the ground as clean as the sun had shed his rays 
upon it. 


47. A better set of servants cleansed the court-yard as clean, as autumn 
days clear the firmament of its rainy clouds. 


48. Rows of lights were placed about the court-yard, which looked as 
beautiful as clusters of stars in the clear sky. 


49. The ground of the court-yard was filled by throngs of people, as the 
earth was covered of yore, by floods of the great deluge. 


50. The dignified ministers and chiefs attended first and took their 
respective seats, and appeared as a set of the newly created rulers of people of 
the world on all sides, or the regents of the quarters of the sky. 


51. The cooling and fragrant odour of thickly pasted camphor filled the 
palace, and the sweet-scented zephyrs breathed profusely the fragrance of the 
lotus flowers, which they bore from all sides. 


52. The chamberlains stood all around in their white garbs, and appeared as 
an assemblage of silvery clouds, hanging over the burning hills under the 
equator. 


53. The ground was strewn over by the morning breeze with heaps of 
flowers, bright as the beaming dawn dispelling the gloom of night, and 
etiolated as clusters of stars fallen upon the ground. 


54. The palace was crowded by the retinue of the chiefs of the land, and 
seemed as it was a lake full of full-blown lotuses, with the fair swimming 
swans rambling about them. 


55. There, Lila took her seat on a golden seat by the side of the throne, and 
appeared as the beauteous Rati seated in the joyous heart of Kama, (i.e., as 
Venus sitting in the lap of aureate lighted Phoebus). 


56. She saw all the princes seated in their order as before, and the elders of 
the people and the nobles of men and all her friends and relatives, seated in 


their proper places. 


57. She was highly delighted to behold them all in their former states, and 
shone forth as the moon with the brightness of her countenance, to find them 
all alive again. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
Exposure of the Errors of this World. 


She said, “I have much consolation in you, and now will I console my 
sorrowing heart.” So saying, she made a sign for the assembly to break, and 
rose from her royal seat. 


2. She entered the inner apartment and sat by the side of the dead body of 
her lord, hidden under the heap of flowers, and thus began to reflect within 
herself. 


3. She exclaimed: — “O the wondrous magic! that presents these people of 
my palace, situated in the same manner without myself, as they were seen to 
be seated within me. 


4. “O how great is the extent of this delusion, as to contain the same high 
hills, and the same spacious forests of palm and Hintdla trees, both in the 
outside as well as they are situated in the inside of myself. 


5. “As the mirror shows the reflexion of the hills within itself as they are 
without it, so the reflector of the intellect presents the whole creation inwardly 
as it has outwards of itself. 


6. “I must now invoke the goddess of wisdom to ascertain which of these is 
illusion, and which the sober and certain reality.” 


7. So saying, she worshipped and invoked the goddess, and beheld her 
immediately present before herself, in the form of a virgin. 


8. She made the goddess sit on the elevated seat, and having seated herself 
low upon the ground before her, asked that divine power to tell her the truth. 


9. Lila said: — “Vouchsafe, O goddess, and clear this doubt of thy 
suppliant, for it is thy wisdom which has framed this beautiful system of the 
universe at first and knows the truth. (Divine wisdom is the prime cause of 
all). 


10. “Tell me, O great goddess, about what I am going to lay before thee at 
present, for it is by thy favour alone that I may be successful to know it. 


11. “I saw the pattern of this world in the intellect, which is more 
transparent than the ethereal sphere, and as extensive as to contain millions 
and millions of miles in a small space of it. 


12. “It is what no definite words can express, and what is known as the 
calm, cool, and ineffable light. This is called the unintelligible intelligence, 
and is without any cover or support, (nirdvarana nirbhitti). 


13. “It exhibits the reflexions of space and the course of time, and those of 
the sky and its light, and the course of events concentrating in itself. 


14. “Thus the images of the worlds, are to be seen both within and without 
the intellect, and it is hard to distinguish the real and unreal ones between 
them.” 


15. The goddess asked: — Tell me fair lady, what is the nature of the real 
world, and what you mean, by its unreality. 


16. Lila replied: — I know the nature of the real to be such as I find myself 
to be sitting here, and looking upon you as seated in this place. 


17. And I mean that to be unreal, as the state in which I beheld my husband 
in the ethereal region erewhile, because vacuity has no limit of time or place 
in it. 

18. The goddess rejoined: — The real creation cannot produce an unreal 
figure, nor a similar cause produce a dissimilar effect. 


19. Lila replied: — But we often see, O goddess! dissimilar effects to be 
produced from similar causes, thus, the earth and earthen pot though similar in 
their substance, yet the one is seen to melt in water, and the other to carry 
water in it. 


20. The goddess said: — Yes, when an act is done by the aid of auxiliary 
means, there the effect is found to be somewhat different from the primary 
cause. (Thus, the earthen pot being produced by the auxiliary appliances of 
fire, the potter’s wheel and the like, differs in its quality from the original 
clay). 


21. Say O beauteous lady! what were the causes of thy husband’s being 
born in this earth? The same led to his birth in the other world also, (i.e., the 
merit of the acts and desires of men, are the causes of their transmigrations in 
both worlds). 


22. When the soul has fled from here, how can the earth follow him there 
anymore, and what auxiliary causes can there be in connection with this 
cause? 


23. Wherever there arises a coaction with its apparent causality, it is 
usually attributed by everyone to some unknown antecedent cause or motive. 


24. Lila said: — Methinks goddess, that it was the expansion of my 
husband’s memory that was the cause of his regenerations, because it is 
certain that reminiscence is the cause of the reproduction of objects before us. 


25. The goddess replied that, memory is an aerial substance, and its 
productions are as unsubstantial as itself. 


26. Lila said: — Yes, I find reminiscence to be an airy thing, and its 
reproduction of my husband and all other things within me to be but empty 
shadows in the mind. 


27. The goddess replied: — So verily was this reproduction of thy husband 
and all those things which appeared to thy sight in thy reverie, and so, my 
daughter, is the appearance of all things I see in this world. 


28. Lila said: — Tell me goddess for the removal of my conception of the 
reality of the world, how the false appearance of my formless lord, was 
produced before me by the unreal world, (since nothing unsubstantial can cast 
a shadow). 


29. The goddess replied: — As this illusive world appeared a reality to thee 
before thy reminiscence of it, so must thou know all this to be unreal from 
what I am going to relate to thee. 


30. There is in some part of the sphere of the Intellect the great fabric of the 
world, with the glassy vault of the firmament for its roof on all sides. 


31. The Meru, (the polar axle or mountain), is its pillar, beset around by the 
regents of the ten sides, as statues carved upon it. The fourteen regions are as 
sO many apartments of it, and the hollow concavity containing the three 
worlds, is lighted by the lamp of the luminous sun. 


32. Its corners are inhabited by living creatures resembling ants and 
emmets, which are surrounded by mountains appearing as ant-hills in the sight 
of Brahma, the prime lord of creatures and the primeval patriarch of many 
races of men. 


33. All animal beings are as worms confined in the cocoons, (prison 
houses), of their own making. The azure skies above and below are as the soot 
of this house, beset by bodies of Siddhas, (or departed spirits), resembling 
groups of gnats buzzing in the air. 


34. The fleeting clouds are the smoke of this house or as webs of spiders in 
its corners, and the hollow air is full of aerial spirits, like holes of bamboos 


filled with flies. 


35. There are also the playful spirits of gods and demi-gods, hovering over 
human habitations, as swarms of busy and buzzing bees about vessels of 
honey. 


36. Here there lay amidst the cavity of heaven, earth and the infernal 
regions, tracts of land well watered by rivers, lakes, and the sea on all sides. 


37. In a corner of this land, there was situated a secluded piece of ground, 
(a vale or village), sheltered by hills and craigs about it. 


38. In this secluded spot thus sheltered by hills, rivers, and forests, there 
lived a Brahman with his wife and children, free from disease and care of gain 
and fear of a ruler, and passed his days in his fire-worship and hospitality, 
with the produce of his kine and lands. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
Story of a former Vasishtha and his wife. 


This Brahman was equal to his namesake, — the sage Vasishtha, in his age 
and attire, in his learning and wealth, and in all his actions and pursuits, 
except in his profession. (The one being a secular man, and the other the priest 
of the royal family). 


2. His name was Vasishtha, and that of his wife Arundhati, who was as fair 
as the moon, and as the star of the same name on earth. 


3. She resembled her namesake the priestess of the solar race, in her virtues 
and parts and in all things, except in her soul and body. 


4. She passed her time in true love and affection in his company, and was 
his all in the world, with her sweet smiling face resembling the Kumuda 
flower. 


5. This Brahman had been sitting once under the shady sarala trees, on the 
table land of his native hill, when he saw the ruler of the land, passing with his 
gaudy train below. 


6. He was accompanied by all the members of the royal family and his 
troops and soldiers, and was going to a chase, with a clamour that resounded 
in the hills and forests. 


7. The white flappers shed a stream of moon light, and the lifted banners 
appeared as a moving forest, and the white umbrellas made the sky a canopy 
to them. 


8. The air was filled with dust raised by the hoofs of horses from the 
ground, and lines of elephants with their high hauidds, seemed as moving 
towers, to protect them from the solar heat and sultry winds. 


9. The wild animals were running on all sides at the loud uproar of the 
party, resembling the roaring of a whirlpool, and shining gems and jewels 
were flashing all about on the persons of the party. 


10. The Brahman saw the procession and said to himself, “O how charming 


is royalty, which is fraught with such splendour and prosperity.” 


11. Ah! how shall I become the monarch of all the ten sides, and have such 
a retinue of horse and elephants and foot soldiers, with a similar train of flags 
and flappers and blazing umbrellas. 


12. When will the breeze waft the fragrance of Kunda flowers, and the 
farina of lotuses to my bed-chamber, to lull me and my consorts to sleep. 


13. When shall I adorn the countenances of my chamber maids with 
camphor and sandal paste, and enlighten the faces of the four quarters with 
my fair fame, as the moon-beams decorate the night. 


14. With these thoughts, the Brahman was thenceforth determined to apply 
himself with vigilance, to the rigid austerities of his religion for life. 


15. He was at last overtaken by infirmities which shattered his frame, as the 
sleets of snowfall, batter the blooming lotuses in the lake. 


16. Seeing his approaching death, his faithful wife was fading away with 
fear, as a creeper withers at the departure of spring, for fear of the summer 
heat. 


17. This lady then began to worship me, (the personification of Wisdom), 
like thyself, for obtaining the boon of immortality which is hard to be had. 


18. She prayed, saying: — Ordain, O goddess! that the spirit of my lord 
may not depart from this sepulchre after his demise, and I granted her request. 


19. After sometime the Brahman died, and his vacuous spirit remained in 
the vacuity of that abode. 


20. This aeriform spirit of the Brahman, assumed the shape of a mighty 
man on earth, by virtue of the excessive desire and merit of acts in his former 
state of existence. 


21. He became the victorious monarch of the three realms, by subjugating 
the surface of the earth by his might, by laying hold on the high steeps (of the 
gods) by his valour, and his kind protection of the nether lands, (watery 
regions), under his sway. 


22. He was as a conflagration to the forest of his enemies, and as the 
steadfast Meru amidst the rushing winds of business on all sides. He was as 
the sun expanding the lotus-like hearts of the virtuous, and as the god of the 
makara ensign, (Kama or Cupid), to the eyes of women. 


23. He was the model of all learning, and the all giving Kalpa tree to his 
suitors, he was the footstool of great Pandits, and as the full-moon shedding 


the ambrosial beams of polity all around. 


24. But after the Brahman was dead, and his dead body had disappeared in 
the forms of elementary particles in air, and his airy spirit had reposed in the 
aerial intellectual soul within the empty space of his house. 


25. His Brahmanic widow, (born of the priestly class), was pining away in 
her sorrow, and her heart was rent in twain as the dried pod of Simbi. 


26. She became a dead body like her husband, and her spirit, by shuffling 
off its mortal coil, resumed its subtle and immortal form, in which it met the 
departed ghost of her husband. 


27. She advanced to her lord, as rapidly as a river runs to meet the sea 
below its level, and became as cheerful to join him, as a cluster of flowers to 
inhale the vernal air. 


28. The houses, lands and all the immovable properties and movable riches 
of this Brahman, are still existent in that rocky village, and it is only eight 
days past, that the souls of this loving pair, are reunited in the hollow vault of 
their house. 


CHAPTER XxX. 
The Moral of the Tale of Lila. 


The goddess said: — That Brahman whom I said before, had become a 
monarch on earth, is the same with thy husband, and his wife Arundhati, is no 
other than thyself, — the best of women. 


2. You two are the same pair now reigning over this realm, and resembling 
a pair of doves in your nuptial love, and the deities Siva and Parvati in your 
might. 


3. [have thus related to you the state of your past lives, that you may know 
the living soul to be but air, and the knowledge of its reality is but an error. 


4. The erroneous knowledge, (derived from sense), casts its reflection in the 
intellect, and causes its error also, (errors in the senses breed errors in the 
mind), and this makes you doubtful of the truth and untruth of the two states 
(of the sensible and intellectual worlds). 


5. Therefore, the question, ‘which is true and which is untrue,’ has no better 
solution than that all creations, (whether visible or invisible, mental or ideal), 
are equally false and unsubstantial. 


6. Vasishtha said: — Hearing these words of the goddess, Lila was 
confused in her mind, and with her eyes staring with wonder, she addressed 
her softly. 


7. Lila said: — How is it, O goddess! that your words are so incoherent 
with truth, you make us the same, with the Brahmanic pair, who are in their 
own house, and we are sitting here in our palace. 


8. And how is it possible that the small space of the room in which my 
husband’s body is lying, could contain those spacious lands and hills and the 
ten sides of the sky, (as I already saw in my trance, — Samadhi). 


9. It is as impossible as to confine an elephant in a mustard seed, and as the 
fighting of a gnat with a body of lions in a nut-shell. 


10. It is as incredible as to believe a lotus seed containing a hill in it, and to 


be devoured by a little bee, or that the peacocks are dancing on hearing the 
roaring of clouds in a dream. 


11. It is equally inconsistent to say, O great goddess of gods! that this earth 
with all its mountains and other things, are contained within the small space of 
a sleeping room. 


12. Deign therefore, O goddess to explain this mystery clearly unto me, 
because it is by thy favour only that the learned are cleared of their doubts. 


13. The goddess said: — Hear me fair lady! I do not tell thee a lie, because 
transgression of the law is a thing unknown to us. (The law is ndnritam 
vadeta, — never tell an untruth). 


14. It is I that establish the law when others are about to break it, if then I 
should slight the same, who else is there who would observe it. 


15. The living soul of the village Brahman, saw within itself and in the very 
house, the image of this great kingdom, as his departed spirit now views the 
same in its empty vacuity. (Therefore, both these states are equally ideal). 


16. But you have lost the remembrance of the states of your former lives 
after death, as they lose the recollection of waking events in the dreaming 
state. 


17. As the appearance of the three worlds in dream, and their formation in 
the imagination, or as the description of a warfare in an epic poem and water 
in the mirage of a maru or sandy desert, (are all false.) 


18. So were the hills and habitations which were seen in the empty space of 
the Brahman’s house, which was no other than the capacity of his own mind 
to form the images of its fancy, and receive the external impressions like a 
reflecting mirror (all mere ideal). 


19. All these though unreal, yet they appear as real substances on account 
of the reality of the intellect, which is seated in the cavity of the inmost sheath 
of the body and reflects the images. 


20. But these images, which are derived from the remembrance of unreal 
objects of the world, are as unreal as those objects which cast their reflexions 
in the intellect, just as the waves rising in the river of a mirage, are as unreal 
as the mirage itself. 


21. Know this seat, (sadana), of yours, which is set in this closet, (kosha), 
of the house, as well as myself and thyself and all things about us, to be but 
the reflections of our intellect only, without which nothing would be 
perceptible, as to one who is devoid of his intellect. 


22. Our dreams and fallacies, our desires and fancies, as also our notions 
and ideas, serve as the best evidences, that afford us their light for the 
understanding of this truth, (that nothing is true beside the subjective mind, 
which creates and forms, produces and presents all objects to our view). 


23. The spirit of the Brahman resided in the vacuity of his house, (the 
body), with the seas and forests and the earth, (i.e., their impressions) within 
itself, as the bee abides in the lotus. 


24. Thus the habitable globe with everything it contains, is situated in a 
small cell in one corner of the intellect, as a spot of flimsy cloud in the 
firmament. 


25. The House of the Brahman was situated in the same locality of the 
intellect, which contains all the worlds in one of its atomic particles. 


26. The intelligent soul contains in every atom of it, unnumbered worlds 
within worlds, enough to remove your doubt, of the Brahman’s viewing a 
whole realm within the space of his intellect. 


27. Lila asked: — How can the Brahmanic pair be ourselves, when they are 
dead only eight days before, and we have been reigning here for so many 
years? 


28. The goddess replied: — There is neither any limit of space or duration, 
nor any distance of place or length of time in reality; hear me now tell you the 
reason of it. 


29. As the universe is the reflexion of the divine mind, so are infinity and 
eternity but representations of himself. 


30. Attend to what I tell you about the manner in which we form the idea of 
time, and its distinct parts of a moment and an age, in the same way as we 
make the distinction of individualities in me, thee, and this, or that person, 
(which are essentially the same undivided spirit and duration). 


SECTION II. 
State of the Human soul after death. 


31. Hear now, that no sooner does anyone come to feel the insensibility 
consequent to his death, than he forgets his former nature and thinks himself 
as another being. 


32. He then assumes an empty form in the womb of vacuity in the 
twinkling of an eye, and being contained in that container, he thinks within 
himself in the same receptacle. 


33. “This is my body with its hands and feet.” Thus the body he thinks 
upon, he finds the same presented before him. 


34. He then thinks in himself: — “I am the son of this father and am so 
many years old, these are my dear friends and this is my pleasant abode.” 


35. “I was born and became a boy, and then grew up to this age. There are 
all my friends and in the same course of their lives.” 


36. Thus the compact density of the sphere of his soul, presents him many 
other figures, which appear to rise in it as in some part of the world. 


37. But they neither rise nor remain in the soul itself, which is as 
transparent as the empty air; they appear to the intellect as a vision seen in a 
dream. 


38. As the view beheld in a dream, presents the sights of all things in one 
place, so does everything appear to the eye of the beholder of the other world 
as in his dream. 


39. Again, whatever is seen in the other world, the same occurs to men in 
their present states also, wherefore the reality of this and unreality of the other 
world, are both alike to a state of dreaming. 


40. And as there is no difference in the waves of the same sea-water, so the 
produced visible creation is no other than the unproduced intellectual world, 
both of which are equally indestructible, (the one being but a copy of the 
other). 


41. But in reality, the appearance is nothing but a reflection of the intellect, 
and which apart from the intelligible spirit, is merely an empty vacuity. 


42. The creation though presided by the intelligible spirit, is itself a mere 
void, its intelligible soul being the only substance of it as the water of the 
waves. 


43. The waves though formed of water, are themselves as false as the horns 
of hares, and their appearance as natural objects, is altogether false, (because 
they are the effects of the auxiliary cause of the winds which have raised 
them). 


44. Hence there being no visible object in reality, (except a false 
appearance of such), how can the observer have any idea of the visible, which 


loses its delusion at the moment of his death. 


45. After disappearance of the visible outer world from sight, the soul 
reflects on its reminiscence of the creation in its inner world of the mind, 
according to the proper time and place of everything. 


46. It remembers its birth, its parents, its age, and its residence, with its 
learning and all other pursuits in their exact manner and order. 


47. It thinks of its friends and servants, and of the success and failure of its 
attempts. And thus the increate and incorporeal soul, ruminates on the events 
of its created and corporeal state in its intellectual form. 


48. It does not however remain long in this state, but enters a new body 
soon after its death, to which the properties of the mind and senses, are added 
afterwards in their proper times. 


49. It then becomes a baby, and finds a new father and mother, and begins 
to grow. Thus, whether one may perceive it or not, it is all the product of his 
former reminiscence. 


50. Then upon waking from this state of trance, like a fruit from the cell of 
a flower, it comes to find that a single moment appeared to it as the period of 
an age. 


51. So King Harish Chandra of yore, thought one night as a period of 
twelve years, and so one day seems as long as a year to them that are 
separated from their beloved objects. 


52. Again as the birth or death of one in his dream, or his getting a begotten 
father in infancy, or a hungry man’s faring on dainty food in thought, is all 
false. 


53. So when a sated man says he is starving, or one declares he is an eye 
witness of a thing he has not seen, or an empty space is full of people, or that 
he has got a lost treasure in his dream, who is there to believe him? 


54. But this visible world rests in the invisible spirit of God, as the property 
of pungency, resides in the particles, of the pepper seed, and as the painted 
pictures on a column. But where are the open and clear sighted eyes to 
perceive the same? 


Interpretation of Lila’s Vision. 


55. The vision of Lila, called, samddhi, in Yoga and clairvoyance of 
spiritualism, was the abstract meditation of her lord in her memory. Which 


presented her with a full view of everything imprinted in it. The memory is 
taken for the whole intellect chit, which is identified with God, in whose 
essence the images of all things, are said to be eternally present. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
Guide to Peace. 


Soon after the insensibility occasioned by one’s death is over, there appears to 
him, (soul), the sight of the world, as he viewed it with his open eyes when he 
was living. 


2. It presents before him the circle of the sky and its sides with the cycle of 
its seasons and times, and shows him the deeds of his pious and secular acts, 
as they were to continue to eternity. 


3. Objects never seen nor thought of before, also offer themselves to his 
view, as the sight of his own death in a dream, and as they were the prints in 
his memory. 


4. But the infinity of objects, appearing in the empty sphere of the 
immaterial intellect, is mere illusion, and the baseless city of the world, like 
an aerial castle, is but the creation of imagination. 


5. It is the remembrance of the past world, that makes it known to us, 
(because it is impossible to recognise anything without a previous impression 
of its kind in the mind). Hence the length of a Kalpa age and the shortness of 
a moment, are but erroneous impressions proceeding from the rapidity and 
slowness of our thoughts. 


6. Therefore, knowledge, based upon previous notions or otherwise, is of 
two kinds, and things known without their cause, are attributed to Divine 
Intelligence (as the hidden cause of all). 


7. We are conscious also of thoughts, unthought of before in our minds, as 
we often have in our dreams, and think of our parents after their demise by 
mistake of other persons as such. 


8. Sometimes genius supersedes the province of memory, as in the first 
creation or discovery of a thing, which is afterwards continued by its 
remembrance. 


9. According to some, those visible worlds are said to have remained in 
their ideal state in the Divine mind, and according to others, that there were no 


pre-existent notions of these in the mind of God. 


10. According to some others, the world manifested itself not from the 
memory, but by the power and will of God, while others maintain it to be the 
production of a fortuitous combination, of intelligence and atomic principles 
on a sudden, (Kdkatdliya sanyoga). 


11. It is the entire forgetfulness of the world, which is styled liberation, and 
which cannot be had from attachment to what is desirable or aversion of the 
undesirable. 


12. It is difficult to effect an entire negation, both of one’s subjective as 
well as objective knowledge of his self, and the existence of the outer world, 
and yet nobody can be freed without obliteration of both. 


13. As the fallacy of taking a rope for a snake, is not removed until the 
meaning of the word snake, is known to be inapplicable to the rope, so no one 
can have rest and peace of his mind, unless he is convinced of the illusive 
nature of the world. 


14. One party, who is at peace with himself (by his abandonment of the 
world), cannot be wholly at rest without divine knowledge, as the ghost of his 
inward ignorance, may overtake him after his getting rid of the devil of 
worldliness. 


15. The world is certainly a monster in itself without the knowledge of its 
Author, but the difficulty of knowing the first cause, has rendered it an 
impassable wilderness. 


16. Lila said: — If reminiscence be the cause of one’s reproduction, then 
say, O goddess! what were the causes of the birth of the Brahmanic pair, 
without the vestiges of their past remembrance. 


17. The goddess replied: — Know that Brahma, the first progenitor of 
mankind, who was absolute in himself, did not retain any vestige of his past 
remembrance in him. 


18. The first born, who had nothing to remember of a prior birth, was born 
in the lotus with his own intelligence, — chaitanya, (and not because of his 
remembrance). 


19. The lord of creatures being thus born by chance of his own genius or 
creative power, and without any assignable cause or design on his part, 
reflected within himself, “now I am become another and the source of 
creation.” 


20. Whatever is thus born of itself, is as it were nothing and never produced 


at all, but remained as the absolute intellect itself in nubibus, (chinnabhas). 


21. It is the Supreme being that is the sole cause of both states of 
reminiscence, (i.e., the one caused by vestiges of prior impressions, and the 
other produced by prior desires), and both the conditions of cause and effect 
combine in Him in the sphere of his intellect. 


22. Thus it is the knowledge of the union of the cause and effect, and the 
auxiliary cause in Him, that gives us our tranquillity and naught otherwise. 


23. Causality and consequence are mere empty words of no significance, 
since it is the recognition of the universal intellect, which constitutes true 
wisdom. 


24. Hence nothing is produced that is seen in the phenomenal, or known in 
the noumenal or intellectual world, (Chid-jagat), but everything is situated 
within the space of the sphere of the intellect in one’s own soul. 


25. Lila said: — O! wonderful was the sight thou hast shown me, O 
goddess, it was a fair prospect of the world as in its morning light, and as 
brilliant as in the glare of a lightning. 


26. Now goddess! deign to satisfy my curiosity, until I become conversant 
with it by my intense application and study. 


27. Kindly take me to that dwelling where the Brahman pair dwelt together, 
and show me that mountainous spot of their former residence. 


28. The goddess replied: — If you want to see that sight, you shall have to 
be immaculate, by forsaking the sense of your personality, (mana or meum), 
and betaking yourself to the clairvoyance or clear sightedness of seeing the 
unintelligible Intellect, (achetya-chit), within the soul. 


29. You shall then find yourself in a vacuous atmosphere, (vyomdtman), 
and situated in the sky, (nabhas-nubibus), resembling the prospects of earthly 
men, and the apartments of the firmament, (i.e., all nil and void). 


30. In this state we shall be able to see them with all their possessions 
without any obstruction, otherwise, this body is a great barrier in the way of 
spiritual vision. 

31. Lila said: — Tell me kindly, O goddess! the reason, why do we not see 


the other world with these eyes, nor go there with these bodies of ours. 


32. The goddess replied: — The reason is that you take the true futurity for 
false, and believe the untrue present as true. For these worlds which are 
formless, appear as having forms to your eyes, as you take the substance gold 


in its form of a ring. 


33. Gold, though fashioned as a circlet, has no circularity in it, so the spirit 
of God appearing in the form of the world, is not the world itself. 


34. The world is a vacuity full with the spirit of God, and whatever else is 
visible in it, is as the dust appearing to fly over the sea. (Hence called mdyd or 
illusion of vision, as specks peopling the summer skies). 


35. This illusory quintessence of the world is all false, the true reality being 
the subjective Brahma alone, and in support of this truth we have the evidence 
of our guides in Vedanta philosophy, and the conviction of our consciousness. 


36. The Brahma believer sees Brahma alone and no other anywhere, and he 
looks to Brahma through Brahma himself, as the creator and preserver of all, 
and whose nature includes all other attributes in itself. 


37. Brahma is not known only as the author of his work of the creation of 
worlds, but as existent of himself without any causation or auxiliary causality, 
(i.e., aS neither the creator or created, nor supporter of nor supported by 
another). 


38. Until you are trained by your practice of Yoga, to rely in one unity, by 
discarding all duality and variety in your belief, so long you are barred from 
viewing Brahma in his true light. 


39. Being settled in this belief of unity, we find ourselves by our constant 
practice of Yoga communion, to rest in the Supreme spirit. 


40. We then find our bodies mixing with the air as an aerial substance, and 
at last come to the sight of Brahma with these our mortal frames. 


41. Being then endued with pure, enlightened, and spiritual frames, like 
those of Brahma and the gods, the holy saints are placed in some part of the 
divine essence. 


42. Without practice of Yoga, you cannot approach God with your mortal 
frame. The soul that is sullied by sense, can never see the image of God. 


43. It is impossible for one to arrive at the aerial castle, (objects of the 
wish) of another, when it is not possible for him to come to the castle, (wished 
for object), which he has himself built in air. 


44. Forsake, therefore, this gross body, and assume your light intellectual 
frame, then betake yourself to the practice of Yoga, that you may see God face 
to face. 


45. As it may be possible to realize an aerial castle by the labour of 


building it, so it is possible to behold God, either with this body or without it, 
by practice of Yoga only and not otherwise. 


46. And as the erroneous conception of the existence of the world, has 
continued since its first creation (by the will of Brahma), so it has been ever 
since attributed to an eternal fate, — niyati, (by fatalists), and to an illusory 
power, (maya sakti of Maya vadis). 


47. Lila asked: — Thou saidst O goddess, that we shall go together to the 
abode of the Brahman pair, but I ask thee to tell me, how are we to effect our 
journey there? 


48. As for me, I shall be able to go there with the purer part of my essence 
the sentient soul, (after leaving this my gross body here). But tell me how wilt 
thou that art pure intellect, (chetas), go to that place? 


49. The goddess replied: — I tell thee lady, that the divine will is an aerial 
tree, and its fruits are as unsubstantial as air, having no figure nor form nor 
substance in them. 


50. And whatever is formed by the will of God from the pure essence of his 
intelligent nature, is only a likeness of himself, and bears little difference from 
its original. 


51. This body of mine is of the like kind, and I will not lay it aside, but find 
out that place by means of this as the breeze finds the odours. 


52. And as water mixes with water, fire with fire and air with air, so does 
this spiritual body easily join with any material form that it likes. 


53. But a corporeal body cannot mix with an incorporeal substance, nor a 
solid rock become the same with an ideal hill. 


54. And as your body, which is composed both of its spiritual and mental 
parts, has become corporeal by its habitual tendency to corporeality. 


55. So your material body becomes spiritual, (dtivahika), by means of your 
leaning to spirituality, as in your sleep, in your protracted meditation, 
insensibility, fancies and reveries. 


56. Your spiritual nature will then return to your body, when your earthly 
desires are lessened and curbed within the mind. 


57. Lila said: — Say goddess, what becomes of the spiritual body after it 
has attained its compactness by constant practice of Yoga, whether it becomes 
indestructible, or perishes like all other finite bodies. 


58. The goddess replied: — Anything that exists is perishable, and of 


course liable to death, but how can that thing die which is nothing, and is 
imperishable in its nature? (Such is the spirit). 


59. Again, the fallacy of the snake in a rope being removed, the snake 
disappears of itself, and no one doubts of it any more. 


60. Thus, as the true knowledge of the rope, removes the erroneous 
conception of the snake in it, so the recognition of the spiritual body, dispels 
the misconception of its materiality. 


61. All imagery is at an end when there is no image at all, as the art of 
statuary must cease for want of stones on earth. (Thus they attribute 
materiality to the immaterial spirit from their familiarity with matter). 


62. We see clearly our bodies full of the spirit of God, which you cannot 
perceive owing to your gross understanding. 


63. In the beginning when the intellect, — chit, is engrossed with the 
imagination of the mind, — chitta, it loses thenceforth its sight of the only one 
object, (the unity of God). 


64. Lila asked: — But how can imagination have any room or trace out 
anything in that unity, wherein the divisions of time and space and all things, 
are lost in an undistinguishable mass? 


65. The goddess replied: — Like the bracelet in gold and waves in water, 
the show of truth in dreams, and the resemblance of aerial castles, 


66. As all these vanish on the right apprehension of them, so the imaginary 
attributes of the unpredicable God, are all nothing whatever. 


67. As there is no dust in the sky, so there can be no ascribing of any 
attribute or partial property to God, whose nature is indivisible and 
unimaginable, who is an unborn unity, tranquil and all-pervading. 


68. Whatever shines about us, is the pure light of that being, who scatters 
his lustre like a transcendental gem all around. 


69. Lila said: — If it is so at all times, then tell me, O goddess! how we 
happened to fall into the error of attributing duality and diversity to His 
nature. 


70. The goddess replied: — It was your want of reason that has led you to 
error so long, and it is the absence of reasoning that is the natural bane of 
mankind, and requires to be remedied by your attending to reason. 


71. When reason takes the place of the want of reason, it introduces in a 
moment the light of knowledge in the soul, in lieu of its former darkness. 


72. As reason advances, your want of reason and knowledge and your 
bondage to prejudice, are put to flight, and then you have an unobstructed 
liberation and pure understanding in this world. 


73. As long as you had remained without reasoning on this subject, so long 
were you either dormant or wandering in error. 


74. You are awakened from this day both to your reason and liberation, and 
the seeds for the suppression of your desires, are sown in your heart. 


75. At first neither was this visible world presented to you nor you to it, 
how long will you therefore reside in it, and what other desires have you 
herein? 


76. Withdraw your mind from its thoughts of the visitor, visibles, and 
vision of this world, and settle it in the idea of the entire negation of all 
existence, then fix your meditation solely in the supreme Being, and sit in a 
state of unalterable insensibility (by forgetting yourself to a stone). 


77. When the seed of inappetency has taken root in your heart, and begun 
to germinate in it, the sprouts of your affections and hatred, (literally, — 
pathos and apathy), will be destroyed of themselves. 


78. Then the impression of the world will be utterly effaced from the mind, 
and an unshaken anesthesia will overtake you all at once. 


79. Remaining thus entranced in your abstract meditation, you will have in 
process of time a soul, as luminous as a luminary in the clear firmament of 
heaven, freed from the concatenation of all causes and their consequences for 
evermore. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
Practice of Wisdom or Wisdom in Practice. 


(Vijnana-bhyasa). 


SECTION I. 
Abandonment of Desires. 


Badsand Tydga. 


The goddess continued: — 


As objects seen in a dream, prove to be false as the dream, on being roused 
from sleep and upon knowing them as fumes of fancy, so the belief in the 
reality of the body, becomes unfounded upon dissolution of our desires. 


2. As the thing dreamt of disappears upon waking, so does the waking body 
disappear in sleep, when the desires lie dormant in the soul. 


3. As our corporeal bodies are awakened after the states of our dreaming 
and desiring, so is our spiritual body awakened after we cease to think of our 
corporeal states. 


4. As a sound sleep succeeds the dormancy which is devoid of desires, (i.e., 
when we are unconscious of the actions and volition of our minds), so does 
the tranquillity of liberation follow the state of our inappetency even in our 
waking bodies. 


5. The desire of living-liberated men, (jivan-muktas), is not properly any 
desire at all, since it is the pure desire relating to universal weal and 
happiness. 


6. The sleep in which the will and wish are dormant, is called the sound 
sleep, susupta, but the dormancy of desires in the waking state, is known as 
insensibility, moha or miurchha. 


7. Again the sleep which is wholly devoid of desire, is designated the turiya 
or the fourth stage of Yoga, and which in the waking state is called samddhi or 


union with Supreme. 


8. The living man, whose life is freed from all desires in this world, is 
called the living liberated, — jivan-mukta, a state which is unknown to them 
that are not liberated (amukta). 


9. When the mind becomes a pure essence, (as in its samddhi), and its 
desires are weakened, it becomes spiritualised, (ativahika), and then it glows 
and flows, as the snow melts to water by application of heat. 


10. The spiritualised mind, being awakened, (as if it were from its 
drowsiness or lethargy), mixes with the holy spirits of departed souls in the 
other world. 


11. When your egoism is moderated by your practice of Yoga, then the 
perception of the invisible, will of itself rise clearly before your mind. 


12. And when spiritual knowledge gains a firm footing in your mind, you 
will then behold the hallowed scenes of the other world more than your 
expectation. 


13. Therefore, O blameless lady! try your utmost to deaden your desires, 
and when you have gained sufficient strength in that practice, know yourself 
to be liberated in this life. 


14. Until the moon of your intellectual knowledge, comes to shine forth 
fully with her cooling beams, so long you shall have to leave this body of 
yours here, in order to have a view of the other world. 


15. This fleshy body of yours, can have no tangible connection with one 
which is without flesh, nor can the intellectual body, (Jingadeha), perform any 
action of the corporeal system. 


16. I have told you all this according to my best knowledge, and the state of 
things as they are, and my sayings are known even to boys, to be as 
efficacious as the curse or blessing of a deity. 


17. It is the habitual reliance of men in their gross bodies, and their fond 
attachment to them, that bind their souls down, and bring them back to the 
earth, while the weakening of earthly desires serve to clothe them with 
spiritual bodies. 


18. No body believes in his having a spiritual body here even at his death 
bed, but everyone thinks the dying man to be dead with his body forever. 


19. This body however, neither dies, nor is it alive at any time, for both life 
and death are mere resemblances of aerial dreams and desires in all respects. 


20. The life and death of beings here below, are as false as the appearances 
and disappearance of persons in imagination, (or a man in the moon), or of 
dolls in play or puppet shows. 


21. Lila said: — The pure knowledge, O goddess! that thou hast imparted 
to me, serves on its being instilled into my ears, as a healing balm to the pain 
caused by the phenomenals. 


SECTION ILI. 
On the Practice of Yoga. 


22. Now tell me the name and nature of the practice, that may be of use to 
Spiritualism, how it is to be perfected and what is the end of such perfection. 


23. The goddess replied: — Whatever a man attempts to do here at any 
time, he can hardly ever effect its completion, without his painful practice of it 
to the utmost of his power. 


24. Practice is said by the wise, to consist in the conference of the same 
thing with one another, in understanding it thoroughly, and in devoting one’s 
self solely to his object. 


25. And those great souls become successful in this world, who are 
disgusted with the world, and are moderate in their enjoyments and desires, 
and do not think on the attainment of what they are in want of. 


26. And those great minds are said to be best trained, which are graced with 
liberal views, and are delighted with the relish of unconcernedness with the 
world, and enraptured with the streams of heavenly felicity. 


27. Again, they are called the best practised in divine knowledge, who are 
employed in preaching the absolute negation of the knower and knowables in 
this world, by the light of reasoning and Sdstras. 


28. Also the knowledge, that there was nothing produced in the beginning, 
and that nothing which is visible, as this world or one’s self, is true at any 
time, is called to be practical knowledge by some. 


29. The strong tendency of the soul towards the spirit of God, which results 
from a knowledge of the nihility of visibles, and subsidence of the passions, is 
said to be the effect of the practice of Yoga. 


30. But mere knowledge of the inexistence of the world, without subduing 


the passions, is known as knowledge without practice, and is of no good to its 
possessor. 


31. Consciousness of the inexistence of the visible world, constitutes the 
true knowledge of the knowable. This habitude of the mind is called the 
practice of Yoga, and leads one to his final extinction, — nirvana. 


32. The mind thus prepared by practice of Yoga, awakens the intelligence 
which lay dormant in the dark night of this world, and which now sheds its 
cooling showers of reason, like dew drops in the frosty night of autumn. 


33. As the sage was sermonizing in this manner, the day departed as to its 
evening service, and led the assembled train to their evening ablutions. They 
met again with their mutual greetings at the rising beams of the sun after the 
darkness of night was dispelled. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
The Aerial Journey of Spiritual Bodies. 


Vasishtha said: — 


After this conference between the goddess and that excellent lady on that 
night, they found the inmates of the family fast asleep in the inner apartment. 


2. They entered the charnel-house which was closely shut on all sides by 
latches fastened to the doors and windows, and which was perfumed with the 
fragrance of heaps of flowers. 


3. They sat beside the corpse decorated with fresh flowers and garments, 
with their faces shining like the fair full-moon, and brightening the place. 


4. They then went to the cemetery and stood motionless on the spot, as if 
they were sculptures engraven on marble columns, or as pictures drawn upon 
the wall. 


5. They shook off all their thoughts and cares, and became as contracted as 
the faded blossoms of the lotus at the decline of the day, when their fragrance 
has fled from them. 


6. They remained still, calm and quiet and without any motion of their 
limbs, like a sheet of clouds hanging on the mountain top in the calm of 
autumn. 


7. They continued in fixed attention without any external sensation, like 
some lonely creepers shrivelled for want of the moisture of the season. 


8. They were fully impressed with the disbelief of their own existence, and 
that of all other things in the world, and were altogether absorbed in the 
thought of an absolute privation of everything at large. 


9. They lost the remembrance of the phantom of the phenomenal world, 
which is as unreal as the horn of a hare. 


10. What was a non ens at first, is even so a not-being at present, and what 
appears as existent, is as inexistent as the water in a mirage. 


11. The two ladies then became as quiet as inert nature herself, and as still 
as firmament before the luminous bodies rolled about in its ample sphere. 


12. They then began to move with their own bodies, the goddess of wisdom 
in her form of intelligence, and the queen in her intellectual and meditative 
mood. 


13. With their new bodies they rose as high as one span above the ground, 
then taking the forms of the empty intellect, they began to mount in the sky. 


14. The two ladies then with their playful open eyes, ascended to the higher 
region of the sky, by their nature of intellectual knowledge. 


15. Then they flew higher and higher by force of their intellect, and arrived 
at a region stretching millions of leagues in length. 


16. Here the pair in their ethereal forms, looked about according to their 
nature in search of some visible objects, but finding no other figure except 
their own, they became much more attached to each other by their mutual 
affection. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
The Aerial Journey. 


Vasishtha continued: — 


Thus ascending higher and higher and reaching by degrees the highest 
station, they went on viewing the heavens, with their hands clasped in each 
other’s. 


2. They saw a vast expanse as that of the wide extended universal ocean, 
deep and translucent within, but soft with ethereal mildness, and a cooling 
breeze infusing heavenly delight. 


3. All delightsome and pleasant was the vast Ocean of vacuity, into which 
they dived, and which afforded them a delight far greater in its purity, than 
what is derived from the company of the virtuous. 


4. They wandered about all sides of heaven, under the beams of the full 
moon shining above them, and now halted under the clear vault of the clouds, 
covering the mountain tops of Meru, as if under the dome of a huge white 
washed edifice. 


5. And now they roved by the regions of Siddhas and Gandharvas, 
breathing the charming fragrance of Mandara chaplets, and now passing the 
lunar sphere, they inhaled the sweet scent exhaled by the breeze from that 
nectarious orb, (Sudhdkara). 


6. Now tired and perspiring profusely, they bathed in the lakes of 
showering clouds, fraught with the blushing lotuses of lurid lightnings 
flashing within them. 


7. They promenaded at random of their free will on all sides, and now 
alighted like fluttering bees on the tops of high mountains, appearing as 
filaments of the lotus-like earth below. 


8. They roved also under the vaults of some fragments of clouds, which 
were scattered by the winds, and raining like the cascade of Ganges, thinking 
them as shower-bath-houses in the air. 


9. Then failing in their strength, they halted in many places, with their slow 
and slackened steps, and beheld the vacuum full of great and wondrous works. 


SECTION II. 
Description of the Heaven. 


10. They saw what they had never seen before, the tremendous depth of 
vacuity, which was not filled up by the myriads of worlds which kept 
revolving in it. 


11. Over and over and higher and higher, they saw the celestial spheres 
filled with luminous orbs adorned with their ornamental stars, roving one 
above and around the other. 


12. Huge mountainous bodies as the Meru moved about in the vacuous 
space, and emitted a rubicund glare, like a flame of fire from within their 
bowels on all sides. 


13. There were beautiful table-lands, like those of the Himalayas, with their 
pearly peaks of snow, and also mountains of gold, spreading an aureate hue 
over the land. 


14. They saw in some place mountains of emerald, tinging the landscape 
with verdant green, as it were a bed of grass, and in others some dark cloud, 
dimming the sight of the spectator, and hiding the spectacle in dark blackness. 


15. They beheld also tracts of blue sapphire, with creepers of pdrijdta 
flowers, blooming with their blossoms as banners in the azure skies. 


16. They saw the flights of Siddhas, (or departed holy spirits), the flight of 
whose minds outstripped the swiftness of the winds, and heard the vocal 
music of the songs of heavenly nymphs in their aerial abodes. 


17. All the great bodies in the universe, (the planetary system), were in 
continual motion, and the spirits of the gods and demi-gods, were moving 
about unseen by one another. 


18. Groups of spiritual beings, as the Kushmandas, Rdkshasas and 
Pisdchas, were seated in aerial circles at the borders, and the winds and gales 
blowing with full force in their ethereal course. 


19. Loud roarings of clouds, as those of the crackling wheels of heavenly 
cars, were heard in some places, and the noise of rapid stars, resembled the 


blowing of pneumatic engines. 


20. There the half-burnt Siddhas, were flying from their burning cars under 
the solar rays, by reason of their nearness to the Sun, and the solar embers 
were flung afar by the breath of the nostrils of his horses. (It means the falling 
of the burning meteors and meteorites from the sky). 


21. In some places they beheld the rulers of men, and trains of Apsaras, 
hurrying up and down the air, and in others, the goddesses roving amidst the 
smoky and fiery clouds in the firmament. 


22. Here they saw some sparks of light, falling like the jewels of celestial 
nymphs, in their hurried flight to their respective spheres, and there they 
beheld the lightsome spirits of lesser Siddhas dwindling into darkness. 


23. Flakes of mists were falling off from the clouds, as if by friction of the 
bodies of turbulent spirits, rushing up and down the skies, and shrouding the 
sides of mountains as with sheets of cloth. 


24. Fragments of clouds, beset by groups in the shapes of crows, owls, and 
vultures, were flying about in the air, and there were seen some monsters also, 
as Dakinis heaving their heads in the forms of huge surges, in the cloudy 
ocean of the sky. 


25. There were bodies of Yoginis too, with their faces resembling those of 
dogs, ravens, asses and camels, who were traversing the wide expanse of the 
heavens to no purpose. 


26. There were Siddhas and Gandharvas, sporting in pairs in the coverts of 
dark, smoky and ash coloured clouds, spread before the regents of the four 
quarters of the skies. 


27. They beheld the path of the planets, (the zodiac), which resounded 
loudly with the heavenly music of the spheres, and that path also, (of the lunar 
mansions), which incessantly marked the course of the two fortnights. 


28. They saw the sons of gods moving about in the air, and viewing with 
wonder the heavenly stream of Ganges, (the milky way), which was studded 
with stars, and rolling with the rapidity of winds. 


29. They saw the gods wielding their thunderbolts, discuses, tridents, 
swords, and missiles, and heard Narada and Tumburu singing in their aerial 
abodes on high. 


30. They beheld the region of the clouds, where there were huge bodies of 
them, mute as paintings, and pouring forth floods of rain as in the great 
deluge. 


31. In some place they saw a dark cloud, as high as the mountain-king 
Himalaya, slowly moving in the air, and at others some of a golden hue as at 
the setting sun. 


32. In some place there were flimsy sheets of clouds, as are said to hover on 
the peaks of the Rishya range, and at another a cloud like the calm blue bed of 
the Sea, without any water in them. 


33. There were tufts of grass seen in some places, as if blown up by the 
winds and floating in the stream of air, and swarms of butterflies at others 
with their glossy coats and wings. 


34. In some place, there was a cloud of dust raised by the wind, and 
appearing as a lake on the top of a mountain. 


35. The Matris were seen, to be dancing naked in their giddy circles in 
some place, and the great Yoginis sat at others, as if ever and anon giddy with 
intoxication. 


36. There were circles of holy men, sitting in their calm meditation in one 
place, and pious saints at others, who had cast away their worldly cares at a 
distance. 


37. There was a conclave of celestial choristers, composed of heavenly 
nymphs, Kinnaras and Gandharvas in one place, and some quiet towns and 
cities situated at others. 


38. There were the cities of Brahma and Rudra full with their people, and 
the city of illusion, (Wdyd), with its increasing population. 


39. There were crystal lakes in some places and stagnant pools at others, 
and lakes with the Siddhas seated by them, and those embosomed by the 
rising moon. 


40. They saw the sun rising in one part, and the darkness of night veiling 
the others, the evening casting its shadow on one, and the dusky mists of dusk 
obscuring the other. 


41. There were the hoary clouds of winter in some places, and those of the 
rains in others, somewhere they appeared as tracts of land and at another as a 
sheet of water. 


42. Bodies of gods and demi-gods, were roving from one side to the other, 
some from east to west, and others from north to the south. 


43. There were mountains heaving their heads to thousands of miles in their 
height, and there were valleys and caves covered in eternal darkness. 


44. There was a vast inextinguishable fire, like that of the blazing sun in 
one place, and a thickly frost covering the moon-light in another. (The 
burning heat of the tropics and the cold of the frigid zone). 


45. Somewhere there was a great city, flourishing with groves and arbours, 
and at another big temples of gods, levelled to the ground by the might of 
demons. 


46. In some place there was a streak of light, described by a falling meteor 
in the sky, in another the blaze of a comet with its thousand fiery tails in the 
air. 


47. In one place there was a lucky planet, rising with its full orb to the 
view, in another there spread the gloom of night, and full sunshine in another. 


48. Here the clouds were roaring, and there they were dumb and mute, here 
were the high blasts driving the clouds in air, and there the gentle breeze 
dropping the clusters of flowers on the ground. 


49. Sometimes the firmament was clear and fair, and without an 
intercepting cloud in it, and as transparent as the soul of a wise man, delighted 
with the knowledge of truth. 


50. The vacuous region of the celestial gods, was so full with the dewy 
beams, (himdnsu), of the silvery orb of the moon, (sweta-vdha), that it 
appeared as a shower of rain, and raised the loud croaking of the frogs below. 


51. There appeared flocks of peacocks and goldfinches, to be fluttering 
about in some place, and vehicles of the goddesses and Vidyadharis thronging 
at another. 


52. Numbers of Kartikeya’s peacocks were seen dancing amidst the clouds, 
and a flight of greenish parrots was seen in the sky appearing as a verdant 
plain. 


53. Dwarfish clouds were moving like the stout buffaloes of Yama, and 
others in the form of horses, were grazing on the grassy meadows of clouds. 


54. Cities of the gods and demons, appeared with their towers on high, and 
distinct towns and hills, were seen at distances, as if detached from one 
another by the driving winds. 


55. In some place, gigantic Bhairavas were dancing with their mountainous 
bodies, and great Garudas were flying at another, as winged mountains in the 
air. 


56. Huge mountains also, were tossed about by the blowing of winds, and 


the castles of the Gandharvas, were rising and falling with the celestial 
nymphs in them. 


57. There were some clouds rising on high, and appearing as rolling 
mountains in the sky, crushing down the forests below, and the sky appeared 
in some place, as a clear lake abounding in lotuses. 


58. The moon-beams shone brightly in one spot, and sweet cooling breezes 
blew softly in another. Hot sultry winds were blowing in some place, and 
singeing the forest on the mountainous clouds. 


59. There was a dead silence in one spot, caused by perfect calmness of the 
breeze, while another spot presented a scene of a hundred peaks, rising on a 
mountain-like cloud. 


60. In one place the raining clouds, were roaring loudly in their fury, and in 
another, a furious battle was waging between the gods and demons in the 
clouds. 


61. In some place the geese were seen gabbling in the lotus lake of the sky, 
and inviting the ganders by their loud cackling cries. 


62. Forms of fishes, crocodiles, and alligators, were seen flying in the air, 
as if they were transformed to aerial beings, by the holy waters of their natal 
Ganges. 


63. They saw somewhere the eclipse of the moon, by the dark shadow of 
the earth, as the sun went down the horizon, and so they saw the eclipse of the 
sun by the shadow of the moon falling on his disk. 


64. They saw a magical flower garden, exhaling its fragrance in the air, and 
strewing the floor of heaven, with profusion of flowers, scattered by showers 
of morning dews. 


65. They beheld all the beings contained in the three worlds, to be flying in 
the air, like a swarm of gnats in the hollow of a fig tree, and then the two 
excellent ladies stopped in their aerial journey, intent upon revisiting the 
earth. 


Note. Most part of the above description of the heavens, consists of the 
various appearances of the clouds, and bears resemblance to Shelly’s poetical 
description of them. All this is expressed by one word in the Cloud- 
Messenger of Kalidasa, where the cloud is said to be, “Kdma ripa,” or 
assuming any form at pleasure. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
Description of the Earth. 


These ladies then alighted from the sky in their forms of intelligence, and 
passing over the mountainous regions, saw the habitations of men on the 
surface of the earth. 


2. They saw the world situated as a lotus, in the heart of the first male Nara, 
(Brahma), the eight sides forming the petals of the flower, the hills being its 
pistils, and the pericarp containing its sweet flavour. 


3. The rivers are the tubes of its filaments, which are covered with drops of 
snow resembling their dust. The days and nights rolling over it, like swarms 
of black-bees and butterflies, and all its living beings appearing as gnats 
fluttering about it. 


4. Its long stalks which are as white as the bright day-light, are composed 
of fibres serving for food, and of tubes conducting the drink to living beings. 


5. It is wet with moisture, which is sucked by the sun, resembling the swan 
swimming about in the air. It folds itself in sleep in the darkness of night in 
absence of the sun. 


6. The earth like a lotus is situated on the surface of the waters of the 
ocean, which make it shake at times, and cause the earthquake by their 
motion. It is supported upon the serpent Vasuki, serving for its understalk, and 
is girt about by demons as its thorns and prickles. 


7. The mount Meru (and others) are its large seeds, and the great hives of 
human population, where the fair daughters of the giant race, propagated (the 
race of men), by their sweet embrace (with the sons of God). 


8. It has the extensive continent of Jambudwipa situated in one petal, the 
petioles forming its divisions, and the tubular filaments its rivers. 


9. The seven elevated mountains, forming the boundary lines of this 
continent, are its seeds, and the great mount of Sumeru reaching to the sky, is 
situated in the midst. (i.e., The topmost north pole). 


10. Its lakes are as dewdrops on the lotus-leaf, and its forests are as the 
farina of the flower, and the people inhabiting the land all around, are as a 
swarm of bees about it. 


11. Its extent is a thousand yojanas square, and is surrounded on all sides 
by the dark sea like a belt of black bees. 


12. It contains nine varshas or divisions, which are ruled by nine brother 
kings, resembling the regents of its eight petalled sides, with the Bharata- 
varsha in the midst. 


13. It stretches a million of miles with more of land than water in it. Its 
habitable parts are as thickly situated as the frozen ice in winter. 


14. The briny ocean which is twice as large as the continent, girds it on the 
outside, as a bracelet encircles the wrist. 


15. Beyond it lies the Saka continent of a circular form, and twice as large 
as the former one, which is also encircled by the sea. 


16. This is called the milky ocean for the sweetness of its water, and is 
double the size of the former sea of salt. 


17. Beyond that and double its size is the Kusadwipa continent, which is 
full of population. It is also of the size of a circle, and surrounded by another 
sea. 


18. Around it lies the belt of the sea of curds, delectable to the gods, and 
double the size of the continent which is encircled by it. 


19. After that lies the circle of the Krauncha dwipa, which is also twice the 
size of the former one, and surrounded by a sea in the manner of a city by a 
canal. 


20. This sea is called the sea of butter, and is twice as large as the continent 
which is girt by it. Beyond it lies the Salmali dwipa, girt by the foul sea of 
wine. 


21. The fair belt of this sea resembles a wreath of white flowers, like the 
girdle of the Sesha serpent, forming the necklace hanging on the breast of 
Hari. 


22. Thereafter, is stretched the Plaxa dwipa, double the size of the former, 
and encircled by the belt of the sea of sugar, appearing as the snowy plains of 
Himalaya. 


23. After that lies the belt of the Pushkara dwipa, twice as large as the 
preceding one, and encircled by a sea of sweet water double its circumference. 


24. Hence they saw at the distance of ten degrees, the descent to the 
infernal regions, where there lay the belt of the south polar circle, with its 
hideous cave below. 


25. The way to the infernal cave is full of danger and fear, and ten times in 
length from the circle of the dwipas, (continents). 


26. This cave is encompassed on all sides by the dreadful vacuum, and is 
half covered below by a thick gloom, appearing as a blue lotus attached to it. 


27. There stood the Lokaéloka Kumeru or South Polar mountain, which is 
bright with sun-shine on one side, and covered by darkness on the other, and 
is studded with various gems on its tops, and decked with flowers growing 
upon it. 


28. It reflected the glory of the three worlds (in the everlasting snows), 
which are clapped as a cap of hairs on its top. 


29. At a great distance from it, is a great forest, untrodden by the feet of 
any living being, and then proceeding upward, they saw the great northern 
ocean encompassing the pole on all sides. 


30. Further on they beheld the flaming light of the aurora borealis, which 
threatened to melt the snowy mountain to water. 


31. Proceeding onward, they met with the fierce Boreas or north winds, 
blowing with all their fury and force. 


32. They threatened to blow away and uproot the mountains, as if they 
were dust or grass, and traversed the empty vacuum with their noiseless 
motion. 


33. Afar from these they saw the empty space of vacuum, stretching wide 
all about them. 


34. It spreads around to an unlimited extent, and encompasses the worlds as 
a golden circlet encircles the wrist, (i.e., the belt of the zodiac). 


35. Thus Lila, having seen the seas and mountains, the regents of the 
worlds, the city of the gods, the sky above and the earth below in the 
unlimited concavity of the universe, returned on a sudden to her own land, 
and found herself in her closet again. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
Meeting the Siddhas 


Vasishtha said: — After the excellent ladies had returned from their visit of 
the mundane sphere, they entered the abode where the Brahman had lived 
before. 


2. There, the holy ladies saw in that dwelling, and unseen by any body, the 
tomb or tope of the Brahman. 


3. Here the maid servants were dejected with sorrow, and the faces of the 
women were soiled with tears. Their countenances had faded away, like 
lotuses with their withered leaves. 


4. All joy had fled from the house, and left it as the dry bed of the dead sea, 
after its waters were sucked by the scorching sun, (Agastya). It was as a 
garden parched in summer, or a tree struck by lightning. 


5. It was as joyless as the dried lotus, torn by a blast or withering under the 
frost, and as faint as the light of a lamp, without its wick or oil, and as dim as 
the eyeball without its light. 


6. The house without its master, was as doleful as the countenance of a 
dying person, or as a forest with its falling and withered leaves, and as the dry 
and dusty ground for want of rain. 


7. Vasishtha continued: — Then the lady with her gracefulness of divine 
knowledge, and the elegance of her perfections, and her devotedness to and 
desire of truth, thought within herself, that the inmates of the house might 
behold her and the goddess, in their ordinary forms as human beings. 


9. The dwellers of the house then beheld the two ladies as Laxmi and Gauri 
together, and brightening the house with the effulgence of their persons. 


10. They were adorned from head to foot, with wreaths of unfading flowers 
of various kinds, and they seemed like Flora, — the genius of spring, 
perfuming the house with the fragrance of a flower garden. 


11. They appeared to rise as a pair of moons, with their cooling and 


pleasant beams, infusing a freshness to the family, as the moonlight does to 
the medicinal plants in forests and villages. 


12. The soft glances of their eyes, under the long, loose, and pendant curls 
of hair on their foreheads, shed as it were a shower of white mdlati flowers, 
from the dark cloudy spots of their nigrescent eyes. 


13. Their bodies were as bright as melted gold, and as tremulous as the 
flowing stream. The current of their effulgence, cast a golden hue on the spot 
where they stood, as also over the forest all around. 


14. The natural beauty of Laxmi’s body, and the tremulous glare of Lila’s 
person, spread as it were, a sea of radiance about them, in which their persons 
seemed to move as undulating waves. 


15. Their relaxed arms resembling loose creepers, with the ruddy leaflets of 
their palms, shook as fresh Kalpa creepers in the forest. 


16. They touched the ground again with their feet, resembling the fresh and 
tender petals of a flower, or like lotuses growing upon the ground. 


17. Their appearance seemed to sprinkle ambrosial dews all around, and 
made the dry withered and brown boughs of tamdla trees, to vegetate anew in 
tender sprouts and leaflets. 


18. On seeing them, the whole family with Jyeshtha Sarma, (the eldest boy 
of the deceased Brahman), cried aloud and said, “Obeisance to the sylvan 
goddesses,” and threw handfuls of flowers on their feet. 


19. The offerings of flowers which fell on their feet, resembled the showers 
of dew-drops, falling on lotus leaves in a lake of lotuses. 


20. Jyeshtha Sarma said: — Be victorious, ye goddesses! that have come 
here to dispel our sorrow, as it is inborn in the nature of good people, to 
deliver others from their distress. 


21. After he had ended, the goddesses addressed him gently and said, tell 
us the cause of your sorrow, which has made you all so sad. 


22. Then Jyeshtha Sarma and others related to them one by one their griefs, 
owing to the demise of the Brahman pair. 


23. They said: — Know, O goddess pair! there lived here a Brahman and 
his wife, who had been the resort of guests and a support of the Brahminical 
order. 


24. They were our parents, and have lately quitted this abode, and having 
abandoned us with all their friends and domestic animals here, have departed 


to heaven, and left us quite helpless in this world. 


25. The birds there sitting on the top of the house, have been continually 
pouring in the air, their pious and mournful ditties over the dead bodies of the 
deceased. 


26. There the mountains on all sides, have been lamenting their loss, in the 
hoarse noise (of the winds) howling in their caverns, and shedding showers of 
their tears in the course of the streams issuing from their sides. 


27. The clouds have poured their tears in floods of rainwater, and fled from 
the skies, while the quarters of the heavens have been sending their sighs in 
sultry winds all around. 


28. The poor village people are wailing in piteous notes, with their bodies 
mangled by rolling upon the ground, and trying to yield up their lives with 
continued fasting. 


29. The trees are shedding their tears every day in drops of melting snow, 
exuding from the cells of their leaves and flowers, resembling the sockets of 
their eyes. 


30. The streets are deserted for want of passers-bye, and have become 
dusty without being watered. They have become as empty as the hearts of 
men forsaken by their joys of life. 


31. The fading plants are wailing in the plaintive notes of Cuckoos and the 
humming of bees, and are withering in their leafy limbs by the sultry sighs of 
their inward grief. 


32. The snows are melted down by the heat of their grief and falling in the 
form of cataracts, which break themselves to a hundred channels by their fall 
upon stony basins. 


33. Our prosperity has fled from us, and we sit here in dumb despair of 
hope. Our houses have become dark and gloomy as a desert. 


34. Here the humble bees, are humming in grief upon the scattered flowers 
in our garden, which now sends forth a putrid smell instead of their former 
fragrance. 


35. And there the creepers that twined so gayly round the vernal arbors, are 
dwindling and dying away with their closing and fading flowers. 


36. The rivulets with their loose and low purling murmur, and light 
undulation of their liquid bodies in the ground, are running hurriedly in their 
sorrow, to cast themselves into the sea. 


37. The ponds are as still in their sorrow, as men sitting in their meditative 
posture (Samddhi), notwithstanding the disturbance of the gnats flying 
incessantly upon them. 


38. Verily is that part of the heaven adorned this day by the presence of our 
parents, where the bodies of heavenly choristers, the Kinnaras, Gandharvas 
and Vidyadharas, welcome them with their music. 


39. Therefore, O Devis! assuage this our excessive grief, as the visit of the 
great never goes for nothing. 


40. Hearing these words, Lila gently touched the head of her son with her 
hand, as the lotus-bed leans to touch its offshoot by the stalk. 


41. At her touch the boy was relieved of all his sorrow and misfortune, just 
as the summer heat of the mountain, is allayed by the showers of the rainy 
season. 


42. All others in the house, were as highly gratified at the sight of the 
goddesses, as when a pauper is relieved of his poverty, and the sick are healed 
by a draught of nectar. 


43. Rama said: — Remove my doubt, Sir, why Lila did not appear in her 
own figure before her eldest son, — Jyeshta Sarma. 


44. Vasishtha answered: — You forget, O Rama! to think that Lila had a 
material body, or could assume any at pleasure. She was in her form of pure 
intellect, (lingadeha), and it was with her spiritual hand that she touched the 
inner spirit of the boy and not his body. (Gloss). Because whoso believes 
himself to be composed of his earthly body only, is verily confined in that, but 
he who knows his spirituality, is as free as air, (and it was in this aerial form 
that Lila was ranging about and touched her son). 


45. Belief in materialism leads one to think his unreal earthly frame as real, 
as a boy’s belief in ghosts makes him take a shadow for a spirit. 


46. But this belief in one’s materiality, is soon over upon conviction of his 
spirituality, as the traces of our visions in a dream, are effaced on the 
knowledge of their unreality upon waking. 


47. The belief of matter as (vacuous), nothing, leads to the knowledge of 
the spirit. And as a glass door appears as an open space to one of a bilious 
temperament, so does matter appear as nothing to the wise. 


48. A dream presents us the sights of cities and lands, of air and water, 
where there are no such things in actuality; and it causes the movements of 
our limbs and bodies, (as in somnambulation), for nothing. 


49. As the air appears as earth in dreaming, so does the non-existent world 
appear to be existent in waking. It is thus that men see and talk of things 
unseen and unknown in their fits of delirium. 


50. So boys see ghosts in the air, and the dying man views a forest in it, 
others see elephants in clouds, and some see pearls in sun-beams. 


51. And thus those that are panic-struck and deranged in their minds, the 
half-waking and passengers in vessels, see many appearances like the 
aforesaid ghosts and forests, as seen by boys and men in the air, and betray 
these signs in the motions and movements of their bodies. 


52. In this manner everyone is of the form of whatever he thinks himself to 
be, and it is habit only that makes him to believe himself as such, though he is 
not so in reality. 


53. But Lila who had known the truth and inexistence of the world, was 
conscious of its nothingness, and viewed all things to be but erroneous 
conceptions of the mind. 


54. Thus, he who sees Brahma only to fill the sphere of his intellect, has no 
room for a son or friend or consort to abide in it. 


55. He who views the whole as full with the spirit of Brahma, and nothing 
produced in it, has no room for his affection or hatred to anybody in it. 


56. The hand that Lila laid on the head of Jyeshtha Sarma, — her eldest 
son, was not lain from her maternal affection for him, but for his edification in 
intellectual knowledge. 


57. Because the intellect being awakened, there is all felicity attendant 
upon it. It is more subtle than ether and far purer than vacuum, and leads the 
intellectual being above the region of air. All things beside are as images in a 
dream. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 
Past Lives of Lila. 


The two ladies then disappeared from that place, leaving the Brahman family 
at their house in the mountainous village. 


2. The family exclaimed, — “We are highly favoured by the sylvan 
goddesses,” and then forgetting their grief, they betook themselves to their 
domestic employments. 


3. Then the ethereal goddess spake to the aerial Lila, who stood fixed in air, 
over the mansion of the Brahman, in a state of mute astonishment. 


4. They then conversed as familiarly with each other, as persons having the 
same thoughts and desires, agree with one another in their views and acts, and 
as the dreamers of the same dream hold their mutual correspondence, like 
Usha and Aniruddha, (the Cupid and Psyche of India). 


5. Their conversation in their immaterial forms, was of the same 
intellectual, (psychical), kind, as we are conscious of in our dreams and 
imaginations. 


6. Saraswati said: — Now you have fully known the knowable, and 
become acquainted with whatever is visible and invisible, such is the essence 
of Brahma; say now what more you want to know. 


7. Lila said: — Tell me the reason why I was seen by my son, and not 
where the spirit of my departed lord is reigning over his realm. 


8. Saraswati replied: — Because you were not then perfect by your practice 
of Yoga to have your wish fulfilled, nor had you then lost your sense of 
duality, which is a preventive of perfection. 


9. He who has not known the unity, is not entitled to the acts and benefits 
of his faith in the true God, as no one sitting in the sun, can enjoy the coolness 
of shade. 


10. You were not practiced to forget your identity as Lila, nor learnt that it 
is not your will, but the will of God that is always fulfilled. 


11. You have afterwards become of pure desire, and wished that your son 
might see you, whereby he was enabled to have your sight. 


12. Now if you should return to your husband, and do the like, you will 
undoubtedly be successful in your desire. 


13. Lila said: — I see within the sphere of this dome (of my mind), the 
Brahman to have been my husband before; and I see also in it, that he died 
and became a ruler of the earth afterwards. 


14. I see in it that spot of the earth, that city and that palace of his where I 
sat as his queen. 


15. I see within myself my lord to be reigning in that place, and I see even 
there how he died afterwards. 


16. I see herein the glory of the sovereign of so many countries on earth, 
and I see also the perfect frankness of his conduct through life. 


17. I see the worlds in the inner sky of my mind, as they are placed in a 
casket, or as the oil is contained in a mustard seed. 


18. I see the bright orb of my husband ever roving before me, and now I 
pray you to contrive any how to place me by his side. 


19. The Goddess replied: — Tell me Lila, to what husband you shall go, as 
there are hundreds of them that you had, and shall have in your past and future 
lives, and now there are three of them confined in this earth. 


20. The nearest of the three, is the Brahman who is here reduced to ashes, 
the next is the prince lying in state and covered with flowers in the inner 
apartment. 


21. The third is now a reigning prince in this earth, and has been buffeting 
in the waves of error in the vast ocean of the world. 


22. His intellect is darkened and disordered by the splashing waves of 
worldliness, his intelligence is perverted to stupidity, and he is converted to a 
tortoise in the ocean of the world. 


23. The management of his very many disordered state affairs, has stultified 
him to a lubbard, and he is now fast asleep amidst the turmoils of business. 


24. He is fast bound to subjection by the strong chain of his thoughts, that 
he is a lord, is mighty, accomplished, and that he is happy, and is to enjoy his 
estates forever. 


25. Now say, O excellent lady! to what husband you wish to be led, in the 
manner of the fragrance of one forest borne by the breeze to another. 


26. Here you are in one place, and there they in others amidst this vast 
world, and the state of their lives and manners differs widely from one 
another. 


27. These orbs of light in the heaven, though they appear to be placed so 
near us, (both to our eyesight and in the mind), are yet situated millions of 
leagues apart from one another, and the departed souls are carried in them, (in 
their endless transmigrations). 


28. And again all these bodies are as vacuous as air, though they contain 
the great mounts Meru and Mandara in themselves. 


29. All bodies are formed by the combination of atoms, incessantly 
proceeding from the Great Intellect, like particles of sun-beams over the 
universe. 


30. The great and stupendous fabric of the world, is no more (in the eye of 
intelligence), than a quantity of paddy weighed in the balance. 


31. As the spangled heavens appear like a forest full of brilliant gems in it, 
so the world appears as full of the glory of God to the contemplative mind, 
and not as composed of earth or other material bodies in it. 


32. It is intelligence alone, that shines in the form of world in the intelligent 
soul, and not any material body, which was never brought into being before. 


33. As billows in the lake, rise and set and rise again, so the rising and 
falling days and nights present these various scenes to our knowledge. 


34. Lila said: — So it is, O mother of mankind! and so I come to remember 
now, that my present birth, (state), is of a royal, (rdjasika), kind, and neither 
of too pure nor gross a nature, (Sattvika or Tamasika). 


35. I having descended from Brahma, had undergone a hundred and eight 
births (in different shapes), and after passing various states, I find myself still 
in existence. 


36. I recollect, O goddess! to have been born in another world before, and 
to have been the bride of a Vidyadhara, when I used to rove about as freely as 
a bee over flowers. 


37. Being debased by my libertinism, I was born in this mortal world, and 
became the mate of the king of the feathered tribe, (an eagle). 


38. And then having been a resident in the woods, I was turned to a 
woodman’s mate, wearing a vest of leaves on my loins. 


39. Growing fond of my life, I sported wantonly about the forest, and was 


changed to the guluncha plant, delighting the woods with my leafy palms and 
flowering eyes. 


40. This arboret of the holy hermitage, was held sacred by the society of 
saintly sages, and then I was regenerated in the form of an anchorite’s child, 
after the woods were burnt down by a wild-fire. 


41. Here, I was initiated in the formularies for removing the curse of 
womanhood, and became as a male being in the person of the handsome 
prince of Surashtra, (Surat), where I reigned for a hundred years (or for a 
whole century). 


42. I was then denounced to become a weasel, and covered with leprosy, in 
the lowlands of Tali, on account of my misconduct in the government. 


43. I remember, O goddess! how I became a bullock at Surat, and was 
goaded by thoughtless cowherd boys, in their merry sport for full eight years. 


44. I bear in mind when I was transformed to a bird, and with what 
difficulty I broke the net, that was laid by bird catchers for my destruction. It 
was in the same manner as we release ourselves from the snares of sinful 
desires. 


45. I remember with pleasure when as a bee, I lighted lightly on the leaflets 
of blossoms, sipped the honey of the blooming buds, dined on the pistils, and 
slept in the cups of lotus flowers. 


46. I wandered about in pleasant wood-lands and lawns, with my exalted 
and branching horns and beautiful eyes, in the form of an antelope, till I was 
killed by the dart of a huntsman in my mortal part. 


47. I have been in the form of a fish, and was lifted up by the waves of the 
sea above the surface of the water. I saw how a tortoise was killed by the blow 
of aclub on the neck, when it failed to break its back-bone. 


48. I was a Chandala huntsman once, roving by the side of Charmanvati, 
(the river Chenab), when I used to quench my thirst with cocoa water, as I 
was tired with roaming. 


49. I became a stork also, delighting in lakes with my mate, and filling the 
air with our sweet cries. 


50. In another birth, I rambled about in groves of palm and tamala trees, 
and fixed my eyes with amorous looks and glances upon my lover. 


51. I had next been a fairy Apsara, with a form as bright as melted gold, 
and features as beautiful as those of the lotus and lily, in which the celestials, 


like bees and butterflies, used to take delight. 


52. I remember to have decked myself in gold and pearls, and in gems and 
rubies upon earth, and to have sported with my youthful consorts in pleasure 
gardens and groves, and on hills and mountains. 


53. And I remember also to have lived long as a tortoise on the borders of a 
river, and to have been carried away by the waves, sometimes under an arbour 
of creepers, over-hung with clusters of beautiful flowers, and at others to some 
wild cave washed by the waves. 


54. I see how I acted the part of a goose with my covering of feathers, 
swimming on the high heaving waves on the surface of a lake. 


55. Then seeing a poor gnat hanging on the moving leaf of a Salmali 
branch, I became its associate and as contemptible a thing like itself. 


56. I became an aquatic crane also, skimming playfully over the waters 
gushing from the hills, and slightly kissing the crests of the waves rising over 
the rapid torrent. 


57. I remember also how I slighted the loves of amorous youths, and 
spurned off from me the Vidyddhara boys on the Gandha Madana and 
Manadara hills. 


58. I remember likewise, the pangs of a lovelorn lass, when I lay pining in 
my bed, strewn over with the fragrance of camphor, and how I was decaying 
like the disk of the waning moon. 


59. Thus I passed through many births, in the wombs of higher and lower 
animals, and found them all to be full of pain. And my soul has run over the 
billows of the irresistible current of life, like the fleet antelope, pacing its 
speed with the swiftness of the wind, (Vdataprami). 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


SECTION I. 
Exposition of Lila’s Vision. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, in what manner the goddesses broke out of the 
strongholds of their bodies, and the prison-house of this world, (where their 
souls were pent up), and passed through infinite space, to survey the scenes 
beyond its confines. (i.e., How does the mind and the flight of imagination, 
reach to regions unknown and unseen before). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Where is the world and where is its support or 
solidity? They were all situated in the region within the minds of the 
goddesses. 


3. They saw in it the hilly tract, where the Brahmana Vasishtha had his 
abode and his desire of royalty, (pictured in their minds). 


4. They saw in a corner of it the deserted mansion of the Brahman, and they 
saw in it the surface of the earth stretching to the seas, (i.e., in their mental 
view). 


5. They beheld in that imaginary spot of earth the city of the prince, and the 
royal palace which he had enjoyed with Arundhati his consort (in his 
imagination). 


6. How she was born under the name of Lila, and worshipped the goddess 
of wisdom, — Saraswati, by whom she was miraculously conveyed to the 
delightful region of the sky. 


7. It was in the mansion situated in that hilly village, that she beheld the 
world placed within the space of a span of her mind. 


8. Having come out of her vision of the world, she found herself seated in 
her house, as one finds himself lying in his own bed, after his rambling from 
one dream to another. 


9. All that she saw was mere vision and void, there was no world nor earth, 
nor a house nor the distance thereof. 


10. It was the mind which showed them these images, as it presents the 
objects of our desire to our view, or else there was neither any world nor earth 
in actuality. 


11. The sphere of intelligence is infinite, and without any covering, and 
being agitated by the powers of one’s intellect, it presents all the objects of 
nature to his view, as the sky when agitated by heat produces the winds. 


12. The sphere of the intellect is uncreated, (being a mode of the Divinity 
itself), it is ever calm everywhere, and is supposed as the world itself by 
deluded minds. 


13. He who understands rightly, views the world to be as unsubstantial as 
air, but whoso is misled by his wrong judgment takes it to be as a solid 
mountain. 


14. As a house and a city are manifested to us in our dream, so is this 
unreal world presented as a reality to our understandings. 


15. As is the misconception of water in the mirage, and the mistake of gold 
in a bracelet, so does all this unreality appear as a substantiality to the 
mistaken mind. 


16. Discoursing in this manner between themselves, the two charming 
ladies, walked out of the house with their graceful steps. 


SECTION II. 
Description of the Mountainous Habitation. 


17. Being unseen by the village people, they viewed the mountain which 
stood before them, kissing the vault of heaven, and touching the orb of the sun 
with its lofty peaks. 


18. It was decorated with flowers of various colours, and covered with a 
variety of woods of various hues. There were waterfalls gushing with their 
tremendous roarings on one side, and groves resounding with the warbling of 
birds in another. 


19. The clouds were variegated by the many coloured clusters of flowers 
sweeping over them, and cranes and storks sat screeching on the cloud-capt 
top of gulancha trees. 


20. There were the robust reeds, hedging the banks of rivers with their wide 


stretching stems and roots, and the strong winds tossing about the tender 
creepers, growing out of the rocky caves, for want of support. 


21. The tops of trees covered with flowers, were over-topped by the sheds 
of clouds hanging from the vault of heaven, which shed profusely their pearly 
drops of rain water upon them, and formed the current streams below. 


22. The banks of the streamlets were continually laved by the waves, raised 
by the winds playing upon the shaking arbours on them, and a continued 
cooling shade was spread by the branching trees all around. 


23. Standing on that spot, the ladies beheld the hilly hamlet in the lawn, 
likening a fragment of heaven fallen upon the ground. 


24. There the purling rills were softly gliding by, and here the brimming 
brooks wabbled in the ground. The birds of the air were chirping on the sprays 
and aquatic fowls were flying about the holes of the sea shore. 


25. There they saw the herds of kine slowly moving and grazing in the 
plains, and filling the echoing woods with their loud lowing, and beheld the 
space, interspersed with shady groves and arbours and verdant meadows all 
about. 


26. The cliffs were whitened with snow, impenetrable by sun-beams, and 
the tops of hills were covered with bushy brambles, forming as braids of hair 
upon their craggy heads. 


27. Cascades falling in torrents in the cavities of rocks, and scattering their 
pearly particles afar, memorialized the churning of the milky ocean by the 
Mandara mountain. 


28. The trees in the glens, loaded as they were with their fruits and flowers, 
appeared as waiters upon the goddesses, and standing to welcome their 
approach with their rich presents. 


29. Shaken by gusts of roaring winds, the forest trees were shedding 
showers of their mellifluent flowers, as offerings to the sylvan gods and 
people. 


30. The birds that approached fearlessly to drink the water dropping from 
the hill, now fled for fear of their seeming as sleets, shells and shots of 
archers. 


31. The birds parched by thirst, and wishing to drink the water dashed by 
the waves of the rivulet, were hovering upon it as stars in the sky. 


32. There were rows of crows sitting on the tops of the tall tala (or palm) 


trees, from whose sight the boys were hiding the remains of their sweetmeat. 


33. There they beheld the rustic lads with garlands of flowers on their heads 
and garments, and roaming in the cooling shades of the date, jam and nimba 
trees. 


34. They saw the lean and hungry beggar woman passing slowly by the 
way, and clad in her flaxen robe, with chaplets of blossoms for her ear dress. 


35. They saw the lazy rustics sitting retired in their lonely retreats, and 
conversing afar from the noisy brooks where they could hardly hear one 
another. 


36. They saw the naked mendicant boys, besmeared in their face and hands 
with curd, and with cow-dung upon their bodies, and holding the flowery 
branches of plants in their hands, and crowding in the compound. 


37. The bushes on the verdant banks of the river, were shaken to and fro as 
in a swing by the dashing of the waves, which left their marks on the sandy 
shore, as the waters receded to their bed. 


38. The house was full of flies cloyed with the sweets of milk and curds, 
but the children were moaning with cries for their want of sufficient food. 


39. The herdswomen were observed to be fretting, at seeing their wristlets 
daubed by the cow-dung (which they were pasting), and the men were seen to 
be smiling, at seeing the eagerness of women, for tying the loosened knots of 
their hair. 


40. The crows were alighting from the tops of hills to pick up the offerings 
of the holy sages, and the paths about their houses, were strewn over with the 
sacred kuru and kurunta leaves. 


41. The floral plants growing in the caverns of the hills, and about the 
precincts of the house, covered the ground every morning, with heaps of 
flowers to the depth of the heels. 


42. There were the chouri kine and antelopes, grazing in one part of the 
forest, and also the tender fawn sleeping on the bed of grass under the gunja 
groves. 


43. There were the young calves lying on one side, and shaking their ears 
to drive the flies away, which were fluttering on their faces, and upon the milk 
exuding from the sides of their mouths. 


44. The rooms were stored with honey, which had been collected by 
driving the bees from the hives, the gardens were full of flowering asokas, 


(asoka Jonesia), and their rooms were painted with lacdye. 


45. The winds moistened by the showers of rain, had given the arboretum 
to bloom, and the blooming buds of Kadamba, overhung like a canopy, the 
beds of green grass below. 


46. The Ketaka (keya) arbour was blooming white by removal of its weeds, 
and the water-course was gliding along with its soft murmuring tune. 


47. The winds whistled in the windows of the caves, and the clouds rested 
on the roofs of the mountain tops, the ponds were brimful of water, and filled 
with lotuses like so many lightsome moons. 


48. The green arbour cast its cooling and undivided shade upon the ground, 
where the dew-drops trembling on the blades of grass, glistened like twinkling 
stars in the azure sky. 


49. The trees incessantly dropped down their ripened fruits, and dried 
flowers and leaves of various sorts, like showers of snow on the whitened 
ground. 


50. There some clouds were seen to hang continually over the household 
compound, like the chirinti (or kulina) girls, that never forsake the abode of 
their parents; while there were others hovering over the roof of the house, and 
flashing in lightnings that supplied the place of lights. 


51. The altar here, re-echoed to the loud roaring of the winds, confined in 
the caverns of the mountains, and the temple there, was graced by the 
twittering swallows and parrots, that alighted upon it in their numerous flights. 


52. Soft breezes were moving slowly, loaded with the fragrance exhaled by 
the sleepy flowers (in the evening), and gently shaking the leaves of trees as 
they passed along the lawn. 


53. There the ladies were attentive to the prattling and playful parrots and 
partridges, and here they listened to the melodious notes of the Kokila, 
responsive to the jarring crows on the branches. 


54. The palma and tamala trees were loaded with fruits, and the forest trees 
were entwined by creepers, which waved their leafy palms around them. 


55. There were the tender ivy creepers, clasping the branches on one side, 
and the fragrance of the efflorescent Kandala and silindhra plants, exhaled on 
the other. The tapering fdla and tamdla trees rising as high as spires, and a 
cooling breeze was blowing amidst the flower plants in the gardens. 


56. There were the kine hastening to drink the water in the troughs, and 


garden trees hanging with loads of green unripe fruits and beautiful flowers, 
the running streams were hidden under rows of trees on the banks, and the 
stalks of plants were studded with flowers without alternation. 


57. The gardens were perfumed with the nectarious fragrance of kunda 
flowers, and the lakes were redolent with the odour of lotuses, hiding the 
humble bees giddy with liquor, in their honied cells. The air was reddened 
with the roseate pollen, flying from the crimson lotuses, (sthala padmas) of 
the land, and mocked the redness of Indra’s palace in the sky. 


58. The gargling noise of the rivulets running down precipitately from the 
hills, and the whiteness of the hoary cloud, hanging with the hue of kundu 
flowers over them, the beauty of the flowery parterres in the compound of the 
house, and the melodious warbling of musical birds singing joyous in the air, 
enchanted the scene. 


59. The youths were sporting on their beds of flowers, and the playful 
damsels were decked with flowery wreaths hanging down to their feet. The 
ground was adorned everywhere with sprouting and prickly shrubs and blades 
of grass, and there was a beauty displayed in the clasping of creepers about 
the clumps of reeds. 


60. The new shooting buds and blossoms covered the trees around, and 
fragments of clouds shrouded the houses below, the ground was decorated by 
wreaths of icicles, and the flash of lightnings in the clouds over the houses, 
terrified the women within. 


61. There was the fragrance of blue lotuses exhaling its sweets about, and 
the hoarse lowings of the kine, hastening to their green grazing ground. The 
confident deer and does were lying tamely in the house-yard, and the 
peacocks dancing merrily before the water-falls, as if they were the showers 
of rain water. 


62. The odoriferous breezes were blowing giddily, with the flavour of the 
fragrance they bore about, and the medicinal plants were lending their lights 
like lamps at night. The nests of birds were resonant with ceaseless warblings, 
and the noise of the cataracts deafened the ears of men on the bank. 


63. The pearly dew drops, that were continually dropped on the ground, 
from the leaves of trees and blades of grass, and the gleaming beauty of the 
ever-blooming blossoms above, form with others, the everlasting charms of 
mountainous habitations, and baffle the description of poets. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
Account of the Previous Life of Lila 


A Description of the Domestic Duties of a Hindu Lady. 


The two goddesses then alighted in that cooling village seat, as the two states 
of felicity and liberation, meet in the tranquil spirit of the man knowing the 
Divine spirit. 

2. Lila, who had by this time, become personified to the form of pure 
intelligence, by her knowledge of Yoga, now became a seer of the three times 
presenting themselves before her. 


3. She remembered the whole course of her past life, and derived pleasure 
in relating the events of her former life and death. 


4. Lila said: — I recollect by thy favour, O goddess! and by sight of this 
place, all what I did and thought of in my past life. 


5. Here I had grown up to old age, and here I had withered and become 
lean and thin as a skeleton. I was a Braéhmanf here, and had my body 
scratched by the dried sacrificial grass, (kusa), which I had to meddle with. 


6. I was the legal wife of my lord, and producer of his race, and was 
employed in the acts of milking the kine, and churning the curd (for butter and 
ghee). I had been mother of many sons, and a kind hostess to my guests. 


7. I was devoted to the service of the gods, Brahmans, and good people, 
and rubbed my body with cow milk and ghee; I was employed in cleaning the 
frying pans and the boiling kettles of the house. 


8. I boiled the food daily with a single bracelet of glass and one of conch- 
shell in my wrists, and served my father, mother, brother and daughters and 
sons-in-law with their daily victuals. 


9. I was emaciated in my body like a domestic servant, by working all day 
and night, and, ‘haste and hasten,’ were the words I used to repeat to myself. 


10. Being thus busied and employed, I was so silly and ignorant, that I 
never thought within myself, even in a dream, about what I was and what was 


this world, although I had been the wife of a Brahman. 


11. Wholly engaged in the collection of fuel, cow-dung, and sacrificial 
wood and vegetables, I became emaciated in my body, which was wrapt in a 
worn out blanket. 


12. I used to pick out the worms from the ears of the milch cow, and was 
prompt to water the garden of greens with watering pots in hand. 


13. used to go to the swelling lake every day, and get the fresh green grass 
for the fodder of my tender calves. I used to wash and clean the house every 
morning, and paint the doorway with the white tints of pasted and powdered 
rice, (gundi). 


14. I had to correct my domestics with gentle rebukes, and tell them to keep 
within their bounds like the billows in the rivers. 


15. With my infirm body and ears shaking as dried leaves of trees, and 
supporting myself on a stick, I lived here under the dread of old age. 


16. As she was speaking in this manner, and walking in company with 
Saraswati about the village, in the valley of the mountain, she was astonished 
to see her former seats of pleasure, and showed them to the goddess. 


17. This was my flowery arbour, decorated by these torn pdtala plants, and 
this was my garden alcove of flowering Asokas. 


18. This is the bank of the pond where the calves were loosely tied to the 
trees, and this is my pet calf Karnika, which has refrained from browzing the 
leaves (in my absence). 


19. This is my watering woman, now so languid and dirty in her 
appearance, and weeping these eight days in my absence, with her eyes 
daubed in tears. 


20. This, O goddess, is the place, where I used to eat and sit, and where I 
slept and walked, and these are the places where I gave and received the 
things to and from my attendants. 


21. This is my eldest son Jyeshtha Sarma, weeping in the house, and this is 
my milch cow, now grazing on the grassy plain in the forest. 


22. I see this portico and these windows, once dear to me as my person, and 
besmeared with the dry powder of the Auli festival of the vernal season. 


23. I see these pulpy plants of gourd planted with my own hands, and dear 
to me as myself, now spreading themselves over the oven place. 


24. I see these relatives of mine, who had been the bonds of my life before, 


now smoking in their eyes with tears, and carrying the fuel for fire, with beads 
of rudrdaksha seeds on their bodies. 


25. I see that stony shore, baffling the force of the waves, which have been 
pelting their pebbles against it, now covered by bushes of the beach. 


26. The verdant meadows were full of leafy plants, with pendant dew drops 
on their tips, and the plains were whitened by the hailstones falling on them in 
showers. 


27. The mid-day was mantled by sun beams, as by a white mist of frost, 
and the arbours resounded with the humming of bees, fluttering about their 
clustering flowers. 


28. The blooming paldsa glowing as reddish corals, had covered the trees 
and the land with heaps of crimson flowers. 


29. The village rill was flowing with the floating fruits, which it bore from 
shore to shore, and the rustic lads jumbled together with loud noise, eager to 
lay hold on them. 


30. The cool shady beach of the rill, was strewn over with pebbles, washed, 
and carried away by the current, and covered by leaves falling from the trees. 


31. There I see the altar of my house, which is so beautifully ornamented 
with the flowering creepers, and which is overhung on its windows by clusters 
of fruits and flowers. 


32. Here lived my husband, whose life has fled to the sky in its aerial form, 
and became afterwards the lord of the earth, reaching to the surrounding seas. 


33. I remember, how he had fostered the fond wish of obtaining royal 
dignity, and how ardently he looked forward on its attainment. 


34. I see, O goddess! his royal dignity of eight days, which had seemed to 
be of so long a duration (as eighty years) before. 


35. I see the soul of my Lord, residing in the empty space of this mansion, 
as in his former kingly state, although it is invisible to all as the current air in 
the sky, and as the odours borne by the winds. 


36. It is in this vacuous space, that his soul is contained in the form of a 
thumb, which contains in its bosom, the whole extent of the realm of my lord, 
stretching to thousands of leagues in its circumference. 


37. I see also, O goddess! the spacious kingdom of my lord, in the space of 
my intellect, which makes room for thousands of mountains by the miraculous 
power of God, styled as illusion, (mdyd). 


38. I wish now, O Goddess! to see the earthly city of my lord again, let us 
therefore, turn our course that way, as no place is distant to the resolute. 


39. Vasishtha said: — Having said so, she bowed down to the goddess and 
entered into the shrine, and then like a bird, she flew into the air with the 
goddess. 


40. It was a region devoid of darkness, and as fair as a sea of moonlight. 
And then it was as azure as the person of Narayana, and as bright as the back 
of a locust. 


41. They passed above the regions of the clouds and winds, as also beyond 
the spheres of the orbits of the sun and moon. 


42. They passed beyond the path of the north polar star, and the limits of 
the circuits of the Sddhyas and Siddhas and other celestial beings. 


43. Thence they ascended to the higher heavens of Brahma and the Tushita 
divinities, and then upward to the sphere of Golaka, (the zodiac), and thence 
again to the Sivaloka, and the sphere of the Pitris or the departed souls of the 
dead. 


44. Passing thus beyond the spheres of the embodied living beings, and 
bodiless souls of the dead, they proceeded far and farther to the unknown 
regions of empty space. 


45. Having passed the ethereal sphere, they beheld nothing there, except 
the sun, moon and the stars shining below them. 


46. There was only a deep darkness to be seen, filling the whole vacuity of 
space, and appearing as the basin of the waters of universal deluge, and as 
compact as the impenetrable cavity of a rock. 


47. Lila said: — Tell me, O goddess! what became of the light of the sun 
and other luminaries, and whence came this dense darkness as to be 
compressed under the fist, (mushti-grdahya). 


48. The goddess replied: — You have got to a spot so remote from the 
spheres of heaven, that the light of the luminaries can never reach to it. 


49. And as one in a deep dark pit, can see no light of a fire fly flitting over 
it, so the solar light is invisible to one behind the great belt of heaven. 


50. Lila said: — Oh! the great distance that we have come to, whence the 
great luminary of the sun also, appears as small as an atom below. 


51. Tell me mother, what sort of a place is that which lies beyond this 
region, and how can we come to it after traversing this gloomy expanse. 


52. Saraswati said: — Behind this is the great pole of the universe, which is 
scattered over with innumerable nebular stars in the form of the particles of 
dust. 


53. Vasishtha said: — As they were talking in this manner, they glided 
imperceptibly to that pole, as the bee saunters over the solitary hut on the 
height of a mountain. 


54. They then were at no pains to come down from that precipice, as there 
is no pains to effect what must certainly come to pass in the end, though it 
appeared difficult at first, (Or) that which is certain must come to pass, 
however hard it might seem at first. 


55. They saw the system of the universe, laid naked to their sight, as the 
bold navigator beholds a world exposed to his view beyond the wide expanse 
of waters. 


56. They saw the watery expanse to be ten times greater than the earth, and 
enveloping it in the shape of the crust of the walnut fruit. 


57. Then there is a latent heat which is ten times as great as the water, and 
the circumambient air which is as much greater than the water, and then the 
all-encompassing vacuum of which there is no end. 


58. There is no beginning, middle or end of that infinite space, and it is 
productive of nothing, like a barren woman of her offspring. 


59. It is only an extended expanse, infinite, calm and without beginning, 
middle or end, and is situated in the Supreme spirit. 


60. Its immensity is as immeasurable as if a stone is flung with full force 
from its top, or if the phoenix would fly up to it with all his might, or if he 
would traverse through it in full velocity, it is impossible for him to reach 
from one end to the other, in a whole Kalpa age. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
Description of the Mundane Egg — (Brahmanda). 


They passed in a moment beyond the regions of the earth, air, fire, water, and 
vacuum, and the tracks of the ten planetary spheres. 


2. They reached the boundless space, whence the universe appeared as an 
egg (ovum). 


3. They beheld under its vault millions of luminous particles floating in the 
air (nebula). 


4. These were as innumerable bubbles, floating on the waters of the 
unlimited ocean of the sphere of the Intellect. 


5. Some of them were going downward, and others rising upward, some 
turning round, and others appeared to their understanding to remain fixed and 
immovable. 


6. These different motions appeared to them with respect to their own 
situations, as they saw them in their different sides. 


7. Here there were no ups and downs and no upside or below, nor any 
going forward or backward. Here there are no such directions as men take to 
be by the position of their bodies. 


8. There is but one indefinite space in nature, as there is but one 
consciousness in all beings, yet everything moves in its own way, as wayward 
boys take their own course. 


9. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, why do we call upward and downward, 
forward and backward, if there are no such things in space and nature. 


10. Vasishtha said: — There is but one space enveloping all things, and the 
worlds which are seen in the infinite and indiscernible womb of vacuity, are as 
worms moving on the surface of water. 


11. All these bodies that move about in the world by their want of freedom, 
(i.e., by the power of attraction), are thought to be up and down by our 
position on earth. 


12. So when there is a number of ants on an earthen ball, all its sides are 
reckoned below which are under their feet, and those as above which are over 
their backs. 


13. Such is this ball of the earth in one of these worlds, covered by 
vegetables and animals moving on it, and by devas, demons, and men walking 
upon it. 


14. It is covered also by cities, towns and mountains, and their inhabitants 
and productions, like the walnut by its coat. 


15. Like elephants appearing as pigmies in the Vindhyan mountains, do 
these worlds appear as particles in the vast expanse of space. 


16. Everything that is anywhere, is produced from and subsists in space. It 
is always all in all things, which are contained as particles in it. 


17. Such is the pure vacuous space of the Divine understanding, that like an 
ocean of light, contains these innumerable worlds, which like the countless 
waves of the sea, are revolving forever in it. 


18. Some of these are hollow within, and others as dark as the darkness in 
the end of a Kalpa age, and they are all moving about in the ocean of vacuity, 
like the waves of the sea. 


19. Some of these are whirling about with a jarring noise forever, which is 
neither heard by nor known to anybody. It is like the motion of men addicted 
to earthly pursuits by their nature. 


20. Some of these are now growing in form, as if they were newly created, 
and are in the course of their development, like sprouts in the cells of seeds 
newly sown in the ground. 


21. Some of these are melting away as icicles under heat, like the 
mountains that were melted down by the burning sun and heavenly fire, at the 
dissolution of the world. 


22. Others have been continually falling downward without gaining the 
ground, till at last they dwindle away, and melt into the divine Intellect. 


23. Others are as immovable in the air, as the animalculae in the water, 
which are moved to and fro by the wind, without any sign of motion or 
sensation in them. 


24. Again, nothing is stable in nature, but everything is as changeful as the 
acts and usages enjoined in the Vedas and Sdstras, are altered and succeeded 
by others. 


25. There are other Brahmas and other patriarchs, and many Vishnus and 
many Indras one after the other. We have different kings of men, and 
sometimes no ruler of them. 


26. Some are as men and lords of others, (Ishas), in this multiform creation, 
and some are creeping and crooked living beings on earth, some kinds are as 
full as the waters of the ocean, and others have become quite extinct in the 
world. 


27. Some are as hard as solid stones, and others as soft as the poor insects 
and worms, some are of godly figures as the giants, and others of puny human 
forms. 


28. Some are quite blind and suited to darkness, (as owls and moles and 
bats); others are suited to light, (as men, birds and beasts), and some to both, 
(as cats and rats). 


29. Some are born as gnats sucking the juice of the fruits of the fig tree, 
while others are empty within, and fly about and feed upon the air. 


30. The world is thus filled with creatures beyond the conception of Yogis, 
and we cannot form even a guess-work of the beings that fill the infinite 
vacuum. 


31. This world is the sphere of these living beings, but the great vacuum 
spreading beyond it, is so extensive, that it is immeasurable by the gods 
Vishnu and others, were they to traverse through it, for the whole of their 
lives. 


32. Every one of these ethereal globes, is encircled by a belt resembling a 
golden bracelet, and has an attractive power like the earth to attract other 
objects. 


33. I have told you all about the grandeur of the universe to my best 
knowledge, anything beyond this, is what I have no knowledge of, nor power 
to describe. 


34. There are many other large worlds, rolling through the immense space 
of vacuum, as the giddy goblins of Yakshas revel about in the dark and dismal 
deserts and forests, unseen by others. 


CHAPTER XXXtI. 


SECTION I. 
Alighting of the Ladies on Earth. 


Vasishtha said: — After having seen the worlds in their aerial journey, the 
ladies alighted from there, and quickly entered the inner apartment of the 
king. 


2. There they saw the dead body of the king lying in state amidst heaps of 
flowers, accompanied by the spiritual body of Lila, sitting beside the corpse. 


3. It was the dead of night, and the inmates had fallen into sound sleep one 
by one, and the room was perfumed with the incense of resin, camphor, and 
sandalwood and saffron. 


4. Lila, seeing the house of her latter husband, and wishing to enter into it, 
alighted in her assumed body, (sankalpadeha), on the spot of his sepulchre. 


5. She then passed through the fictitious spacious palace of her lord, 
(sankalpasansdra), by breaking out of the confines of her body and cranium 
called the earthly and worldly environs in Yoga terminology, (sansdra and 
Brahmdnda-dvaranas). 


6. Then she went again with the goddess to the bright and spacious temple 
of the world, (Brahmdnda-mandapa), in which she quickly entered. 


7. She saw her husband’s imaginary world to lie as a dirty and mossy pool, 
as the lioness beholds the mountain cave covered by darkness and clouds. 


8. The goddesses then entered into that vacuous world with their airy 
bodies, as weak ants make their passage through the hard crust of the wood- 
apple or bel-fruit. 


9. There they passed through regions of cloudy hills and skies, and reached 
the surface of the earth, consisting of tracts of land and basins of water. 


10. They then came to the Jambudwipa, (Asia), situated amidst the ninefold 
petals of the other dwipas (or continents), and thence proceeded to the 


territories of Lila’s husband in the varsha land of Bharata, (India). 


11. At this interval of time they beheld a certain prince, — (the ruler of 
Sinde), strengthened by other chiefs, making an attack on this part which was 
the beauty of the world. 


12. They beheld the air crowded by people of the three worlds, who had 
assembled there to see the conflict. 


13. They remained undaunted, and saw the air crowded by aerial beings in 
groups like clouds. 


14. There were the Siddhas, Charanas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Stras, 
celestials and Apsardas in large bodies. 


15. There were also the goblins of Bhttas and Pisdchas, and Rdakshasa 
cannibals, while the Vidyddhara females were flinging handfuls of flowers 
like showers of rain on the combatants. 


16. The Vetdlas, Yakshas and Kushmands, that were looking at the affray 
with pleasure, took themselves to the shelter of hills, to avoid the flying darts 
and weapons. 


17. The imps were flying from the air, to keep themselves from the way of 
the flying weapons, and the spectators were excited by sound of the war- 
whoop of the combatants. 


18. Lila who was standing by with a flapper (or fan) in her hand, was 
frightened at the imminent dreadful conflict, and smiled to scorn their mutual 
vauntings. 


SECTION II. 
Sight of a Battle Array in Earth and Air. 


19. Virtuous people who were unable to endure the horrid sight, betook 
themselves to prayers, with the chief priests for averting the calamity. 


20. The messengers of Indra, were ready with their decorated elephants, 
(called loka-pdlas), for bearing the souls of mighty heroes to grace the seats of 
heaven. 


21. The charanas and Gandharvas, were singing praises of the advancing 
heroes, and heavenly nymphs that liked heroism, were glancing at the best 
combatants. 


22. Voluptuous women were wishing to embrace the arms of the brave, and 
the fair fame of the heroes, had turned the hot sunshine to cool moonlight. 


23. Rama asked: — Tell me, Sir, what sort of a warrior is called a hero, that 
becomes a jewel in heaven, and who is an insurgent. 


24. Vasishtha answered: — He who engages in a lawful warfare, and fights 
for his king, and whether he dies or becomes victorious in the field, is called a 
hero, and goes to heaven. 


25. Whoever kills men otherwise in war and dies afterwards, in an unjust 
cause, is called an insurgent, and goes to hell at last. 


26. Whoever fights for unlawful property, and dies in battle, becomes 
subject to everlasting hell fire. 


27. Whoso wages a just warfare, that is justified by law and usage, that 
warrior is called both loyal as well as heroic in deed. 


28. Whoever dies in war, for the preservation of kine, Brahmans and 
friends with a willing mind, and whoso protects his guest and refugee with all 
diligence, he verily becomes an ornament in heaven after his death. 


29. The king who is steadfast in protecting his subjects and his own 
country, is called the just, and those that die in his cause are called the brave. 


30. They that die fighting on the side of riotous subjects, or in the cause of 
rebellious princes or chiefs, are doomed to fire. 


31. They that die fighting unjustly against their kings, lawgivers and rulers, 
are subjected to the torments of hell. 


32. A war which is just, serves to establish order, but the giddy that are 
fearless of the future, destroy all order (by their unjust warfare). 


33. The hero dying, goes to heaven, is the common saying, and the Sdstras 
call the lawful warrior only a hero, and not otherwise. 


34. They who suffer wounds on their bodies, for the protection of the 
righteous and good, are said to be heroes, or else they are insurgents, 
(dimbhavas). 


35. It was in expectation of seeing such heroes that the damsels of the gods, 
were standing in the air, and talking to themselves of becoming the spouses of 
such warriors. 


36. The air was as decorated as by an illumination on high, and by rows of 
the beautiful heavenly cars of gods and Siddhas, and presence of celestial 
maidens, who sang in sweet notes, and decorated their locks with manddra 


flowers. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
Onset of the war. 


Vasishtha said: — Lila standing with the goddess of wisdom in air, saw the 
Apsards dancing there, at the eagerness of the combatants for war below. 


2. She beheld the assemblage of the forces in her own territory once 
governed by her lord, and saw the field of the air not less formidable by the 
assembled ghosts, (and its encircling belt composed of the lion, scorpion, 
crab, and the archer). 


3. The meeting of the two forces made the ground appear as a billowy sea, 
like the meeting of two clouds in the sky, giving it the appearance of two 
hostile forces. 


4. The battle array of armoured warriors, flashing as the fire of heaven, was 
succeeded by their commingled blows, resembling the rattling of thunders 
above, deafening the ears and dazzling the sight. 


5. Then darts and javelins, spears and lances, and many other missiles, 
(prdsas), began to fall on both sides, like showers of raindrops, hailstones and 
meteorolites from the skies. 


6. Showers of shafts fell with a force, that would pierce the pinions of 
Garuda, and struck out the glare of sunbeams, by hitting at the armours of the 
warriors. 


7. The combatants standing face to face with their lifted arms, and staring 
at each other with steadfast looks, seemed as they were pictures in a painting. 


8. The armies drawn in long regiments, standing in lines opposite to each 
other, were heard to answer one another by their repeated shouts. 


9. The battalia of both armies, and the drums on both sides, were put to a 
stop by the warnings of their leaders, against striking the first blow. 


10. The intermediate space of the breadth of two bows, that separated the 
hostile forces like a bridge from one another, appeared as the gap, caused by 
the winds in the midst of the ocean at the universal deluge. (Or more like the 


partition of the waters of the Red sea by the rod of Moses). 


11. The leaders were drowned in thoughts for fear of bloodshed and 
massacre, and the cowardly soldiers groaned in their hearts, with the hoarse 
noise of croaking frogs. 


12. There were numbers of bravoes, eager to yield up their precious lives in 
a trice, and the bowyers stood with their bowstrings drawn to the ear, and 
ready to let loose their pointed arrows at the foe. 


13. Others stood dreadfully fixed to strike their arms upon the enemy, and 
many were looking sternly at their adversaries, with their frowning looks. 


14. The armours were clashing by mutual concussion, the countenances of 
the bravoes were burning with rage, and the faces of cowards were turned 
towards sheltered retreats for flight. 


15. The lookers stood in doubt of their lives until the end of the war, and 
old men like big elephants, were covered with horripilation on their bodies. 


16. The silence which ensued at the expectation of the first blow, resembled 
the calm of the stormy main, and the deep sleep of a city at the dead of night. 


17. The musical instruments, the drum and conch-shell were all silent, and 
a thick cloud of dust, covered the face of the earth and sky. 


18. The retreaters were flying from their stronger assailants, who kept 
running after them, in the manner of sharks pursuing the shoals of fishes in the 
sea. 


19. The glittering fringes of the flags, put the ethereal stars to blush, and the 
lifted goads in the hands of the elephant-drivers, made a forest of tapering 
trees in the sky. 


20. The flinging arrows were flying like flocks of the winged tribe in air, 
and the loud beating of drums and blowing of pipes, resounded amidst the air. 


21. There was a phalanx in a circular form, attacking a host of wicked 
demons, and here was a squadron in the form of Garuda, with its right and left 
wings, attacking a body of elephants. 


22. Somewhere a great howling was heard to rise from the vanguard of a 
body of troops, disconcerted by a cohort in the form of eagles, and at another 
many were seen to fall upon one another with mutual shouts. 


23. Thus a tremendous noise was raised by the warriors of the many 
legions, and a multitude of big mallets were seen to be raised on high by the 
hands of the combatants. 


24. The glaring of sable steel, shaded the sunbeams like a cloud, and 
hissing darts in the air, emitted a sound, resembling the rustling of breeze 
amidst the dry leaves of trees. 


25. Now the brunt of battle, began like the dashing of clouds upon clouds at 
the end of a Kalpa, and the war raged like the raging sea ruffled by a 
hurricane. 


26. Big elephants were falling in the field like coal-black rocks, hurled 
down by gusts of wind. 


27. It seemed that the infernal spirits were let loose from their caves of hell, 
to rage in the battle field with their horrid and dismal figures. 


28. The day light was obscured by the sable cloud of swords, and the 
mallets and lances were raised up by the black Kunta warriors, who seemed 
bent upon converting the earth to an ocean of bloodshed. 


CHAPTER XXXITII. Comingled Fighting. 


Rama said: — Sir, relate to me in short and promptly, about this warfare, as 
my ears are delighted with narratives of this kind. 


2. Vasishtha said: — These ladies then, in order to have a better view of the 
battle below, ascended in their imaginary aerial cars, vimdnas, to a more 
retired spot in the higher regions of the sky. 


3. At this interval, there began a mingled fight of the forces face to face, 
with a commingled shout of the two armies, as the dashing of the waves 
against one another in the raging sea. 


4. At this instant, Vidtratha the lord of the realm, (formerly Padma, — the 
husband of Lila), seeing a daring warrior of the hostile force attack one of his 
soldiers, struck him impatiently on the breast with the blow of a ponderous 
mallet. 


5. Then the battle raged with the impetuosity of the rolling waves of the 
stormy main, and the arms on both sides, flamed with living fire and flash of 
fiery lightnings. 


6. Now the edges of waving swords, (/arattarat), glittered in the sky, and 
cracking and clashing noise, (Kanakana), filled the air with a hideous 
crackling, (kadkada). 


7. Then flew the winged arrows, overshadowing the beams of the sun, and 
emitting a booming noise, (hunkdra), which hushed the rattling clamour, 
(gharghara), of summer clouds. 


8. Armours clashed against armours, (Kankata), with a clanking noise, 
(tankdra), and shot forth the sparks of glistening fire, (Kanatkana), and arms, 
hashing, (ch’hina-bhinna) and slashing, (Khanda-khanda), against arms, filled 
the air with their fragments flying like birds in the air. 


9. The shaking (dodulya) shanks and arms of the army, appeared as a 
moving forest, (dordruma), on the land, and the twangings of their bows, 
(tankdra), and rumbling of the disks, (krenkdra), drove away the birds of the 
air, and crackled like the rattling drive of wheels, (dravat), in heaven. 


10. The hissing of their loosened strings, (halhala), resembled the 
(ghunghuna) buzzing of bees, heard in the samddhi Yoga (by shutting the 
ears). 


11. Iron shafts like sleets of hailstones, pierced the heads of the soldiers, 
and the (ranat) crashing of armours, (sanghatta), broke the arms of the 
warriors in mail, (Kankata sankata). 


12. Weapons struck on brazen armours with a howling noise, (hunkdra), 
made a clanking sound by the stroke, (tdnkdra), and flying like drifts of rain 
water, (tartara), pierced the face of the air on all sides, (literally, denticulated, 
— dantura dingmukha). 


13. The striking of steel on one another, (sanghatta), made the hands ring 
with a jingling sound, (Gjhanjhanat), and the continued rapping on the arms, 
(dsphota), and clapping of hands, (karasphota), raised a pattering and 
chattering sound, (chat chat and pat pat). 


14. The whizzing noise of unsheathing the sword, (shitkdra), and the 
hissing of the sparks of fire, (sansana), the flinging of arrows in all ways, 
(sadatkdra), and the flying of darts, likened the rustling of falling leaves, 
(Kharkhara), in autumn. 


15. The spouting of life blood, (dhakdhak), from the throats separated from 
the bodies, the mangled limbs and heads, and the broken swords filled the 
whole space. 


16. The flame of fire flaring, (sphurat), from the armours, emblazoned the 
hairs of the warriors, and the fighting and falling (ranatpatat) of swordsmen, 
raised a giddy and loud jingling of their weapons, (jhanjhana). 


17. The lofty elephants pierced by the spears of the Kunta lancers, poured 
out torrents of red-hot blood, while the tusky tribe was goring whole bodies of 
them with their shrill cries, (chitkdra). 


18. Others crushed by the ponderous maces of their antagonists, creaked 
grievously under the blows, while the heads of the slain soldiers, swam in the 
rivers of blood over the plain. 


19. Here the hungry vultures were pouncing from above, and there the sky 
was covered by a cloud of dust, and the weaponless combatants, were 
engaged in Kesdkesi fighting, by holding each other down by the hairs. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
Description of the Battle. 


Now the generals and ministers of the belligerent powers, and the aerial 
spectators of the war, were thus talking among themselves. 


2. Lo! here the ground has become a lake of blood, with the heads of the 
slaughtered hosts floating as lotuses upon it, and there the air has become as 
the starry heaven, glittering with broken weapons, flying like birds in the sky. 


3. Behold, the air is reddened with the particles of vermeil blood, borne 
above by the winds, and the sky presenting the evening clouds, with the glow 
of the setting sun at midday. 


4. What are these, says one, that are flying as straws in the firmament? 
They are, says the other, no straws, but the flight of arrows, that have filled the 
atmosphere. 


5. As long as the dust of the earth, cries another, is moistened by the 
bloodshed of the brave, so long are the heroes entitled to glory, and have their 
abode in heaven for myriads of years. 


6. Fear not these sable swords, says the Sdstra, whose blades are worn by 
the brave like petals of blue lotuses about their necks and breasts, and bravoes 
are favourites in the eyes of the goddess of fortune. (Fortune favours the 
brave). 


7. The heavenly nymphs that beheld the fighting, felt a desire to embrace 
the brave, and the god of the flowery bow (Kama or Cupid), was busy to 
loosen their waist bands. (Cupid by inversion is Dipuc, another name of the 
Indian Kama. And Fairies or Paries and Huries are said to fall to the lot of the 
fighters in Jehad-battle. So says Dryden: — “None but the brave deserve the 
fair’). 


8. They beckoned their welcome by the waving of their reddish palms, in 
the shaking of the ruddy leaves of trees, and by the round glances of their 
eyes, in the blooming blossoms of plants, and by the perfume of their breath 
in the honied fragrance of flowers. 


9. The geniuses of the garden of Paradise, were singing sweetly in the notes 
of the sylvan choir, and betook themselves to dancing in the wagging tails of 
peacocks. 


10. As the brave warrior was breaking the line of the enemy with his hardy 
axe, so was his beloved breaking his hard heart and spirit, with the soft 
glances of her eyes. 


11. It is by my lance, says the lancer, that I have severed the head of my 
adversary with the rings in his ears, like the head of the ascending node of 
Rahu, approaching the disk of the sun. 


12. Lo! There is a champion, hurling the blocks of stones, attached to the 
end of a chain reaching his feet, and another whirling his wheel with a 
wondrous log of wood, held in his uplifted arm. 


13. There comes that combatant in the form of Yama, appearing from the 
region of Pluto, (Preta), and spreading a horrid devastation all around. Come 
let us go hence as we came. 


14. Look there the ravenous birds, greedily plunging their long necks in the 
cells of bodies just separated from their heads, and glutting themselves with 
the gushing blood, and see there the headless trunk of the slain, moving to and 
fro in the field of battle. 


15. The eloquent among the spectators were talking to one another, about 
the frailty of human life, and the uncertainty of the time of their meeting in the 
next world. 


16. Oh! the stern cannibal of death, says one, that devours in one swoop, 
whole bodies of the assembled armies, now weltering in blood, and levels the 
levelling hosts to the ground. 


17. The showers of arrows falling on the bodies of elephants, resemble the 
showers of rain drops on mountain tops, and the darts sticking to their frontal 
bones, liken the bolts of lightning piercing the peaks of cliffs. 


18. While the headless body of the beheaded, was groveling grievously on 
the ground for want of its head, the pate flying on high as a bird of air, 
proclaimed its immortality in heaven. 


19. The army harassed by stones slung on their heads, cried to entrap the 
enemy in the snares set at their feet. 


20. Wives that had become Apsards, (heavenly nymphs), after death, were 
now eager to claim their husbands, who were restored to their youth, by virtue 
of their falling in the field of battle. 


21. The glaring light of the line of lances that had reached the skies, 
seemed as a flight of stairs or golden vistas, for the ascent of the brave to the 
gates of heaven. 


22. The wife of the slain soldier, seeing now a heavenly goddess, taking 
possession of her husband’s fair gold-like breast, was looking about in search 
of another. 


23. Generals, wailing loudly with their uplifted arms, over their fallen 
armies in the field, appeared as the cliffs of rocks, resounding to the 
clamorous surges below. 


24. They cried out to fight the foremost in war, and to remove the wounded 
to the rear, and not to trample over the bodies of their own soldiers, now lying 
low on the ground. 


25. Behold! there the Apsards eagerly tying their loosened locks, and 
advancing with sobbing bosoms to receive the departed warriors, joining their 
company in their celestial forms. 


26. Ah! receive them says one, who are our guests from afar, on the banks 
of the rivers of Paradise, decorated with lotus blossoms of golden hue, and 
entertain them with fresh water and cooling breeze. 


27. Look! there the groups of weapons, broken into pieces like bones by 
their concussion, are huddled in the air with a jingling sound, (kanatkdra), and 
shining as stars in the sky. 


28. Lo! the stream of deceased souls, flowing in arrowy currents and rolling 
in whirlpools of the flying disks, is rapidly gliding with the pebbles and 
stones, flung from the slings in the air. 


29. The sky is become as a lake of lotuses with the lotiform heads of 
warriors flung aloft in the air, while the flying weapons are floating like their 
stalks in it, with the broken swords as their thorns all around. 


30. The flying fragments of the flags, forming the folia of the plants, and 
the darts sticking to them, appear as big black bees fluttering about the flowers 
moving with the breeze. 


31. The arrows sticking to the dead bodies of elephants, are as emmets on 
mountain tops, and as timid girls clinging to the bosoms of men. 


32. The winds unfurling the curling locks of Vidyddhara females, indicate 
their approaching spousals, as the unfolding plumage of fowls are predictions 
of success in augury. 


33. The lifted umbrellas are shining as so many moons on high, and the 
moon shining above in the form of fair fame, spreads her light as a white 
canopy on earth. 


34. The brave warrior, soon after his death, assumes a celestial form framed 
by his own merit, as a man in his sleep, attains to a state, he has imagined to 
himself in his waking. 


35. The flying spears and lances and clubs and disks are hurtling in the air, 
like shoals of restless fishes and sharks, moving about incessantly in the 
troubled waters of the sea. 


36. The milk-white rags of umbrellas, tattered and shattered by arrowy 
shafts, are flying as cranes in the crowded air, and appearing as the disk of the 
moon broken into a thousand pieces. 


37. These waving flappers flying in the air with a hoarse gurgling, 
(gharghara), seem as the waves of the sea lifted in the air, and undulating 
with a babbling noise in the ocean of the sky. 


38. Those slips of the flappers and umbrellas, hashed by the slashing arms, 
appear as the laurels of glory flung aloft and flying in the regions of air. 


39. Behold, ye friends! how these flying arrows and showering spears, are 
approaching to us with hits of their spoil, like bodies of locusts, bearing away 
their verdant booty in the air. 


40. Hearken to the clanking sound of the striking steel, in the uplifted arm 
of the armoured soldier, resounding like the loud larum of the regent of death. 


41. Hear the tremendous blows of weapons, like the blowing of an all 
destroying tornado, throwing down the elephants like craigs of mountains, 
with their long stretching tusks lying like water falls on the ground. 


42. Lo! there the drivers of war chariots are stopped in their course, and 
striving to make their way through the puddles of blood, in which the wheels 
and horses of the car, are huddled together as in a bog of quagmire. 


43. The jingling of arms and armours, and the jangling of swords and steel, 
resound, as the tinkling of the lute at the dancing of the dire and dreaded dame 
of death. 


44. See the skirts of the sky reddened by the roseate particles, borne by the 
winds from the streams of blood, issuing out of the wounds in the bodies of 
men, horses, and elephants lying dead in the field. 


45. Look at the array of arrows formed in the air as a wreath of blossoms, 


and falling as the rays of lightnings from the dark black clouds of weapons 
hanging on high. 


46. Lo! the surface of the earth filled with blood-red weapons, appearing as 
faggots of fire strewn over the ground in an universal conflagration. 


47. The multitudes of commingled weapons, clashing with and breaking 
one another into pieces, are falling down in showers, like the innumerable 
rays of the sun. 


48. The fighting of one man among the motionless many, is like the magic 
play of a magician, where the conjurer acts his parts amidst the bewitched 
beholders, Lo! there the indifferent spectators viewing the warfare as a dream, 
(by their prajna or inward vision of the mind). 


49. The field of battle, where all other sounds are hushed under the clashing 
of arms, resembles the stage of the martial god Bhairava, chanting his pitiless 
war song in jarring cacophony. 


50. The battlefield is turned to a sea of blood, filled with the sands of 
pounded weapons, and rolling with the waves of broken discuses. 


51. All the quarters under the regents of the sky, are filled with martial 
music loudly resounding on all sides, and the rebellowing hills seem to 
challenge one another, in their aerial flight and fighting, (as in contest of the 
gods and titans of old). 


52. Alas for shame! says one, that these arrows flung with such force from 
the bow strings, and flying with such loud hissing, and glittering as red hot 
lightnings in the air, are foiled in their aim of piercing the impenetrable 
armours, and driven back by them to hit at the stony hills. 


53. Hear me friend, that art tired with the sight, that it is time for us to 
depart from this place, ere we are pierced in our bodies by these sharp arrows 
flashing as fire, and before the day runs its course of the fourth watch, 
(evening). 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
Description of the Battlefield. 


Vasishtha said: — Then the waves of horse troops mounting to the sky, made 
the battlefield appear as a raging sea. 


2. The moving umbrellas floated as its foam and froth, and the feathered 
silvery arrows glided like the finny pearly fishes in it, while the high flight and 
rush of the cavalry, heaved and dashed as surges of the sea. 


3. The rushing of the weapons resembled the running of its currents, and 
the circles of the soldiers were as vortices of its waters. The elephants were as 
its islets and their motions resembled the moving rocks in it. 


4. The whirling disks were as its eddies, and the flying hairs on the heads 
likened its floating weeds. The sparkling sands were as its shining waters, and 
the flash of swords like its glassy spray. 


5. The gigantic warriors were its whales and alligators, and the resounding 
caverns like its gurgling whirlpools. 


6. The flying arrows were like its swimming fishes, and the floating flags 
likened its uprising waves and bores. 


7. The shining weapons formed the waters of this ocean and their 
whirlpools also, while the long lines of forces appeared as the huge and 
horrible bodies of its whales. 


8. Soldiers clad in black iron armour, were as the dark blue waters of the 
deep, and the headless bodies groveling in dust were as the eddies of the sea, 
with the encircled equipments as the sea weeds. 


9. The showers of arrows had obscured the skies with a mist, and the 
confused rattlings of the battlefield, were as the roarings of the clouds. 


10. The flying and falling heads of the slain soldiers, resembled the large 
drops of rain, and their bodies were as pieces of wood, whirling in the eddies 
of the disks. 


11. The bold bowyer, bending his strong bow in the form of a curve, and 


leaping above the ground, resembled the spouting sea, rising from underneath 
the ground with his heaving waves on high. 


12. The unnumbered umbrellas and flags, that were moving up and down in 
the field, were as the foaming and frothing sea, rolling in waves of blood, and 
carrying away the beams and timbers of the broken cars in its current. 


13. The march of the army resembled the flowing of the sea waters, and the 
blood spouting from the wounds of the elephants likened its bubbles, while 
the moving horses and elephants represented the sea animals in their motion. 


14. The battlefield had become like the wondrous field of the air, where the 
furious war, like a tremendous earthquake, shook the hills like moving clouds 
in the sky. 


15. Here the waves were undulating like flights of birds in the air, and the 
groups of elephants falling aground like rocks, and the cowardly ranks were 
murmuring like herds of the timorous deer. 


16. The field is turned to a forest of arrows, and wounded soldiers are 
standing fixed on the ground as trees, with the arrows flying as locusts, and 
the horses moving like antelopes in it. 


17. Here the loud drum sounded as the humming of bees in the hollows of 
trees, and the army appearing as a mist, with the bold warrior sprawling like a 
lion in it. 

18. The dust was rising in clouds and the forces falling as rocks, the huge 
cars broken down as hills, and the flaming swords shining on all sides. 


19. The rise and fall of the foot soldier’s feet flitted like the falling flowers 
on the ground, and the flags and umbrellas o’ertopped it as clouds; it was 
overflown by streams of blood, and the high-sounding elephants falling as 
thundering showers of rain. 


20. The war was as the last doom of death ready to devour the world, and 
destroy the flags and banners, the umbrellas and chariots in a confused chaos. 


21. The shining weapons were falling like fragments of the refulgent sun, 
and burning all things as a burning pain inflames the soul and mind. 


22. The out-stretched bows were as rainbows, and the falling arrows as 
showers of rain; the flying sabres resembled the forky lightnings, and their 
falling fragments like the sparkling hailstones. 


23. The dire massacre made a sea of blood, with the hurling stones as its 
shoals and rocks; while the flying arms resembled the falling stars from 


heaven. 


24. The sky was as a sea full of the whirlpools of the groups of disks and 
circlets, that were hurled in the air, and there were the burning fires, that 
performed the funerals of the slain. 


25. The missiles were as bolts of thunder, which struck the rock-like 
elephants dead in the field, to block the passage of men. 


26. The earth and sky were obscured by a thick cloud of showering arrows, 
and the army below was a sea of tempestuous warfare and bloodshed. 


27. The destructive weapons were flying on all sides, like huge dragons of 
the sea, carried aloft by gusts of wind from the stormy main. 


28. The flying arms of bolts and swords, disks, pikes, and lances, were 
blazing and breaking one another in the air with such hideous noise, that it 
seemed to be a second deluge, when the last tornado blew up everything on 
high, scattering them in all directions, and crushing and smashing them with a 
tremendous peal. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


SECTION I. 
Collision of Equal Arms and Armigerents. 


The heaps of arrows rising in spires above the ground, drove the cowards and 
the wounded afar from the field. 


2. The hills of the dead bodies of men, horses, and elephants, heaving in 
promiscuous heaps, and appearing as clouds fallen upon earth, invited the 
Yakshas and Rdakshasas, and the carnivorous Pisdchas, to come and sport in 
the wide ocean of blood. 


3. Now there commenced a commutual contest, betwixt men of rank and 
virtue, and those of good character, valour and strength on both sides, not 
excepting even the holy and household people, all of whom took part in the 
combat, (that is, no condition of life, nor age nor sex, could escape the 
contagion of a warfare). 


4. Duels were fought between these, like the clashing of one cloud with 
another, and like the confluence of two streams discharging their fury against 
each other. 


5. As a rib is joined to another, and one side with the other, so met the 
horse against the horse, and elephant opposed the elephant in mutual conflict. 


6. As one forest clasps and clings to another, and one hill is linked with the 
other in a range, so the duelists strove together, as one wave dashes against 
the other. 


7. Footmen fought with footmen, as the reeds crush the reeds, and bamboos 
clash against one another, and the contrary winds struggle between 
themselves. 


8. Cars falling upon cars, and chariots running against chariots, broke one 
another to pieces, and the citizens beat the rustics, as the Devas smote the 
demons of old. 


9. The sky which had been erewhile clouded by the flight of arrows, was 


now emblazoned by the banner of the bowyer, resembling the rainbow of 
various colours. 


10. At last the warriors who were overpowered in their conflict with 
unequal arms, fled away from the field, as they do from the fire of a 
conflagration. 


11. Now the armigerents with discuses, met the thwarters of disks, 
(chakras), in contest, and bowyers were opposed to bowmen, and swordsmen 
challenged the sword fighters in the field. So met the hookers and crookers 
with their co-rivals with crowbars, (bhusundis), in hand. 


12. Maces were opposed to maces, (musalas), and lancers were set against 
the lance bearers, (kuntas), in fighting. Spearmen braved the spearmen, 
(rishtis), and the throwers of missiles were crossed with missives, (prdsas), in 
hand. 


13. Mallets militated against mallets, (mudguras), and clubs were 
contravened by clubmen in the conflict. Combatants with pikes, (saktis), 
encountered the pikemen, (sakti-dharas), face to face, and iron rods were 
crossed to pointed rods, (siilas), in the strife. 


14. Pugilists with missive weapons, counteracted the missiles of their 
antagonists, (prdsas), and those fighting with battle axes, (parasus), baffled 
the poleaxes and pickaxes, (paraswadhas), of their foes. 


15. Trappers with their traps and snares, attacked the darters of nooses and 
lassos, (pdsas), and the darters of javelins, (sankus), withstood the darts of the 
dartsmen on the other side. Daggers were opposed to daggers, (kshurikas), 
and cudgels were presented before the cudgels, (bhindipdlas of the enemy). 


16. Combatants with iron gloves contravened the boxers with iron fistcuffs, 
(Vajramushtis), and those with iron cranes, pursued the fighters with crooked 
goads, (ankusas), in hand. Warriors with ploughshares attacked the 
ploughmen, and those with tridents, fell upon the trident holders, (trisiilins), in 
contest. 


17. Champions with chained armours set upon the soldiers attired in mail, 
(srinkhala jala), and they poured upon the field as flights of locusts, or as the 
waves in the troubled sea. 


18. The air also seemed as a sea, with flying disks whirling as whirlpools, 
(chakravartas), and the flight of reeds whistling like gusts of wind, while the 
range of running weapons seemed as sharks and dolphins moving about it. 


19. The hollow of the heaven became as the great deep of the sea, 


impassable by the celestials, owing to the waving weapons, moving as sea 
monsters in the air. 


20. Thus the armies of the two belligerent potentates, each composed of 
eight ranks or battalions, were furiously engaged with one another, as 
described below. 


SECTION ILI. 
Catalogue of the Forces. 


21. Now hear me relate to you, the forces on the side of Padma, now named 
Viduratha, and the allied powers that came to his side, from the Central and 
Eastern districts. 


22. There came the hardy warriors of Kosala, (Oudh), and Kasi, (Benares), 
those of Magadha, (Behar), and Utkala, (Orissa), situated in the east; and the 
Mekhalas (of Vindhya range), the Karkars (of Karnatic), and the Madras (of 
Madura) in the south. 


23. The chiefs of Hema, (Imaus), and Rudras, and the Tamraliptas, 
(Tamils), from the south; the Pragjyotishas (of east Assam), and the horse 
faced Osmuks and Ambashtha cannibals. 


24. Then there joined the Varna-koshthas and Viswotras, and the eaters of 
raw food and flesh and the fish eaters (piscivori); and those with faces like 
tigers, the Kiratas, (Kirrhoids and Kira-antis), with the Sauviras and one 
legged people. 


25. Next came the mountaineers of Malyavana, Sibira and Anjanagiri, and 
others having the ensigns of bulls and lotuses, and the people of the sun rising 
mountain, (Udaya-giri), in the east. 


26. Those that joined from the south east (pragdaxina), are the following, 
namely, the Vindhyaris, the Chedis, the Vatsas, the Dasarnas, (near the 
confluence of the ten streams), and the Angas, Bangas and Upabangas (of 
Upper and Lower Bengal). 


27. They that met from the south were, Kalingas and Pundras, the Jatharas, 
Vidarbhas and the hill people (on the Karnatic coast), the Sabaras, the 
outcasted savages, the Karnas and the Tripura people. 


28. Those named Kantakas from their thorny district, the unenlightened 


Komalas (of Comilla?); the Karnas (Canarese), the Andhras, the Cholas and 
the people on the borders of the Charmanvati river. 


29. The Kakos or bald-headed and bearded people, and those of the Hema- 
kuta hills, the frizzled and long necked people, and the inhabitants of 
Kishkindha and cocoa forests. 


30. The princes that joined with Lila’s husband from the south, were as 
follows, — the Vindhyans, the Kusumians (of Patna), the Mahendras and the 
Darduras (of the hills of the same names). 


31. The Malays and the solar race, and the Prince of the (33) united states 
and the rich and united cities of Avanti and Sambavati. 


32. And those of Dasapura (or ten cities) of Katha (Kota), Chakra, Reshika 
Cutch and others, and the foresters of Upagiri and Bhadragiri hills. 


33. The prince of Nagore and the chiefs of Dandaka forest, and the joint 
states of the people, the Sahas, Saivas, and the hill people of the Rishyamuka 
and Karkota and the Vimbila foresters. 


34. Then came the inhabitants from the banks of Pampa, the Kerakas and 
Karkaviras, with the Kherikas, Asikas and the people of Dhrumapattana. 


35. Next came the Kasikas and Khallukas, the Yadas and Tamraparnikas, 
the Gonardas, the Kanakas and the people of Dinapattam. 


36. The Tamris (Tamils), Kadambharas, Sahakaéras and Enakas (or deer 
hunters), the Vaitundas, Tumba-vanalas, and those attired in deer and elephant 
skins. 


37. Then came the lotus-like Sibis and Konkans and the inhabitants of 
Chitrakuta mountains, with the people of Karnata, the Mantas, Batakas and 
those of Cattak. 


38. The Andhras and Kola hill people (Koles), the Avantis and Chedis, 
with the Chandas and Devanakas and Kraunchavahas. 


39. At last came the people from the three peaks of Chitraktita mountains, 
called the Silakhara, Nanda mardana and Malaya, which were the seats of the 
guardian Bakshasas of Lanka. 


40. Then those of the southwest where there is the great realm of Surastra, 
(Surat), with the kingdoms of Sindhu, (Sinde), Sauvira, Abhira, and Dravidas 
(in Deccan). 


41. Also those of the districts of Kikata, Siddha Khanda, and Kaliruha, and 
the mount Hemagiri or golden hills and the Raivataka range. 


42. Then the warriors of Jaya Kachchha (the victorious Cutch), and 
Mayavara (Mewar), as also the Yavanas (Ionians), the Bahlikas (Balkhs), the 
Marganas (nomads), and the grey coloured Tumbas (on the north). 


43. Then there came Lahsa races and many hill peoples, inhabiting the 
borders of the sea (Caspian), forming the limit of the dominion of Lila’s 
husband (Hindu Government) on the north. 


44. Now know the names of the countries belonging to the enemy in the 
west, and of those composed of the following mountain ranges, viz. 


45. The mount Maniman and the Kurar-pana hills, with the hillocks of 
Vanorka, Megha-bhava, and the Chakra-vana mountain. 


46. There is the country of the five peoples limiting the territory of the Kasa 
Brahmans, and after that the Bharaksha, the Paraka and Santika countries. 


47. Thence stretch the countries of the Saivyas, Amarakas, the Pachchyas 
(Paschatyas) and Guhutwas, and then the Haihaya country, and those of the 
Suhyas, Gayas and Tajikas and Hunas (Huns). 


48. Then along the side of some other countries, there is the range of Karka 
hills, inhabited by barbarous people, devoid of caste, customs, and limits of 
moral duties. 


49. Thence stretches a country hundreds of leagues in length, to the 
boundary mountain of Mahendra, abounding in rich stones and gems. 


50. After that stands the Aswa range with hundreds of hills about it, and 
extending to the dread ocean on the north of the Pariyatra range. 
(Paropamisus). 


51. On the north western side, there are countries beyond the boundary 
mountains (of Asia), where Venupati was the king of the land. 


52. Then there are the countries of the Phalgunakas and Mandavayas and 
many other peoples, and those of Purukundas and Paras (Paris?) as bright as 
the orb of the sun. 


53. Then the races of Vanmilas and Nalinas and the Dirghas, who are so 
called, from their tall statures and long arms and hairs. Then there are the 
Rangas, (Red men), Stanikas with protuberant breasts, and the Guruhas and 
Chaluhas. 


54. After that is the kingdom of women (ruled by a queen), where they feed 
upon bullocks and heifers. Now about the Himalayas and its hills in the north 
(of India): — 


55. These are the Krauncha and Madhuman hills, and the Kaildsa, 
Vasuman and the Sumeru peaks, at the foot of which are the people, known 
under many names. 


56. Beside these there met the warlike tribes of India consisting of the 
Madrawars, Malavas and Sura-senas. The Rajputs of the race of Arjuna, the 
Trigartas and the one-legged people and Khudras. 


57. There were the Abalas, Prakhalas, and Sakas, (Sacce or Scythians). 
The Khemadhitrtas, the Dasadhanas, the Gavasanas and Dandahanas, (club 
fighters). 


58. The Dhanadas and Sarakas and Batadhanas also, with the islanders and 
Gandharas and Avanti warriors of Malwa. 


59. The warlike Takshasilas, (Taxilas), the Bilavas, Godhanas and the 
renowned warriors of Pushkara, (Pokhra). 


60. Then there were the Tikshas and Kaélavaras, and the inhabitants of the 
cities of Kahaka and Surabhuti likewise. 


61. There were the people of the Ratikadarsa and Antaradarsa also, and the 
Pingalas, the Pandyas, Yamanas and Yatudhanas Rdkshasas too. 


62. There were also the races of men, known as Hematdlas and Osmuks, 
together with the hilly tribes, inhabiting the Himalaya, Vasuman, Krauncha, 
and Kailasa mountains. 


63. Hear me now relate to you the peoples that came from the north east 
quarter, which extends a hundred and eighty leagues in its circumference. 


64. There came also the Kalutas and Brahmaputras, the Kunidas and 
Khudinas, with the warlike Malavas and the champions of the Randhra and 
forest states. 


65. Then there were the Kedavas and Sinhaputras of dwarfish statures, the 
Sabas, (Sabe or Sabians?), the Kacczs, the Pahlavis, (ancient Persians), the 
Kamiras and the Daradas, (the present Darduis or Himalayan hills). 


66. There were also the people of Abhisa, the Jarvakas, the Pulolas and 
Kuves, the Kiratas and Yamupatas, together with the poor and rich people of 
desert lands and tracts of gold. 


67. Thus Lila saw in one view, the residences of the devas, the forest lands 
and the earth in all their beauty. She saw all the seats of opulence, 
(viswavasus), and the edifices with which they were adorned, she beheld the 
summit of Kaildsa, and the delightful groves at its foot, and the level lands 


traversed by the aerial cars of Vidyadhara and celestial beings. 


CHAPTER XXXVII 
Catalogue of the Forces continued. 


Vasishtha said: — Thus the ravaging war was making a rapid end of men, 
horse, elephants and all, and the bravos coming foremost in the combat, fell in 
equal numbers on both sides. 


2. These, (as named before), and many others were reduced to dust and 
ashes, and the bravery of the brave, served but to send them like poor moths 
to the fire and flame of destruction. 


3. Know now the names of the central districts, not yet mentioned by me, 
that sent their warriors to the field, in favour of the consort prince of Lila. 


4. These were the inland forces of Sursena, (Muttra), the Gudas, (Gaudas?), 
and the Asganas (?); the Madhymikas and they that dwell under sunlight, (the 
tropics). 


5. The Salukas and Kodmals, and Pippalayanas; the Mandavyas, Pandyans, 
Sugrivas and Guryjars. 


6. The Pariyatras, Kurashtras, Yamunas and Udumvaras; the Raj-waras, the 
Ujjainas, the Kalkotas (Calicuts) and the Mathuras (of Muttra). 


7. The Panchalas, (Panjabis), the Northern and Southern Dharmakshetras; 
the Kurukshetriyas, Panchdlakas and Saraswatas. 


8. The line of war chariots from Avanti, being opposed by the arms of the 
warriors of the Kunta and Panchanada districts, fell in fighting by the sides of 
the hills. 


9. Those arrayed in silken attire, being dismantled by the enemy, fell upon 
the ground, and were trodden down by the elephants. 


10. The bravadoes of Daspura, being hacked in their breasts and shoulders 
by the hostile weapons, were pursued by the Banabhuma warriors, and driven 
to the distant pool. 


11. The Santikas being ripped in their bellies, lay dead and motionless in 
naked field, and wrapped in their mangled entrails, which were torn and 


devoured by the voracious Pisdchas at night. 


12. There the veteran and vociferous warriors of Bhadrasiri, who were well 
skilled in the battle field, drove the Amargas to the ditch, as they drive the 
tortoises to their pits. 


13. The Haihayas were driving the Dandakas, who like fleet stags were 
flying with the swiftness of winds, and all gushing in blood by the pointed and 
piercing arrows of the enemy. 


14. The Daradas were gored by the tusks of the elephants of their enemies, 
and were borne away in floods of their blood, like the broken branches of 
trees. 


15. The Chinas, (Chinese), were mangled in their bodies by darts and 
arrows, and cast their tortured bodies in the water, as a burden they could no 
longer support. 


16. The Asiiras, pierced in their necks by the flying lances of the Karnatic 
lancers, fled in all directions like the faggots of fire, or as the flying meteors of 
heaven. 


17. The Sadkas and Dasakas were fighting together, by holding down one 
another by the hair on their heads, as if the whales and elephants were 
struggling mutually from their respective elements. 


18. The flying cowards were entrapped in the snares cast by the Dasarna 
watriors, as dolphins hiding under the reeds, are dragged out by nets on the 
blood-red shore. 


19. The lifted swords and pikes of the Tongas, (Tonguise), destroyed the 
Gurjara (Guzrati) force by hundreds, and these like razors balded the heads, 
(i.e., made widows) of hundreds of Gurjara women. (It is their custom to 
remain baldheaded in widowhood). 


20. The lustre of the lifted weapons of the warriors, illumined the land as 
by flashes of lighting, and the clouds of arrows were raining like showers of 
rain in the forest. 


21. The flight of the crowbars, (bhusundis), which untimely obscured the 
orb of the sun, affrighted the Abhira (cowherd) warriors with the dread of an 
eclipse, and overtook them by surprise, as when they are pursued by a gang of 
plunderers of their cattle. 


22. The handsome gold collared army of the Tamras or tawny coloured 
soldiers, were dragged by the Gauda warriors, as captors snatch their fair 
captives by the hair. 


23. The Tongons were beset by the Kanasas, like cranes by vultures with 
their blazing weapons, destroying elephants and breaking the discuses in war. 


24. The rumbling noise, (gudugudurava), raised by the whirling of cudgels 
by the Gauda gladiators, frightened the Gandharas to a degree, that they were 
driven like a drove of beasts, or as the dreading Dravidas from the field. 


25. The host of the Saka or Scythian warriors, pouring as a blue torrent 
from the azure sky, appeared by their sable garb as the mist of night, 
approaching before their white robed foes of the Persians. 


26. The crowded array of lifted arms in the clear and bright atmosphere, 
appeared as a thick forest under the milk white ocean of frost, that shrouds the 
mountainous region of Mandara. 


27. The flights of arrows which seemed as fragments of clouds in the air 
from below, appeared as waves of the sea, when viewed by the celestials from 
above. 


28. The air appeared as a forest thickly beset by the trees of spears and 
lances, with the arrows flying as birds and bees, and innumerable umbrellas, 
with their gold and silver mountings, appearing as so many moons and stars in 
the sky. 


29. The Kekayas made loud shouts, like the war whoops of drunken 
soldiers, and the Kankas covered the field like a flight of cranes, and the sky 
was filled with dust over their heads. 


30. The Kirata army made a purling noise, (kulakula), like the effeminate 
voice of women, causing the lusty Angas to rush upon them with their furious 
roar. 


31. The Kasas, (Khasias), covering their bodies with kusa grass (in their 
grassy garbs), appeared as birds with feathers, and raised clouds of dust by 
flapping their feathered arms. 


32. The giddy warriors of Narmada’s coasts, came rushing in the field 
unarmed with their weapons, and began to fleer and flout and move about in 
their merry mood. 


33. The low statured Salwas came with the jingling bells of their waist 
bands, flinging their arrows in the air, and darting showers of their darts 
around. 


34. The soldiers of Sibi were pierced with the spears hurled by the Kuntas. 
They fell as dead bodies in the field, but their spirits fled to heaven in the form 
of Vidyadharas. 


35. The Pandu-nagaras were laid groveling on the ground in their quick 
march, by the mighty and light-footed army, who had taken possession of the 
field. 


36. The big Pancha-nadas, (Punjabis), and the furious warriors of Kasi, 
(Benares), crushed the bodies of stalwart warriors with their lances and 
cudgels, as elephants crush the mighty trees under their feet and tusks. 


37. The Burmese and Vatsenis were cut down on the ground by the disks of 
the Nipas, (Nepalese), and the Sahyas were sawn down with saws as withered 
trees. 


38. The heads of the white Kakas, (Caucasians), were lopped off with sharp 
axes, and their neighbouring prince of the Bhadras was burnt down by the 
fiery arrows, (fire arms). 


39. The Matangajas (of Elephanta) fell under the hands of Kashthayodhas 
(of Katiawar), as old unchained elephants falling in the miry pit, and others 
that came to fight, fell as dry fuel into the blazing fire. 


40. The Mitragartas falling into the hands of the Trigartas, were scattered 
about as straws in the field, and having their heads struck off in their flight, 
they entered the infernal regions of death. 


41. The weak Vanila force, falling into the hands of the Magadha army, 
resembling a sea gently shaken by the breeze, went down in the sands, as lean 
and aged elephants. 


42. The Chedis lost their lines in fighting with the Tongans, and lay 
withered in the field of battle, as flowers when scattered in the plains, fade 
away under the shining sun. 


43. The Kosalas were unable to withstand the war cry of the deadly 
Pauravas, and were discomfited by showers of their clubs, and missile arrows 
and darts. 


44. Those that were pierced by pikes and spears, became as coral plants red 
with blood all over their bodies, and thus besmeared in bloodshed, they fled to 
the sheltering hills like red hot suns to the setting mountains, (astdchala). 


45. The flight of arrows and weapons borne away by the rapid winds, 
moved about in the air as fragments of clouds, with a swarm of black bees 
hovering under them. 


46. The flying arrows seemed as showering clouds, and their feathers 
appeared as the woolly breed, their reedy shafts seeming as trees, were roving 
with the roar of elephants. 


47. The wild elephants and people of the plains, were all torn to pieces like 
bits of torn linen. 


48. War chariots with their broken wheels, fell into the pits like the broken 
craigs of mountains, and the enemy stood upon their tops as a thick mist or 
cloud. 


49. The multitude of stalwart warriors meeting in the field, had given it the 
appearance of a forest of tala and tamala trees, but their hands being lopped 
off by weapons, they made it appear as a mountainous wood, with its clumps 
of tapering pine trees. 


50. The youthful damsels of Paradise were filled with joy and glee, to find 
the groves of their native hill, (Meru), full of the brave champions (fallen in 
the field). 


51. The forest of the army howled in a tremendous roar, until it was burnt 
down by the all devouring fire of the enemy. 


52. Hacked by the Pisdchas, (Assamese), and snatched of their weapons by 
the Bhutas, (Bhoteas), the Dasarnas (at the confluence of the ten streams of 
Vindhya) threw off their staffs, and fled as a herd of heifers (nikuchya 
karnidhavati — bolted with their broken staves. Panini). 


53. The Kasias were eager to despoil the tinsels from the dead bodies of the 
chiefs by their valour, as the summer heat robs the beauty of lotuses in a 
drying pool. 


54. The Tushakas were beset by the Mesalas, with their darts, spears and 
mallets, and the sly Katakas were defeated and driven away by the Narakas in 
battle. 


55. The Kauntas were surrounded by Prastha warriors, and were defeated 
like good people by the treachery of the wily. 


56. The elephant drivers, that struck off the heads of their hosts in a trice, 
were pursued by the harpooners, and fled with their severed heads, as they do 
with the lotus-flowers plucked by their hands. 


57. The Saraswatas fought on both sides with one another until it was 
evening, and yet no party was the loser or gainer, as in a learned discussion 
between pandits and among lawyers. 


58. The puny and short statured Deccanese, being driven back by the 
Radkshas of Lanka, redoubled their attack on them, as the smothering fire is 
rekindled by fuel. 


59. What more shall I relate Rama about this war, which baffles the attempt 
of the serpent Vasuki even, to give a full description of it with his hundred 
tongues and mouths. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
Cessation of the War. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now as the war was waging fiercely, with mingled 
shouts on both sides, the sun shrouded his burnished armour under the mist of 
darkness, and was about to set. 


2. The waters of the limpid streams glided with the showers of stones flung 
by the forces, and falling on the fading clusters of lotuses growing in them. 


3. Flashes of fire glittered in the sky, by the clashing of the shafts and darts 
below; and waves of arrows were seen, now approaching nigh and now 
receding at a distance. 


4. Severed heads, like loose lotuses, floated and whirled in the whirlpools 
of blood below, and the sea of heaven was filled with flying weapons, moving 
as marine animals above. 


5. The rustling of the breeze and the whistling of the overshadowing clouds 
of weapons, frightened the aerial Siddhas and sylvan apes, with the fear of an 
approaching rain. 


6. The day declined after it had run its course of the eight watches, 
(Ydmdardhas), and assumed the graceful countenance of a hero, returning in 
glory, after he has fought his battle. 


7. The army like the day, declined in splendour, being battered in its 
cavalry, and shattered in its force of elephants. 


8. Then the commanders of the armies, in concert with the ministers of war, 
sent envoys to the hostile parties for a truce to the fighting. 


9. Both parties agreed to the armistice, seeing how much they were 
harassed in the engagement, and the soldiers with one voice, gave their assent 
to it. 


10. They hoisted their soaring banners of truce on the pinnacles of the 
highest chariots, (rathas), and a crier on each side, mounted over one, to give 
proclamation to the armies below. 


11. They furled the white flags on all sides, which like so many moons in 
the gloom of night, proclaimed peace on earth by cessation from contention. 


12. Then the drums sent their loud peals around, which were resounded by 
roarings of the clouds, (Pushkardvartas) above and all about. 


13. The flights of arrows and weapons, that had been raging as fire in the 
atmosphere, now began to fall in torrents, like the currents of the lake 
Mansaravara on the ground below. 


14. The hands and arms of the warriors were now at rest like their feet, as 
the shaking of trees and the surges of the sea are at an end after the earthquake 
iS over. 


15. The two armies now went their own ways from the field of battle, as the 
arms of the sea run into the land in different directions. 


16. The armies being at rest, there was an end of all agitation in the field, as 
the waves of the ocean are lulled to rest, on its calm after a storm, (literally, 
after its churning by the Mandara mountain). 


17. It became in an instant as dreadful as the dismal womb of death, 
(Putand); and as deep and dark as the hollow pit of the sea, after its waters 
were sucked up by Agastya (the sun). 


18. It was full of the dead bodies of men and beasts, and flowed in floods of 
purpling blood, it was resonant with the sounds of insects, like a heath with 
the humming of beetles. 


19. The gory bodies were gushing with blood, and gurgling as the waves of 
the sea, and the cries of the wounded who wished to live, pierced the ears, and 
throbbed the heart strings of the living. 


20. The dead and wounded weltering side by side in streams of blood, 
made the living think the dead as still alive like themselves. 


21. Big elephants lying dead in piles in the field appeared as fragments of 
clouds, and the heaps of broken chariots seemed as a forest dispersed by the 
storm. 


22. Streams of blood were running with the dead bodies of horses and 
elephants, and heaps of arrows and spears and mattocks and mallets, flowing 
together with broken swords and missiles. 


23. Horses were lying girt in their halters and harnesses, and the soldiers 
wrapt in their mails and armours, and flags and flappers and turbans and 
helmets lay scattered in the field. 


24. The winds were rustling in the orifice of the quivers, like the hissing of 
arrowy snakes, or as the whistling of the breeze in the holes of bamboo trees, 
and the Pisdchas were rolling on beds of dead bodies, as upon their beddings 
of straws. 


25. The gold chains of the helmets and the head ornaments of the fallen 
soldiers, glittered with the various colours of the rainbow, and greedy dogs 
and jackals were tearing the entrails of the dead like long ropes or strings. 


26. The wounded were gnashing their teeth in the field of blood, like the 
croaking of frogs in the miry pool of blood. 


27. Those clad in party coloured coats with a hundred spots on them, had 
now their arms and thighs gushing in a hundred streams of blood. 


28. The friends of the dead and wounded, were wailing bitterly over their 
bodies, lying amidst the heaps of arrows and weapons, the broken cars and the 
scattered trappings of horses and elephants, which had covered the land. 


29. Headless trunks of the goblins were dancing about with their uplifted 
arms touching the sky, and the stink of the carrion, fat and blood, filled the 
nostrils with nausea. 


30. Elephants and horses of noble breed, lay dead, and others gasping with 
their mouths gaping upwards, and the dashing of the waving streams of blood, 
beat as loud as drums against their rock-like bodies. 


31. The blood gushing out of the pores of the wounded horses and 
elephants, ran like that of a wounded whale into a hundred streams. And the 
blood spouting from the mouths of the dying soldiers flowed into a hundred 
channels. 


32. Those who were pierced with arrows in their eyes and mouths, were 
uttering an inaudible voice in their last gasp of death, and those pierced in 
their bellies, had their bowels gushing out with a horrible stench, while the 
ground was reddened with thickened blood issuing out of the wounds. 


33. Half dead elephants grasped the headless trunks with their uplifted 
trunks, (proboscis), while the loose horses and elephants, that had lost their 
riders, were trampling over the dead bodies at random. 


34. The weeping, crying, and tottering wives of the fallen soldiers, fell 
upon their dead bodies weltering in blood, and embracing them fast by their 
necks, made an end of themselves with the same weapons. 


35. Bodies of soldiers were sent with their guides on the way, to fetch the 
dead bodies from the field, and the hands of their lively companions, were 


busily employed in dragging the dead. 


36. The field had become a wide river running with waves of blood, and 
breaking into a hundred whirling streams, carrying the severed heads, as 
lotuses swimming in them, and the torn braids of hair floating as bushes on 
them. 


37. Men were busy to extract the weapons from the bodies of the wounded, 
who lamented loudly on account of their dying in a foreign land, and losing 
their arms and armours and horses and elephants in the field. 


38. The dying souls remembered their sons and parents, their dear ones, 
and their adored deities, and called out by their names, and began to sigh and 
sob with heart-rending heigh-hos and alacks. 


39. The brave that died cursed their fates, and those falling in their fighting 
with elephants, blamed the unkind gods they had adored in vain. 


40. The cowards fearing to be killed betook themselves to base flight, but 
the dauntless brave stepped forward amidst the whirlpools of blood. 


41. Some suffering under the agony of arrows piercing their mortal parts, 
thought upon the sins of their past lives, that had brought this pain upon them, 
while the blood sucking Vefdlas, advanced with their horrid mouths for 
drinking the blood of the headless trunks, (Kabandhas). 


42. The floating flags and umbrellas and flappers, seemed as white lotuses 
in the lake of blood below, while the evening stretched her train of stars like 
red lotuses in the ethereal sea above. 


43. The battle field presented the appearance of an eighth sea of blood, the 
rathas or war-cars forming its rocks, and their wheels its whirlpools, the flags 
being its foam and froth, and the white flappers as its bubbles. (There are 
seven seas only on record). 


44. The field of blood with the scattered cars, appeared as a track of land 
plunged in mud and mire, and covered over with woods broken down and 
blown away by a hurricane. 


45. It was as desolate as a country burnt down by a conflagration, and as 
the dry bed of the sea sucked up by the sage Agastya, (the sun). It was as a 
district devastated by a sweeping flood. 


46. It was filled with heaps of weapons, as high as the bodies of big 
elephants lying dead about the ground. 


47. The lances which were carried down by the streams of blood, were as 


big as the palm trees growing on the summits of mountains. (Compare the 
description in Ossian’s poems). 


48. The weapons sticking in the bodies of the elephants, seemed as the 
shining flowers growing on verdant trees, and the entrails torn and borne up 
by vultures, spread a fretted network in the sky. 


49. The lances fixed beside the streams of blood, were as a woody forest on 
the bank of a river, and the flags floating on the surface, appeared as a bush of 
lotuses in the liquid-blood. 


50. Dead bodies of men were drawn up by their friends, from the bloody 
pool in which they were drowned, and the embedded bodies of big elephants 
were marked by men by the jutting weapons sticking in them. 


51. The trunks of trees which had their branches lopped off by the weapons, 
appeared as the headless bodies of slain soldiers, and the floating carcasses of 
elephants seemed as so many boats swimming in the sea of blood. 


52. The white garments that were swept down by the current, seemed as the 
froth of the pool of blood, and were picked up by the servants sent to search 
them out. 


53. The demoniac bodies of headless soldiers, were rising and falling in the 
field, and hurling large wheels and disks upon the flying army on all sides. 


54. The dying warriors were frothing forth floods of blood from their 
throats, and stones stained with blood were inviting the greedy vultures to 
devour them. 


55. Then there were groups of Sutdla, Vetala and Uttala demons dancing 
their war dance about the field, and whirling the rafts of the broken cars upon 
the flying soldiers on all sides. 


56. The stir and last gasp of those that were yet alive, were fearful to 
behold, and the faces of the dying and the dead that were covered in dust and 
blood, were pitiful to the beholder. 


57. The devouring dogs and ravenous ravens beheld the last gasp of the 
dying with pity, while the feeders on carrions were howling and fighting on 
their common carcass, till many of them became dead bodies by their mutual 
fighting. 


58. Now I have described the sea of blood, which flowed fast with the gore 
of unnumbered hosts of horses, elephants and camels, and of warriors and 
their leaders, and multitudes of cars, and war chariots, but it became a 
pleasure garden to the god of death, delighting in his bed of bloodshed, and 


grove of the weapons beset all around. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
Description of the Battle-field Infested by Nocturnal 
Fiends. 


Now the blood-red sun set down in the west, like a hero red with blood, and 
hid his lustre, which was dimmed by the brightness of the weapons of war in 
the western main. 


2. The sky which had reflected the blood-red flush of the field of blood, was 
now dimmed by the setting of the glorious sun, and darkened by the veil of 
evening. 


3. Thick darkness overspread the face of heaven and earth like the waters 
of the great deluge, and there appeared a body of ghosts, (Vetdlas), dancing in 
a ring and clapping their hands. 


4. The face of the day like that of an elephant, being besmeared with the 
blackness of night fall, was again painted by the light of evening with the 
pearly spots of stars on the cheeks. 


5. The busy buzz of Creation being silent in the dead darkness of night, like 
the humming of bees over the surface of the waters, the hearts of men were 
closed in sleep as in death, like the petals of the lotus at night. 


6. The birds lay with their folded wings and fallen crests in their nests, as 
the dead bodies were lying in the field, covered with their wounds and 
weapons. 


7. Then the fair moonbeams shone above, and the white lotuses were blown 
below, the hearts of men were gladdened, and the victors felt joyous in 
themselves. 


8. The ruddy evening assumed the shape of the blood-red sea of battle, and 
the fluttering bees now hid themselves like the faces of the fallen soldiers. 


9. There was an ethereal lake above spangled with stars like the white 
lotuses on high, and here was the earthly lake below, beset by lotuses 
resembling the stars of heaven. 


10. The bodies that were thought to be lost in darkness, were now 
recovered in light, as the gems hid under the water, are found scattered about 
in moonlight. 


11. The battle field was filled by the Vetala demons, howling with their 
hideous cry, while bodies of vultures, crows and owls, were tearing the 
carcasses and sporting with the skeletons. 


12. Then blazed the funeral piles as brightly as the starry frame on high, 
and the fire consumed the dead bodies together with their bones and raiments. 


13. The fire burnt the bodies with their bones to ashes, after which it 
extinguished itself as if sated with plenty. The female fiends now began to 
sport in the water. 


14. There arose a mingled cry of dogs and crows, of Yakshas and Vetdlas, 
with the clapping of their hands, and bodies of ghosts were moving about as 
woods and forests. 


15. The Dakinis, (Dayinis), were eager to steal away the flesh and fat from 
the piles, and the Pisdchas delighted in sucking the blood and the flesh and 
bones of the dead. 


16. The demons were now looking and now lurking about the funeral piles, 
and the Rakshasas that rushed in, bore away the carcasses on their shoulders. 


17. There came also bodies of ferocious Kumbhandas, and big Damaras, 
uttering their barbarous cries of chumchum, and hovering over the fumes of 
fat and flesh in the shapes of clouds. 


18. Bodies of Vetdlas stood in the streams of blood like earthly beings, and 
snatched the skeletons with hideous cries. 


19. The Vetdla younglings slept in the bellies and chests of the elephants, 
and the Rdakshasas were drinking their fill in the bloody field. 


20. The giddy Vetdlas fought with one another with the lighted faggots of 
the piles, and the winds were wafting the stench of the putrid carcasses on all 
sides. 


21. The female fiends, (Rupikds), filled the baskets of their bellies with 
carrion, with a rat-a-tat, (ratarata) noise, and the Yaksha cannibals were 
snatching the half-burnt carcasses from the funeral piles, as their roasted meat 
and dainty food (S. kali A. Kul). 


22. Aerial imps, (khagas), attacked the dead bodies of the big Bangas and 
black Kalingas, and flouted about with their open mouths, emitting the blaze 


of falling meteors. 


23. The Vetdla goblins fell down in the dark and discoloured blood-pits, 
lying hid in the midst of the heaps of dead bodies, while the Pisdcha ogres 
and the leaders of Yogini sprites, laughed at them for their false step, (vetdla). 


24. The pulling of the entrails, (antras-dnts), vibrated as by striking the 
strings of wired instruments, (tantras — or tants), and the ghosts of men that 
had become fiends from their fiendish desires, fell a-fighting with one another. 


25. Valiant soldiers were affrighted at the sight of the spectres, (Rupikds), 
and the obsequies were disturbed by the Vetdla and Rakshasa goblins. 


26. The hobgoblins of the night, (nisdcharas), got frightened at the fall of 
the carcasses from the shoulders of the elves, (Rupikds), who were carrying 
them aloft in the air, where they were waylaid by a throng of ghostly demons, 
(bhita-sankata). 


27. Many dying bodies, that were lifted aloft with labour by the bogies, 
(Danas), were let to fall down dead on the ground, being found unfit for their 
food. 


28. Pieces of blood-red flesh, fallen from the fiery jaws of jackals, 
resembled clusters of Asoka flowers, strewn all around the funeral ground. 


29. Vetdla urchins were busy in putting on the scattered heads over the 
headless bodies of kabandhas, (acephali), and bodies of Yaksha, Raksha and 
Pisdcha ogres, were flashing as firebrands in the sky. 


30. At last a thick cloud of darkness, covered the face or the sky, and the 
view of the hills and valleys, gardens and groves, was hid under an 
impenetrable gloom. The infernal spirits got loose from their dismal abodes, 
and ranged and ravaged at large over the field, as a hurricane under the vault 
of heaven. 


CHAPTER XL. 
Reflections on Human Life and Mind. 


Vasishtha related: — The nocturnal fiends were thus infesting the gloomy 
field, and the myrmidons of death, (Yama), roaming about it as marauders in 
the day time. 


2. The naked and fleeting ghosts, were revelling on their provision of 
carrion in their nightly abode, and under the canopy of thick darkness, which 
was likely to be laid hold upon under the clutches of one’s hand, (hasta- 
grdhya). 


3. It was in the still hour of the gloomy night, when the host of heaven 
seemed to be fast bound in sleep, that a sadness stole in upon the mind of 
Lila’s magnanimous husband, (the belligerent prince Vidtratha by name). 


4. He thought about what was to be done on the next morning, in council 
with his counsellors, and then went to his bed, which was as white as 
moonlight, and as cold as frost. (A cold bed in the east vs. a warm one in the 
west). 


5. His lotus-eyes were closed in sleep for a while in his royal camp, which 
was as white as the moonbeams, and covered by the cold dews of night. 


6. Then the two ladies, issued forth from their vacuous abode, and entered 
the tent through a crevice, as the air penetrates into the heart and amidst an 
unblown bud of flower. 


7. Rama asked: — How is it possible Sir, that the gross bodies of the 
goddesses, with their limited dimensions, could enter the tent through one of 
its holes, as small as the pore of a piece of cloth? 


8. Vasishtha answered saying that: — Whoso mistakes himself to be 
composed of a material body, it is no way possible for him to enter a small 
hole with that gross body of his. 


9. But he who thinks himself to be pent up in his corporeal body as in a 
cage, and obstructed by it in his flight, and does not believe himself to fill his 
frame, or to be measured by its length, but has the true notion of his inward 


subtle spirit, it is no way impossible for him to have his passage anywhere he 
pleases to go. 


10. He who perceives his original spiritual state, as forming the better half 
of his body, may pass as a spirit through a chink, but whoso relies in his 
subsequent half of the material body, cannot go beyond it in the form of his 
intellect. 


11. As the air never rises upward, nor the flame of fire ever goes 
downward, so it is the nature of the spirit to rise upward, as that of the body to 
go down, but the intellect is made to turn in the way in which it is trained. 


12. As the man sitting in the shade, has no notion of the feeling of heat or 
warmth, so one man has no idea of the knowledge or thoughts of another 
person. 


13. As is one’s knowledge so is his thought, and such is the mode of his 
life, it is only by means of ardent practice (of Yoga and learning), that the 
mind is turned to the right course. 


14. As one’s belief of a snake in a rope, is removed by the conviction of his 
error, so are the bent of the mind and course of conduct in life, changed from 
wrong to right by the knowledge of truth. 


15. It is one’s knowledge that gives rise to his thoughts, and the thoughts 
that direct his pursuits in life, this is a truth known even to the young and to 
every man of sense. 


16. Now then the soul that resembles a being seen in a dream or formed in 
fancy, and which is of the nature of air and vacuum, is never liable to be 
obstructed anywhere in its course, (for who can constrain the flight of his 
imagination?) 


17. There is an intellectual body, which all living beings possess in every 
place. It is known both by consciousness, as well as the feelings of our hearts. 


18. It is by the divine will, that the intellect rises and sets by turns. At first 
it was produced in its natural, simple and intellectual form, and then being 
invested with a material body, it makes together an unity of the person out of 
the duality (of its material and immaterial essences). 


19. Now you must know the triple vacuity, composed of the three airy 
substances, — the spirit, mind, and space, to be one and the same thing, (all 
the three being equally all pervasive), but not so their receptacle (of the 
material body), which has no pervasion. 


20. Know this intellectual body of beings, to be like the air, present with 


everything and everywhere (over which it extends and which it grasps in 
itself), just as your desire of knowing extends over all things in all places, and 
presents them all to your knowledge. 


21. It abides in the smallest particles, and reaches to the spheres of heavens 
(which it grasps within itself), it reposes in the cells of flowers, and delights in 
the leaves of trees. (i.e., It stretches over all these things in its knowledge of 
them). 


22. It delights in hills and dales, and dances over the waves of the oceans, it 
rides over the clouds, and falls down in the showers of rain and hailstones of 
heaven. 


23. It moves at pleasure in the vast firmament, and penetrates through the 
solid mountains. Its body bears no break in it, and is as minute as an atom. 


24. Yet it becomes as big as a mountain lifting its head to heaven, and as 
large as the earth, which is the fixed and firm support of all things. It views the 
inside and outside of everything, and bears the forests like hairs on its body. 


25. It extends in the form of the sky, and contains millions of worlds in 
itself, it identifies itself with the ocean, and transforms its whirlpools to spots 
upon its person. 


26. It is of the nature of an uninterrupted understanding, ever calm and 
serene in its aspect, it is possessed of its intellectual form, from before the 
creation of the visible world, and being all comprehensive as vacuity itself, it 
is conversant with the natures of all beings. 


27. It is an unreality as the appearance of water in the mirage, but manifests 
itself as a reality to the understanding by its intelligence. Without this 
(intellection), the intellectual man is a nil as the son of a barren woman, and a 
blank as the figure of a body seen in a dream. 


28. Rama asked: — How is that mind to which you attribute so many 
powers, and what is that again which you say to be nothing? Why is it no 
reality, and as something distinct from all what we see? 


29. Vasishtha replied: — All individual minds are indued with these 
faculties, except all such individualities, whose minds are engrossed with the 
error (of the reality) of the outer world. 


30. All the worlds are either of a longer or shorter duration, and they appear 
and disappear at times, some of these vanish in a moment, and others endure 
to the end of a Kalpa. But it is not so with the mind, whose progress I will 
now relate to you. 


31. There is an insensibility which overtakes every man before his death, 
this is the darkness of his dissolution, (mahd-pralaya-ydmini). 


32. After the shocks of delirium and death are over, the spiritual part of 
every man, is regenerated anew in a different form, as if it was roused from a 
state of trance, reverie or swoon; (the three states of insensibility, — avidyd- 
trayam). 


33. And as the spirit of God, assumes his triune form with the persons of 
Brahma and Virdj, after the dissolution of the world for its re-creation, so 
every person receives the triplicate form of his spiritual, intellectual, and 
corporeal beings, after the termination of his life by death. 


34. Rama said: — As we believe ourselves to be reproduced after death by 
reason of our reminiscence, so must we understand the re-creation of all 
bodies in the world by the same cause. Hence there is nothing uncaused in it, 
(as it was said with regard to the unproduced Brahma and others). 


35. Vasishtha replied: — The gods Hari, Hara and others, having obtained 
their disembodied liberation or videha-mukti, (i.e., the final extinction of their 
bodies, their minds and spirit as in nirvana), at the universal dissolution, could 
not retain their reminiscence to cause their regeneration. 


36. But human beings having both their spiritual and intellectual bodies 
entire at their death, do not lose their remembrance of the past, nor can they 
have their final liberation like Brahma, unless they obtain their disembodied 
state, which is possible to all in this life or hereafter, by the edification of their 
souls, through Yoga meditation alone. 


37. The birth and death of all other beings like yourself, are caused by their 
reminiscence, and for want of their disembodied liberation or eternal 
salvation. 


38. The living soul retains its consciousness within itself, after its pangs of 
death are over, but remains in its state of insensibility by virtue of its own 
nature, (called pradhdna). 


39. The universal vacuum is called nature, (prakriti). It is the reflexion of 
the invisible divine mind, (chit prativimbam), and is the parent of all that is 
dull or moving (Jadd-Jada), which are so produced by cause of their 
reminiscence or its absence, (sansmriti and asmriti); the former causing the 
regeneration of living beings, and the latter its cessation as in inert matter. 


40. As the living principle or animal life begins to have its understanding, 
(bodha), it is called mahat or an intelligent being, which is possessed of its 
consciousness, (ahankdra). It has then the organs of perception and 


conception, added to it from their elements, (tanmdtras), residing in the 
vacuous ether. 


41. This minutely intelligent substance, is next joined with the five internal 
senses, which form its body, and which is otherwise called its spiritual body, 
(dtivahika or lingadeha). 


42. This spiritual being by its long association with the external senses, 
comes to believe itself as a sensible being, and then by imagining to have the 
sensible form, it finds itself invested with a material body, (ddhibhautika- 
deha), as beautiful as that of a lotus. 


43. Then seated in the embryo, it reposes in a certain position for some 
time, and inflates itself like the air, until it is fully expanded. 


44. It then thinks itself to be fully developed in the womb, as a man dreams 
of a fairy form in his sleep, and believes this illusion as a reality. 


45. He then views the outer world, where he is born to die, just as one visits 
a land where he is destined to meet his death, and there remains to relish its 
enjoyments, as prepared for him. 


46. But the spiritual man soon perceives everything as pure vacuum, and 
that his own body and this world are but illusions and vain vacuities. 


47. He perceives the gods, and human habitations, the hills, and the 
heavens resplendent with the sun and stars, to be no more than abodes of 
disease and debility, decay and ultimate death and destruction. 


48. He sees nothing but a sad change in the natures of things, and all that is 
movable or immovable, great or small, together with the seas, hills, and rivers 
and peoples of this earth and the days and nights, are all subject to decay 
sooner or later. 


49. The knowledge that I am born here of this father, and that this is my 
mother, these my treasures, and such are my hopes and expectations, is as 
false as empty air. 


50. That these are my merits and these my demerits, and these the desires 
that I had at heart, that I was a boy and am now young, are the airy thoughts 
of the hollow mind. 


51. This world resembles a forest, where every being is like a detached 
arbor, the sable clouds are its leaves, and the stars its full-blown flowers. 


52. The walking men are as its restless deer, and the aerial gods and 
demons its birds of the air, the broad day light is the flying dust of its flowers, 


and the dark night the deep covert of its grove. 


53. The seas are like its rills and fountains, and the eight boundary 
mountains as its artificial hills, the mind is the great tank in it, containing the 
weeds and shrubs of human thoughts in abundance. 


54. Wherever a man dies, he is instantly changed to this state, and views 
the same things everywhere, and everyone thus rises and falls incessantly, like 
the leaves of trees in this forest of the world. 


55. Millions of Brahmas, Rudras, Indras, Maruts, Vishnus and Suns, 
together with unnumbered mountains and seas, continents, and islands, have 
appeared and disappeared in the eternal course of the world. 


56. Thus no one can count the numbers of beings that have passed away, 
are passing, and shall have to pass hereafter, nor such as are in existence and 
have to become extinct in the unfathomable eternity of Brahma. 


57. Hence it is impossible to comprehend the stupendous fabric of the 
universe any how except in the mind, which is as spacious as the infinite 
space itself, and as variable as the course of events in the world. 


58. The mind is the vacuous sphere of the intellect, and the infinite sphere 
of the intellect, is the seat of the Supreme. 


59. Now know the whirlpool and waves of the sea to be of the same 
element, as the sea in which they rise and fall, though they are not of the same 
durable nature as the sea water, by reason of their evanescence. So, the 
phenomena are the same with the Noumena, though none of these is a reality. 


60. The ethereal sphere of heaven, is but a reflexion of the intellectual 
sphere of the Divine mind, and the bright orbs of the firmament, are as gems 
in the bosom of Brahma. Its concavity is the cave of the mind of the Eternal 
One. 


61. The world according to the sense in which I take it, as the seat of God, 
is highly interesting, but not so in your sense of its being a sober reality. So 
the meaning of the words, “I and thou,” refers according to me to the 
intellectual spirit, and according to you to the living soul and body. 


62. Hence Lila and Saraswati, being in their vacuous intellectual bodies, 
were led by the pure desire of their souls, to every place without any 
obstruction or interruption. 


63. The intellectual spirit has the power, to present itself wherever it likes, 
on earth or in the sky, and before objects known or unknown and wished to be 
known by it. It was by this power that they could enter into the tent of the 


prince. 


64. The intellect has its way to all places and things, over which it exercises 
its powers of observation, reflection and reasoning to their full extent. This is 
known as the spiritual and unconfined body, (Ativdhika), whose course cannot 
be obstructed by any restriction whatever. 


CHAPTER XLI. 
Discrimination of Error. 


Vasishtha said: — Upon the entrance of the ladies in the tent, it appeared as a 
bed of lotuses, and its white vault, seemed as graceful as the vault of heaven 
with two moons rising at once under it. 


2. A pure and cooling fragrance spread about it, as if wafted by the breeze 
from the Mandara flowers, and lulled the prince to sleep, with every body 
lying in their camps. 


3. It made the place as pleasant as the garden of Eden, (Nandana), and 
healed all the pains and cares of the people there. It seemed as a vernal 
garden, filled with the fragrance of the fresh blown lotuses in the morning. 


4. The cooling and moon-bright radiance of the ladies, roused the prince 
from his sleep, as if he was sprinkled over with the juice of ambrosia. 


5. He beheld upon his rising the forms of two fairies, (Apsards), seated on 
two stools, and appearing as two moons risen on two pinnacles of the mount 
Meru. 


6. The prince beheld them with wonder, and after being composed in his 
mind, he rose up from his bed, as the god Vishnu rises from his bed of the 
serpent. 


7. Then advancing respectfully to them, with long strings of flowers in his 
hands, he made offerings of them to the ladies, with handfuls of flowers flung 
at their feet. 


8. Leaving his pillowed sofa in the midst of the hall, he sat with his folded 
legs on the ground, and lowly bending his head, he addressed them saying: — 


9. Be victorious, O moon-bright goddesses! that drive away all the miseries 
and evils and pains and pangs of life, by your radiance, and dispellest all my 
inward and outward darkness by your sunlike beams. 


10. Saying so, he poured handfuls of flowers on their feet, as the trees on 
the bank of a lake, drop down their flowers on the lotuses growing in it. 


11. Then the goddess, desiring to unfold the pedigree of the prince, inspired 
his minister, who was lying by, to relate it to Lila. 


12. He, upon waking, saw the nymphs manifest before him, and advancing 
lowly before them, threw handfuls of flowers upon their feet. 


13. The goddess said: — Let us know, O prince! who you are, and when, 
and of whom you are born herein. Hearing these words of the goddess, the 
minister spake saying: — 


14. It is by your favour, O gracious goddesses! that I am empowered to 
give a relation of my prince’s genealogy to your benign graces. 


15. There was a sovereign, born of the imperial line of Ixaku, by name of 
Mukunda-ratha, who had subjugated the earth under his arms. 


16. He had a moon-faced son by name of Bhadraratha, whose son 
Viswaratha was father to the renowned prince Brihadratha. 


17. His son Sindhuratha was the father of Sailaratha, and his son 
Kamaratha was father of Maharatha. 


18. His son Vishnuratha was father of Nabhoratha, who gave birth to this 
my lord of handsome appearance. 


19. He is renowned as Viduratha, and is born with the great virtues of his 
sire, as the moon was produced of the milky ocean, to shed his ambrosial 
beams over his people. 


20. He was begotten by his mother Sumitra, as the god Guha of Gauri, and 
was installed in the realm at the tenth year of his age, owing to his father’s 
betaking himself to asceticism. 


21. He has been ruling the realm since that time with justice, and your 
appearance here tonight, betokens the blossoming of his good fortune. 


22. O goddesses! whose presence is hard to be had, even by the merit of 
long devotion, and a hundred austerities, you see here the lord of the earth- 
famed Vidtratha, present before you. 


23. He is highly blessed today by your favour. After saying these words, 
the minister remained silent with the lord of the earth. 


24. They were sitting on the ground with their folded legs, (padmdsana), 
and clasped hands, (kritdnjali), and downcast looks; when the goddess of 
wisdom told the prince, to remember his former births, by her inspiration. 


25. So saying, she touched his head with her hand, and immediately the 
dark veil of illusion and oblivion was dispersed from over the lotus of his 


mind. 


26. It opened as a blossom by the touch of the genius of intelligence, and 
became as bright as the clear firmament, with the rays of his former 
reminiscence. 


27. He remembered by his intelligence his former kingdom, of which he 
had been the sole lord, and recollected all his past sports with Lila. 


28. He was led away by the thoughts of the events of his past lives, as one 
is carried away by the current of waves, and reflected in himself, this world to 
be a magic sea of illusion. 


29. He said: — I have come to know this by the favour of the goddesses, 
but how is it that so many events have occurred to me in course of one day 
after my death. 


30. Here I have passed full seventy years of my lifetime, and recollect to 
have done many works, and remember also to have seen my grand-sire. 


31. I recollect the bygone days of my boyhood and youth, and I remember 
well all the friends and relatives and all the apparels and suite, that I had 
before. 


32. The goddess replied: — Know O king! that after the fit of insensibility 
attending on your death was over, your soul continued to remain in the 
vacuum of the same place, of which you are still a resident. 


33. This royal pavilion, where you think yourself to abide, is situated in the 
vacuous space, within the house of the Brahman in that hilly district. 


34. It is inside that house that you see the appearances of your other abodes 
present before you, and it was in that Brahmana’s house, that you devoted 
your life to my worship. 


35. It is the shrine within the very house and on the same spot, that contains 
the whole world which you are seeing all about you. 


36. This abode of yours is situated in the same place, and within the clear 
firmament of your mind. 


37. It is a false notion of your mind, which you have gained by your 
habitual mode of thinking, that you are born in your present state, of the race 
of Ixaku. 


38. It is mere imagination, which has made you to suppose yourself to be 
named so and so, and that such and such persons were your progenitors, and 
that you had been a boy of ten years. 


39. That your father became an ascetic in the woods, and left you in the 
government of the realm. And that you have subjugated many countries under 
your dominion, and are now reigning as the lord paramount over them. 


40. And that you are ruling on earth with these ministers and officers of 
yours, and are observant of the sacrificial rites, and a just ruler of your 
subjects. 


41. You think that you have passed seventy years of your life, and that you 
are now beset by very formidable enemies. 


42. And that having waged a furious battle, you have returned to this abode 
of yours, where you are now seated and intend to adore the goddesses, that 
have become your guests herein. 


43. You are thinking that these goddesses will bless you with your desired 
object, because one of them has given you the power of recollecting the 
events of your former births. 


44. That these goddesses have opened your understanding like the blossom 
of a lotus, and that you have the prospect of getting your riddance from all 
doubts. 


45. That you are now at peace and rest, and enjoy the solace of your 
soliety, and that your long continued error (of this world), is now removed 
forever. 


46. You remember the many acts and enjoyments of your past life, in the 
body of prince Padma, before you were snatched away by the hand of death. 


47. You now perceive in your mind, that your present life is but a shadow 
of the former, as it is the same wave, that carries one onward, by its rise and 
fall. 


48. The incessant current of the mind flows as the stream of a river, and 
leads a man, like a weed, from one whirlpool into another. 


49. The course of life now runs singly as in dreaming, and now conjointly 
with the body as in the waking state, both of which leave their traces in the 
mind, at the hour of death. 


50. The sun of the intellect being hid under the mist of ignorance, there 
arises this network of the erroneous world, which makes a moment appear as 
a period of hundred years. 


51. Our lives and deaths are mere phantoms of imagination, as we imagine 
houses and towers in aerial castles and icebergs. 


52. The world is an illusion, like the delusion of moving banks and trees to 
a passenger in a vessel on water, or a rapid vehicle on land, or as the 
trembling of a mountain or quaking of the earth, to one affected by a 
convulsive disease. 


53. As one sees extraordinary things in his dream, such as the decapitation 
of his own head, so he views the illusions of the world, which can hardly be 
true. 


54. In reality you were neither born nor dead at any time or place, but ever 
remain as pure intelligence in your own tranquility of soul. 


55. You seem to see all things about you, but you see nothing real in them, 
it is your all seeing soul, that sees everything in itself. 


56. The soul shines as a brilliant gem by its own light, and nothing that 
appears beside it, as this earth or yourself or anything else, is a reality. 


57. These hills and cities, these people and things, and ourselves also, are 
all unreal and mere phantoms, appearing in the hollow vault of the Brahmana 
of the hilly district. 


58. The kingdom of Lila’s husband, was but a picture of this earth, and his 
palace with all its grandeur, is contained in the sphere of the same hollow 
shrine. 


59. The known world is contained in the vacuous sphere of that shrine, and 
it is in one corner of this mundane habitation, that all of us here, are situated. 


60. The sphere of this vaulted shrine, is as clear as vacuity itself, which has 
no earth nor habitation in it. 


61. It is without any forest, hill, sea, or river, and yet all beings are found to 
rove about in this empty and homeless abode, (i.e., in the Divine Mind). 


62. Here there are no kings, nor their retinue, nor any thing that they have 
on earth. Vidtratha asked: — If it is so, then tell me goddess! how I happened 
to have these dependents here? 


63. A man is rich in his own mind and spirit, and is it not so ordained by 
the Divine mind and spirit also? If not, then the world must appear as a mere 
dream, and all these men and things are but creatures of our dreams. 


64. Tell me goddess, what things are spiritually true and false, and how are 
we to distinguish the one from the other. 


65. Saraswati answered: — Know prince that, those who have known the 
only knowable one, and are assimilated to the nature of pure understanding, 


view nothing as real in the world, except the vacuous intellect within 
themselves. 


66. The misconception of the serpent in a rope being removed, the fallacy 
of the rope is removed also, so the unreality of the world being known, the 
error of its existence, also ceases to exist. 


67. Knowing the falsity of water in the mirage, no one thirsts after it 
anymore, so knowing the falsehood of dreams, no one thinks himself dead as 
he had dreamt. The fear of dreaming death may overtake the dying, but it can 
never assail the living in his dream. 


68. He whose soul is enlightened with the clear light of the autumnal moon 
of his pure intellect, is never misled to believe his own existence or that of 
others, by the false application of the terms, I, thou, this, efc. 


69. As the sage was sermonizing in this manner, the day departed to its 
evening service with the setting sun. The assembly broke with mutual 
greetings to perform their ablutions, and it met again with the rising sun, after 
dispersion of the gloom of night. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
Philosophy of Dreaming. Swapnam or Somnum. 


The man who is devoid of understanding, ignorant and unacquainted with the 
All-pervading principle, thinks the unreal world as real, and as compact as 
adamant. 


2. As a child is not freed from his fear of ghosts until his death, so the 
ignorant man never gets rid of his fallacy of the reality of the unreal world, as 
long as he lives. 


3. As the solar heat causes the error of water in the mirage to the deer and 
unwary people, so the unreal world appears as real to the ignorant part of 
mankind. 


4. As the false dream of one’s death, appears to be true in the dreaming 
state, so the false world seems to be a field of action and gain to the deluded 
man. 


5. As one not knowing what is gold, views a golden bracelet as a mere 
bracelet, and not as gold, (i.e., who takes the form and not the substance for 
reality), so are the ignorant ever misled by formal appearances, without a 
knowledge of the causal element. 


6. As the ignorant view a city, a house, a hill and an elephant, as they are 
presented before him, so the visibles are all taken only as they are seen, and 
not what they really are. 


7. As strings of pearls are seen in the sunny sky, and various paints and 
taints in the plumage of the peacock, so the phenomenal world, presents its 
false appearances for sober realities. 


8. Know life as a long sleep, and the world with myself and thyself, are the 
visions of its dream; we see many other persons in this sleepy dream, none of 
whom is real, as you will now learn from me. 


9. There is but one All-pervading, quiet, and spiritually substantial reality. 
It is of the form of unintelligible intellect, and an immense outspreading 
vacuity. 


10. It is omnipotent, and all in all by itself, and is of the form as it 
manifests itself everywhere. 


11. Hence the citizens that you see in this visionary city, are but transient 
forms of men, presented in your dream by that Omnipotent Being. 


12. The mind of the viewer, remains in its self-same state amidst the sphere 
of his dreams, and represents the images thought of by itself in that visionary 
sphere of mankind. (So the Divine Mind presents its various images to the 
sight of men in this visionary sphere of the world, which has nothing 
substantial in it). 


13. The knowing mind has the same knowledge of things, both in its 
waking as well as dreaming states, and it is by an act of the percipient mind, 
that this knowledge is imprinted as true in the conscious souls of men. 


14. Rama said: — If the persons seen in the dream are unreal, then tell me 
Sir, what is that fault in the embodied soul, which makes them appear as 
realities. 


15. Vasishtha replied: — The cities and houses, which are seen in dreams 
are in reality nothing. It is only the illusion, (mdyd), of the embodied soul, 
which makes them appear as true like those seen in the waking state, in this 
visionary world. 


16. I will tell you in proof of this, that in the beginning of creation the self- 
born Brahma himself, had the notions of all created things, in the form of 
visionary appearances, as in a dream and their subsequent development, by 
the will of the creator; hence their creator is as unreal as their notions and 
appearances in the dream. 


17. Learn then this truth of me, that this world is a dream, and that you and 
all other men have your sleeping dreams, contained in your waking dreams of 
this visionary world. (i.e., The one is a night dream and the other a day dream, 
and equally untrue in their substance). 


18. If the scenes that are seen in your sleeping dream, have no reality in 
them, how then can you expect those in your day dreams to be real at all? 


19. As you take me for a reality, so do I also take you and all other things 
for realities likewise, and such is the case with everybody in this world of 
dreams. 


20. As I appear an entity to you in this world of lengthened dreams, so you 
too appear an actual entity to me, and so it is with all in their protracted 
dreaming. 


21. Rama asked: — If both these states of dreaming are alike, then tell me, 
why the dreamer in sleep, does not upon his waking, think the visions in his 
dream, to be as real as those of his day dreaming state? 


22. Vasishtha replied: — Yes, the day dreaming is of the same nature as 
night dreams, in which the dreamt objects appear to be real, but it is upon the 
waking from the one, as upon the death of the day dreamer, that both these 
visions are found to vanish in empty air. 


23. As the objects of your night dreams do not subsist in time or place upon 
your waking, so also those of your day dream, can have no subsistence upon 
death. 


24. Thus is everything unreal, which appears real for the present, and it 
disappears into an airy nothing at last, though it might appear as charming as a 
fairy form in the dream. 


25. There is one Intelligence that fills all space, and appears as everything 
both within and without everybody. It is only by our illusive conception of it, 
that we take it in different lights. 


26. As one picks up a jewel he happens to meet with in a treasure house, so 
do we lay hold on anything, with which the vast Intellect is filled according to 
our own liking. (Here we find the free agency of human will). 


27. The goddess of intelligence, having thus caused the germ of true 
knowledge, to sprout forth in the mind of the prince, by sprinkling the 
ambrosial drops of her wisdom over it, thus spake to him in the end: — 


28. I have told you all this for the sake of Lila, and now, good prince, we 
shall take leave of you, and these illusory scenes of the world. 


29. Vasishtha said: — The intelligent prince, being thus gently addressed 
by the goddess of wisdom, besought her in a submissive tone. 


30. Viduratha said: — Your visit, O most bounteous goddess, cannot go for 
nothing, when we poor mortals cannot withhold our bounty from our 
suppliant visitants. 


31. I will quit this body to repair to another world, as one passes from one 
chain of dreams into another. 


32. Look upon me, thy suppliant, with kindness, and deign to confer the 
favour I ask of thee, because the great never disdain to grant the prayers of 
their suppliants. 


33. Ordain that this virgin daughter of my minister, may accompany me to 


the region, where I shall be led, that we may have spiritual joy in each other’s 
company hereafter. 


34. Saraswati said: — Go now prince to the former palace of your past life, 
and there reign without fear, in the enjoyment of true pleasure. Know prince, 
that our visits never fail to fulfil the best wishes of our supplicants. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
Burning of the City. 


The goddess added: — Know further, O prince! that you are destined to fall in 
this great battle, and will have your former realm, presented to you in the 
same manner as before. 


2. Your minister and his maiden daughter will accompany you to your 
former city, and you shall enter your lifeless corpse, lying in state in the 
palace. 


3. We shall fly there as winds before you, and you will follow us 
accompanied by the minister and his virgin daughter as one returning to his 
native country. 


4. Your courses thereto will be as slow or swift as those of horses, 
elephants, asses, or camels, but our course is quite different from any of these. 


5. As the prince and the goddess were going on with this sweet 
conversation, there arrived a man on horse-back before them in great hurry 
and confusion. 


6. He said: — Lord! I come to tell that, there are showers of darts and 
disks, and swords and clubs, falling upon us as rain, from the hostile forces, 
and they have been forcing upon us as a flood on all sides. 


7. They have been raining their heavy weapons upon us at pleasure, like 
fragments of rocks hurled down from the heads of high hills, by the impetuous 
gusts of a hurricane. 


8. There they have set fire to our rock-like city, which like a wild fire, is 
raging on all sides. It is burning and ravaging with chat chat sounds, and 
hurling the houses with a hideous noise. 


9. The smoke rising as heaving hills, have overspread the skies like 
diluvian clouds, and the flame of fire, ascending on high, resembles the 
phoenix flying in the sky. 


10. Vasishtha said: — As the royal marshal was delivering with trepidation 


this unpleasant intelligence, there arose a loud cry without, filling the sky with 
its uproar, (hallahalloo-kold halam). 


11. The twanging, (tankdra), of bow strings drawn to the ears, the rustling, 
(sarsara), of flying arrows flung with full force; the loud roaring, (bringhana), 
of furious elephants, and the shrieks, (chitkdra), of frightened ones. 


12. The gorgeous elephants bursting in the city with a clattering 
(chatchata) sound, and the high halloos, (halahala) of citizens, whose houses 
have been burnt down on the ground: — (Here dagdhaddra Arabic 
daghdaghad-ddr, means both a burnt house and also a burnt wife). 


13. The falling and flying of burnt embers with a crackling noise, (tankdra), 
and the burning of raging fire with a hoarse sound, (dhaghdhaga, Arabic 
daghdagha, Bengali dhakdhak): — 


14. All these were heard and seen by the goddesses and the prince and his 
minister, from an opening of the tent, and the city was found to be in a blaze 
in the darkness of the night. 


15. It was as the conflagration or fiery ocean of the last day, and the city 
was covered by clouds of the hostile army, with their flashing weapons, 
waving on all sides. 


16. The flame rose as high as the sky, melted down big edifices like hills by 
the all-dissolving fire of destruction. 


17. Bodies of thick clouds roared on high, and threatened the people, like 
the clamour (kala-kala) of the gangs of stout robbers, that were gathered on 
the ground for plunder and booty. 


18. The heavens were hidden under clouds of smoke, rolling as the shades 
of Pushkara and Avarta, and the flames of fire, were flashing, like the golden 
peaks of Meru. 


19. Burning cinders and sparks of fire, were glittering like meteors and 
stars in the sky, and the blazing houses and towers glared as burning 
mountains in the midst. 


20. The relics of the forces were beset by the spreading flames of clouds of 
fire, and the half-burnt citizens (with their bitter cries), were kept from flight, 
for fear of the threatening enemy abroad. 


21. Sleets of arrowy sparks flying in the air on all sides, and showers of 
weapons falling in every way, burnt and pierced the citizens in large numbers. 


22. The greatest and most expert champions, were crashed under the feet of 


elephants in fighting, and the roads were heaped with treasures, wrested from 
the robbers in their retreat. 


23. There were wailings of men and women at the falling of fire-brands 
upon them, and the splitting of splinters and the slitting of timbers emitted a 
phat-phat noise all around. 


24. Big blocks of burning wood were blown up, blazing as burning suns in 
the air, and heaps of embers filled the face of the earth with living fire. 


25. The cracking of combustible woods and the bursting of burning 
bamboos, the cries of the parched brutes and the howling of the soldiers, re- 
echoed in the air. 


26. The flaming fire was quenched after consuming the royalty to ashes, 
and the devouring flame ceased after it had reduced everything to cinders. 


27. The sudden outbreak of the fire was as the outburst of house breaking 
robbers upon the sleeping inhabitants, and it made its prey of everything, 
(whether living or lifeless), that fell in its way. 


28. At this moment the prince Vidtratha heard a voice, proceeding from his 
soldiers, at the sight of their wives flying from the scorching flames. 


29. Oh! the high winds, that have blown the flames to the tops of our 
household trees, with their rustling sound, (kharakhara), and hindered our 
taking shelter under their cooling umbrage. 


30. Woe for the burning of our wives, who were as cold as frost to our 
bodies before, (by their assuaging the smart of every pain), and whose ashes 
now rest in our breasts, like the lime of shells, 7.e., in the sublimated state of 
spiritual bodies, (stikshma-dehas). 


31. Oh! the mighty power of fire, that has set to flame the forelocks of our 
fair damsels, and is burning the braids of their hair, like blades of grass or 
straws. 


32. The curling smoke is ascending on high, like a whirling and long 
meandering river in the air, and the black and white fumes of fire, resemble 
the dark stream of Yamuna in one place, and the milky path of the ethereal 
Ganga in another. 


33. Streams of smoke bearing the brands of fire on high, dazzled the sight 
of the charioteers of heaven by their bubbling sparks. 


34. There are our fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, relations, and suckling 
babes, all burnt alive in the livid flames, and here are we burning in grief for 


them in these houses, which have been spared by the devouring fire. 


35. Lo! there the howling fire is fast stretching to these abodes, and here the 
cinders are falling as thick as the frost of Meru. 


36. Behold the direful darts and missiles dropping down as the driving rain, 
and penetrating the windows, like bodies of gnats in the shade of evening. 


37. The flashing spears and flaming fire, flaring above the watery ocean of 
the sky, resemble the sub-marine fire ascending to heaven. 


38. The smoke is rising in clouds, and the flames are tapering in the form of 
towers, and all that was humid and verdant, is sucked and dried up, as the 
hearts of the dispassionate. 


39. The trees are broken down by the raging element, like posts of enraged 
elephants, and they are falling with a cracking noise, (kata-kata), as if they 
were screaking at their fall. 


40. The trees in the orchards, now flourishing in their luxuriance of fruits 
and flowers, are left bare by the burning fire, like householders bereft of their 
properties. 


41. Boys abandoned by their parents in the darkness of the night, were 
either pierced by flying arrows or crushed under the falling houses, in their 
flight through the streets. 


42. The elephants posted at the front of the army, got frightened at the 
flying embers driven by the winds, and fled with loud screaming at the fall of 
the burning houses upon them. 


43. Oh! the pain of being put to the sword, is not more grievous, than that 
of being burnt by the fire, or smashed under the stones of the thundering 
engine. 


44. The streets are filled with domestic animals and cattle of all kinds, that 
are let loose from their folds and stalls, to raise their commingled cries like 
the confused noise of battle in the blocked up paths. 


45. The weeping women were passing as lotus flowers on land, with their 
lotus like faces and feet and palms, and drops of tears fell like fluttering bees 
from their lotiform eyes and wet apparel upon the ground. 


46. The red taints and spots of alakdvali, blazed as asoka flowers upon their 
foreheads and cheeks. 


47. Alack for pity! that the furious flame of fire, should singe the black bee- 
like eyelids of our deer-eyed fairies, like the ruthless victor, that delights in 


his acts of inhumanity. 


48. O the bond of connubial love! that the faithful wife never fails to follow 
her burning lord, and cremates herself in the same flame with him, (this shows 
the practice of concremation to be older than the days of Valmiki and 
Viswamitra). 


49. The elephant being burnt in his trunk, in breaking the burning post to 
which he was tied by the leg, ran with violence to a lake of lotuses, in which 
he fell dead. (Here is a play upon the homonymous word, “pushkara,” in its 
triple sense of a lake, a lotus, and the proboscis of an elephant). 


50. The flames of fire flashing like flitting lightnings amidst the clouds of 
smoke in the air, were darting the darts of burning coals like bolts of thunder 
in showers. 


51. Lord! the sparks of fire sparkling amidst the dusky clouds, appear as 
glittering gems in the bosom of the airy ocean, and seem by their twirling to 
gird the crown of heaven with the girdle of Pleiades. 


52. The sky was reddened by the light of the flaming fires, and appeared as 
the courtyard of Death, dyed with purple hues in joy for reception of the souls 
of the dead. 


53. Alas! the day and want of manners! that the royal dames are carried 
away by these armed ruffians by force. (O tempores, O mores). 


54. Behold them dragged in the streets from their stately edifices, and 
strewing their paths with wreaths of flowers torn from their necks, while their 
half-burnt locks are hanging loosely upon their bare breasts and bosoms. 


55. Lo! their loose raiments uncovering their backs and loins, and the 
jewels dropt down, from their wrists, have strewn the ground with gems. 


56. Their necklaces are torn and their pearls are scattered about, their 
bodies are bared of their bodices, and their breasts appear to view in their 
golden hue. 


57. Their shrill cries and groans rising above the war cry, choked their 
breath and split their sides, and they fell insensible with their eyes dimmed by 
ceaseless floods of tears. 


58. They fell in a body with their arms twisted about the necks of one 
another, and the ends of their cloths tied to each other’s, and in this way they 
were dragged by force of the ruffians, with their bodies mangled in blood. 


59. “Ah! who will save them from this state,” — cried the royal soldiers, 


with their piteous looks on the sad plight of the females and shedding big 
drops of their tears like lotuses. 


60. The bright face of the sky turned black at the horrible sight, and it 
looked with its blue lotus-like eyes of the clouds, on the fair lotus-like 
damsels thus scattered on the ground. 


61. Thus was the goddess of royal prosperity, decorated as she was with her 
waving and pendant locks, her flowing garments, flowery chaplets and 
gemming ornaments, brought to her end like these ladies, after her enjoyment 
of the pleasures of royalty and gratification of all her desires. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
Spiritual Interpretation of the Vision. 


Vasishtha said: — At this instant the great queen, who was in the bloom of 
youthful beauty, entered the camp of Viduratha, as the goddess of grace pops 
upon the lotus flower. 


2. She was decorated with pendant wreaths of flowers and necklaces, and 
accompanied by a train of her youthful companions and handmaids, all 
terrified with fear. 


3. With her face as bright as the moon and her form as fair as the lily, she 
appeared as a luminary of heaven, with her teeth shining as sets of stars, and 
her bosom throbbing with fear. 


4. Then the king was informed by one of her companions about the fate of 
the warfare, which resembled the onset of demons upon the Apsara tribe. 


5. Lord! this lady, — said she, — has fled with us from her seraglio, to take 
refuge under thy arms, as a tender creeper seeks the shelter of a tree, from a 
rude gust of wind. 


6. Behold! the ravishers ravishing the wives of the citizens with their 
uplifted arms, like the swelling waves of the sea carrying away the arbours of 
the bank in their rapid current. 


7. The guards of the royal harem are all crushed to death by the haughty 
marauders, as the sturdy trees of the forest are broken down by the furious 
tornado. 


8. Our armies, frightened by the enemy from afar, dare not approach the 
falling city, as nobody ventures to rescue the lotus beds from a flood, under 
the threatening thunders of a rainy night. 


9. The hostile force have poured upon the city in terrible numbers, and 
having set it on fire, are shouting loudly under the clouds of smoke, with their 
weapons brandishing on all sides. 


10. The handsome ladies are dragged by the hair from amidst their families, 


in the manner of screaming cranes, caught and carried away by the cruel 
fowlers and fishermen. 


11. Now we have brought this exuberant tender creeper to thee, that thou 
mayst save her from similar fate by thy might. 


12. Hearing this, he looked at the goddesses and said, now will I go to the 
war from here, and leave this my lady as an humble bee at your lotus feet. 


13. Saying so, the king rose in a rage from his seat and sprang like the 
enraged lion from the den, when pierced and pressed by the tusk of a furious 
elephant. 


14. The widowed Lila beheld the queen Lila to be exactly of her form and 
features, and took her for a true inflexion of herself in a mirror. 


15. Then said the enlightened Lila to Saraswati: — Tell me, O goddess! 
how this lady here is exactly as myself, she is what I have been before, and 
how she came to be as myself. 


16. I see this prime minister with all these soldiers and citizens, these forces 
and vehicles, to be the same as mine, and situated in the same place and 
manner as before. 


17. How is it then, O goddess! that they came to be placed in this place. I 
see them as images situated within and without the mirror of my mind, and 
know not whether these be living beings, (or the false chimeras of my 
imagination). 


18. Saraswati replied: — All our external perceptions of things, are the 
immediate effects of our internal conceptions of them. The intellect has the 
knowledge of all the intelligibles in it, as the mind has the impressions of 
mental objects in itself. (Or in other words: — the intellect is possessed of all 
intelligence, like the mind of its thoughts, as they present themselves in 
dreams. — Gloss). 


19. The external world appears in an instant in the same form and manner 
to one, as he has its notion and impression in his intellect and mind, and no 
distance of time or place, nor any intermediate cause can create any difference 
in them. 


20. The inward world is seen on the outside, as the internal impressions of 
our minds, appear to be seen without us in our dreams. Whatever is within us, 
the same appears without us, as in our dreams and desires, and in all our 
imaginations and fancies of objects. 


21. It is the constant habitude of your mind, that presented these things as 


realities to your sight, and you saw your husband in the same state in which 
you thought him to be, when he died in that city of yours. 


22. It is the same place wherein he exists at present, and is presented with 
the same objects of his thought at present as he had at that moment. Anything 
that appears to be different in this state, proceeds from the turn of his mind of 
thinking it so before. 


23. All that appears real to him, is as unreal as his dream or desire, and the 
creation of his fancy, for everything appears to be the same as it is thought of 
in the mind. (All external objects are representations of their prototypes in the 
mind). 


24. Say, therefore, what truth can there be in these visionary objects, which 
are altogether unsubstantial as dreams, and vanish in the end into airy nothing. 


25. Know then everything to be no better than nothing, and as a dream 
proves to be nothing upon waking, so is waking also a dream and equally 
nothing at death. 


26. Death in life time is a nullity, and life in death becomes null and 
extinct, and these extinctions of life and death, proceed from the fluctuating 
nature of our notions of them. 


27. So there is neither any entity nor nonentity either, but both appear to us 
as fallacies by turns. For what neither was before, nor will be, after a Kalpa = 
creation or dissolution, the same cannot exist today or in any Yuga = age, 
whether gone before or coming afterwards. 


28. That which is never inexistent, is the ever-existent Brahma, and the 
same is the world. It is in him that we see everything to rise and fall by our 
fallacy, and what we falsely term as the creation or the created. 


29. As phantoms appearing in the vacuum, are all vacant and void, and as 
the waves of the sea, are no other than its water, so do these created things 
exist and appear in Brahma only. 


30. As the minutiz appearing in the air, vanish in the air, and as the dust 
driven by the winds, are lost in the winds, so the false notions of yourself and 
myself, are lost in that Supreme self, in which all things rise and fall like 
waves of the ocean. 


31. What reliance can there be in this dust of creation, which is no more 
than the water of the mirage? The knowledge of individualities is mere 
fallacy, when everything is united in that sole unity. 


32. We see apparitions in the dark, though the darkness itself is no 


apparition, so our lives and deaths are the false notions of our error, and the 
whole existence is equally the production of gross error, (mdyd). 


33. All this is Himself, for He is the great Kalpa or will which produces 
everything; it is He that exists when all things are extinct in Him; and 
therefore, these appearances, are neither real nor unreal of themselves. 


34. But to say both, (the real and unreal), to be Brahma, is a contradiction; 
therefore, it is He, who fills the infinity of space, and abides equally in all 
things and their minutest particles. 


35. Wherever the spirit of Brahma abides, and even in the minute 
animalcule, it views the whole world in itself, like one thinking on the heat 
and cold of fire and frost, has the same sensation within himself at that 
moment. (Vide Hume). 


36. So doth the pure intellect perceive the Holy Spirit of God within itself, 
just as one sees the particles of light flying in his closet at sunrise. 


37. So do these multitudes of worlds, move about as particles in the infinite 
space of the Divine mind, as the particles of odoriferous substances oscillate 
in the empty air. 


38. In this manner does this world abide in its incorporeal state in the mind 
of God, with all its modifications of existence and inexistence, emanation and 
absorption, of its condensation and subtilization, and its mobility and rest. 


39. But you must know all these modes and these conditions of being to 
belong to material bodies only and not to the spirit, which is unconditioned 
and indivisible, (i.e., without attributes and parts). 


40. And as there is no change or division of one’s own soul, so there is no 
partition or variation of the Supreme Spirit. It is according to the ideas in our 
minds, that we view things in their different aspects before us. 


41. Yet the word world, — visva, — all, is not a meaningless term, it 
means the all as contained in Brahma (who is to pan). Therefore, it is both 
real and unreal at the same time like the fallacy of a snake in a rope. 


42. It is the false notion (of the snake), that makes the true (rope) to appear 
as the untrue snake to us, which we are apt to take for the true snake itself, so 
we take the Divine Intellect, which is the prime cause of all, as a living soul, 
(like ours), by mistake. 


43. It is this notion (of the living soul), that makes us to think ourselves as 
living beings, which whether it be false or true, is like the appearance of the 
world in empty air. 


44. Thus these little animals delight themselves with their own 
misconceived idea of being living beings, while there are others who think 
themselves so, by their preconceived notions as such. 


45. Some there are that have no preconceived notions, and others that retain 
the same as or somewhat different notions of themselves than before. 
Somewhere the inborn notions are predominant, and sometimes they are 
entirely lost. 


46. Our preconceived notions of ourselves, represent unrealities as realities 
to our minds, and present the thoughts of our former family and birth, and the 
same occupations and professions before us (as also the enjoyments we had 
before and no more existent at present). 


47. Such are the representations of your former ministers and citizens, 
imprinted as realities in your soul, together with the exact time and place and 
manner of their functions, as before. 


48. And as the intelligence of all things, is present in the omniscient spirit 
of God, so is the idea of royalty inherent in the soul of the prince, (i.e., like the 
ex-king Lear, he thinks himself every inch a king). 


49. This notion of his goes before him as his shadow in the air, with the 
same stature and features, and the same acts and movements as he had before. 


50. In this manner, Lila! Know this world to be but a shadowy reflexion of 
the eternal ideas of God, and this reflection is caught by or refracted in the 
consciousness of all animal souls as in a prismatic mirror. 


51. Everything shows itself in every place in the form in which it is, so 
whatever there is in the living soul, casts out a reflexion of itself, and a 
shadow of it is caught by the intellect, which is situated without it. (The mind 
is a mirror of the images in the soul). 


52. Here is the sky containing the world, which contains this earth, wherein 
you and myself and this prince are situated, as reflexions of the One Ego only. 
Know all these to be contained within the vacuous womb of the Intellect, and 
to remain as tranquil and transparent as vacuity itself. 


CHAPTER XLV. 
Theism Consisting in True Knowledge. 


Saraswati continued: — Know Lila! this Vidtratha, thy husband, will lose his 
life in this battle-field, and his soul will repair to the sepulchre in the inner 
apartment, where it will resume its former state. 


2. Upon hearing these words of the goddess, the second Lila, who was 
standing by, bent herself lowly before the goddess, and addressed her with her 
folded palms. 


3. The second Lila’s speech. — Goddess! the genius of intelligence is ever 
adored by me, and she gives me her visits in my nightly dreams. 


4. I find thee here exactly of her likeness, therefore, give me thy blessing, 
thou goddess with the beauteous face. 


5. Vasishtha said: — The goddess being thus addressed by the lady, 
remembered her faith and reliance in her, and then spake with complacence to 
the lady standing suppliant before her. 


6. The goddess said: — I am pleased my child, with thy unfailing and 
unslakened adoration of me all thy lifetime, now say what thou askest of me. 


7. The second Lila said: — Ordain, O goddess, that I may accompany my 
husband with this body of mine to whatever place he is destined to go, after 
his death in the war. 


8. The goddess replied: — Be it so my child, that hast worshipped me with 
all diligence and without fail, with flowers, incense, and offerings. 


9. Vasishtha said: — The second Lila being gladdened by this blessing of 
the goddess, the first Lila, was much puzzled in her mind at the difference of 
their states. 


10. The first Lila said: — Those who are desirous of truth, and they whose 
desires lean towards godliness, have all their wishes fulfilled without delay 
and fail. 


11. Then tell me, goddess! why could I not keep company with my 


Braéhmana husband with my body of the Brahmanj, but had to be taken to him 
in the hilly mansion after my death, (and reproduction in the present form). 


12. The goddess answered, saying: — Know, O excellent lady! that I have 
no power to do anything, but everything happens to pass according to the 
desire of the living being. 


13. Know me only as the presiding divinity of wisdom, and I reveal 
everything according to my knowledge of it. It is by virtue of the intellectual 
powers as exhibited in every being, that it attains its particular end. 


14. It is according to the development of the mental powers of living beings 
in every state, that it obtains its object in the manner and in the same state as it 
aims at. 


15. You had attained the powers of your understanding by your 
devotedness to my service, and have always desired of me for being liberated 
from flesh. 


16. I have accordingly awakened your understanding in that way, whereby 
you have been able to arrive at your present state of purity. 


17. It was by cause of your constant desire of liberation, that you have 
gained the same state, by enlargement (of the powers) of your intellect. 


18. Whoever exerts his bodily powers according to the dictates of his 
understanding, is sure to succeed in gaining his object sooner or later. 


19. Performance of austerities and adoration of gods, are as vain without 
cultivation of the intellect, as to expect the falling of fruits from the sky. 


20. Without cultivation of the intellect and exertion of manly powers, there 
is no way to success; do therefore as you may choose for yourself. 


21. It is verily the state of one’s mind, that leads his internal soul to that 
state which it thinks upon, and to that prosperity which it attempts to obtain. 


22. Now distinguish between what is desirable or disagreeable to you, and 
choose that which is holy and perfect, and you will certainly arrive to it. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
Onslaught of Vidtratha. 


Rama said: — Relate to me the acts of Vidtratha, after he went out enraged 
from the camp, and left the ladies and the goddess talking in that manner. 


2. Vasishtha said: — Vidtratha left his camp in company with a large body 
of his companions like the bright moon beset by a host of stars. 


3. He was in armour and girt by laces and girdles, and thus attired in his 
martial habit, he went forth amidst the loud war cry of vae victis, like the god 
Indra going to battle. 


4. He gave orders to the soldiers and was informed of the battle array, and 
having given directions to his captains, he mounted his chariot. 


5. It was adorned with mountings resembling the pinnacles of mountains 
and beset by five flags fringed with strings of pearls and gems, resembling a 
celestial car. 


6. The iron hoops of its wheels flashed with their golden pegs, and the long 
and beautiful shaft of the car, rang with the tinkling of pearls which were 
suspended to it. 


7. It was drawn by long necked, swift and slender horses of the best breed 
and auspicious marks, that seemed to fly in the air by their swiftness and 
bearing aloft a heavenly car with some god in it. 


8. Being impatient of the swiftness of the winds, they spurred them with 
their hinder heels and left them behind, and sped the forepart of their bodies 
as if to devour the air, impeding their course. 


9. The car was drawn by eight coursers with their manes hanging down 
their necks like flappers, and white spots or circlets resembling the disks of 
moon on their foreheads, and filling the eight sides around with their hoarse 
neighing. 


10. At this time there rose a loud noise of the elephants, resounding like 
drums from the hollows of the distant hills. 


11. Loud clamours, (kala-kalas), were raised by the infuriate soldiers, and 
the tinkling of their belted trinkets, (kinkini), and clashing of their weapons, 
rang afar in the open air. 


12. The crackling (chatachata) of the bows, and the wheezing (shitkara) of 
the arrows, joined with the jangle (jhanjhana) of armours, by their clashing 
against one another, raised a confused hubbub all around. 


13. The sparkling (kanatkara) of blazing fire, and the mutual challenge of 
the champions, the painful shrieks of the wounded and the piteous cry of 
captives, were seen and heard on all sides. 


14. The mingled sounds thickened in the air, and filled its cavity and its 
sides as with solid stones and capable of being clutched in the hands. 


15. Clouds of dust flew as fast and thick into the air, that they seemed to be 
the crust or strata of the earth, rising upward to block the path of the sun in the 
sky. 


16. The great city was hid in the dark womb of the overspreading dust, 
(rajas), as the ignorant state of man is covered in darkness by the rising 
passion, (rajas), of juvenescence. 


17. The burning lights became as dim, as the fading stars of heaven by day 
light, and the darkness of night became as thick, as the devils of darkness 
gather their strength at night. 


18. The two Lilas saw the great battle with the virgin daughter of the 
minister from the tent, and they had their eyes enlightened with farsightedness 
by favour of the goddess. 


19. Now there was an end of the flashing and clashing of the hostile arms in 
the city, as the flash and crash of sub-marine fires were put to an end by the 
all-submerging floods of the universal deluge. 


20. Viduratha collected his forces and without considering the superiority 
of the hostile power, pressed himself forward amidst them, as the great Meru 
rushed into the waters of the great deluge. 


21. Now the twanging of the bow strings emitted a clattering (Chatachata) 
sound, and the forces of the enemy advanced in battle array, like bodies of 
clouds with rainbows amidst them. 


22. Many kinds of missiles flew as falcons in the air, and the black steel 
waved with a dark glare owing to the massacres they made. 


23. The clashing swords flashed with living flames of fire by their striking 


against one another, and showers of arrows whistled like hissing rainfalls in 
the air. 


24. Two edged saws pierced the bodies of the warriors, and the flinging 
weapons hurtled in the air by their clashing at and crashing of each other. 


25. The darkness of the night was put to flight by the blaze of the weapons, 
and the whole army was pierced by arrows, sticking as the hairs on their 
bodies. 


26. Headless trunks moved about as players in the horrid solemnity of the 
god of death, (Yama), and the furies fled about at the dint of war, like the 
raving lasses at Bacchanal revelries. 


27. Elephants fighting with their tusks, sent a clattering noise in the air, and 
the stones flung from the slings, flew as a flowing stream in the sky. 


28. Bodies of men were falling dead on the ground, like the dried leaves of 
forests blown away by blasts, and streams of blood were running in the field 
of battle, as if the heights of war were pouring down the floods of death 
below. 


29. The dust of the earth was set down by the floods of blood, and the 
darkness was dispelled by the blaze of weapons; all clamour ceased in intense 
fighting, and the fear for life, was lost under the stern resolution of death. 


30. The fighting was stern without a cry or noise, like the pouring of rain in 
the breezeless sky, and with the glitter of swords in the darkened air, like the 
flashes of forky lightnings amidst the murky clouds. 


31. The darts were flying about with a hissing noise, (khad-khada), and the 
crow-bars hit one another with a harsh, (taktaka) sound, large weapons were 
struck upon one another with a jarring noise, (jhanjhana), and the dreadful 
war raged direfully in the dim darkness (timitimi) of the night. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 
Encounter of Sindhu and Vidtratha. 


Vasishtha said: — As the war was waging thus furiously between the two 
armies, the two Lilds addressed the goddess of knowledge and said: — 


2. “Tell us, O goddess! what unknown cause prevents our husband to gain 
the victory in this war, notwithstanding your good grace to him, and his 
repelling the hostile elephants in the combat.” 


3. Saraswati replied: — Know ye daughters, that I was ever solicited by 
Viduratha’s enemy to confer him victory in battle, which your husband never 
craved of me. 


4. He lives and enjoys his life as it was desired by him, while his antagonist 
gains the conquest according to his aim and object. 


5. Knowledge is contained in the consciousness of every living being, and 
rewards every one according to the desire to which it is directed. 


6. My nature, like that of all things, is as unchangeable as the heat of fire, 
(which never changes to cold). So the nature of Vidtratha’s knowledge of 
truth, and his desire of liberation lead him to the like result (and not to 
victory). 


7. The intelligent Lila also will be liberated with him, and not the 
unintelligent one, who by her nature is yet unprepared for that highest state of 
bliss. 


8. This enemy of Vidutratha, the king of Sinde, has long worshipped me for 
his victory in war, whereby the bodies of Vidtratha and his wife must fall into 
his hands. 


9. Thou girl wilt also have thy liberation like hers in course of time, but ere 
that, this enemy of yours, — the king of Sinde, will reign victorious in this 
earth. 


10. Vasishtha said: — As the goddess was speaking in this manner, the sun 
appeared on his rising hill to behold the wondrous sight of the forces in 


fighting. 


11. The thick mists of night disappeared like the hosts of the enemy, 
(Sinde), and left the forces of Vidtratha to glitter as stars at the approach of 
night. 


12. The hills and dales, and the land and water gradually appeared to sight, 
and the world seemed to reappear to view from amidst the dark ocean of the 
(deluge). 


13. The bright rays of the rising sun radiated on all sides like the streams of 
liquid gold, and made the hills appear as the bodies of warriors besmeared 
with (blood). 


14. The sky seemed as an immense field of battle, stretched over by the 
radiant rays of the sun, (Karas), likening the shining arms, (Karas), of the 
warriors, shaking in their serpentine mood. 


15. The helmets on their heads raised their lotus-like tops on high, and the 
rings about their ears blazed with their gemming glare below. 


16. The pointed weapons were as fixed as the snouts of unicorns, and the 
flying darts fled about as butterflies in the air. The bloody field presented a 
picture of the ruddy dawn and dusk, and the dead bodies on the ground, 
represented the figures of motionless saints in their Yoga. 


17. Necklaces like snakes overhung their breasts, and the armours like 
sloughs of serpents covered their bodies. The flags were flying like crests of 
creepers on high, and the legs of the warriors stood as pillars in the field. 


18. Their long arms were as branches of trees, and the arrows formed a 
bush of reeds; the flash of weapons spread as a verdant meadow all around, 
while their blades blazed with the lustre of the long-leaved ketaka flowers. 


19. The long lines of weapons formed as rows of bamboos and bushes of 
brambles, and their mutual clashing emitted sparks of fire like clusters of the 
red asoka flowers. 


20. The bands of Siddhas were flying away with their leaders from the air, 
to avert the weapons which were blazing there with the radiance of the rising 
sun, and forming as it were, a city of gold on high. 


21. The sky re-echoed to the clashing of darts and discuses, of swords and 
spears and of mallets and clubs in the field, and the ground was overflown by 
streams of blood, bearing away the dead bodies of the slain. 


22. The land was strewn with crowbars, lances and spears, and with tridents 


and stones on all sides, and headless bodies were falling hideously, pierced by 
poles and pikes and other instruments of death. 


23. The ghosts and goblins of death were making horrible noise above, and 
the shining cars of Sindhu and Vidtratha, moved with a loud rumbling below. 


24. They appeared as the two luminaries of the sun and moon in heaven, 
and equipped with their various weapons of disks and rods, of crowbars and 
spears, and other missiles besides. 


25. They were both surrounded by thousands of soldiers, and turned about 
as they liked, with loud shouts of their retinues. 


26. Crushed under heavy disks, many fell dead and wounded with loud 
cries, and big elephants were floating lightly on the currents of blood. 


27. The hairs on the heads of dead bodies, floated like weeds in the stream 
of blood, and the floating discuses glided like the disks of the moon, reflected 
in the purple streamlet. 


28. The jingling (jhanat) of gemming ornaments, and the tinkling (ranat) 
bells of war carriages, with the flapping (patat) of flags by the wind, filled the 
field with a confused noise. 


29. Numbers of valiant as well as dastardly soldiers followed their 
respective princes, some bleeding under the spears of Kuntas and others 
pierced by the arrows of bowyers. 


30. Then the two princes turned round their chariots in circling rings over 
the ground, and amidst phalanxes armed with all sorts of destructive weapons. 


31. Each confronted the other with his arms, and having met one another 
face to face, commenced showering forth his arrows with the pattering sound 
of hailstones. 


32. They both threatened one another with the roaring of loud surges and 
clouds, and the two lions among men, darted their arrows upon one another in 
their rage. 


33. They flung their missiles in the air in the form of stones and malls, and 
some faced like swords, and others headed as mallets. 


34. Some were as sharp-edged disks, and some as curved as battle axes, 
some were as pointed as pikes and spears, and others as bars and rods in their 
forms, and some were of the shape of tridents, and others as bulky as blocks 
of stones. 


35. These missives were falling as fully and as fast as blocks of stones, 


which are hurled down from high and huge rocks, by gusts of blustering 
hurricanes. And the meeting of the two armigerent powers, was as the 
confluence of the Indus and the sea, with tremendous roaring, and mutual 
collision and clashing. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 
Description of Daivastras or Supernatural 
Weapons. 


Vasishtha said: — Raja Vidtratha, finding the high shouldered Sindhu-raja 
before him, was enraged like the raging sun, in his mid-day fury. 


2. The twanging of his bow resounded in the air on all sides, and growled 
as loudly as the howling of winds in the caverns of mountains. 


3. He drew his arrows from the dark quiver, and darted them like the rays 
of the sun rising from the womb of night. 


4. Each arrow flung from the bowstring, flew as thousands in the air, and 
fell as millions on the ground. (The arrow or bdna is a name given to bombs 
which burst out into unnumbered shells). 


5. The king Sindhu was equally expert in his bowmanship, as both of these 
bowyers owed their skill in archery to the favour of Vishnu. 


6. Some of these darts were called bolts, which blocked the aerial passages 
as with bolts at their doors, and fell down on the ground with the loud roar of 
thunderbolts. 


7. Others begirt with gold, flew hissing as if blown by the winds in the air, 
and after shining as stars in the sky, fell as blazing meteors on the ground. 


8. Showers of shafts poured forth incessantly from the hands of Vidtratha, 
like the ceaseless torrents of rivers or billows of the sea, and the endless 
radiation of solar rays. 


9. Shells and bullets were flying about as sparks of fire struck out of the 
balls of red-hot iron, and falling as flowers of forests, blown away by gusts of 
wind. 


10. They fell as showers of rainwater, and as the rush of water-falls, and as 
plentifully as the sparks of fire which flew from the burning city of Vidtratha. 


11. The jarring sound (chatchat) of their bowstrings, hushed the clamour of 


the two armies, as a calm quiets the roaring of the raging sea. 


12. The course of the arrows, was as the stream of Ganges, (the milky path) 
in heaven, running towards the king Sindhu, as the river runs to meet the sea, 
(Sindhu). 


13. The shower of arrows flying from the golden bow of the king, was as 
the flood of rain falling under the variegated rainbow in the sky. 


14. Then Lila the native of that city, saw from the window the darts of her 
husband, rushing like the currents of Ganges, against the forces of Sindhu 
resembling a sea. 


15. She understood the flight of those darts to promise victory to her lord, 
and then spoke gladly to Saraswati, with her lotus like face, (Lit. — by 
opening her lotus like mouth). 


16. Be victorious O goddess! and behold victory waiting on the side of my 
lord, whose darts are piercing the rocks, and breaking them to pieces. 


17. As she was uttering these words full of affection (to her lord), the 
goddesses eyed her askance, and smiled at her womanish tenderness of heart. 


18. The flaming (Agastian) fire of Sindhu swallowed the raging sea of 
Viduratha’s arrows, as the sub-marine fire consumes the water, and as Jahnu 
drank the stream of Ganges. 


19. The missive weapons of Sindhu, thwarted the thickening arrows of his 
adversary, and drove them back broken and flying as dust in the empty air. 


20. As an extinguished lamp loses its light in the air, so the flashes of the 
fire arms disappeared in the sky, and nobody knew where they fled. 


21. Having thus dispelled the shower of arrows, he sent a thick cloud of his 
weapons, appearing as hundreds of dead bodies flying in the air. 


22. Viduratha repelled them quickly by means of his better bolts, as a 
hurricane disperses the frightening clouds in the air. 


23. Both the kings being thus baffled in their aims by the opposing arms, 
which were indiscriminately let loose against one another, laid hold on more 
potent missiles (which they had got as gifts of their gods to them). 


24. Sindhu then let fly his magic missile the gift of a Gandharva to him, 
which kept his hostile army all spell-bound except Vidtratha’s self. 


25. Struck with this weapon, the soldiers became as mute as moonstruck, 
staring in their looks, and appearing as dead bodies or as pictures in a 
painting. 


26. As the soldiers of Vidtratha remained exorcised in their files, the king 
employed his instruments of a counter-charm to remove the spell. 


27. This awakened the senses of Vidtratha’s men as the morning twilight 
discloses the bed of lotuses, and the rising sun opens their closed petals to 
light, while Sindhu, like the raging sun, darted his rage upon them. 


28. He flung his serpentine weapons upon them, which bound them as fast 
as a band all about their bodies, and encircled the battle ground and air, like 
snakes twining round the craigs and rocks. 


29. The ground was filled with snakes as the lake with the spreading stalks 
of lotuses, and the bodies of gigantic warriors were begirt by them, like hills 
by huge and horrible hydras. 


30. Everything was overpowered by the poignant power of the poison, and 
the inhabitants of the hills and forests were benumbed by the venomous 
infection. 


31. The smart poison spread a fiery heat all around, and the frozen snows 
like fire-brands sent forth their burning particles which were wafted by the hot 
winds in the air. 


32. The armigerous Vidtratha who was equally skilled in arms, had then 
recourse to his Garuda or serpivorous weapons, which fled like mountainous 
eagles to all sides. 


33. Their golden pinions spread in the sky on all sides, and embroidered the 
air with purple gold, and the flapping of their wings wheezed like a breeze, 
which blew away the poisonous effluvia afar in the air. 


34. It made the snakes breathe out of their nostrils with a hissing, 
resembling the gurgling, (ghurghur), of waters in a whirlpool in the sea. 


35. The flying Garuda weapons devoured the creeping terrene serpents with 
a whistling noise, (salsala), like that of the rising waters, (water-spouts), in 
the act of their suction by Agastya, — the sun. 


36. The face of the ground delivered from its covering of these reptiles, 
again appeared to view, as the surface of the earth re-appeared to light, after 
its deliverance from the waters of the deluge. 


37. The army of Garudas disappeared afterwards from sight, like a line of 
lamps put out by the wind, and the assemblage of clouds vanishing in autumn. 


38. They fled like flying mountains for fear of the bolts of the thundering 
Indra, and vanished like the evanescent world seen in a dream, or as an aerial 


castle built by fancy. 


39. Then king Sindhu shot his shots of darkness, (smoke), which darkened 
the scene like the dark cave under the ground. 


40. It hid the face of the earth and sky, like the diluvian waters reaching to 
the welkin’s face, making the army appear as a shoal of fishes, and the stars as 
gems shining in the deep. 


41. The overspreading darkness appeared as a sea of ink or dark quagmire, 
or as the particles of Anjanagiri, (Inky mountain), wafted by the breeze over 
the face of nature. 


42. All beings seemed to be immersed in the sea or darkness, and to lose 
their energies as in the deep gloom of midnight. 


43. Viduratha the best of the most skilful in ballistics, shot his sun-bright 
shot which like the sun illumined the vault of the sky. 


44. It rose high amidst the overspreading darkness like the sun, (Agastya), 
with his effulgent beams, and dispelled the shades of darkness, as autumn 
does the rainy clouds. 


45. The sky being cleared of its veil of darkness, manifested itself with its 
reddish clouds, resembling the blowzy bodices of damsels before the king. 
(Here is a pun upon the word, payodhara, which means both a cloud and the 
breast of a woman). 


46. Now the landscape appeared in full view, like the understanding (good 
sense) of men coming in full play after the extinction of their avarice. 


47. The enraged Sindhu then laid hold on his dreadful Rakshasa weapon, 
which he instantly flung on his foe with its bedeviled darts. 


48. These horrid and destructive darts flew on all sides in the air, and 
roared as the roaring sea and elephantine clouds, (dighastis), of heaven. 


49. They were as the flames of lambent fire, with their long licking tongues 
and ash-coloured and smoky curls, rising as hoary hairs on the head, and 
making a chat-chat sound like that of moist fuel set up on fire. 


50. They wheeled round in circles through the air, with a horrible tangtang 
noise, now flaming as fire and now fuming as smoke, and then flying about as 
sparks of fire. 


51. With mouths beset by rows of sprouting teeth like lotus stalks, and 
faces defaced by dirty and fusty eyes, their hairy bodies were as stagnate 
pools full of moss and weeds. 


52. They flew about and flashed and roared aloud as some dark clouds, 
while the locks of hairs on their heads glared as lightnings in the midway sky. 


53. At this instant, Viduratha, the spouse of Lilé, sent forth his Narayana 
weapon, having the power of suppressing wicked spirits and demons. 


54. The appearance of this magic weapon, made the bodies of the 
Rakshasas, disappear as darkness at sun rise. 


55. The whole army of these fiends was lost in the air, as the sable clouds 
of the rainy season, vanish into nothing at the approach of autumn. 


56. Then Sindhu discharged his fire arms which set fire to the sky, and 
began to burn down everything, as by the all destroying conflagration of the 
last day. 


57. They filled all the sides of air with clouds of smoke, which seemed to 
hide the face of heaven under the darkness of hell. 


58. They set fire to the woods in the hills, which burned like mountains of 
gold, while the trees appeared to bloom with yellow champaka flowers all 
around. 


59. All the sides of the sky above, and the hills, woods, and groves below, 
were enveloped in the flames, as if they were covered under the red powder of 
huli, with which Yama was sporting over the plain. 


60. The heaven-spreading flame burnt down the legions in one heap of 
ashes, as the sub-marine fire consumes whole bodies of the fleet and navy in 
the sea. 


61. As Sindhu continued to dart his firearms against his vanquished 
adversary, Vidtratha let off his watery arms with reverential regard. 


62. These filled with water, flew forward as the shades of darkness from 
their hidden cells, and spread up and down and on all sides, like a melted 
mountain gushing in a hundred cataracts. 


63. They stretched as mountainous clouds or as a sea in the air, and fell in 
showers of watery arrows and stones on the ground. 


64. They flew up like large tamdla trees, and being gathered in groups like 
the shades of night, appeared as the thick gloom beyond the lokaloka or polar 
mountains. 


65. They gave the sky the appearance of subterraneous caves, emitting a 
gurgling sound, (ghurghura), like the loud roaring of elephants. 


66. These waters soon drank, (cooled), the spreading furious fire, as the 


shades of the dark night swallow (efface) the surrounding red tints of the 
evening. 


67. Having swallowed the fires above, the waters overflooded the ground 
and filled it with a humidity which served to enervate all bodies, as the power 
of sleep numbs everybody in death-like torpidity. 


68. In this manner both the kings were throwing their enchanted weapons 
against each other, and found them equally quelling and repelling one another 
in their course. 


69. The heavy armed soldiers of Sindhu and the captains of his regiments 
were swept away by the flood, together with the war-cars which floated upon 
it. 

70. At this moment, Sindhu thought upon his anhydrous weapons, 
(soshandstre, — thermal arms), which possessed the miraculous power of 
preserving his people from the water, and hurled them in the air. 


71. These absorbed the waters as the sun sucks up the moisture of the night, 
and dried up the land and revived the soldiers, except those that were already 
dead and gone. 


72. Their heat chased the coldness as the rage of the illiterate enrages the 
learned, and made the moist ground as dry, as when the sultry winds strew the 
forest land with dried leaves. 


73. It decorated the face of the ground with a golden hue, as when the royal 
dames adorn their persons with a yellow paint or ointment. 


74. It put the soldiers on the opposite side to a state of feverish (or blood 
heated) fainting, as when the tender leaves of trees are scorched by the 
warmth of a wild fire in summer heat. 


75. Vidtratha in his rage of warfare laid hold on his bow, (kodanda), and 
having bent it to a curve, let fly his cloudy arms on his antagonist. 


76. They sent forth columns of clouds as thick as the sable shades of night, 
which flying upward as a forest of dark tamdla trees, spread an umbrage 
heavy with water on high. 


77. They lowered under the weight of their water, and stood still by their 
massive thickness, and roared aloud in their circles all over the sky. 


78. Then blew the winds dropping the dewdrops of the icy store they bore 
on their pinions, and showers of rain fell fast from the collections of the 
clouds on high. 


79. Then flashed the fiery lightnings from them like golden serpents in their 
serpentine course or rather like the aslant glances of the eyes of heavenly 
nymphs. 


80. The roarings of the clouds rebounded in the mountainous caverns of the 
sky, and the quarters of heaven re-echoed to the same with the hoarse noise of 
elephants and the roaring of lions and growling of tigers and bears. 


81. Showers of rain fell in floods with drops as big as musalas, — malls or 
mallets, and with flashes of lightnings threatening as the stern glancings of the 
god of death. 


82. Huge mists rising at first in the form of vapours of the earth, and then 
borne aloft by the heated air into the sky, seemed like titans to rise from the 
infernal regions (and then invade heaven with their gloomy armament). 


83. The mirage of the warfare ceased after a while, as the worldly desires 
subside to rest upon tasting the sweet joys attending on divine knowledge. 


84. The ground became full of mud and mire and was impassable in every 
part of it, and the forces of Sindhu were overflown by the watery deluge, like 
the river Sinde or the sea. 


85. He then hurled his airy weapon which filled the vault of heaven with 
winds, and raged in all their fury like the Bhairava-Furies on the last day of 
resurrection. 


86. The winds blew on all sides of the sky, with darts falling as thunder 
bolts, and hailstones now piercing and then crushing all bodies as by the last 
blast of nature on the dooms-day. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 
Description of Other Kinds of Weapons. 


Then blew the icy winds of winter, blasting the beauty of the foliage of forest 
trees, and shaking and breaking the beautiful arbors, and covering them with 
gusts of dust. 


2. Then rose the gale whirling the trees like birds flying in the air, dashing 
and smashing the soldiers on the ground, and hurling and breaking the edifices 
to dust. 


3. This fearful squall blew away Vidtratha and his force, as a rapid current 
carries away the broken and rotten fragments of wood. 


4. Then Vidtratha who was skilled in ballistics hurled his huge and heavy 
arrows, which stretched themselves to the sky, and withstood the force of the 
winds and rain. 


5. Opposed by these rock-like barriers, the airy weapons were at a stand 
still, as the animal spirits are checked by the firm stoicity of the soul. 


6. The trees which had been blown up by the winds and floating in the 
breezy air, now came down and fell upon the dead bodies, like flocks of crows 
upon putrid carcasses. 


7. The shouting, (shitkdra), of the city, the distant hum, (ddtkdra), of the 
village, the howling, (bhdnkdra), of forests, and the rustling, (utkdra), of the 
trees, ceased on all sides like the vain verbiology of men. 


8. Sindhu saw burning rocks (rockets?) falling from above like leaves of 
trees, and flying about as the winged Maindkas or moving rocks of the sea or 
Sinde, (sindhu). 


9. He then hurled his thundering weapons, falling as flaming thunderbolts 
from heaven, which burnt the rocks away as the flaming fire destroys the 
darkness. 


10. These falling bolts broke the stones with their pointed ends, and hewed 
down the heads, (tops), of the hills, like a hurricane scattering the fruits of 


trees on the ground. 


11. Vidtratha then darted his Brahma weapon to quell the thunderbolts, 
which jostling against one another, disappeared in their mutual conflict. 


12. Sindhu then cast his demoniac weapons, (Pisdchdstras), as black as 
darkness, which fled as lines of horrid Pisécha demons on all sides. 


13. They filled the firmament with the darkness of their bodies, and made 
the daylight turn to the shade of night, as if it were for fear of them. 


14. They were as stalwart in their figures as huge columns of smoke, and as 
dark in their complexion as the blackest pitch, and tangible by the hand. 


15. They were as lean skeletons with erect hairs on their heads and bearded 
faces, with looks as pale as those of beggars, and bodies as black as those of 
the aerial and nocturnal fiends. 


16. They were terrific and like idiots in their looks, and moved about with 
bones and skulls in their hands. They were as meagre as churls, but more cruel 
than either the sword or thunderbolt. 


17. The Pisdchas lurk about the woods, bogs and highways, and pry into 
empty and open door houses. They hunt about as ghosts in their dark forms, 
and fly away as fast as the fleeting lightning. 


18. They ran and attacked with fury the remaining forces of the enemy, that 
stood weaponless in the field, with their broken and sorrowful hearts. 


19. Frightened to death, they stood motionless, and dropped down their 
arms and armours, and stood petrified as if they were demon-struck, with 
staring eyes, open mouths, and unmoving hands and feet. 


20. They let fall both their lower and upper garments, loosened their 
bowels and slakened their bodies through fear, and kept shaking as fixed trees 
by the winds. 


21. The line of the Pisdchas then advanced to frighten Viduratha out of his 
wits, but he had the good sense to understand them as the mere Mumbo- 
jumbos of magic. 


22. He knew the counter charm to fight out the Pisdchas from the field, and 
employed his charmed weapons against the Pisacha army of his enemy. 


23. He darted in his ire the Rupika weapon, which gave comfort to his own 
army, and deluded the Pisacha force of his adversary. 


24. These Rupikas flew in the air with erect hairs on their heads, their 
terrific eyes were sunk in their sockets, and their waists and breasts moved as 


trees with bunches of fruit. 


25. They had past their youth and become old, and their bodies were bulky 
and worn out with age; they had deformed backs and hips, and protuberant 
navels and naves. 


26. They had dark dusky bodies, and held human skulls in their hands all 
besmeared with blood. They had bits of half devoured flesh in their mouths, 
and pouring out fresh blood from their sides. 


27. They had a variety of gestures, motions, and contortions of their bodies, 
which were as hard as stone, with wry faces, crooked backs and twisted legs 
and limbs. 


28. Some had their faces like those of dogs, crows, and owls, with broad 
mouths and flat cheek-bones and bellies, and held human skulls and entrails in 
their hands. 


29. They laid hold of the Pisdchas as men catch little boys, and joined with 
them in one body as their consorts. (i.e., The Rupika witches bewitching the 
demoniac Pisdchas, got the better of them). 


30. They joined together in dancing and singing with outstretched arms and 
mouths and eyes, now joining hand in hand and now pursuing one another in 
their merry sport. 


31. They stretched their long tongues from their horrid mouths, and licked 
away the blood exuding from the wounds of the dead bodies. 


32. They plunged in the pool of blood with as much delight, as if they 
dived in a pond of ghee, and scrabbled in the bloody puddle with outstretched 
arms and feet, and uplifted ears and nose. 


33. They rolled and jostled with one another in the puddle of carrion and 
blood, and made it swell like the milky ocean when churned by the Mandara 
mountain. 


34. As Vidtratha employed his magic weapon against the magic of Sindhu, 
so he had recourse to others from a sense of his inferiority. 


35. He darted his Vetala weapon, which made the dead bodies, whether 
with or without their heads, to rise up in a body in their ghastly shapes. 


36. The joint forces of the Vetdlas, Pisdchas and Rupikas presented a 
dreadful appearance as that of the Kavandhas, and seemed as they were ready 
to destroy the earth. 


37. The other monarch was not slow to show his magical skill, by hurling 


his Rakshasa weapon, which threatened to grasp and devour the three worlds. 


38. These with their gigantic bodies rose as high as mountains, and seemed 
as hellish fiends appearing from the infernal regions in their ghostly forms. 


39. The ferocious body of the roaring Rdkshasas, terrified both the gods 
and demi-gods, (Surdsuras), by their loud martial music and war dance of 
their headless trunks, (Kavandhas). 


40. The giddy Vetdlas, Yakshas and Kushmandas, devoured the fat and 
flesh of dead bodies as their toast, and drank the gory blood as their lurid 
wines in the coarse of their war dance. 


41. The hopping and jumping of the Kushmandas, in their war dance in 
streams of blood, scattered its crimson particles in the air, which assembled in 
the form of a bridge of red evening clouds over the sparkling sea. 


CHAPTER L. 
Death of Vidtratha. 


Vasishtha said: — As the tide of war was rolling violently with a general 
massacre on both sides, the belligerent monarchs thought on the means of 
saving their own forces from the impending ruin. 


2. The magnanimous Sindhuraja, who was armed with patience, called to 
his mind the Vaishnava weapon, which was the greatest of arms and as 
powerful as Siva, (Jove), himself. 


3. No sooner was the Vaishnava weapon hurled by him with his best 
judgment, (mantra), than it emitted a thousand sparks of fire from its flaming 
blade on all sides. 


4. These sparks enlarged into balls, as big and bright as to shine like 
hundreds of suns in the sky, and others flew as the lengthy shafts of cudgels in 
the air. 


5. Some of them filled the wide field of the firmament with thunderbolts as 
thick as the blades of grass, and others overspread the lake of heaven, with 
battle axes as a bed of lotuses. 


6. These poured forth showers of pointed arrows spreading as a network in 
the sky, and darted the sable blades of swords, scattered as the leaves of trees 
in the air. 


7. At this time, the rival king Vidtratha, sent forth another Vaishnava 
weapon for repelling the former, and removing the reliance of his foe in his 
foible. 


8. It sent forth a stream of weapons counteracting those of the other, and 
overflowing in currents of arrows and pikes, clubs and axes and missiles of 
various kinds. 


9. These weapons struggled with and justled against one another. They split 
the vault of heaven with their clattering, and cracked like loud thunder claps 
cleaving the mountain cliffs. 


10. The arrows pierced the rods and swords, and the swords hewed down 
the axes and lances to pieces. The malls and mallets drove the missiles, and 
the pikes broke the spears, (saktis). 


11. The mallets like Mandara rocks, broke and drove away the rushing 
arrows as waves of the sea, and the resistless swords broke to pieces by 
striking at the maces. 


12. The lances revolved like the halo of the moon, repelling the black 
sword-blades as darkness, and the swift missiles flashed as the destructive 
fires of Yama. 


13. The whirling disks were destroying all other weapons; they stunned the 
world by their noise, and broke the mountains by their strokes. 


14. The clashing weapons were breaking one another in numbers, and 
Viduratha defeated the arms of Sindhu, as the steadfast mountain defies the 
thunders of Indra. 


15. The truncheons, (Sankus), were blowing away the falchions, (asis), and 
the spontoons, (siilas), were warding off the stones of the slings. The crow 
bars, (bhusundis), broke down the pointed heads of the pikes, (bhindhipdlas). 


16. The iron rods of the enemy, (parasitlas), were broken by tridents, 
(tristlas), of Siva, and the hostile arms were falling down by their crushing 
one another to pieces. 


17. The clattering shots stopped the course of the heavenly stream, and the 
combustion of powder filled the air with smoke. 


18. The clashing of dashing weapons lightened the sky like lightnings, their 
clattering cracked the worlds like thunderclaps, and their shock split and 
broke the mountains like thunderbolts. 


19. Thus were the warring weapons breaking one another by their 
concussion, and protracting the engagement by their mutual overthrow. 


20. As Sindhu was standing still in defiance of the prowess of his 
adversary, Vidtratha lifted his own fire-arm, and fired it with a thundering 
sound. 


21. It set the war chariot of Sindhu on fire like a heap of hay on the plain, 
while the Vaishnava weapons filled the ethereal sphere with their meteoric 
blaze. 


22. The two Kings were thus engaged in fierce fighting with each other, the 
one darting his weapons like drops of raging rain, and the other hurling his 


arms like currents of a deluging river. 


23. The two Kings were thus harassing each other like two brave 
champions in their contest, when the chariot of Sindhu was reduced to ashes 
by its flame. 


24. He then fled to the woods like a lion from its cavern in the mountain, 
and repelled the fire that pursued him by his aqueous weapons. 


25. After losing his car and alighting on the ground, he brandished his 
sword and cut off the hoofs and heels of the horses of his enemy’s chariot in 
the twinkling of an eye. 


26. He hacked everything that came before him like the lean stalks of 
lotuses, when Vidtratha also left his chariot with his asi (ensis) in hand. 


27. Both equally brave and compeers to one another in their skill in 
warfare, turned about in their rounds, and scraped their swords into saws by 
mutual strokes on one another. 


28. With their denticulated weapons, they tore the bodies of their enemies 
like fishes crushed under the teeth, when Vidtratha dropt down his broken 
sword, and darted his javelin against his adversary. 


29. It fell with a rattling noise on the bosom of Sindhu, (the king), as a 
flaming meteor falls rumbling in the breast of the sea, (Sindhu). 


30. But the weapon fell back by hitting upon his breast plate, as a damsel 
flies back from the embrace of a lover deemed an unfit match for her. 


31. Its shock made Sindhu throw out a flood of blood from his lungs, 
resembling the water spout let out from the trunk of an elephant. 


32. Seeing this, the native Lila cried with joy to her sister Lila: — see here 
the demon Sindhu killed by our lion-like husband. 


33. Sindhu is slain by the javelin of our lion-like lord, like the wicked 
demon by the nails of the lion-god Nrisinha, and he is spouting forth his blood 
like the stream of water, thrown out by the trunk of an elephant from a pool. 


34. But alas! this Sindhu is trying to mount on another car, although 
bleeding so profusely from his mouth and nostrils, as to raise a wheezing, 
(chulchulu), sound. 


35. Lo there! our lord Vidtratha breaking down the golden mountings of 
his car with the blows of his mallet, as the thundering clouds, — Pushkara and 
Avarta, break down the gold peaks of Sumeru. 


36. See this Sindhu now mounting on another carriage, which is now 


brought before him, and decorated as the splendid seat of a Gandharva. 


37. Alack! our lord is now made the mark of Sindhu’s mallet darted as a 
thunder bolt against him, but lo! how he flies off and avoids the deadly blow 
of Sindhu. 


38. Huzza! how nimbly he has got up upon his own car, but woe is to me! 
that Sindhu has overtaken him in his flight. 


39. He mounts on his car as a hunter climbs on a tree, and pierces my 
husband, as a bird-catcher does a parrot hidden in its hollow, with his pointed 
arrow. 


40. Behold his car is broken down and its flags flung aside, his horses are 
hurt and the driver is driven away. His bow is broken and his armour is 
shattered, and his whole body is full of wounds. 


41. His strong breast-plate is broken also by slabs of stone and his big head 
is pierced by pointed arrows. Behold him thrown down on earth, all mangled 
in blood. 


42. Look with what difficulty he is restored to his senses, and seated in his 
seat with his arm cut off and bleeding under Sindhu’s sword. 


43. See him weltering in blood gushing out profusely from his body, like a 
rubicund stream issuing from a hill of rubies. Woe is me! and cursed be the 
sword of Sindhu that hath brought this misery on us. 


44. It has severed his thighs as they dissever a tree with a saw, and has 
lopped off his legs like the stalks of trees. 


45. Ah! it is I that am so struck and wounded and killed by the enemy. I am 
dead and gone and burnt away with my husband’s body. 


46. Saying so, she began to shudder with fear at the woeful sight of her 
husband’s person, and fell insensible on the ground like a creeper cut off by 
an axe. 


47. Vidtratha though thus mutilated and disabled, was rising to smite the 
enemy in his rage, when he fell down from his car like an uprooted tree, and 
was replaced there by his charioteer ready to make his retreat. 


48. At this instant, the savage Sindhu struck a sabre on his neck, and 
pursued the car in which the dying monarch was borne back to his tent. 


49. The body of Padma, (alias Vidtratha), was placed like a lotus in the 
presence of Saraswati, shining with the splendour of the sun, but the elated 
Sindhu was kept from entering that abode, like a giddy fly from a flame. 


50. The charioteer entered in the apartment, and placed the body in its 
death-bed, all mangled and besmeared with blood, exuding from the pores of 
the severed neck, in the presence of the goddess, from where the enemy 
returned to his camp. 


Gloss: — Here Padma fighting in the person of Vidtratha, and falling 
bravely in the field, obtained his redemption by his death in the presence of 
the goddess, but the savage Sindhu, who slew his foiled foe in his retreat, 
proved a ruffian in his barbarous act, and could have no admittance into the 
presence of the goddess and to his future salvation. 


CONCLUSION. 


The whole vision of Lila, like that of Mirza, shows the state of human life, 
with its various incidents and phases to its last termination by death. It is not 
so compact and allegorical as that of the western essayist, but as idle effusions 
of those ideal reveries or loose vagaries which are characteristic of the wild 
imagination of eastern rhapsodists. The discontented Brahmana longs for 
royal dignity, imagines to himself all its enjoyments in the person of Padma, 
and sees at last all its evils in the character of Viduratha, which serves as a 
lesson to aspirants from aiming at high worldly honours which end in their 
destruction. 


Lila by her wisdom sees in her silent meditation, the whole course and 
vicissitudes of the world, and the rise and fall of human glory in the 
aspirations of her husband. These parables serve to show the nature of Yoga 
philosophy to be no other, than an absolute idealism or mental abstraction, 
consisting in the abstract knowledge of all things appertaining to our temporal 
as well as Spiritual concerns. 


The knowledge is derived either by intuition as that of the Brahmana and 
Padma, or by inspiration like that of the genius of wisdom to her votary Lila. 
It may also be had by means of communication with others, as in the 
discourse of Rama and his preceptor, as also from the attentive perusal of such 
works as the present one, treating both of temporal and spiritual subjects, and 
reviewing them with the eye of the mind. 


The Yogi is said to know all things through the medium of his intellectual 


eye, (jndna chakshu), apart from his connection with everything in the world 
called nihsanga, as it is expressed by the Persian sophist: — “amokhteh 
Oniamekhteh az harche hast.” — “Knowing and not mixing with all that is.” 


From this view of Yoga, it will appear that, all kinds of knowledge, whether 
as it existed among the ancients, or is in the course of its improvement in 
modern times, forms a subject of the Yoga or meditative philosophy, which 
embraces and comprehends in itself a knowledge of all practical arts and 
sciences, as the military art and other things treated of in this work. Hence it is 
evident, that a large fund of learning forms the greatest Yoga, and the most 
learned among men, were the greatest thinkers or Yogis amongst mankind in 
all ages. No rational being therefore can either refrain from thinking, or 
employing his mind to the acquisition of knowledge, both of which are termed 
Yoga in Indian philosophy. 


But the Yogi is commonly believed to be an inspired sage or seer, viewing 
all things appearing before him in his dream and vision. These are sometimes 
retrospective, and resultants of the vibrations of waking feelings and 
imagination, as in the case of the Brahmana’s anticipation of royalty as a 
coming reality. 


In many instances they are believed as prospective and prophetic of future 
events, as in Padma’s dread of his future life and fate. In Lila’s case, however, 
they were, “no dreams but visions strange” of supernatural sights, and 
prophetical of the future state of her husband, as it was revealed to her by the 
goddess. 


But as there are few that rely any faith “in the baseless fabric of a vision,” 
they require to be told that the books of revelation in all religions are based 
upon these dreams and visions, which are believed to be the outpouring of the 
Holy Spirit into the souls of saints, in the sacred records of all nations. 


The holy scriptures furnish us with many texts on the divine origin of 
dreams and visions as the following. 


“But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel. And it shall come to 
pass in the last days, saith God. I shall pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and 
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see 
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. 


“And on my servants and on my handmaidens, I will pour out in those days 
of my spirit, and they shall prophesy; 


“And I will shew wonders, in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; 
blood, and fire and vapour of smoke. 


“The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, etc.” 


The Book of Acts, Chap II. v. 16-20. 


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


CHAPTER LI. 


Description of Sindhu’s Dominions. 


Vasishtha said: — The loud cry that the king was killed in battle by the rival 
monarch, struck the people with awe, and filled the realm with dismay. 


2. Carts loaded with utensils and household articles, were driving through the 
streets, and women with their loud wailings, were running away amidst the 
impassable paths of the city. 


3. The weeping damsels that were flying for fear, were ravished on the way by 
their captors; and the inhabitants were in danger of being plundered of their 
properties by one another. 


4. The joyous shouts of the soldiers in the enemy’s camp, resounded with the 
roarings of loose elephants and neighings of horses, trampling down the men 
to death on their way. 


5. The doors of the royal treasury were broken open by the brave brigands, the 
valves flew off and the vaults re-echoed to the strokes. The warders were 
overpowered by numbers, and countless treasures were plundered and carried 
away. 


6. Bandits ripped off the bellies of the royal dames in the palace, and the 
chandala free-booters hunted about the royal apartments. 


7. The hungry rabble robbed the provisions from the royal stores, and the 
soldiers were snatching the jewels of the weeping children trodden down 
under their feet. 


8. Young and beautiful maidens were dragged by their hair from the seraglio, 
and the rich gems that fell from the hands of the robbers, glistened all along 
the way. 


9. The chiefs assembled with ardour with their troops of horses, elephants, 
and war-chariots, and announced the installation of Sindhu by his minister. 


10. Chief engineers were employed in making the decorations of the city and 
its halls, and the balconies were filled by the royal party attending at the 


inauguration. 


11. It was then that the coronation of Sindhu’s son, took place amidst the loud 
acclamations of victory, and titles and dignities, were conferred upon the 
noblemen on the victor’s side. 


12. The royal party were flying for life into the villages, where they were 
pursued by the victorious soldiers, and a general pillage spread in every town 
and village throughout the realm. 


13. Gangs of robbers thronged about, and blocked the passages for pillage and 
plunder, and a thick mist darkened the light of the day for want of the 
magnanimous Vidtratha. 


14. The loud lamentations of the friends of the dead, and the bitter cries of the 
dying, mixed with the clamour raised by the driving cars, elephants and 
horses, thickened in the air as a solid body of sound, (pindagrdhya). 


15. Loud trumpets proclaimed the victory of Sindhu in every city, and 
announced his sole sovereignty all over the earth. 


16. The high-shouldered Sindhu entered the capital as a second Manu, (Noah), 
for re-peopling it after the all-devastating flood of war was over. 


17. Then the tribute of the country poured into the city of Sindhu from all 
sides, and these loaded on horses and elephants, resembled the rich cargoes 
borne by ships to the sea. 


18. The new king issued forthwith his circulars and royal edicts to all sides, 
struck coins in his own name, and placed his ministers as commissioners in all 
provinces. 


19. His iron-rod was felt in all districts and cities like the inexorable rod of 
Yama, and it overawed the living with fear of instant death. 


20. All insurrections and tumults in the realm, soon subsided to rest under his 
reign, as the flying dust of the earth and the falling leaves of trees, fall to the 
ground upon subsidence of a tempest. 


21. The whole country on all sides was pacified to rest, like the perturbed sea 
of milk after it had been churned by the Mandara mountain. 


22. Then there blew the gentle breeze of Malaya, unfurling the locks of the 
lotus-faced damsels of Sindhu’s realm, and wafting the liquid fragrance of 
their bodies around, and driving away the unwholesome air (of the carnage). 


CHAPTER LIL. 


State of Man after Death. 


Vasishtha said: — In the meanwhile, O Rama! Lila seeing her husband lying 
insensible before her and about to breathe his last, thus spoke to Saraswati: — 


2. Behold, O mother! my husband is about to shuffle his mortal coil in this 
perilous war, which has laid waste his whole kingdom. 


3. Saraswati replied: — This combat that you saw to be fought with such fury, 
and lasting so long in the field, was neither fought in thy kingdom nor in any 
part of this earth. 


4. It occurred nowhere except in the vacant space of the shrine, containing the 
dead body of the Brahman, and where it appeared as the phantom of a dream 
only (in your imagination). 


5. This land which appeared as the realm of thy living lord Viduratha, was 
situated with all its territories in the inner apartment of Padma. (The incidents 
of Vidtratha’s life, being but a vision appearing to the departed spirit of 
Padma). 


6. Again it was the sepulchral tomb of the Brahman Vasishtha, situated in the 
hilly village of Vindhyé, that exhibited these varying scenes of the mortal 
world within itself. (i.e., As a panorama shows many sights to the eye, and 
one man playing many parts in the stage). 


7. As the departed soul views the vision of the past world within its narrow 
tomb, so is the appearance of all worldly accidents unreal in their nature. 
Gloss: — The apparitions appearing before the souls of the dead lying in their 
tombs, are as false as the appearances presenting themselves before the living 
souls in their tomb of this world. The souls of the living and the dead are both 
alike in their nature, and both susceptible of the like dreams and visions. 


8. These objects that we see here as realities, including these bodies of mine 
and thine and this Lila’s, together with this earth and these waters, are just the 
same as the phantoms rising in the tomb of the deceased Brahman of the hilly 


region. 


9. It is the soul which presents the images of things, and nothing external 
which is wholly unreal can cast its reflexion on the soul. Therefore, know thy 
soul as the true essence which is increate and immortal, and the source of all 
its creations within itself. Note: — The subjective is the cause of the objective 
and not this of that. 


10. The soul reflects on its inborn images without changing itself in any state, 
and thus it was the nature of the Brahman’s soul, that displayed these images 
in itself within the sphere of his tomb. 


11. But the illusion of the world with all its commotion, was viewed in the 
vacant space of the souls of the Brahman and Padma, and not displayed in the 
empty space of their tombs, where there was no such erroneous reflexion of 
the world. 


12. There is no error or illusion anywhere, except in the misconception of the 
observer; therefore, the removal of the fallacy from the mind of the viewer, 
leads him to the perception of the light of truth. 


13. Error consists in taking the unreal for the real, and in thinking the viewer 
and the view or the subjective and objective as different from each other. It is 
the removal of the distinction of the subjective and objective, that leads us to 
the knowledge of unity, (the on or one or om). 


14. Know the Supreme soul to be free from the acts of production and 
destruction, and it is his light that displays all things of which He is the 
source, and learn the whole outer nature as having no existence nor change in 
itself. 


15. But the souls of other beings, exhibit their own natures in themselves, as 
those in the sepulchral vault of the Brahman, displayed the various 
dispositions to which they were accustomed. (Thus, the one unvaried soul 
appears as many, according to its particular wont and tendency in different 
persons). 


16. The soul has no notion of the outer world or any created thing in it; its 
consciousness of itself as an increate vacuity, comprehends its knowledge of 
the world in itself. (7.e., The subjective consciousness of the Ego, includes the 
knowledge of the objective world). 


17. The knowledge of the mountain chains of Meru and others, is included 
under the knowledge in the vacuity of the soul, there is no substance or 
solidity in them as in a great city seen in a dream. 


18. The soul views hundreds of mountainous ranges and thousands of solid 
worlds, drawn in the small compass of the mind, as in its state of dreaming. 


19. Multitudes of worlds, are contained in a grain of the brain of the mind, as 
the long leaves of the plantain tree, are contained in one of its minute seeds. 


20. All the three worlds are contained in an atom as the intellect, in the same 
manner as great cities are seen in a dream, and all the particles of intellect 
within the mind, have each the representation of a world in it. 


21. Now this Lila, thy step-dame, has already gone to the world which 
contains the sepulchre of Padma, before the spirit of Vidtratha could join the 
same. 


22. The moment when Lila fell in a swoon in thy presence, know her spirit to 
be immediately conveyed to him and placed by his side. 


23. Lila asked: — Tell me, O goddess! how was this lady endowed here with 
my form before, and how is she translated to and placed as my step-dame 
beside my deceased husband? 


24. Tell me in short, in what form she is now viewed by the people in 
Padma’s house, and the manner in which they are talking to her at present. 


25. The goddess replied: — Hear Lila, what I will relate to thee in brief in 
answer to thy question, regarding the life and death of this Lila as an image of 
thyself. 


26. It is thy husband Padma, that beholds these illusions of the world spread 
before him in the same sepulchre in the person of Viduratha. 


27. He fought this battle as thou didst see in his reverie, and this Lila 
resembling thyself was likewise a delusion. These his men and enemies were 
but illusions, and his ultimate death, was as illusory as a phantom of the 
imagination, like all other things in this world. 


28. It was his self delusion, that showed him this Lila as his wife, and it is the 
same deceit of a dream, which deludes thee to believe thyself as his consort. 


29. As it is a mere dream that makes you both to think yourselves as his 
wives, so he deems himself as your husband, and so do I rely on my existence 
(also in a like state of dream). 


30. The world with all its beauty, is said to be the spectre of a vision, 
wherefore knowing it a mere visionary scene, we must refrain from relying 
any faith in this visible phantasmagoria. 


31. Thus this Lila, yourself, and this king Vidtratha, are but phantoms of your 


fancy, and so am I also, unless I believe to exist in the self-existent spirit. 


32. The belief of the existence of this king and his people, and of ourselves as 
united in this place, proceeds from the fulness of that intellect, which fills the 
whole plenitude. 


33. So this queen Lila also situated in this place with her youthful beauty, and 
smiling so charmingly with her blooming face, is but an image of divine 
beauty. 


34. See how gentle and graceful are her manners, and how very sweet is her 
speech, her voice is as dulcet as the notes of the Kokila, and her motions as 
slow as those of a lovelorn maiden. 


35. Behold her eyelids like the leaves of the blue lotus, and her swollen 
breasts rounded as a pair of snow-balls, her form is as bright as liquid gold, 
and her lips as red as a brace of ripe Vimba fruits. 


36. This is but a form of thee as thou didst desire to be to please thy husband, 
and it is the very figure of thy ownself, that thou now beholdest with wonder. 


37. After the death of thy husband, his soul caught the same reflexion of thy 
image, as thou didst desire to be hereafter, and which thou now seest in the 
person of the young Lila before thee. 


38. Whenever the mind has a notion or sensation or fancy of some material 
object, the abstract idea of its image is surely imprinted in the intellect. 


39. As the mind comes to perceive the unreality of material objects, it 
thenceforth begins to entertain the ideas of their abstract entities within itself. 
(Hence the abstract ideas of things are said to accompany the intellectual spirit 
after its separation from the body). 


40. It was the thought of his sure death, and the erroneous conception of the 
transmigration of his soul in the body of Viduratha, that represented to Padma 
thy desired form of the youthful Lila, which was the idol of his soul. (This 
passage confutes the doctrine of metempsychosis, and maintains the verity of 
eternal ideas). 


41. It was thus that thou wast seen by him and he was beheld by thee 
according to your desires, and thus both of you though possessed of the same 
unvaried soul which pervades all space, are made to behold one another in 
your own ways (agreeably to your desires). 


42. As the spirit of Brahma is all pervasive, and manifests itself in various 
ways in all places, it is beheld in different lights, according to the varying 
fancies, (vikshepa sakti), or tendencies, (vdsand sakti), of men, like the ever- 


changeful scenes appearing to us in our visions and dreams. 


43. The omnipotent spirit displays its various powers in all places, and these 
powers exert themselves everywhere, according to the strong force and 
capability it has infused in them (in their material or immaterial forms). 


44. When this pair remained in their state of death-like insensibility, they 
beheld all these phantoms in their inner souls, by virtue of their reminiscence 
and desires, (which are inherent in the soul). 


45. That such and such person were their fathers and such their mothers 
before, that they lived in such places, had such properties of theirs, and did 
such acts erewhile, (are reminiscences of the soul). 


46. That they were joined together in marriage, and the multitude which they 
saw in their minds, appeared to them as realities for the time in their 
imagination (as it was in a magic show). 


47. This is an instance that shows our sensible perceptions, to be no better 
than our dreams, and it was in this deluded state of Lila’s mind, that I was 
worshipped and prayed by her: — 


48. In order to confer upon her the boon that she might not become a widow, 
and it was by virtue of this blessing of mine, that this girl had died before her 
husband’s death (to escape the curse of widowhood). 


49. lam the progeny of Brahma, and the totality of that intelligence of which 
all beings participate, it is for this reason that I was adored by her as the Kula 
Devi or tutelar divinity of all living beings. 


50. It was at last that her soul left her body, and fled with her mind in the form 
of her vital breath, through the orifice of her mouth. 


51. Then after the insensibility attendant upon her death was over, she 
understood in her intellect her living soul to be placed in the same empty 
space with the departed spirit of Padma. 


52. Her reminiscence pictured her in her youthful form, and she beheld herself 
as in a dream, to be situated in the same tomb. She was as a blooming lotus 
with her beautiful countenance, and her face was as bright as the orb of the 
moon, her eyes were as large as those of an antelope, and she was attended by 
her graceful blandishments for the gratification of her husband. 


CHAPTER LIII. 


Representations of Reminiscence. 


Argument. Description of Lila’s passage in the air, and her union with her 
husband’s spirit. Relation of the depravity of those that are unacquainted with 
and unpractised in Yoga. 


Vasishtha said: — Lila having obtained the blessing of the goddess, 
proceeded with her fancied body to meet her royal spouse in heaven beyond 
the skies. 


2. Having assumed her spiritual form which was as light as air, she fled 
merrily as a bird, and was wafted aloft by the fond desire of joining with her 
beloved lord. 


3. She met before her a damsel sent by the goddess of wisdom, and as issuing 
out of the best model of her heart’s desire. 


4. The damsel said: — I am the daughter of thy friend, Saraswati, and 
welcome thee, O beauteous lady in this place. I have been waiting here on thy 
way through the sky in expectation of thee. 


5. Lila said: — Lead me, O lotus-eyed maid to the side of my husband, as the 
visit of the good and great never goes for nothing. 


6. Vasishtha said: — The damsel replied, come let us go there; and so saying, 
she stood before her looking forward on her way. 


7. Then proceeding onward both together, they came to the door-way of 
heaven, which was as broad as the open palm of the hand, and marked with 
lines as those in palmistry. (?). 


8. They passed the region of the clouds, and overstepped the tracks of the 
winds, then passing beyond the orbit of the sun, they reached the stations of 
the constellations. 


9. Thence they passed through the regions of air and water, (Indraloka), to the 
abodes of the gods and saints, (Siddhas), whence they went across the seats of 
Brahma, Vishnu and Siva to the great belt, — of the universe. 


10. Their spiritual bodies pierced through its orifice, as the humidity of ice 
water passes out of the pores of a tight water-jar. 


11. The body of Lila was of the form of her mind, which was of the nature of 
its own bent and tenor, and conceived these wanderings within itself, (i.e., the 
peregrinations of Lila were purely the workings of her own mind and 
inclination). 


12. Having traversed the spheres of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva, and crossed the 
limit of the mundane sphere, and the environs of atmospheric water and air: 


13. They found an empty space as spacious as the scope of the great intellect, 
and impassable by the swift Garuda, (the eagle of Jupiter), even in millions of 
Kalpa ages. (i.e., The unlimited space of the mind and vacuity). 


14. There they beheld an infinity of shapeless and nameless worlds, scattered 
about as the countless fruits in a great forest. (The Nebulae of unformed 
worlds). 


15. They pierced through the ambit of one of these orbs before them, and 
passed inside the same as a worm creeps in a fruit which it has perforated. 


16. This brought them back by the same spheres of Brahma, Indra and others, 
to the orb of the globe below the starry frame. 


17. Here they saw the same country, the same city, and the same tomb as 
before, and after entering the same, they sat themselves beside the corpse of 
Padma, covered under the heap of flowers. 


18. At this time Lila lost the sight of the heavenly damsel, who had been her 
companion erewhile, and who had now disappeared from her sight like a 
phantom of her illusion. 


19. She then looked at the face of her husband, lying there as a dead body in 
his bed, and recognized him as such by her right discretion. 


20. This must be my husband, said she, aye, my very husband, who fell 
fighting with Sindhu, and has now attained this seat of the departed heroes, 
where he rests in peace. 


21. Ihave by the grace of the goddess arrived here in person, and reckon 
myself truly blest to find my husband also as such, (i.e., resting here in his 


own figure). 


22. She then took up a beautiful chauri flapper in her hand, and began to wave 
it over his body as the moon moves in the sky over the earth. 


23. The waking Lila asked: — Tell me, O goddess! in what manner did the 
king and his servants and hand-maids accost this lady, and what they thought 
her to be. 


24. The goddess replied: — It was by our gift of wisdom to them, that this 
lady, that king and those servants, found themselves to partake of the one and 
same intellectual soul, in which they all subsisted. 


25. Every soul is a reflection of the divine intellect, and is destined by his 
fixed decree to represent the individual souls to one another as refractions of 
the same, or as shadows in a magic show, (bhojakddrishta). 


26. Thus the king received his wife as his companion and queen, and his 
servants as cognate with himself. (i.e., Partaking of the same soul with his 
own). 


27. He beheld the unity of his soul with her’s and their’s, and no distinction 
subsisting between any one of them. He was astonished to find that there was 
nothing distinct in them from what he had in himself. 


28. The waking Lila said: — Why did not that Lila meet her husband in her 
own person, according to her request and the boon that was granted to her? 


29. The goddess replied: — It is not possible for unenlightened souls, (as that 
of the young Lila), to approach in person to holy spirits (or their persons or 
places), which are visible and accessible only to the meritorious, and 
unapproachable by gross bodies as the sun light is inaccessible by a shadow. 


30. So it is the established law from the beginning of creation, that intelligent 
souls can never join with dull beings and gross matter, as truth can never be 
mixed up with falsehood. 


31. And so is that as long as a boy is prepossessed with his notion of a ghost, 
it is in vain to convince him of the falsehood of goblins as mere chimeras of 
his imagination. 

32. And as long as the feverish heat of ignorance rages within the soul, it is 


impossible for the coolness of the moon of intelligence to spread over it. 


33. So long also as one believes himself to be composed of a corporeal body, 
and incapable to mount in the higher atmosphere, it is no way possible to 
make him believe otherwise, (that he has an incorporeal nature in his soul and 


mind). 


34. But it is by virtue of one’s knowledge and discrimination, and by his own 
merit and divine blessing, that he acquires a saintly form, (nature), wherewith 
he ascends to the higher region, as you have done with this body of yours. 


35. As dry leaves of trees are burnt in no time by the burning fire, so this 
corporeal body is quickly lost by one’s assumption of his spiritual frame. 


36. The effect of a blessing or curse, on any one is no other than his obtaining 
the state he desired or feared to have. (Hence the boon of Lila has secured to 
her what she wished to get). 


37. As the false appearance of a snake in a rope, is attended with no motion or 
action of the serpent in it, so the unreal views of Lila’s husband and others, 
were but the motionless imageries of her own imagination. 


38. Whoever views the false apparitions of the dead as present before the 
vision of his mind, he must know them as reflections of his past and constant 
remembrance of them. 


39. So our notions of all these worlds are mere products of our reminiscence, 
and no creation of Brahma or any other cause, but simple productions of our 
desire (which presents these figures to the imagination). 


40. So they who are ignorant of the knowable spirit of God, have only the 
notions of the outer world in them, as they view the distant orb of the moon 
within themselves (in their minds). 


CHAPTER LIV. 


Reflections on Death. 


Argument. The lot of living beings and the cause of their death. The duration 
of human life as determined by their acts and enjoyments, and the merit of 
their conduct in life time. 


The goddess continued: — Those, therefore, who know the knowable God, 
and rely in virtue, can go to the spiritual worlds and not others. (Knowable 
means what ought to be and not what is or can be known). 


2. All material bodies which are but false and erroneous conceptions of the 
mind, can have no place in Truth, (the true spirit), as no shadow can have any 
room in sunshine. (So gross matter has no room in the subtle spirit). 


3. Lila being ignorant of the knowable (God), and unacquainted with the 
highest virtue, (the practice of Yoga), could go no further than the city of her 
lord which she had at heart. 


4. The waking Lila said: — Let her be where she is, (I inquire no more about 
her), but will ask you of other things. You see here my husband is about to 
die, so tell me what must I do at present. 


5. Tell me the law of the being and not being of beings, and what is that 
destiny which destines the living beings to death. 


6. What is it that determined the natures of things and gave existence to the 
categories of objects? What is it that has caused the warmth of the fire and 
sun, and gave stability to the earth? 


7. Why is coldness confined to the frost and the like, and what forms the 
essence of time and space, what are the causes of the different states of things 
and their various changes, and the causes of the solidity of some and tenuity 
of others? 


8. What is that which causes the tallness of trees and men above the grass and 


brambles, and why is it that many things dwindle and decay in the course and 
capability of growth? 


9. The goddess said: — At the universal dissolution of the world, when all 
things are dissolved in the formless void, there remains the only essence of 
Brahma, in the form of the infinite sky stretching beyond the limits of creation 
on all sides. 


10. It then reflects in its intellect in the form of a spark of fire, as you are 
conscious of your aerial journey in a dream. 


11. This atomic spark then increased in its size in the divine spirit, and having 
no substance of itself, appeared what is commonly styled the ideal world. 


12. The spirit of God residing in it, thought itself as Brahma, — the soul of 
the world, who reigned over it in his form of the mind, as if it was identic with 
the real world itself. (The world is a display of the Divine Mind). 


13. The primary laws that he has appointed to all things at their first creation, 
the same continue invariably in force with them to the present time. (i.e., The 
primordial law or nature). 


14. The minds of all turn in the same way as it was willed by the divine mind, 
and there is nothing which of itself can go beyond the law which the divine 
will has assigned to it. 


15. It is improper to say that all formal existences are nothing, because they 
remain in their substance (of the divine spirit), after disappearance of their 
forms, as the substance of gold remains the same after alteration of its shape 
and form. 


16. The elementary bodies of fire and frost, still continue in the same state, as 
their elements were first formed in the Divine mind in the beginning of 
creation. 


17. Nothing therefore has the power to forsake its own nature, as long as the 
divine intellect continues to direct his eternal laws and decrees which are 
appointed to all. 


18. It is impossible for anything to alter its nature now from the eternal stamp, 
which Divine will has set upon all the substantial and ideal forms of creation. 


19. As the Divine Intellect knows no opposition in its way, it never turns from 
the tenor of its own wonted intelligence which directs the destinies of all. 
(This is the real or subjective, intellectual or nominal view of evolution of all 
things from the divine mind). 


20. But know in the first place the world to be no created thing. All this that 
appears to exist, is but a display of the notions in our consciousness, like the 
appearances in our dreams. 


21. The unreal appears as real, as the shadow seems to be the substance. Our 
notions of things are the properties of our nature. (i.e., They are natural to us, 
as they are engrafted in it by the eternal mind). 


22. The manner in which the intellect exhibited itself, in its different 
manifestations, at the beginning, the same continues in its course to this time, 
and is known as the samvid-kachana or manifestations of consciousness, 
which constitute the niyati, — course or system of the universe. 


23. The sky is the manifestation of the intellectual idea of vacuity in the 
divine mind, and the idea of duration in the intellect, appeared in the form of 
the parts of time. 


24. The idea of liquidity evolved itself in the form of water in the divine mind, 
in the same manner as one dreams of water and seas in his own mind. (So the 
air and earth are manifestations of the ideas of fluidity and solidity). 


25. We are conscious of our dreams in some particular state of our intellect, 
and it is the wonderfully cunning nature of the intellect, that makes us think 
the unreal as real. 


26. The ideas of the reality of earth, air, fire, and water are all false, and the 
intellect perceives them within itself, as its false dreams and desires and 
reveries. 


27. Now hear me tell you about death, for removing your doubts with regard 
to the future state, that death is destined for our good, in as much as it leads us 
to the enjoyment of the fruits of acts in this life. 


28. Our lives are destined in the beginning to extend to one, two, three, and 
four centuries in the different Kali, Dwapara, Treta and Satya ages of the 
world. (Corresponding with the golden, silver, brazen and iron ages of the 
ancients). 


29. It is however by virtue of place and time, of climate and food, and our 
good or bad actions and habits, that human life extends above or descends 
below these limits. 


30. Falling short of one’s duties lessens his life, as his excelling in them 
lengthens its duration, but the mediocrity of his conduct keeps it within its 
proper bound. 


31. Boys die by acts causing infant diseases and untimely deaths, so do the 


young and old die of acts that bring on juvenile and senile weakness, sickness, 
and ultimate death. 


32. He who goes on doing his duties as prescribed by law of the Sdstras, 
becomes both prosperous and partaker of the long life allotted by the rule of 
the Sdstra. 


33. So likewise, do men meet their last state and future reward, according to 
the nature of their acts in life-time, or else their old age is subjected to regret 
and remorse, and all kinds of bodily and mental maladies and anxieties. 


34. Lila said: — Tell me in short, O moon-faced goddess! something more 
with regard to death, as to whether it is a pleasure or pain to die, and what 
becomes of us after we are dead and gone from here. (Death is said to be 
release from misery by some, and the most grievous of all torments by others. 
So Pope: — O, the pain, the bliss of dying). 


35. The goddess replied: — Dying men are of three kinds, and have different 
ends upon their death. These are those who are ignorant, and such as are 
practiced in Yoga, and those that are reasonable and religious. 


36. Those practicing the dhdrand Yoga, may go wherever they like after 
leaving their bodies, and so the reasonable Yogi is at liberty to range 
everywhere. (It consists in mental retention and bodily patience and 
endurance). 


37. He who has not practiced the dhdrand Yoga, nor applied himself to 
reasoning, nor has certain hopes of the future, is called the ignorant sot, and 
meets with the pain and pangs of death. 


38. He whose mind is unsubdued, and full of desires and temporal cares and 
anxieties, becomes as distressed as a lotus torn from its stalk. (i.e., It is the 
subjection of inordinary passions, and suppression of inordinate desires and 
cares, which ensure our true felicity). 


39. The mind that is not guided by the precepts of the Sdstras, nor purified by 
holiness, but is addicted to the society of the wicked, is subjected to the 
burning sensation of fire within itself at the moment of death. 


40. At the moment when the last gurgling of the throat chokes the breath, the 
eye-sight is dimmed and the countenance fades away, then the rational soul 
also becomes hazy in its intellect. 


41. A deep darkness spreads over the dimming sight, and the stars twinkle 
before it in day-light; the firmament appears to be obscured by clouds, and the 
sky presents its gloomy aspect on every side. 


42. An acute pain seizes the whole frame, and a fata Morgana dances before 
the vision; the earth is turned to air and the mid-air seems to be the moving 
place of the dying person. 


43. The sphere of heaven revolves before him, and the tide of the sea seems to 
bear him away. He is now lifted up in the air, and now hurled down as in his 
state of dizziness or dream. 


44. Now he thinks as falling in a dark pit, and then as lying in the cavern of a 
hill; he wants to tell aloud his torments, but his speech fails him to give 
utterance to his thoughts. 


45. He now finds himself as falling down from the sky, and now as whirled in 
the air like a bundle of straws blown aloft in the air by a gust of wind. He is 
now riding swiftly as in a car, and now finds himself melting as snow. 


46. He desires to acquaint his friends of the evils of life and this world, but he 
is carried away from them as rapidly as by an air-engine, (like a stone shot by 
a ballista or an aeronaut in a balloon). 


47. He whirls about as by a rotatory machine or turning wheel, and is dragged 
along like a beast by its halter. He wallows about as in an eddy, or turns 
around as the machine of some engine. 


48. He is borne in the air as a straw, and is carried about as a cloud by the 
winds. He rises high like a vapour, and then falls down like a heavy watery 
cloud pouring out in the sea. 


49. He passes through the endless space and revolves in all its vortiginous 
vacuities, to find as it were, a place free from the vicissitudes to which the 
earth and ocean are subject. (i.e., A place of peace and rest). 


50. Thus the rising and falling spirit roves without cessation, and the soul 
breathing hard and sighing without intermission, sets the whole body in sore 
pain and agony. 


51. By degrees the objects of his senses become as faint to his failing organs, 
as the landscape fades to view at the setting of the sun. (The world recedes; it 
disappears. — Pope). 


52. He loses the remembrance of the past and present, upon the failing of his 
memory at this moment; as one is at a loss to know the sides of the compass 
after the evening twilight has passed away. 


53. In his fit of fainting, his mind loses its power of thinking, and he is lost in 
a state of ignorance, at the loss of all his thoughts and sensibility. (So the 
lines: — It absorbs me quite, steals my senses, shuts my sight. — Pope). 


54. In the state of faintishness, the vital breath ceases to circulate through the 
body, and at the utter stoppage of its circulation, there ensues a collapse 
murch’ha or swooning. 


55. When this state of apoplexy joined with delirium, has reached its climax, 
the body becomes as stiff as stone by the law of inertia, ordained for living 
beings from the beginning. 


56. Lila said: — But tell me, O goddess, why do these pains and agonies, this 
fainting and delirium, and disease and insensibility, overtake the body, when 
it is possessed of all its eight organs entire? 


57. The goddess replied: — It is the law appointed by the author of life from 
the first, that such and such pains are to fall to the lot of living beings at such 
and such times. (Man’s primeval sin brought pain and disease and death into 
the world). 


58. The primeval sin springs of itself as a plant in the conscious heart of man, 
and subjects him to his doomed miseries, which have no other intelligible 
cause. (There is no other assignable cause of death and disease except the 
original guilt). 


59. When the disease and its pain overpower the body, and prevent the lungs 
and arteries to expand and contract, in order to inhale and exhale the air, it 
loses its equipoise, (samdna), and becomes restless. 


60. When the inhaled air does not come out, nor the exhaled breath re-enter 
the lungs, all pulsation is at a stop, and the organic sensations are lost in their 
remembrance only. (As in the memory of sleeping and dreaming men). 


61. When there is no ingress nor egress of the vital air, the pulse sinks and 
becomes motionless, and the body is said to become senseless, and the life to 
be extinct. 


62. I shall also die away in my destined time, but my consciousness of former 
knowledge will all be awake at the hour of death (which proves the 
immortality of the soul). 


63. Though I am dead and gone from here in this manner, yet I must mind, 
that the seed of my innate consciousness, (the soul), is never destroyed with 
my life and body. 


64. Consciousness is inward knowledge and imperishable in its nature, 
therefore, the nature of consciousness is free from birth and death. (The body 
is subject to birth and death, but not the soul). 


65. This consciousness is as clear as a fresh fountain in some persons, and as 


foul as tide water in others; it is bright in its form of the pure intellect, — chit 
in some, and polluted with the passions of animal life, in its nature of the 
sentient or living soul, — chetana in many. 


66. As a blade of grass is composed of joints in the midst, so is the even 
nature of the sentient or living soul, which is combined with the two states of 
birth and death amidst it. 


67. The sentient soul is neither born nor dead at any time, but witnesses these 
two states as the passing shadows and apparitions in a dream and vision. 


68. The soul is no other than the intellect, which is never destroyed anywhere 
by any. Say, what other thing is this soul, which is called the Purusha beside 
the intellect itself. Gloss. It is not the body, nor the vital breath, nor 
perceptions nor mind; it is not the understanding nor egoism, nor the heart nor 
illusion, all of which are inactive of themselves. 


69. Say then whom and what you call to be dead today, and whether the 
intellect is liable to disease or demise at any time and in any wise. Millions of 
living bodies are verily dying every day, but the intellect ever remains 
imperishable. 


70. The intellect never dies at the death of any living being, because all the 
living soul continues the same upon the demise of everybody here. 


71. The living soul, therefore, is no more than the principle which is conscious 
of its various desires, affections and passions. It is not that principle to which 
the phases of life and death are attributed by men. 


72. So there is none that dies, nor any one that is born at any time; it is this 
living principle only that continually revolves in the deep eddy of its desires. 


73. Considering the unreality of the visible phenomena, there can be no desire 
for them in any body; but the inward soul that is led by its egoism to believe 
them as true, is subject to death at the dis-appearance of the phenomena. 


74. The recluse ascetic flying from the fears of the world as foreign to his 
soul, and having none of its false desires rising in his breast, becomes 
liberated in his life and assimilated with the true ONE. 


CHAPTER LV. 


The states of Life and Death. 


Lila said: — Tell me, goddess! for edification of my knowledge, the manner 
in which a living being comes to die and to be re-born in another form. 


2. The goddess replied: — As the action of the heart ceases to act, and the 
lungs blow and breathe no more, the current of the vital airs is utterly stopped, 
and the living being loses its sensibility. 


3. But the intellectual soul which has no rise nor fall, remains ever the same as 
it abides in all moving and unmoving bodies, and in air, water, fire, and 
vacuum. — Gloss. So saith the Sruti: — The soul is unlimited, permanent, 
and imperishable. 


4. When the hindrance of breathing, stops the pulsation, and motion of the 
body, it is said to be dead; and is then called an inert corpse, (but not so the 
soul). 


5. The body being a dead carcass, and the breathing mixing with the air, the 
soul is freed from the bonds of its desires, and flies to and remains in the 
mode of the discrete and self-existent soul. — Gloss. The Sruti says: — “His 
elemental parts mix with the elements, and his soul with the Supreme.” The 
unconditioned, — nirupadhika spirit, joins with the Holy spirit, but not so the 
conditioned, (upddhika), soul of the unholy. 


6. The soul having its desires and styled the animal spirit, — Jiva, is 
otherwise than the dtman-soul. It remains in its sepulchral vault under the 
same atmosphere as the soul of Padma, which thou sawest hovering about his 
tomb. — Gloss. The desire binds down the spirit to its own sphere. (The 
Ghost hovering about the charnel vault. — Milton). 


7. Hence such departed spirits are called pretas or ghosts of the dead, which 
have their desires and earthly propensities attached to them, as the fragrance 
of the flower is concentrated in its pollen, and thence diffused through the air. 


8. As the animal souls are removed to other spheres, after their departure from 


this visible world, they view the very many scenes and sights, that their 
desires present before them like visions in a dream. 


9. The soul continues to remember all its past adventures, even in its next 
state, and finds itself in a new body, soon after the insensibility of death is 
over. — Gloss. This is the linga or suikshma deha, — the spiritual or subtle 
body of spiritualism. 


10. What appears an empty vacuum to others, seems as a dusky cloud to the 
departed soul, enveloping the earth, sky, moon, and all other orbs within its 
bosom, (the circumambient atmosphere). 


11. The departed spirits are classed in six orders, as you shall now hear from 
me, namely, the great, greater, and greatest sinners, and so likewise the three 
degrees of the virtuous. 


12. These are again subdivided into three kinds, as some belonging to one 
state, and others composed of two or three states; (i.e., of virtue and vice 
intermixed) in the same individual soul. 


13. Some of the most sinful souls, lose the remembrance of their past states 
for the period of a whole year, and remain quite insensible within themselves, 
like blocks of wood or stone. (This is called the pretdrasthda continuing for a 
whole year after death). (It is allied to Abraham’s bosom or Irack of 
Mahomedans). 


14. Rising after this time, they are doomed to suffer the endless torments of 
hell, which the hardness of their earthly mindedness has brought upon them. 
(This is the Purgatory of Christians). 


15. They then pass into hundreds of births, leading from misery to misery, or 
have a moment’s respite from the pains in their short-lived prosperity, amidst 
their dreaming journey through life. (These transmigrations of the soul, are 
the consequences of its evil propensities). 


16. There are others, that after their torpor of death is over, come to suffer the 
unutterable torments of torpidity, in the state of unmoving trees, (which are 
fixed to undergo all the inclemencies of weather). 


17. And others again that having undergone the torments of hell, according to 
their inordinate desires in life, are brought to be re-born on earth, in a variety 
of births in different forms. 


18. Those of lesser crimes, are made to feel the inertness of stones for some 
time, after the insensibility attending upon their death. (This means either the 
insensibility of dead bodies, or that of mineral substances.) 


19. These being awakened to sensibility after some period, either of duration 
long or short, (according to their desert), are made to return on earth, to feel 
the evils of brutish and beastly lives. 


20. But the souls of the least sinful, come to assume soon after their death, 
some perfect human form, in order to enjoy the fruits of their desire and desert 
on earth. 


21. These desires appear before the soul as dreams, and awaken its 
reminiscence of the past, as present at that moment. 


22. Again, the best and most virtuous souls, come soon after their death, to 
find themselves in heavenly abodes, by reason of their continued thoughts and 
speculations of them. 


23. Some amongst them, are brought to enjoy the rewards of their actions in 
other spheres, from which they are sent back to the mortal world, at the 
residences of the auspicious and best part of mankind. 


24. Those of moderate virtues are blown away by the atmospheric air, upon 
the tops of trees and medicinal plants, where they rove about as the protozoa, 
after the insensibility of death is over. 


25. Being nourished here by the juice of fruits, they descend in the form of 
serum and enter into the hearts of men, whence they fall into the uterus in the 
form of semen virilis, which is the cause of the body and life of other living 
beings. 


The gloss says: — Having enjoyed in the next world the good fruits of their 
virtuous deeds, they are blown down on earth by the winds and rain. Here 
they enter in the form of sap and marrow in the vegetable productions of corn, 
grain, and fruits; and these entering the body of animals in the form of food, 
produce the semen, which becomes the cause of the lives and bodies of all 
living beings. 


26. Thus the dead, figure to themselves some one of these states of living 
bodies, according to their respective proclivity, after they recover from the 
collapse attending upon their death. 


27. Having thought themselves to be extinct at first, they come to feel their 
resuscitation afterwards, upon receiving the offering of the mess, made to 
their departed spirits (by their surviving heirs). 


28. Then they fancy they see the messengers of death, with nooses in their 
hands, come to fetch them to the realm of Yama; where they depart with 
them, (with their provision for one year offered in their Sradh ceremony). 


29. There the righteous are carried in heavenly cars to the gardens of Paradise, 
which they gain by their meritorious acts in life. 


30. But the sinful soul, meets with icebergs and pitfals, tangled with thorns 
and iron pikes, and bushes and brambles in its passage, as the punishment of 
its sins. 


31. Those of the middling class, have a clear and paved passage, with soft 
grassy path-ways shaded by cooling arbours, and supplied with spring waters 
on both sides of them. 


32. On its arrival there, the soul reflects within itself that: — “here am I, and 
yonder is Yama, — the lord of the dead. The other is the judge of our actions, 
— Chitragupta, and this is his judgment given on my behalf.” 


33. In this manner the great world also, appears to every one as in a dream, 
and so the nature and manner of all things, present themselves before every 
soul. 


34. But all these appearances are as void as air, the soul alone is the sentient 
principle, and the spacious space and time, and the modes and motions of 
things, though they appear as real, are nothing in reality. 


35. Here, (in Yama’s court), the soul is pronounced to reap the reward of its 
acts, whereby it ascends either to the blissful heaven above, or descends to the 
painful hell below. 


36. After having enjoyed the bliss of heaven, or suffered the torment of hell, it 
is doomed to wander in this earth again, to reap the reward of its acts in 
repeated transmigrations. 


37. The soul springs up as a paddy plant, and brings forth the grains of 
intelligence, and then being assembled by the senses, it becomes an animal, 
and lastly an intelligent being. 


LE. The insensible vegetable, entering into the animal body in the form of 
food, is converted to a sensible but irrational soul; but entering as food in the 
body of man, it turns to a rational and human soul. The one Universal soul is 
thus diversified in different beings. (It is the plant and food that sustains and 
nourishes all souls. — Gloss). 


38. The soul contains in itself the germs of all its senses, which lie dormant in 
it for want of its bodily organs. It is contained in the semen virilis of man, 
which passing into the uterus, produces the foetus in the womb of the female. 


39. The foetus then becomes either well-formed or deformed, according to the 
good or evil deeds of the person in its past state, and brings forth the infant of 


a goodly or ill-shapen appearance. 


40. It then perceives the moonlike beauty of youthful bloom, and its amorous 
disposition coming upon itself, and feels afterwards the effects of hoary old 
age, defacing its lotus-like face, as the sleets of snow, shatter and shrivel the 
lotus leaflets. 


41. At last it undergoes the pains of disease and death, and feels the same 
insensibility of Euthanasia as before, and finds again as in a dream its taking 
of a new form. 


42. It again believes itself to be carried to the region of Pluto, and subjected to 
the former kinds of revolution, and thus it continues to conceive its 
transmigration, in endless births and various forms. 


43. Thus the aerial spirit goes on thinking, forever in its own ethereal sphere, 
all its ceaseless metempsychosis, until its final liberation from this changeful 
state. 


44. Lila said: — Tell me kindly, O good goddess! for the enlightenment of my 
understanding, how this misconception of its changeableness, first came upon 
the soul in the beginning. 


45. The goddess replied: — It is the gross view of the abstract, that causes us 
to assume the discrete spirit, in the concrete forms of the earth and sky and 
rocks and trees, (all of which subsist in the spirit, and are unsubstantial in 
themselves). 


46. As the divine intellect manifests itself, as the soul and model of all forms, 
So we see these manifestations, in the transcendental sphere of its pure 
intelligence. 


47. In the beginning, God conceived himself as the lord of creation, (Brahma), 
and then as it were in a dream, he saw in himself, all the forms as they 
continue to this time. 


48. These forms were manifested in the divine spirit, at first as his will, and 
then exhibited in the phenomenal world, as reflexions of the same, in all their 
present forms. 


49. Among these, some are called living beings, which have the motions of 
their bodies and limbs, and live by means of the air which they breathe, and 
which circulate in their bodies through the lungs and arteries. 


50. Such also is the state of the vegetable creation from the first, that they 
having their inward sensitiveness, are notwithstanding devoid of outward 
motion, and receive their sustenance by the roots, wherefore they are called 


Padapas or pedobibers. 


51. The hollow sphere of the divine intellect, beaming with intelligence, sends 
forth its particles of percipience, which form the consciousness of some 
beings, and sensitiveness in others. 


52. But man uses his eyes to view the outer and the reflected world (in 
disregard of his consciousness of the real), although the eyes do not form his 
living soul, nor did they exist at his creation and before his birth. (When his 
view was concentrated within himself as in his sleeping visions). 


53. It is according to one’s estimation of himself, that he has his proper and 
peculiar desires, and the particular form of his body also. Such is the case of 
the elementary bodies likewise, from their inward conception of their peculiar 
natures. 


Gloss: — So the ideas of vacuity, fluidity and solidity forming the bodies of 
air, water and earth, and the form of every thing agreeing with its inherent 
nature. 


54. Thus all moving and unmoving things, have their movable and immovable 
bodies, according to their intrinsic disposition or idiosyncrasy as such and 
such. 


55. Hence all self-moving beings have their movable bodies, conforming with 
the conception of their natures as so and so; and in this state of their belief, 
they continue to this time, with their same inborn or congenital bodies. 


56. The vegetable world still continues in the same state of fixedness, from its 
sense of immobility; and so the rocks and minerals continue in their inert 
state, from the inborn sense of their inertness. 


57. There is no distinction whatever between inertness and intelligence, nor 
any difference betwixt production, continuance, and extinction of things, all 
which occur in one common essence of the supreme. 


58. The varying idiocrasy subsisting in vegetables and minerals, makes them 
feel themselves as such, and causes their various natures and forms, as they 
have to this time. 


59. The inward constitution of all immovable objects, makes them remain in 
their stationary states; and so of all other substances, according to their 
different names and natures. 


60. Thus the inward crasis or quality of worms and insects, makes them 
conceive themselves according to their different kinds, and gives them their 
particular natures forever. 


61. So the people under the north pole know nothing about those in the south, 
except that they have the knowledge of themselves only (as ever subject to the 
intense cold of the frigid zone). 


62. So also all kinds of moving and unmoving beings, are prepossessed with 
their own notions of things, and regard all others according to the peculiar 
nature of themselves. (Atma vat etc.). 


63. Again as the inhabitants of caves, know nothing of their outsiders, and as 
the frogs of dirty pools are unacquainted with pure water of streams, so is one 
sort of being ignorant of the nature of another. 


64. But the inane intellect, residing in the form of the all pervasive mind, and 
all sustaining air, knows the natures of all things in all places. 


65. The vital air that enters all bodies through the pores of their bodies, is the 
moving principle, that gives life and motion to all living beings. 


66. Verily the mind is situated in all things, whether they are moving or 
immovable, and so is the air, which causes the motion in some, and 
quiescence in others. 


67. Thus are all things but rays of the conscious soul, in this world of illusion, 
and continue in the same state as they have been from the beginning. 


68. I have told you all about the nature of things in the world, and how un- 
realities come to appear as real unto us. 


69. Lo, here this king Viduratha is about to breathe his last, and the garlands 
of flowers heaped on the corpse of thy husband Padma, are now being hung 
upon the breast of Vidtiratha. 


70. Lila said: — Tell me goddess! by what way he entered the tomb of 
Padma, and how we may also go there to see what he has been doing in that 
place. 


71. The goddess said: — Man goes to all places by the way of his desires, and 
thinks also he goes to the distant future, in the spiritual form of pure intellect. 


72. We shall go by the same way, (aerial or spiritual), as you will like to take, 
because the bond of our friendship will make no difference in our choice and 
desires. 


73. Vasishtha said: — The princess Lila being relieved of her pain, by the 
recital of this agreeable narration, and her intellectual sight being brightened, 
by the blazing sun of spiritual light, beheld the insensible and unmoving 
Vidtratha, breathe out his last expiring breath. 


CHAPTER LVI. 


State of the soul after death. 


Argument. The desire of the king, and his departure to the realm of death, 
followed by Lila and the goddess; and their arrival to his former city. 


Vasishtha continued: — In the meantime, the eye-balls of the king became 
convoluted, and his lips and cheeks grew pale and dry, with his whole 
countenance, and there remained only the slender breath of life in him. 


2. His body became as lean as a dry leaf, and his face turned as ghastly as the 
figure of death, his throat gurgled as the hoarsest beetles, and his lungs 
breathed with a bated breath. 


3. His sight was darkened upon the insensibility of death, and his hopes were 
buried in the pit of despair, and the sensations of his external organs, were hid 
within the cavity of his heart. 


4. His figure was as senseless as a picture in painting, and all his limbs were 
as motionless, as those of a statue carved upon a block of marble. 


5. What need is there of a lengthy description, when it may be said in short, 
that his life quitted his body, as a bird flies off afar from a falling tree. 


6. The two ladies with their divine eye-sight, beheld his animal spirit, flying 
upwards in the sky in its aerial form, and his consciousness disappearing, like 
the odour of a flower wafted by the wind. 


7. His living soul being joined with its spiritual body, began to fly higher and 
higher in the air, as it was led by its inward desire or expectation of ascending 
to heaven. 


8. The two ladies kept going after that conscious soul, like a couple of female 
bees, pursuing a particle of perfume borne afar in the air on the wings of the 
wind. 


9. Then in a moment, after the fainting fit of death was over, the conscious 
soul was roused from its insensibility, like some fragrance expanding itself 
with the breeze. 


10. It saw the porters of death, carrying away the souls of the dead, that have 
resumed their grosser forms, by means of the mess offerings of their kinsmen 
to their manes. 


11. After a long year’s journey on the way, it reached at the distant abode of 
Yama, with the hope of reaping the reward of its acts, but found the gate fast 
beset by beasts of prey. (Like the Cerberus at the hell-gate of Pluto). 


12. Yama, on beholding the departed spirit of every body brought before him, 
ordered to find out its foul acts all along its life time. 


13. On finding the prince’s spirit spotless, and ever inclined to virtuous acts 
and to have been nourished by the grace of the goddess of wisdom: — 


14. He ordered it to be released, and re-entered into its former dead body, 
which lay buried under the flowers in the tomb. 


15. It was then let to fly in the ethereal path, with the swiftness of a stone 
flung from a sling, and was followed by the living Lila and the goddess in the 
air. 


16. The living soul of the king thus sailing through the sky, did not observe 
the forms of the two ladies that followed it, though they saw it all along its 
course. (Because heavenly forms are invisible to mortal eyes and souls). 


17. They traversed through many worlds, and soon passed the bounds of the 
extra-mundane systems, till they arrived at the solar world, whence they 
descended on this orb of the earth. 


18. The two self-willed forms (of Lila and the goddess), in company with the 
living soul of the king, arrived at the royal city of Padma, and entered the 
apartment of Lila. 


19. They entered in a trice and of their own free will, into the inside of the 
palace, as the air passes in flowers, and the sunbeams penetrate in the water, 
and the odors mix with the air. 


20. Rama asked: — How was it Sir, that they entered into the abode adjoining 
to the tomb, and how could they find out the way to it, the one having been 
dead a long time, and all three being but bodiless vacuity? 


21. Vasishtha replied: — The tomb of the dead body of the prince, being 
impressed in his soul, and the object of its desire, led his spirit insensibly to it, 


as if it were by its inborn instinct. 


22. Who does not know, that the endless desires which are sown in the human 
breast, like the countless seeds of a fig fruit, come of their own nature, to grow 
up to big trees in their time? 


23. Just as the living body bears its seed, — the subtle or Jinga deha in the 
heart, which germinates and grows to a tree at last, so every particle of the 
intellect, bears the mundane seed in itself. (The cosmos is contained in every 
individual soul). 


24. As a man placed in one country, sees within himself his house, which is 
situated in a far distant land, so the soul sees the objects of his distant desires, 
ever present before it. 


25. The living soul, ever longs after the best object of its desire, though it may 
undergo a hundred births, and become subject to the errors and delusions of 
his senses, and of this illusive world. (For whatever is born in the root, must 
come out in the seed; and that which is bred in the bones, must appear in the 
flesh). 


26. Rama rejoined: — There are many persons, that are free from their desire 
of receiving the funeral cake; now tell me, Sir, what becomes of those souls, 
who get no cake offering at their Sradh. 


27. Vasishtha replied: — The man having the desire of receiving the mess 
settled in his heart, and thinking it to be offered to him; is surely benefitted by 
its offering. (The funeral cake like every other food, is said to nourish the 
spirit, and cause its resuscitation in a new life and body). 


28. Whatever is in the heart and mind, the same notions form the nature of 
living beings, and whether these are in their corporeal or incorporeal states, 
they think themselves as such beings and no other. (The sense of personal 
identity accompanies the soul everywhere). 


29. The thought of having received the pinda cake, makes a man sapinda, 
though it is not actually offered to him; so on the other hand, the thought of 
not being served with the cake, makes a sapinda become a nispinda, (or one 
served with it becomes as one without it). 


30. It is verily the desire of all living beings to be such and such as they have 
in their hearts, and that is the cause of their becoming so in reality. (Gloss. — 
The ordinance of the necessity of cake offering, fosters its desire in the hearts 
of men. Or, which is the same thing, the desire of receiving the funeral cake, 
is fostered in the hearts of men, by the ordinance of Sradh). 


31. It is the thought of a man, that makes the poison savour as nectar to his 
taste, and it is his very thought that makes an untruth seem as truth to him. 
(Gloss. — The thought of a snake-catcher that he is the snake eating Garuda, 
makes him swallow the bitter poison as sweet honey, and the thought of 
snake-bite from the pricking of a thorn, mortifies a man by his false fear or 
imagination only). 


32. Know this for certain, that no thought ever rises in any one without some 
cause or other, hence the desire or thought which is inherent in the spirit, is 
the sole cause of its regeneration on earth. 


33. Nobody has ever seen or heard of any event, occurring without its proper 
cause, except the being of the Supreme Being, which is the causeless cause of 
all beings, from their state of not-being into being. 


34. The desire is inherent in the intellect, like a dream in the soul, and the 
same appears in the form of acts, as the Will of God is manifested in his 
works of creation. 


35. Rama said: — How can the spirit that is conscious of its demerit, foster 
any desire of its future good, and how can it profit by the pious works of 
others for its salvation? (as the Sradh made by the relatives of the deceased). 


36. Tell me too whether the pious acts of others, which are offered to the 
manes go for nothing, and whether the absence of future prospects of the 
unmeritorious ghost, or the benevolent wishes of others (for its future good) 
are to take effect. 


37. Vasishtha said: — A desire is naturally raised in one at its proper time and 
place, and by application of appropriate acts and means, and the rising of the 
desire necessarily overcomes its absence. — Gloss. So a Sradh done in proper 
season and manner, serves to the benefit of the desertless spirit. 


38. The pious gifts made on behalf of the departed souls, accrue to them as 
their own acts, and the sense which they thus acquire of their worthiness, fills 
them with better hopes and desires of their future state. (Hence rises the hope 
of redemption by means of the redeeming son of man). 


39. And as the stronger man gains the better of his adversary, so the later acts 
of piety drive away the former impiety from the spirit. Therefore, the constant 
practice of pious acts is strictly enjoined in the Sdstras. 


40. Rama said: — If the desire is raised at its proper time and place, how then 
could it rise in the beginning when there was no time nor place, (i.e., when all 
was void and yet Brahma had his desire and will). 


41. You say that there are accessory causes, which give rise to the desires, but 
how could the will rise at first without any accessory cause whatever? 


42. Vasishtha replied: — It is true, O long-armed Rama, that there was neither 
time nor place in the beginning, when the Spirit of God was without its will. 


43. And there being no accessory cause, there was not even the idea of the 
visible world, nor was it created or brought into existence, and it is so even 
now. 


44. The phenomenal world has no existence, and all that is visible, is the 
manifestation of the Divine Intellect, which is ever lasting and imperishable. 


45. This will I explain to you afterwards in a hundred different ways, and it is 
my main purpose to do so, but hear me now tell you what appertains to the 
matter under consideration. 


46. They having got in that house, saw its inside beautifully decorated with 
chaplets of flowers as fresh as those of the spring season. 


47. The inmates of the palace were quietly employed in their duties, and the 
corpse of the king was placed upon a bed of mandara and kunda flowers. 


48. The sheet over the dead body, was also strewn over with wreaths of the 
same flowers, and there were the auspicious pots of water placed by the bed 
side. 


49. The doors of the room were closed, and the windows were shut fast with 
their latchets; the lamps cast a dim light on the white washed walls around, 
and the corpse was lying as a man in sleep, with the suppressed breathing of 
his mouth and nostrils. 


50. There was the full bright moon, shining with her delightsome lustre, and 
the beauty of the palace, put to blush the paradise of Indra; it was as charming 
as the pericarp of the lotus of Brahma’s birthplace, and it was as silent as 
dumbness or a dummy itself, and as beautiful as the fair moon in her fulness. 


CHAPTER LVIL. 


Phenomena of Dreaming. 


Argument. Unsubstantiality of the aerial body of Lila and the Spiritual bodies 
of Yogis. 


Vasishtha continued: — They beheld there the younger Lila of Viduratha, 
who had arrived there after her demise, and before the death of that king. 


2. She was in her former habit and mode with the same body, and the same 
tone and tenor of her mind; she was also as beautiful in all her features, as in 
her former graceful form and figure when living. 


3. She was the same in every part of her body, and wore the same apparel as 
before. She had the very ornaments on her person, with the difference that it 
was sitting quietly in the same place, and not moving about as before. 


4. She kept flapping her pretty fan, (chouri), over the corpse of the king, and 
was gracing the ground below, like the rising moon brightening the skies 
above. 


5. She sat quiet, reclining her moonlike face on the palm of her left hand, and 
decorated with shining gems, she appeared as a bed of flowers, with new- 
blown blossoms on it. 


6. With the glances of her beautiful eyes, she shed showers of flowers on all 
sides, and the brightness of her person, beamed with the beams of the ethereal 
moon. 


7. She seemed to have approached to the lord of men, like the goddess 
Lakshmi, appearing before the god Vishnu, and with the heaps of flowers 
before her, she seemed as Flora or the vernal season in person. 


8. Her eyes were fixed on the countenance of her husband, as if she was 
pondering his future well-being, and there was a melancholy like that of the 
waning moon, spread over her face, to think of his present woeful state. 


9. They beheld the damsel, who however had no sight of them, because their 
trust was in truth, and saw everything clearly, while her views being 
otherwise, she could not discern their spiritual forms. 


10. Rama said: — You have said Sir, that the former Lila had repaired there in 
her reverie and spiritual form, by the favour of the goddess of wisdom. 


11. How do you now describe her as having a body, which I want to know 
how and whence it came to her. 


12. Vasishtha replied: — What is this body of Lila, Rama! It is no more true 
than a false imagination of her gross spirit, like that of water in the mirage. (It 
is the conception of one’s self as so and so, that impresses him with that belief 
also). 


13. It is the spirit alone that fills the world, and all bodies are creations of the 
fancy. This spirit is the Intellect of God, and full of felicity in itself. 


14. The same understanding which Lila had of herself to her end, 
accompanied her to her future state, and the same notion of her body followed 
her there, though it was reduced to dust, as the ice is dissolved into water. 


15. The spiritual bodies also, are sometimes liable to fall into error, and think 
themselves as corporeal bodies, as we mistake a rope for the serpent. 


16. The belief in the materiality of any body, as composed of the earth and 
other elements, is as false as it is to believe the hares to have horns on their 
heads. 


17. Whoso thinks himself to have become a stag in his dream, has no need of 
seeking another stag for comparing himself with it. (.e., Men are actuated by 
their own opinion of themselves). 


18. An untruth appears as truth at one time, and disappears at another, as the 
error of a snake in a rope, vanishes upon the knowledge of its falsehood. 


19. So the knowledge of the reality of all things, in the minds of the un- 
enlightened, is dispersed upon conviction of their un-reality in the minds of 
the enlightened. 


20. But the ignorant, that have a belief in the reality of this world of dreams, 
believe also in the transmigration of the animal soul, like the revolution of the 
globe on its own axis. 


21. Rama asked: — If the bodies of Yogis be of a spiritual nature, how is it 
that they are seen to walk about in the sights of men? 


22. Vasishtha replied: — The Yogi may take upon himself various forms, 


without the destruction of his former body, as the human soul may deem itself 
transformed to a stag or any other being in a dream, without undergoing any 
change in its spiritual essence. (The identity of the self is not lost under any 
form of the body. — Locke). 


23. His spiritual body is invisible to all, though it may appear as visible to 
their sight. It is like the particles of frost seen in sun-beams, and as the 
appearance of a white spot in autumnal sky (when there is no frost nor cloud 
in it). 

24. No body can easily discern the features of a Yogi’s body, nor are they 
discernible by other Yogis. They are as imperceptible as the features of a bird 
flying in the air. 


25. It is from the error of judgment, that men think some Yogis to be dead and 
others to be living; but their spiritual bodies are never subject to death or 
common sight. 


26. The embodied soul is subject to errors, from which the souls of Yogis are 
free, because their knowledge of truth has purged the mistake of a snake in the 
rope, from their souls. 


27. What is this body and whence it is, and what of its existence or 
destruction? What is lasting remains forever and is freed from the ignorance it 
had before, (and it is the soul which is ever lasting and free from error). 


28. Rama said: — Whether the embodied soul takes the spiritual form, or is it 
something other than this. Tell me this and remove my doubt. 


29. Vasishtha said: — I have told this repeatedly to you, my good Rama! and 
how is it that you do not understand it yet, that there exists only the spiritual 
body, and the material form is nothing? 


30. It is by habit of constant meditation, that you must know your spiritual 
state, and subdue your sense of corporeality, and as you abstain from the 
latter, so you attain to the former state. 


31. Then there will be an end of your sense of the gravity and solidity of 
objects, like the disappearance of the visions of a dreaming man, when he 
comes to wake. 


32. The body of a Yogi becomes as light and subtle, as the evanescent 
appearances in a dream, (the fleeting objects of vision). 


33. And as a dreaming man feels the lightness of his body, in his dreaming 
rambles, so the Yogi finds his solid body, as volatile as air in all places. 


34. The expectation of the long life of a master-head in his material body, is 
realized in the spiritual one, after the corpse has been burnt away. (Longevity 
consists in the long life of the spirit and not of the body). 


35. Everybody must have to assume his spiritual frame afterwards; but the 
Yogi finds it in his life-time, by the enlightenment of his intellect. 


36. As a man upon his waking from sleep, remembers his having an 
intellectual form in his dreaming state, so the Yogi is conscious of his spiritual 
body in his own intellect. 


37. The notion of the corporeal body is a mere fallacy, like that of the snake in 
a rope, hence nothing is lost by the loss of this body, nor is anything gained by 
its production and regeneration. 


38. Rama said: — Now tell me Sir, what the inmates of the house thought this 
Lila to be, whether they viewed her as an embodied being or a bodiless 
apparition appearing before them. 


39. Vasishtha answered: — They took the sorrowful queen to be some friend 
of the king, and to have come from some place they knew not what and 
where. 


40. They did not like to examine the matter, because it is the nature of the 
ignorant like that of brutes, to believe what they see, without investigation or 
consideration of its nature. 


41. As a stone flung at random flies off from its mark, so the brutish and 
ignorant folks go astray, from hitting at the true mark of a thing placed before 
them. 


42. As we know not what becomes of the objects of our dream, and whither 
they are fled upon our waking, such is the case with our material bodies, 
which are as false and fleeting as our delusive dreams. 


43. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, where the hill we dream of, is hid upon our 
waking, kindly remove my doubt, as the wind disperses the autumnal clouds. 


44. Vasishtha said: — All things appearing in our dream or residing in our 
desire as the hill, efc., are absorbed in our consciousness whence they sprang, 
just as the motion of bodies subsides in the air which gives the vibration. 


45. As the motion of the air mixes with the fixed ether, so the dreams and 
desires which we are conscious of, set in the unchanging soul whence they 
have their rise. 


46. Our dreams, like our knowledge of all other things, are made known to us 


by our consciousness, the nature of which is unknown to us as that of the 
inward soul. (Consciousness and the soul are represented as two different 
predicaments, and the one is not predicated of the other, as we say, — the 
conscious soul). 


47. We do not find our dreams and desires as distinct from our consciousness 
of them, they appertain to it in the same manner, as fluidity to water and 
motion to the air. 


48. Whatever difference may appear to exist between them, is the effect of 
sheer ignorance, and this gross ignorance is the feature of this world, known 
as the phantom of fancy. 


49. As it is impossible to conceive two co-eternal and co-existent causes 
together (as an efficient and a material cause), so it is wrong to suppose the 
dream as a distinct existence or otherwise, than an act of our consciousness. 


50. There is no difference whatever between the dreaming and waking states, 
in dream we see a false city appearing to view, so in waking you behold the 
unreal world, standing as a reality before you. 


51. Nothing can be truly existent that appears as true in a dream, this being 
always true of the visions in a dream, it is likewise so of the external 
phenomena, appearing to the sight in our day dreams. 


52. As the hill in a dream, immediately disappears into airy nothing, so the 
material world sooner or later disappears into naught by thinking on its 
nihility. 

53. A Yogi is seen by some to mount in the air, and by others as a dead body 
lying on the ground, and this is according to one’s belief in his spiritual or 
material body, that everyone sees him in his own way. 


54. The view of the phenomenal world as distinct from the Unity, is as false 
as a sight in delusion or magical show, or a dream or delirium of the great 
Illusion, — mdyd. 


55. Others who are blinded by similar errors, entertain as in a dream, the 
notion of their reproduction after being awakened from the insensibility of 
their death like sleep, but the spiritual body of the Yogi shines and soars 
upward, after passing over the mirage of the false appearances of the world. 


CHAPTER LVIII. 


Revival of Padma. 


Argument. Extinction of the Spiritual life of Lila, and Restoration of Padma’s 
Life. 


Vasishtha continued: — It was in the meantime that the goddess of wisdom, 
stopped the course of Vidtratha’s life, as we stop the flight of our minds at 
will. 


2. Lila said: — Tell me, goddess, what length of time has expired, since the 
corpse of the king was laid in this tomb, and I was absorbed in my deep 
meditation. 


3. The goddess replied: — A month has passed since these maid servants of 
thine have been waiting here for watching thy body, which they thought lay 
asleep in the room. 


4. Hear excellent lady! what has become of thy body, after it was rotten in a 
fortnight and evaporated in the air. 


5. Seeing thy lifeless corpse lying as cold as frost on the ground, and turning 
as dry as a log of wood, or rather as a withered leaf on the floor, — 


6. The royal ministers thought thee to be dead of thyself, (a suicide), and 
removed thy putrid carcass out of the room. 


7. And what more shall I say, than they laid thy corpse on a heap of sandal 
wood, and having set fire to the pile with the sprinkling of ghee, they reduced 
it to ashes in a short while. 


8. Then the family raised a loud cry that their queen was dead, and wept 
bitterly for some time, after which they performed thy funeral ceremonies. 


9. Now when they will behold thee coming here in thy same body, they must 
be astonished to think thee as returned from the next world of the dead. 


10. Now my daughter, when thou shalt appear before them in this thy purer 
and spiritual form, they must look upon thee with astonishment. 


11. For thou hast not thy former form at present, but it is changed to a purer 
one, agreeably to the tenor and temperament of thy mind. (Lit. according to 
the desire in thy heart). 


12. For every body beholds every thing without him, according to his inward 
feelings, as for example the sight of shadowy ghosts is frequent to children, 
that have a fear of devils at heart. 


13. Now, O beauteous lady! Thou art an adept in spiritualism, and hast a 
spiritual body on thee, and hast forgotten and forsaken thy former body, with 
all the desires connate with it. 


14. The view of material bodies, is lost to the sight of spiritualists, and the 
intelligent view them in the light of autumnal clouds, which are void of 
substance. (i.e., The flimsy clouds which are without rain-water in them). 


15. On attainment of the spiritual state, the material body becomes as an 
empty cloud, and as a flower without its odor. 


16. When a man of pure desire, is conscious of his attaining the spiritual state, 
he loses the remembrance of his material body, as a youth forgets his 
embryonic state. 


17. It is now the thirty first day that we have arrived at this place, and I have 
caused the maid servants here, to fall into a fast sleep this morning. 


18. Now Lila! let us advance before the willful Lila, and then discover to her 
at our will, the form of the truthful Lila, and her manner and conduct to thee. 


19. Vasishtha said: — So saying, they wished themselves to be perceived by 
the willful Lila, and stood manifest to her sight in their ethereal forms of the 
goddess and her inspired dame. 


20. At this instant the Lila of Vidtratha, looked upon them with her staring 
eyes, and found the room lighted up by the full lustre of their bodies. 


21. The apartment seemed to be lighted by the bright orb of the moon, and its 
wall washed over with liquid gold, the ground floor shone as paved with ice, 
and all was full of splendour. 


22. After seeing the brightness of the bed chamber, Lila looked up at the 
goddess and the other Lila, and rising respectfully before them, she fell at 
their feet. 


23. Be victorious, O ye goddesses! she said, that have blessed me with your 


visit, and know that know all, that I have come here first as a preparer of your 
way. (Lit. as the sweeper of your path). 


24. As she was speaking in this manner, they received her with good grace, 
and then all the three sat together on a bedding in their youthful bloom, like 
luxuriant creepers on the snow capt top of Meru. 


25. The goddess said: — Tell us daughter, how you came here before 
ourselves, how you have been, and what you have seen on your way hither. 


26. The younger Lila answered: — As I lay insensible on that spot, (upon the 
shock of my death), I was enveloped in darkness like the new moon, and felt 
myself burnt away by the flame of a conflagration, (i.e., funeral fire). 


27. Thad no sense nor thought of anything good or bad, but remained with my 
eyes closed under my eye-lids. 


28. Then I found myself, O great goddess! after I had recovered from my 
anaesthesia of death, to assume (by mistake a new body agreeably to my 
former impression), and to be translated at once into the midst of the sky. 


29. I mounted on the vehicle of winds, and was borne like fragrance to this 
mansion through the ethereal space. 


30. I found this house guarded by its warders, and lighted with lamps, and 
having a costly bedstead placed in the midst of it. 


31. Lam looking here upon this corpse, as my husband Viduratha, who has 
been sleeping here with his body covered under the flowers, like the vernal 
god in a flower garden. 


32. I thought he was taking his rest, after the fatigue of the warfare, and did 
not like to disturb his repose in this place. 


33. [have now related to you, my gracious goddesses! all that I have seen and 
thought of, since I have been restored to my new life. 


34. The goddess spake: — Now I tell thee Lila, that hast such beautiful eyes, 
and movest like a swan, that I will raise the corpse of the king to life from his 
bed in this bier. 


35. Saying so, she breathed the breath of life as the lotus lets off its fragrance, 
and it fled into the nostrils of the carcass, like a creeping plant crawls into a 
hole. 


36. It entered into the heart through the vital sheath, as the wind penetrates 
into the hole of a bamboo, and the breath of life was fraught with desires, as 
the waves of the sea sparkle with pearls. 


37. The infusion of life, added to the colour of the face and body of king 
Padma, as the rain-water refreshes the fading lotus in a drought. 


38. By degrees the members of the body became renovated, like a garden with 
its returning flowering season, and as the sides of a hill become virescent, 
with fresh grown bushes and creepers. 


39. The person of the king shone as the queen of the stars, with all her digits 
of the full moon, when she enlightens the whole world, with the beams of her 
radiant face. 


4O. All his limbs became as tender and roscid, as the branches of trees in 
spring, and they regained their bright and golden hue, like the flowers of the 
vernal season. 


41. He opened his eyes which were as clear as the sky, with their two pupils 
rolling as the two orbs of light, and enlightening the world, with their 
charming and auspicious beams. 


42. He raised his body, as the Vindhyé mountain uplifts its head, and cried, 
“who waits there,” with a grave and hoarse voice. 


43. The two Lilas responded to him saying: — “your commands,” when he 
beheld the two Lilds in attendance upon him, and lowly bending themselves at 
his feet. 


44. Both of them were of the same form and features, and of the like 
demeanour and deportment towards him. They were alike to one another in 
their voice and action, as in their joy and gladness at his rising. 


45. Then looking upon them he asked, “what art thou and who is she?” At this 
the elder Lila responded to him saying, — “deign to hear what I have to say.” 


46. I am Lila thy former consort, and was joined as twain in one with thee, as 
sounds and their senses are combined together. 


47. The other Lila is but a reflexion of myself, and cast by my free will for 
your service. 


48. The lady sitting here beside the bed, is the goddess of wisdom, — the 
blessed Saraswati, and mother of the three worlds set her on the golden seat 
before you. 


49. It is by virtue of our great merit, that she has presented herself to our sight, 
and brought us back from other worlds to your presence in this place. 


50. Hearing this, the lotus-eyed king, rose from his seat, and with pendant 
wreaths of flowers and a strap of cloth hung about his neck, prostrated himself 


at her feet. 


51. He exclaimed: — I hail thee, O divine Saraswati! that dost confer all 
blessings on mankind. Deign to confer on me the blessings of understanding 
and riches with a long life. 


52. As he was saying so, the goddess touched him with her hand and said, “be 
thou my son, possessed of thy desired blessings, and gain thy blessed abode in 
future. 


53. “Let all evils and evil thoughts be far from thee, and all thy discomforts be 
dispersed from this place, let an everlasting joy alight in thine hearts, and a 
thick population fill thy happy realm. May all prosperity attend on thee 
forever.” 


CHAPTER LIX. 


Extinction of Padma’s Life. 


Argument. Great joy on the King’s return to Life. His Government of the 
kingdom and his final Liberation. 


Vasishtha said: — “Be it so,” said Saraswati and disappeared in the air, and 
the people rose in the morning with their revivified king. 


2. He embraced the renascent Lila, who embraced him in her turn, and they 
were exceeding glad in their coming to life again. 


3. The palace was filled with loud acclamations of joy as those of giddy 
revelry, and the citizens were full of mirth and merry, song and music. 


4. The shouts of victory, and sounds of huzzas and heydays, resounded in the 
air, and the people elated with joy, thronged at the royal courtyard to see their 
king. 


5. The genii of the Siddhas and Vidyadharas, dropped down handfuls of 
flowers from above, and the sound of drums and kettles, and trumpets and 
conches, resounded on all sides. 


6. The elephants roared aloud on the outside, with their uplifted trunks, and 
crowds of females filled the inner court-yard, with their loud rejoicings. 


7. Men bearing presents to the king, fell upon one another at their mutual 
clashing, and others wearing the flowery chaplets on their heads and hairs, 
moved gracefully all about. 


8. The red turbans of joy on the heads of the chiefs and host of citizens, and 
the waving of the reddish palms of dancing girls, filled the sky with a bed of 
red lotuses. 


9. The ground also was strewn over with rosy flowers, by foot-falls of dancers 
with their reddish soles, and the pendant earrings of ballet girls, which 


flourished with the oscillation of their heads and shoulders, waved in the air 
like flowers of gold. 


10. The silken veils which like autumnal clouds, covered the faces of fairy 
damsels in their dancing, glittered as so many moons shining in the court- 
yard. 


11. The people then retired to their respective abodes, with loud applause of 
the queen’s return with her husband from the other world. 


12. The king Padma heard of his adventures from the hearsay of his subjects, 
and made his purificatory ablution, with the waters of the four seas of the 
earth. 


13. Then the royal ministers and ministerial Brahmans, joined together in the 
act of his installation, like the synod of immortals, meeting at the inauguration 
of Indra. 


14. The two Lilds continued in company with the king, to relate with delight 
their respective adventures, and the wisdom they had gathered thereby. 


15. It was thus by grace of the genius of wisdom and their own experience, 
that this king Padma and his two queens, obtained their prosperity equal to 
that of the three worlds. 


16. The king, who was fraught with the wisdom imparted to him by the 
goddess, continued to rule over his kingdom for thousands of years, in 
company with his consorts. 


17. They reigned on earth, in their state of living liberation for myriads of 
years, and then receiving the perfect knowledge of the holy Siddhas, they 
became wholly liberated after their deaths. 


18. The happy pair having reigned jointly, over their delightful realm of ever 
increasing population, and which was graced by learned men and righteous 
people, knowing their own rights and duties of doing good to all mankind, 
became freed from the burden of their state affairs for ever. 


CHAPTER LX. 


On Duration and Time and Thoughts of the Mind. 


Argument. The reason of introducing the two Lilas in the tale. The one as the 
counterpart of the other. 


Vasishtha said: — I have related to you this tale, O prince! for removing your 
error of the phenomenal world. Mind this tale of Lila, and renounce your 
misconception of the gross material world. 


2. The substantiality of phenomena is a nil by itself, and requires no pains to 
invalidate it. It is hard to disprove a reality, but there is no difficulty in 
effacing a falsehood from the mind. 


3. True knowledge consists in viewing the visibles as void, and knowing the 
one vacuum as the sole unity and real entity; one loses himself at last in this 
infinite vacuity. (Vasishtha was a suinya vddi or vacuist, which Sankaracharya 
was at the pains to refute in his Dig-vijaya). 


4. When the self-born Brahma created the world from nothing, and without 
the aid of any material or elementary body, it is plain that there was an eternal 
void, and all these are but manifestations of the vacuous soul. (The Teom and 
Beom of Genesis, corresponding with Tama and Vyom of the Veda, were the 
origin of creation). 


5. The same creative soul, has spread the seeds of its consciousness in the 
stream of creation, and these produce the images as they incessantly appear to 
us, unless we take the pains to repress them. 


6. The appearance of the world, is but a perspective of the sphere of divine 
intellect, and contained in the small space of human intellect within the soul, 
as in a transparent particle of sand. 


7. Such being the case, say what is the essence of this erroneous conception, 
and what may be our desires of reliance in it, and what can be the meaning 


either of destiny or necessity? (The predestination and chance, to which the 
Fatalists ascribe the origination of the universe). 


8. This entire whole which is visible to the eye, is but a false appearance as 
that of magic, and there is no truth nor substance in a magic show. 


9. Rama said: — Oh! the wondrous exposition of the world, that you have 
now explained to me. It refreshes my soul, as the moon-beams revive the 
blades of grass, that have been burnt down by a conflagration. 


10. It is after so long, that I have come to know the truly knowable, such as 
what and how it is, and the manner whereby, whence and when it is to be 
known. 


11. [have my peace and rest in pondering on this wonderful theory, and your 
elucidation of the doctrines of the Sruti Sdstras. 


12. But tell me this one thing to remove my doubt, as my ears are never 
satiate, with drinking the nectarious juice of your sweet speech. 


13. Tell me the time, which transpired during the three births of Lila’s 
husband. Was it the duration of a day and night in one case, and of a month in 
another, and the period of a whole year in the case of Vidtiratha? 


14. Or did any one of them live for many years, and whether they were of 
short or longer durations, according to the measure of men, gods or Brahma. 
(Because a human year is a day and night of the polar gods, and a moment of 
the cycle of Brahma. And revolution of the whole planetary system to the 
same point makes a day of Brahma). 


15. Please Sir, kindly tell me this, because little hearing is not sufficient to me, 
as a drop of water is not enough to moisten the dry soil or the parched ground 
of summer heat. 


16. Vasishtha said: — Know sinless Rama! that whosoever thinks of anything 
in any manner at any place or time, he comes to feel the same in the same 
manner, and in the same place and time. 


17. Take for instance the destructive poison, which becomes as ambrosia to 
venomous insects, that take it for their dainty nourishment, and so is an enemy 
turning to a friend by your friendly behaviour unto him. (In both cases the evil 
turns to good by our taking it as such). 


18. And the manner in which all beings consider themselves, and all others for 
a length of time, the same they seem to be by their mode and habit of 
thinking, as if it were by an act of destiny. (i.e., They consider their thoughts 
of things as their destined nature, which is not so in reality, for fair is foul and 


foul is fair, according as our judgments declare). 


19. The manner in which the active intellect represents a thing in the soul, the 
same is imprinted in the consciousness of its own nature. (Here the Chit is 
said to be the intellectus agens and consciousness, — Samvid, — the 
intellectus patiens. The motion of the mind gives us the impressions of the 
swiftness and slowness of time). 


20. When our consciousness represents a twinkling of the eye as a Kalpa, we 
are led to believe a single moment an age of long duration. (As a short nap 
appears an age in dreaming), and (a long age as a moment as in the case of the 
seven sleepers of Kehef). 


21. And when we are conscious of or think a Kalpa age as a twinkling, the 
Kalpa age is thought to pass as a moment, and so a long night in our 
unconscious sleep, appears as a moment upon waking. 


22. The night appears a longsome age, to the long suffering sick, while it 
seems as a moment, in the nightly revels of the merry, so a moment appears as 
an age in the dream, and an age passes off as a moment in the state of 
insensibility. (The length and shortness of duration, depending on our 
consciousness and insensibility of the succession of our ideas. (See Locke and 
Kant on our idea of time). 


23. The notions of the resurrection of the dead, and of one’s metempsychosis, 

and being re-born in a new body, of his being a boy, youth or old man, and of 

his migrations to different places at the distance of hundreds of leagues, are all 
but the phenomena of sleep, and retrospective views in a dream. 


24. King Haris Chandra is said, to have thought a single night as a dozen of 
years; and the prince Lavana to have passed his long life of a hundred years as 
the space of a single night. (So the seven sleepers of Kehef passed a long 
period as one night, and so of others). 


25. What was a moment to Brahma, was the whole age of the life-time of 
Manu (Noah), and what is a day to Vishnu, constitutes the long period of the 
life-time of Brahma. (This alluded to the comparative differences in the cycles 
of planetary bodies presided by the different deities, such as Jupiter’s cycle of 
60 years round the sun, is but one year to the presiding god of that planet). 


26. The whole life-time of Vishnu, is but one day of the sedate Siva, for one 
whose mind is motionless in his fixed meditation, is unconscious of the 
change of days and nights and of seasons and years. (Since the meditative 
mind is insensible of the fluctuation of its ideas, or that there is an utter 
quietus of them in the quietism of the Yogi’s mind). 


27. There is no substance nor the substantive world, in the mind of the 
meditative Yogi (who views them in their abstract light), and to whom the 
sweet pleasures of the world, appear as bitter, as they are thought to be the 
bane of his true felicity. 


28. The bitter seems to be sweet, by being thought to be so, and what is 
unfavorable, becomes favorable as that which is friendly comes to be 
unfriendly by being taken in their contrary senses. (The mind can make a 
heaven of hell and a hell of a heaven. — Milton). 


29. Thus Rama! it is by habitual meditation, that we gain the abstract 
knowledge of things, as on the other hand we forget what we learnt, by want 
of their recapitulation. (Habit is second nature, and practice is the parent of 
productions). 


30. These by their habitude of thinking, find everything in a state of positive 
rest, while the unthinking fall into the errors of the revolutionary world, as a 
boat-passenger thinks the land and objects on the shore, to be receding from 
and revolving around him. 


31. Thus the unthinking part of mankind, and those wandering in their error, 
think the world to be moving about them, but the thinking mind, sees the 
whole as an empty void, and full of phantoms, as one sees in his dream. 


32. It is the thought, (erroneous conception), that shows the white as black and 
blue, and it is the mistake of judgment, that makes one rejoice or sorrow at the 
events of life. 


33. The unthinking are led to imagine a house where there is none, and the 
ignorant are infatuated to the belief of ghosts, as they are the killers of their 
lives. 


34. It is reminiscence or memory, which raises the dream as her consort, and 
which represents things as they are presented to it, by the thoughts of the 
waking state. 


35. The dream is as unreal as the empty vacuity, abiding in the hollow 
receptacle of the intellectual soul, it overspreads the mind like the shadow of a 
cloud, and fills it with images like those of a puppet-show under the magic 
lantern. 


36. Know the phenomena of the revolving worlds, to be no more in reality, 
than mere resultants of the vibrations of the mind, in the empty space of the 
soul, and as the motions and gestures of the fancied hobgoblins, to the sight of 
children. 


37. All this is but a magical illusion, without any substance or basis of itself, 
and all these imposing scenes of vision, are but the empty and aerial sights of 
dreams. 


38. Just as the waking man, beholds the wondrous world before him, so also 
does sleeping man see the same, and both of them resemble the insensible 
pillar, which finds the images of statues engraved upon it, (because the soul is 
ever awake in every state of all living bodies). 


39. The great monument of the Divine Spirit, has the figure of the created 
world, carved in itself in the same manner, as I see a troop of soldiers passing 
before me in my dream. (All these appear to be in action, in their true state of 
nullity and inaction). 


40. So is this waking world asleep in the soul of Brahma, and rises in his mind 
as the vegetable world springs from the sap lying hid in the earth, which gives 
it its growth and vernal bloom. 


41. So likewise does the creation lie hid in, and spring from the Supreme 
Spirit, as the brightness of gold ornaments is contained in, and comes out of 
the material metal. (The Divine Spirit is both the material and efficient cause 
of creation, — ex quo & a quo.) 


42. Every atom of creation, is settled in the plenum of Divine spirit, as all the 
members of the body, are set in the person of their possessor. 


43. The visible world has the same relation, to the bodiless and undivided 
spirit of God, as one fighting in a dream bears to his antagonist, (both 
believing in their reality, while both of them are unreal in their bodies). 


44. Thus the real and unreal, the spirit and the world, all dwindled into 
vacuum, at the great Kalpdnta annihilation of creation, except the intellect of 
God which comprises the world in itself. 


45. The causality of the one, (i.e., the spirit of God), and the unreality of the 

world cannot be true, (since nothing unreal can come out of the real). Except 
Brahm, — the all (to pan), there is no other cause, as a Brahma or any other, 
the Divine Intelligence is the only cause and constituent of its productions. 


46. Rama asked: — But what cause was it that represented the citizens, 
counsellors, and ministers of Vidtratha’s royal house also to Lila’s vision, in 
the same manner as her lord the king, (who was alone the object of her 
thought)? 


47. Vasishtha said: — All other thoughts are associated with the principal one 
in the intellect, in the same manner as the high winds are accompaniments of 


the storm. 


48. The association of thoughts, follows one another in a long and perpetual 
train, and caused the succession of the sights of the ministers, citizens and 
subjects of the king, in Lila’s vision one after the other. 


49. In this way the thought that the king was born of such and such a family, 
naturally introduced the thoughts of his palace and city, and of those that 
dwelt in them. 


50. It is in vain to enquire into the cause and manner, of the intellect’s being 
combined with its thoughts at all times, since it is called the gem of thoughts, 
(Chintdmani), and must be always accompanied with its radiating thoughts, 
like a brilliant gem with its rays. (i.e., Thinking is the inseparable attribute of 
the mind). 


51. Padma thought to become a king like Viduratha, in the proper discharge of 
the duties of his royal family, and this constant thought of himself as such, 
cast the mould of the mind and manner of Vidtratha upon him, (i.e., he 
looked himself in the light of that king). 


52. All animate beings of every kind, are but models of their own thoughts, 
like looking-glasses showing their inward reflexions to the sight. (The innate 
man appearing in his outward figure, is a verity in physiognomy). 


53. The mind which is fixed in the meditation of God, and remains unshaken 
amidst the turmoils of the world, is fraught with perfect rest, and preserves the 
composure of the soul, until its final liberation from the bondage of the body. 


54. But the thoughts of the fluctuating enjoyments of this world, alternately 
represented in the mirror of the mind, like the shadows of passing scenes upon 
a looking glass. 


55. It requires therefore a great force of the mind, to overcome its worldly 
thoughts, and turn them to the channel of truth, as the greater force of the 
main current of a river, leads its tributaries to the ocean. 


56. But the mind is greatly disturbed, when the worldly and spiritual thoughts, 
press it with equal force to both ways, and it is then, that the greater force 
leads it onward in either way. (There is no midway like that of the 
Maddhyamikas between this world and the next). 


Gloss. — The worldly and spiritual thoughts being equally forcible, they 
naturally struggle in the mind, and that which is of greater force overcomes 
the other. 


57. Such is the case with all the myriads of beings, whether are living, dead or 


to come to life, and the same accidents take place in the particles of all human 
minds, (like the concussions of atomic forces). 


58. All this is the empty sphere of the Intellect, all quiet and without any basis 
or substratum. It is neither peopled nor filled by anything except its own 
native thoughts. 


59. All these appear as dreams, even in our unsleeping states, and have no 
form or figure in the sight of the wise. The perception of their positive 
existence, is but a misconception of their negative inexistence. 


60. There really exists but one omnipotent and all-pervasive Spirit, which 
shows itself in diverse forms like the flowers, fruits, and leaves of trees, all 
appearing from the self-same woody trunk (which like the great Brahma is the 
origin of all its off-shoots.) 


61. He who knows the increate Brahma to be the measurer, measure and the 
thing measured, (i.e., the creator, created and the creation), to be all one and 
himself, can never forget this certain truth of unity, nor ever fall into the error 
of dualism of the cause and effect. 


62. There is but one Being, (SAT), who is Holy and without beginning, and 
who, though he appears to be of the forms of light and darkness, and of space 
and time, doth never rise nor set anywhere. He is without beginning, middle 
or end, and remains as a vast expanse of water, exhibiting itself in its waves 
and currents. 


63. The notion of myself, thyself, and the objective world, are but effusions of 
our perverted understandings, and it is ignorance only that shows the One as 
many within the Sheath of the mind, according as it imagines it to be. 


CHAPTER LXI. 


On the Nature of the World. 


Argument. Proofs of the unreality of the world, leading to the Quietism of the 
Spirit. 


Rama said: — Please Sir, explain to me whence arises this error of our 
knowledge of the objective world, without a cause of this error. (The True 
God cannot lead us to the knowledge of untruth). 


2. Vasishtha said: — Because we have the knowledge of all things, (i.e., the 
objective), to be contained alike in our consciousness, (as of the subjective 
self), it is plain that this eternal and increate self, (or soul), is the cause and 
container of them all at all times. 


3. That which has an insight or intuitive knowledge of all things, which are 
expressed by words and their meanings, is Brahma, — the soul and no other, 
and nothing that is meant by any significant term, has a different form of its 
own. (It is the doctrine of nominalism that the notions conveyed by words 
have no realities corresponding with them in the mind, and have no existence 
but as mere names). 


4. As the quality of a bracelet is not different from its substance of gold, nor 
that of a wave from the water, so the expansion of the world, is not distinct 
from the spirit of God. (The spirit inflated and produced the world out of 
itself. — Sruti). 


5. It is Brahma that is manifest in the form of the world, and not the world that 
appears as God, and so doth gold display itself in the form of a bracelet, and 
not the bracelet that takes the nature of gold. 


6. As the whole is displayed in all its various parts, so the entire intellect 
shows itself in all the various operations of the mind composing the world. 
(The intellect displaying the mind, and this the world). 


7. It is ignorance of the infinite and eternal Spirit of God, that exhibits itself as 
myself, thyself, and the world itself in the mind. (i.e., The knowledge both of 
the subjective and objective results from ignorance of the only One, — 
tanmdtram). 


8. As the shades of different colours in gems, are not apart from the gems, so 
the notions of one’s self and the world are the shades inherent in the self-same 
intellect. 


9. Like waves appearing on the surface of the undulated waters of the deep, 
this so-called and meaningless creation, is but a phasis in the Divine Intellect. 


10. Neither does the Spirit of God reside in the creation, nor does the creation 
subsist in the Divine Spirit, (like waves in the waters), nor is there such 
relation as of a part with the whole between them. (These are not parts of one 
undivided whole). 


11. One should meditate on his intellect as the form of the Divine Intellect, in 
his own consciousness of it, and he will feel the Divinity stirring within 
himself, as it were stirred by the breath of a breeze. (There is a divinity 
stirring within us, Addition). 


12. The minute particle of the vacuous intellect, will then appear in its 
wondrous form of a void, within the empty space of his conscious mind. (The 
primary hypostasis of the vacuous soul being but a void, its attributes of the 
intellect and mind, are of the same form). 


13. He then finds this vacuous form stirring in himself as the airy spirit, with 
its property of feeling, as it is felt in the flatus venti or breath of air. (This is 
the Spirit of God). 


14. The God then assumes a luminous form as the state of his own 
substantiality, and this is posited in the sheath of the intellect as a spark of 
fire. (This is the holy light of the God of glory or glorious God). 


15. The light then melts into water as the self-same substance of itself, and 
this fluid substance contains in it the property of taste. (This is the liquid state 
of the floating spirit before creation). 


16. The same is condensed in the form of a solid substance, which is the same 
with the Divine Mind. This becomes the earth bearing in its bosom the 
property of smell. (The earth being produced from the scum of water, is 
dissolved again into its watery form). 


17. Again God represents himself to our intellect, as one infinite and uniform 
duration, and its measures in twinklings and other divisions, are but 


manifestations of the succession of our thoughts. (Prakachanamvidah 
parampara, — is the very doctrine of Locke and others). 


18. The other states in which God presents himself to our intellects are that, 
He is Holy, infinitely glorious, seen within us, and without beginning, middle 
and end; that, He has no rising nor setting, and subsists of Himself without a 
substratum and as the substratum of all. 


Note: The intuition of his existence, is the best proof of the same. — Sruti. So 
says the mystic sufi: — I sought him everywhere but found him nowhere; I 
then looked within myself, and saw him there, — as his seat was there. 


19. This knowledge of God is bliss itself, and his creation is identic with 
himself. Ignorance of God leads to the knowledge of the objective world, and 
its extinction is the way to know the eternity of His existence. 


20. Brahma is conceived in the same manner in our souls, as He is represented 
to us by our intellects, just as we know all other things according to our ideas 
of them, in our all comprehensive minds. 


21. Of these, those things only are true, the notions of which we derive from 
the dictates of our well-directed understandings, as all those are untrue, which 
the mind paints to us from the impressions of the senses and the meanings of 
words, which are incapable of expressing the nature of the undefinable and 
indescribable God, (whom no words can express, — Yato vdcho nivastante. 
(Sruti) 


22. Know the unreal world which appears as real, and the reality of God 
which appears as unreality, to be of the manner of the air in motion and at 
rest. The visible world like the current air, appears true to them, that have no 
knowledge of the invisible God, who is as calm as the still air underlying the 
ethereal air and its fluctuations. 


23. A thing may appear different from another, and yet be the same with it, as 
the light in the fire is the self-same fire. So the visible world arising from the 
invisible Brahma, appears as another reality, though it is same with the reality 
of God. 


24. All things whether in being or not being, subsist in God as their invisible 
and unknown source and cause, as the unscooped earth is the cause of the 
would-be doll, the unhewn tree of a future statue, and the soot of the ink not in 
esse. (So all future statues are contained in the unhewn marbles, according to 
Aristotle). 


25. One thing is exhibited as another in the great desert of the Divine Mind, 
which shows the phenomena of the world as figures in the mirage. 


26. The wise soul thinks this world as one with its source, — the Divine 
Intellect, as he considers the tree no way different from its parent seed. 


27. As the sweetness of milk, the pungency of pepper, the fluidity of water, 
and the motion of winds, are the inseparable properties of their substances: — 


28. So this creation is inseparable from the spirit of Brahma, and is a mere 
form of the one Supreme soul, beside which there is nothing in reality. 
(Whose body nature is, and God the soul). 


29. This world is the manifestation of the lustre of the gem of Divine mind, 
and has no other cause except the essence of Brahma, which is no other than 
its material cause, — the Supreme soul itself. 


30. The will, the mind, the living soul, and its consciousness, are all the 
offspring of Divine intellection, because there is nothing that can be produced 
by exertion of any power without direction of the Intellect. 


31. There is nothing that rises or sets anywhere, nor appears or disappears at 
any time, but everything is unborn at all times, and lies quiet in the Divine 
Intellect, which is as solid as a massive rock. 


32. To attribute the formation of these multitudes of the combination of 
atoms, and to suppose every particle to be composed of minutest 
infinitesimals, are but vagaries of imagination, as none of them could combine 
of themselves except by direction of the eternal mind. (Matter having no force 
nor design in itself). 


33. All force resides in some living principle, as the waking, sleeping, and 
dreaming states appertain to the living soul, and as the undulation of waves 
subsists in the water, (or) as the current of the stream lies hidden in it. 


34. When the living soul feels its inappetency towards worldly enjoyments, it 
is then said to have reached to his highest perfection by the Sruti, (such as: — 
nishkdma or abandonment of the desire of fruition, is the highest state of 
human felicity). 


35. As the mind is freed from its choice and dislike of things, so is the soul 
liberated by avoiding its egoism and personality, and then it has no more to be 
conscious of the pain, attending upon a future birth and transmigration. 


36. Whoso comes to know in his understanding, this state of supreme and 
inexpressible felicity, he is sure to overcome all his worldly appetites, that 
bind him fast to this earth. 


37. But whoso labours in his mind under his affections to this world, he has to 
rove continually in it as in the whirlpool of a stream, and destroys the supreme 


felicity of his soul in his continuous turmoil. 


38. It was the lotus-born Brahma, that was conscious of his egoism at first, 
and who has by the will of his mind, spread out this universe. (He is eternally 
acting, and has not retired after his act of creation). 


CHAPTER LXILI. 


Interpretation of Destiny. 


Argument. The erroneous conception of creation and of Destiny both as active 
and inactive. 


Vasishtha continued: — These myriads of worlds and the millenniums of 
Kalpa ages, are no more real in themselves than our false computation of the 
millionth part of an atom or the twinkling of an eye. 


2. It is our error that represents them as true to us, though they are as false as 
our calculation of those infinitesimals. 


3. These creations whether past or future, follow one another in endless 
succession, like the overflowing currents of water, with all the waves, eddies, 
and whirlpools in them. 


4. The prospect of these created worlds is as false, as the delusive mirage, 
which presents a stream of water, flowing with strings of flowers, fallen from 
the plants on the shore. 


5. The conceptional creation is as baseless as a city in a dream or magic show, 
or as mountain in fiction, or an imaginary castle in air. 


(It is a flatus venti, and not based on anything real, but has a mere 
psychological existence, depending on fancy and imagination). 


6. Rama said: — Sir, the drift of your reasoning, leads to the establishment of 
the identity of the conceptional creation with the creator, and that this unity of 
both is the belief of the learned and wise. (So says Hegel: — “creation is the 
reality of God; it is God passing into activity.” Lewe’s Hist. Ph. II p. 626). 


7. Now tell me, what you have to say with regard to the material bodies, 
which these existence bear on earth, and what is the cause that the body is 
subject to the casualties unknown to the inward spirits. (i.e., The body is 
subject to material laws, but not so the immaterial spirit which has no 


change). 


8. Vasishtha replied: — There is a supernatural and active energy of the 
Divine Intellect, called the predominant Decree, Fate or Destiny, which must 
come to pass, and bear its command over all our actions and desires. (Destiny 
is irresistible, being the decree of Providence, governing all events and our 
free wills also. Fate is the personification of the female agency of god. Here 
Vasishtha is a fatalist also, but his fate is the Divine decree). 


9. She is invested from the beginning with irresistible and multifarious 
powers, and destines the manner in which everything is to take place and 
continue forever. (The philosophical destiny is the sum of the laws of 
universe, of matter and mind). 


10. She is the essential cause of all essence, and the chief mover of the 
intellect; she is styled as the great power of powers, and remains as the great 
viewer of all things. 


11. She is called the great agency and the great producer of all events. She is 
known as the chief mover of occurrences, and she is the soul and source of all 
accidents. (The mythological Destiny is superior to gods and men, and rules 
over the great Jove himself). 


12. She whirls the worlds as straws, and bears her sway over the deities and 
demons; she commands the Naga dragons and the mountain monsters to the 
end of time. 


13. She is sometimes thought to be an attribute of Divine essence, and to 
remain pictured in her ever varying colours in the hollow vacuity of the 
Divine Mind. (The theological destiny is the Almighty Will of God and his 
foreknowledge also, before which the fates float about, as if they are drawn up 
in variegated pictures). 


14. The learned have explained Brahma the Demiurge, to be identic with the 
Spirit of Brahma, for the understanding of those that are ignorant in spiritual 
knowledge, and by destiny they mean his creation. (i.e., Creation is 
destination of the preordaining and irrevocable will of God). 


15. The immovable spirit of Brahma, appears to be full of moving creatures 
and the infinity of Divine existence, seems to teem with the finite creation in 
the midst of it, like a grove of trees growing under the concavity of the hollow 
sky. 


16. The unwaking spirit of God reflected various images in itself, (as in a 
dream), likening to the reflection of a dense forest in the lens of a crystal 
stone, and these were understood by the demiurgus Brahma, as the prototype 


of the destined creation, in the hollow sphere of the Divine mind. 


17. The Intellect naturally exhibits a variety of forms in itself, as the body of 
an embodied person, shows its various members to view, and these were taken 
by the lotus-born Brahma, as the several parts in the great body of the cosmos. 
(The Intellect is the phantasmagoria of the world, and the Demiurge is the 
formal framer of it). 


18. This foreknowledge of events imprinted in the Intellect of God, is called 
Destiny, which extends over all things at all times. (This is Fatum 
christianum, that everything is regulated by foreknowledge and Providence). 


19. The meaning of Destiny, comprises the knowledge of the causes, which 
move, support, and sustain all things in their proper order, and that such and 
such causes, must produce such and such effects for ever. (This is the Stoic 
Fate of Jewish Essences, or a concatenation of causes whence all things 
necessarily result). 


20. This destiny is the force or mobile power, that moves all men and animals, 
and vegetable and inanimate creations; it is the beginning (or primary source) 
of the time and motion of all beings. (It is fatum from fari, — the word or 
decree of Providence, that was the beginning of all existence.) 


21. It is combined with Divine power, as the power divine is combined with 
it; and this combination of them into one, is the cause of the production and 
existence of the world. 


22. It is the union or conformity of human exertion, with the course of destiny 
or decree of God, that is productive of certain ends, which are respectively 
called their destiny and destined effects. (Here Destiny is defined as the 
combination of human and superhuman powers, and that the co-operation of 
natural and supernatural agencies, are necessary to the production of effects). 


23. What more have you to ask me, Rama! with regard to destiny and self- 
exertion, when I tell you that it is destined to all beings to betake themselves 
to their proper actions, in the destined or prescribed manner, in order to bring 
about the desired result? (Their destiny is equal to Vidhi or fixed laws, which 
were combined in Brahma). 


24. When a predestinarian sits idle and quiet, under the belief of being fed by 
his fixed lot, he is then said to depend on his destiny alone (as a fatalist). 


25. By sitting idle in the manner of a waiter on Providence, for the whole of 
his lifetime, he gains nothing, but comes to lose his good sense and energy in 
a short time, and finally dies away in famine by his sole reliance on destiny. 
(Hence fate = fat and faut (in Arabic), is synonymous with death). 


26. It is quite certain that whatever is destined, must surely come to pass of its 
own accord, and that it is impossible to prevent it by the foresight of gods and 
men. 


27. Yet the intelligent ought not cease to exert their activity, by relying in 
their fates only; for they must know that it is our exertion that brings destiny 
into action. (Because it is, destined, that destiny requires to be enforced by 
human exertion, in order to bring on its effect. It is operation which enforces 
the law, which is otherwise dormant and a dead letter). 


28. Destiny is inactive and abortive, without an active power to enforce it to 
action; it is human activity, that is productive of any effect or production in 
nature by the help of destiny. 


29. Depend on destiny, and remain both deaf and dumb as a doll; be inactive, 
and become dull and torpid as a block. Say, what is the good of this vital 
breath, unless it has its vitality and activity? (Destiny has destined man to 
exertion in order to produce the destined end, and has so ordained all 
animated nature, in order to be productive). 


30. It is good to sit quiet, by restraining even the vital breath in Yoga 
meditation, whereby one can obtain his liberation, otherwise the inactive man 
is not to be called a Yogi, but an idler and a lazzarone. 


31. Both activity and inactivity are good for our liberation from pain, but the 
high minded esteem that as better, which saves them from the greater pain of 
regeneration, (i.e., the hybernation of Yoga meditation). 


Note: Activity is attended with the pleasure of enjoyment, with the pain of 
bondage; and inactivity with the pleasure of freedom, and the pain of poverty. 
The insensible are fond of fruition at the expense of their freedom; but the 
wise prefer their liberty with poverty, as it is said in the Upanishad: — 


wate Gara God | WaTAaraNT ataTaheeh GUT | 


32. This inactive destiny is a type of the latent Brahma, and who so leans to it 
by laying aside his busy course, is verily installed in the supremely holy state 
of highest felicity, (as in ecstasis and hypnotism). 


33. The inert destiny resides everywhere in the manner of Brahma, — the 
latent soul in all bodies, and evolves itself in various shapes, by means of 
activity in all its productions. 


CHAPTER LXIII. 


Immutability of the Divine Mind. 


Argument. Expansion of the Divine Spirit, and its apparent variations in 
Nature. 


Vasishtha continued: — The essence of Brahma is all in all, and ever remains 
in every manner in everything in all places. It is omnipotence, omniform, and 
the lord God of all. 


(This is the to pan of Pantheism, that, God is All and All is God; that God and 
nature are one substance, and all its various modifications. (This is the 
doctrine of Vedanta, Plato and Plotinus, and lately of Sufism and German 
philosophy)). 


2. This Essence is the Spirit or Soul, whose omnipotence develops itself 
sometimes in the form of intellectual activity, and sometimes in the tranquility 
of soul. Sometimes it shows itself in the momentum of bodies, and at others in 
the force of the passions and emotions of the soul. Sometimes as something in 
the form of creation, and at another as nothing in the annihilation of the world. 
(This is the to on onton, — the All of all; the eternal source of all existence; 
the Subjective as well as Objective both together). 


3. Whenever it realises itself anywhere in any form or state, it is then viewed 
in the same manner at the same place and time. (The spirit realises itself in 
one form or other of its own free Will). 


4. The absolute Omnipotence manifests itself as it likes and appears to us, and 
all its powers are exhibited in one form or other to our view and 
understandings. 


5. These powers are of many kinds, and are primarily concentrated in the 
Divine Soul or Spirit. The potentialities, (or potes esse), are the Active and 
Passive powers, also the Rational and Irrational and all others. 


6. These varieties of powers are the inventions of the learned for their own 
purpose and understanding, but there is no distinction of them in the Divine 
Spirit. (All diversities are one and the same to the unity of God: (omne ens-to 
en-est unum. And again, Qua ens est indivisum in se, divisum ab omnialio). 


7. There is no duality in reality, the difference consists in shape and not in 
substantiality. Thus the waves in the waters of the sea, the bracelets and 
wristlets formed of gold, are no more than modifications of the same 
substances. 


(All formal differences terminate in the material, and this again in the 
immaterial Spirit of God). 


8. The form of a thing is said to be so and so, from its appearance only and not 
in its reality. The snake is affirmed of a rope, but we have neither the outward 
perception nor inward thought of a snake in it. Hence all appearances are 
delusions of sense. 


9. It is the universal soul that shows itself in some form or other, to our 
deluded senses and understandings, and this also according to our different 
apprehensions of the same thing, (as what appears as gold to one, seems as 
brass to another). 


10. It is the ignorant only that understand the Omniform God, to be all forms 
of things; while the learned know the forms to be modifications of the various 
powers of the Almighty, and not the figures themselves. 


11. Now whether the forms (of material things) be real or unreal, it is to be 
known that they appear to men according to their different apprehensions of 
those beings, which Brahma is pleased to exhibit in any particular form to 
their minds and senses. (i.e., Some taking an abstract and others a concrete 
view of them, agreeably to their internal conceptions or external perceptions, 
of their various properties and qualities). 


CHAPTER LXIV. 


The Germinating Seed. 


Vasishtha resumed: — The supreme Deity is the all-pervading spirit and the 
great God and Lord of all. He is without beginning and end, and is self-same 
with the infinite bliss of his translucent self-cogitation. 


2. It is this supreme felicity and purely intellectual substance, whence the 
living soul and mind have their rise, prior to their production of the Universe. 
(i.e., The eternal and inert bliss called Brahma, became the living soul-anima, 
of and the active mind-mens, which created the world). 


3. Rama asked: — How could the self-cogitation of Brahma, as the infinite 
spirit and one without a second, conceive in it a finite living soul other than 
itself, and which was not in Being. 


(The inactive and active souls, are not the one and the same thing, nor can the 
immutable and infinite be changed to one of a finite and changeful nature; nor 
was there a secondary being co-existent with the unity of the self-existent 
God). 


4. Vasishtha replied: — The immense and transparent Spirit of Brahma, 
remained in a state of asat — non-existence, a state of ineffable bliss as seen 
by the adept Yogi; but of formidable vastness as conceived by the uninitiated 
novice. (i.e., The meditation of the Infinite is a delight to the spiritualist, but it 
is a horror to the gross idolator, whose mind knows nothing beyond matter 
and material forms). 


5. This state of supreme bliss, which is ever tranquil, and full with the pure 
essence of God, is altogether undefinable, and incomprehensible, even by the 
most proficient in divine knowledge. (God is unknowable, is the motto of the 
wise Athenians and modern Agnostics). 


6. Thence sprang a power, (an hypostasis), like the germ of a seed, and 
possessed of consciousness and energy, that is called the living and conscious 
soul, and which must last until its final liberation. (This is the Demiurge, an 


emanation from God, and the source and soul of the world). 


7. The clear mirror of the mind of this being, reflected in its vast vacuous 
sphere, the images of innumerable worlds set above one another, like statues 
engraved upon it. 


8. Know Rama! the living soul to be an inflation of Divine Spirit, like the 
swelling of the sea and the burning of a candle, when its flame is unshaken by 
the wind. 


(The psyche or anima is the energy of the universal soul, or the finite rising 
from the Infinite). 


9. The living soul is possessed of a finite cognoscence as distinguished from 
the clear and calm consciousness of the Divine Spirit. Its vitality is a flash of 
the vacuous intellect of Brahma and appertaining to the nature of the living 
God. Divina particula aurae. The Lord says: ‘Aham asmi, — I am that I am’; 
but the living soul knows itself to be “Soham asmi,’ — 1 am He or of Him. 


10. Vitality is the essential property of the soul, resembling the inseparable 
properties of motion in the wind, warmth in the fire and coldness in the ice. 
(Animation is the natural faculty and necessary property of the soul). 


11. Our ignorance of the nature of the Divine Intellect and Spirit, throws us to 
the knowledge of ourselves by our self-consciousness, and this it is, which is 
called the living soul. 


(Beyond our conscious or subjective knowledge of ourselves, we know 
nothing of the subjectivity of God, nor are we certain of any objective reality). 


12. It is by means of this positive consciousness, that we know our egoism or 
self-existence, it strikes us more glaringly than a spark of fire, and enlightens 
us to the knowledge of ourselves more than any other light. 


(Our self-consciousness is the clearest of all knowledge, and the basis of all 
truth according to Descartes). 


13. As in looking up to heaven, its blue vault is presented to the sight, beyond 
which our eyes have not the power to pierce, so in our inquiry into the nature 
of soul, we see no more than the consciousness of ourselves, and nothing 
besides. (i.e., The subjective soul only is knowable, and naught beyond it). 


14. Our knowledge of the soul presents to us in the form of Ego known by its 
thoughts, like the vacuous sky appearing as a blue sphere by cause of the 
clouds. (The Ego is the subject of thoughts and self-cogitation). 


15. Egoism differentiates the soul from our ideas of space and time, and stirs 


within it like the breath of winds, by reason of its subjectivity of thoughts. 
(Differentiation of the subjective Ego from the Objective space and time, is as 
the difference of Ego and Non-Ego, I and Not I, Le moi et non moi, Das Ich 
und nicht ich, Aham and twam efc.). 


16. That which is the subject of thoughts, is known as the Ego, and is 
variously styled as the intellect, the soul, the mind, the maya or delusion and 
Prakriti or nature. (The Ego personified is Rudra, the personification of chitta- 
cogitation is Vishnu, of Jiva or the soul is Brahma, and of the manas or mind 
is the maya or Illusion). 


17. The mind, (chetas), which is the subject of thoughts, contemplates on the 
nature of elementary matter, and thus becomes of itself the quintessence of the 
five elements. 


(The mind is opposed to matter, but being the principle of volition produces 
matter at its will). 


18. The quintessential mind next becomes as a spark of fire (of itself), and 
remains as a dim star, — a nebula, in the midst of the vacuity of the yet 
unborn universe. 


(The nebulae are the primary formations of heavenly bodies, called 
Brahmandas or mundane eggs). 


19. The mind takes the form of a spark of fire by thinking on its essence, 
which gradually develops itself like the germ of a seed, in the form of the 
mundane egg by its internal force. 


(The doctrine of evolution from fire, the arche of all things according to 
Heraclitus. Lewe’s Hist. Ph. I 72). 


20. The same fiery spark figuratively called the Brahmanda or mundane egg, 
became as a snowball amidst the water, and conceived the great Brahma 
within its hollow womb. 


(The Spirit of God, dove-like, sat brooding over the hollow deep. — Milton). 


21. Then as sensuous spirits assume some bodily forms at pleasure, although 
they dissolve as a magic city in empty air, so this Brahma appeared in an 
embodied form to view. (Spirits are at liberty to take upon them any form they 
like). 


22. Some of them appear in the form of immovable, and others in those of 
moving beings, while others assume the shapes of aerials, as they are fond of 
choosing for themselves. (Hence the transmigration of souls in different 
bodies, depends on their own choice, and not on necessity or result of prior 


acts). 


23. Thus the first born living being had a form, for himself as he liked in the 
beginning of creation, and afterwards created the world in his form of Brahma 
or Virinchi (Vir-incipiens). (The Demiurge, maker, creator or architect of the 
visible world, had necessarily a personality of his own). 


24. Whatever the self-born and self-willed soul, wishes to produce, the same 
appears immediately to view as produced of its own accord. (Everything 
appeared of itself at the Fiat of God). 


25. Brahma, originating in the Divine Intellect, was by his nature the primary 
cause of all, without any cause of his own, though he appointed the acts of 
men to be the cause of their transition from one state to another, in the course 
of the world. 


(All the future states of beings depend on their acts of past and present lives, 
except that of the Great creator who is uncreated and unchangeable). 


26. The thoughts naturally rise in the mind, like the foaming water, to subside 
in itself, but the acts done thereby, bind us, as the passing froth and flying 
birds are caught by ropes and snares. 


(The thoughts are spontaneous in their growth as grass, and they entail no 
guilt on us. — Shakespeare). 


27. Thoughts are the seeds of action, and action is the soul of life. Past acts 
are productive of future consequence, but inaction is attended with no result. 
(Our lives are reckoned by our acts, and there is no vitality without activity). 


28. The living soul bears its vitality as the seed bears the germ in its bosom, 
and this sprouts forth in future acts, in the manner of the various forms of 
leaves, fruits and flowers of trees. 


(Thus the living soul of Brahma was the seed of all animate and inanimate 
beings). 


29. All other living souls that appeared in the various forms of their bodies, 
had such forms given to them by Brahma, according to their acts and desires 
in premundane creations in former Kalpas. (Hence the belief in the endless 
succession of creations). 


30. So the personal acts of people are the causes of their repeated births and 
deaths in this or other worlds, and they ascend higher or sink lower by virtue 
of their good or bad deeds, which proceed from their hearts and the nature of 
their souls. 


31. Our actions are the efforts of our minds, and shape our good or bad 
destinies according to the merit or demerit of the acts. The fates and chances 
of all in the existing world, are the fruits and flowers of their past acts, and 
even of those done in prior Kalpas, and this is called their destiny. (Sdstra: — 
No act goes for naught even in a thousand Kalpas. Ma bhuktan kshiyate 
Karma, Kalpa koti satai rapi). 


CHAPTER LXV. 


Nature of the Living Soul. 


Argument. The mind and its operations, the subjective and objective, and 
lastly the Divine Intellect. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Mind sprang at first from the supreme cause of 
all; this mind is the active soul which resides in the supreme soul, (the Ens 
entium). 


2. The mind hangs in doubt between what is and what is not, and what is right 
and what is wrong. It forgets the past like the scent of a fleeting odor by its 
willful negligence. (Unmindfulness is the cause of forgetfulness). 


3. Yet there is no difference between these seeming contraries, because the 
dualities of Brahma and the soul, the mind and maya, the agent and act, and 
the phenomenal and noumenal worlds, all blend together in the unity of God. 
(All seeming differences converge in unvarying Mind). 


4. There is but one Universal soul displaying its Intellect as a vast ocean, and 
extending its consciousness as a sea of unlimited extent. (These extend to all 
beings in the universe). 


5. What is true and real shines forth amidst all that is untrue and unreal, so 
does the subjective essence of the mind subsist amidst all its airy and fleeting 
dreams in sleep. And thus the world is both true and untrue as regards its 
subsistence in God and its external phenomena. (The substance is real but the 
appearance is false). 


6. The erroneous conception either of the reality or unreality of the outer 
world, does not spring in the mind, which is conscious of its operations only, 
and of no outward phenomena. This conception is like the deception of a 
magic show, and is concomitant with all sensuous minds. 


7. It is the long habit of thinking the unreal world as real, that makes it appear 


as such, to the unthinking, as a protracted sleep makes its visionary scenes 
appear as true to the dreaming soul. It is the want of reflection, that causes us 
to mistake a man in a block of wood. 


8. Want of spiritual light misleads the mind from its rationality, and makes it 
take its false imaginations for true, as children are impressed with a belief of 
ghosts in shadows, through their fear and want of true knowledge. 


9. The mind is inclined of its own tendency, to assign a living soul, (and also a 
body), to the Divine Spirit, which is devoid of appellation, form or figure, and 
is beyond our comprehension, (and is styled the Incomprehensible). 


10. Knowledge of the living state, (personality), leads to that of Egoism which 
is the cause of intellection. This again introduces the sensations and finally the 
sensible body. (Ego is the subject of thoughts). 


11. This bondage of the soul in body, necessitates a heaven and hell for want 
of its liberation and then the acts of the body, become the seeds of our endless 
transmigrations in this world. 


12. As there is no difference between the soul, intellect, and life, so there is no 
duality in the living soul and intellect, nor in the body and its acts, which are 
inseparable from each other. 


13. Acts are the causes of bodies, and the body is not the mind; the mind is 
one with egoism, and the ego is the living soul. The living soul is one with the 
Divine Intellect and this soul is all and the lord God of all. 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


Meditation of the Subjective and Objective. 


Argument. Origin and Nature of Duality and the Manner of its Extinction. 


Thus Rama! there is one true essence, which appears many by our mistake, 
and this variety is caused by the production of one from the other, as one lamp 
is lighted from another. 


2. By knowing one’s self as nothing as it was before its coming to being, and 
by considering the falsity of his notions (of his reality), no one can have any 
cause of grief (at its loss). (The Sruti: — The knower of the true-self, is above 
all grief and sorrow). 


3. Man is but a being of his own conception, and by getting rid of this 
concept, he is freed from his idea of the duality of the world (as a distinct 
existence), just as one with his shoes on, perceives the whole earth he treads 
upon, to be covered over with skin. 


4. As the plantain tree has no pith except its manifold coats, so there is no 
substantiality of the world beside our false conceptions of it. 


5. Our births are followed by childhood, youth, old age, and death, one after 
the other, and then opens the prospect of a heaven or hell to our view, like 
passing phantoms before the flighty mind. 


6. As the clear eye sees bubbles of light in the empty sky, so the thoughtless 
mind views the firmament full of luminous bodies (which are but phantoms of 
the brain). 


7. As the one moon appears as two to the dim-sighted eye, so the intellect, 
vitiated by influence of the senses, sees a duality in the unity of the supreme 
spirit. 

8. As the giddiness of wine presents the pictures of trees before the drunken 
eye, so does the inebriation of sensation, present the phantoms of the world 


before the excited intellect. 


9. Know the revolution of the visible world, to resemble the revolving wheel 
of a potter’s mill, which they turn about in play as the rotatory ball of a 
terrestrial globe. 


10. When the intellect thinks of another thing (as matter) beside itself, it then 
falls into the error of dualism, but when it concentrates its thoughts in itself, it 
then loses the sense of the objective duality. 


11. There is nothing beside the Intellect except the thoughts on which it 
dwells, and its sensations are all at rest, as it comes to know the nihility of 
objects. 


12. When the weak intellect is quiet by its union with the Supreme, and by 
suppression of its functions, it is then called sansanta, — or quiescent or 
insouciant. 


13. It is the weak intellect that thinks of the thinkables, but the sound 
understanding ceases from all thoughts, as it is a slight intoxication that makes 
one rave and revel about, while deep drinking is dead to all excitements. 


14. When the sound and consummate understanding, runs in one course 
towards its main reservoir of the supreme, it becomes divested of its 
knowledge of the knowables, and of its self-consciousness also in the 
presence of the one and no other. 


15. The perfected understanding finds the errors, to which it is exposed by its 
sensation of the sensibles, and comes to know, that birth and life and all the 
acts and sights of the living state, are as false as dreams. 


16. The mind being repressed from its natural flight, can have no thought of 
anything, and is lost in itself, as the natural heat of fire and motion of the wind 
being extinct, they are annihilated of themselves. 


17. Without the suppression of mental operations, the mind must continue in 
its misconceptions, as that of mistaking a rope for a snake through ignorance. 


18. It is not difficult to repress the action of the mind and rouse our 
consciousness, in order to heal our souls of the malady of their mistaken 
notion of the world. 


19. If you can succeed to suppress the desires of your restless mind at any 
time, you are sure to obtain your liberation even at the very moment and 
without fail. 


20. If you will but turn to the side of your subjective consciousness only, you 


will get rid of the objective world, in the same manner as one is freed from his 
fear of a snake in a rope, by his examination of the thing. 


21. If it is possible to get rid of the restless mind, which is the source of all our 
desires, it is no way impossible to attain to the chief end of liberation to any. 


22. When high-minded men are seen to give up their lives as straws (in an 
honorable cause), there is no reason why they should be reluctant to abandon 
their desires for the sake of their chief good of liberation. 


23. Remain unfettered by forsaking the desires of your greedy mind, for what 
is the good of getting sensible objects, which we are sure to lose (some time 
or other). 


24. The liberated are already in the sight of the immortality of their souls and 
of God, as one who has got a fruit in his hand, or sees a mountain palpable 
before him. 


25. It is the Spirit of God alone, that abides in everything in these phenomenal 
worlds, which rise to view like the waves of the waters of the great deluge. It 
is his knowledge that is attended with the swmmum bonum of liberation, and it 
is ignorance of that supreme Being, that binds the mind to the interminable 
bondage of the world. 


CHAPTER LXVII. 


Lecture on Truth. 


Argument. Nature of the Active and Living Soul (Jiva) and its Sensations. 


Rama said: — Leaving the mind please tell me more about the nature of the 
living soul, what relation it bears to the Supreme soul, how it sprang from the 
same and what is its essence. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Know Brahma is omnipresent, and the Lord of all at 
all times; He manifests himself in whatever attribute he assumes to himself at 
his free will. Exarbitrio suo. 


3. The attribute which the universal soul assumes to itself in the form of 
perception, (chétana), is known by the term living soul, which possesses the 
power of volition in itself. 


4. There are two causal principles combined with the living soul, namely, its 
predestination resulting from its prior acts and volitions, and its later free will 
which branch forth severally into the various causes of birth, death and 
subsistence of beings. 


5. Rama said: — Such being the case, tell me, O thou greatest of sages, what 
this predestination means and what are these acts, and how they become the 
causal agents of subsequent events. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — The intellect, (chit), is possessed of its own nature of 
the properties of oscillation and rest, like the vacillation and stillness of the 
winds in the air. Its agitation is the cause of its action, otherwise it is calm and 
quiet as a dead lock, — quietus itself. 


7. Its oscillation appears in the fluctuation of the mind, and its calmness in the 
want of mental activity and exertions, as in the nonchalance of Yoga quietism. 


8. The vibrations of the intellect lead to its continual transmigrations, and its 
quietness settles it in the state of the immovable Brahma. The oscillation of 


the intellect is known to be the cause of the living state and all its actions. 


(The moving force of the mind is the animism of Stahl, and its rest is the 
quietus of Plato). 


9. This vibrative intellect is the thinking Soul, and is known as the living 
agent of actions, and the primary seed of the universe. (This is the anima 
mundi or moving force of the world, — the doctrine of Stahl). 


10. This secondary soul then assumes a luminous form according to the light 
of its intellect, and afterwards becomes multifarious at its will, and by means 
of the pulsations of the primary intellect all over the creation. (This luminous 
form is represented by the red body of Brahma and the red clay of which 
Adam was formed. (It was the All, — to pan of Pantheism, and the 
Principium hylarchicum or first principle of Henry Moore)). 


11. The pulsative intellect or soul, having passed through many 
transformations (or transmigrations), is at last freed from its motion and 
migration. And there are some souls which pass into a thousand births and 
forms, while there are others which obtain their liberation in a single birth (by 
means of their Yoga meditation or unification with God, which is the final aim 
of Platonism and of the Chinese Laosin). 


12. So also the human soul being of its own nature prone to assume its 
dualism of the motive intellect, becomes by itself the cause of its 
transmigration and sufferings, as also of its transient bliss or misery in heaven 
or hell. (There is no rest for the restless soul, until it rests in the bosom of the 
all-tranquil and Universal soul). 


13. As the same gold is changed to the forms of bracelets and other things, 
and as the same gross matter appears in the different forms of wood and stone, 
so the uniform soul of God appears as multiform according to his various 
modes and attributes. (The soul modifies itself into many forms of activity and 
passivity). 


14. It is the fallacy of the human mind, that views the forms as realities, and 
causes one to think his soul which is freed from birth and form, to be born, 
living and dead, as a man sees a city to rise and fall in his delirium. (The 
appearances and forms of things are objective and false fabrications of the 
intellect). 


15. The varying intellect erroneously conceives its unreal egoism and 
meitatem as realities, from its ignorance of its unity with the unchangeable 
reality of God, and also from its felicity of enjoyments peculiar to its varied 
state. (The YPTM or desire of fruition is the cause of the revolution of the soul 


in endless states of beings). 


16. As Lavana the King of Mathura, falsely deemed himself as a Chandala, so 
the intellect thinks on its own different states of existence and that of the 
world, (from its desire of enjoying its pleasures which are deeply rooted in 
itself). 


17. All this world is the phantom of an erroneous imagination, O Rama! it is 
no more than the swelling of the waters of the deep. (The world is the 
expansion of the self-same soul and its evolution is the volition of Brahma). 


18. The intellect is ever busied with the intellection of its own intelligences, 
and the innate principles of its action, in the same manner as the sea is seen to 
swell with its waters moving in waves of themselves. (The continuation of the 
intellect in the association of its preconceived ideas, is carried on by law of 
continuity). 


19. The intellect is as the water in the wide expanse of Brahma, its inflation 
raises the waving thoughts in the mind, resembling the bubbles of water, and 
produces the revolutions of living souls like eddies in the sea of this world. 


20. Know thy soul, O gentle Rama! as a phenomenon of the all pervading 
Brahma, who is both the subject and object of his consciousness, and who has 
posited in thee a particle of himself, like the breath of a mighty lion. 


21. The intellect with its consciousness, constitutes the living soul, and that 
with the will forms the mind; its knowing power is the understanding, and its 
retentiveness is called its memory, its subjectivity of selfishness is styled 
egoism, and its error is called mdyd or delusion. (Consciousness is perception 
qua mens de presenti suo statu admonitur. The living soul is psyche or 
animus. The intellect is the mover of the will. The intellectus est prior 
voluntate, non enimést voluntas etc. The understanding has the power to 
acquire knowledge, and memory has the power of retention etc.). 


22. The mind by its imagination stretches out this world, which is as false as 
the phantom of Utopia Gandharva-nagaram or an air drawn city. 


23. The objective knowledge of the world in the mind, is as false as the 
appearance of chains of pearls in the sky, and as the visionary scenes in a 
dream. (The objective is the feigned fabrication of the mind, and therefore 
unreal). 


24. The soul which is ever pure and self-sufficient in its nature, and remains in 
its own state of tranquility, is not perceived by the perverted mind dwelling on 
its delusive dreams. 


25. The objective world is referred to waking, — Jdgara, because it is 
perceived in the waking state of the soul, and the subjective mind is allied to 
sleep, — swapna, because the mind is active during the sleeping and 
dreaming states. The ego is related to deep sleep, — sushupta, when we are 
unconscious of ourselves, and the fourth or pure Intellect, — turiya or turya, 
is the trance or hybernation of the soul. 


26. That which is above these four conditions, is the state of ultimate bliss, 
ecstasis, and it is by reliance on that supremely pure essence of God, that one 
is exempted from all his causes of grief and sorrow (in his ecstatic delight). 


27. Everything is displayed in Him and all things are absorbed in Him also; 
this world is neither a reality here or there, it presents only the false 
appearance of strings of pearls in the sky. (Sensible forms are empty 
appearances, and are only believed as real by materialists). 


28. And yet God is said to be the cause and substratum, of all these 
unobstructed phantoms rising to the view, as the empty air is said to be the 
receptacle of the rising trees. Thus, the uncausal God is said to be the cause of 
this uncaused world, which only exists in our illusive conceptions, and 
presents itself to our delusive sensations of it. 


29. As a polished piece of iron gets the reflexion of a grosser piece, so do our 
finer or inner sensations take the representations of the gross forms of their 
particular objects, (though the senses and sensible objects are both untrue, as 
mere delusive and delusions). 


30. These sensations are conveyed to the mind, and thence again to the living 
soul and intellect, in the same manner as the roots supply the sap to the stem, 
and thence to the branches, and lastly to the fruits of trees. (i.e., The Divine 
Intellect is the last receptacle of the impressions of the senses). 


31. As the seed produces the fruit, and the same contains the seed in itself, so 
the intellect producing the mind and its thoughts cannot get rid of them, but is 
contained in, and reproduced by them in successive transmigrations. 


32. There is some difference however in the simile of the insensible seed and 
tree, with the sensible intellect and mind, (which are freed from reproduction 
by their attainment of liberation), but the thoughts of the creator and creation 
like the seed and tree, are reproductive of one another without end. (Because 
the thought of the creator accompanies that of the creation, and so the vice 
versa; owing to the unbroken chain and interminable concatenation of the 
ideas of causality and its effect). 


33. But there is this difference between the insensible seed and sensible 


intellect, that the former is continually productive of one another, while the 
latter ceases in its process upon its attainment of liberation, yet the ideas of 
the creator and creation are reproductive of each other adinfinitum. 


34. Yet our understanding shows it as clearly, — as the sun light sets forth the 
forms and colours of objects to view, that there is one eternal God of truth, 
who is of the form of intellectual light, which shows the forms of all things, 
that proceed from Him (as the colours of objects originate from the solar light, 
and are shown again by the same to our optical vision). 


35. As the ground which is dug presents a hollow, so the reasoning of every 
system of sound philosophy establishes the existence of the transcendental 
void as the cause of all. (An unknown first cause without any attribute, is the 
unanimous conclusion, arrived at every rational system of Philosophy. See 
Kusumanjali. Here Vasishtha establishes his vacuous rather than a personal 
cause). 


36. As a prismatic crystal represents various colours in its prisms, without 
being tinged by the same, so the transparent essence of Brahma shows the 
groups of worlds in its hollow bosom without its connection with them. (This 
variety of vision is caused by our optical deception). 


37. The universal soul is the source, and not the substance of all these vast 
masses of worlds, just as the seed is the embryo, and not the matter of the 
trees and plants and their fruits and flowers that grow from the same. (The to 
on is the only principle called God, all other objects are but phenomenal 
modifications of his essence). 


38. Rama said: — Oh how wonderful is this world, which presents its 
unreality as a reality in all its endless forms unto us, and though situated in the 
Divine self, appears to be quite apart from it. O how it makes its minuteness 
seem so very immense to us. (What are these worlds but as particles 
subsisting in the divine essence, when they are compared with the immensity 
of the Divine spirit and mind, — the finite with the Infinite). 


39. I see how this shadowy scene of the world appearing in the Divine soul, 
and becoming as an orb, by virtue of the ideal tanmdtras or particles of the 
divine essence in it. I find it as a snow ball or icicle made of frozen frost. 


40. Now tell me Sir, how the spiritual particles increase in bulk, and in what 
manner the body of the self-born Brahma was produced from Brahma. Say 
also in what manner do these objects in nature come to existence in their 
material forms. 


(Brahma the Demiurgus was an emanation of God according to Gnostics; and 


Vaishwanara was the same as the soul of the world according to Plotinus). 


41. Vasishtha replied: — Too incredible is this form and without a parallel, 
which sprang of itself from its own essence. It is altogether inconceivable how 
something is produced of its own conception. 


42. Just fancy, O Rama! how the unexpanded phantom of a Vetala or ghost, 
swells in bigness to the sight of fearful children, and conceive in the same 
manner the appearance of the living spirit from the entity of Brahma. 
(Evolution of the Living God from the inert Brahma, is as the springing of the 
moving spirit from the dormant soul). 


43. This living spirit was a development of Brahma, — the universal soul; it 
was holy and a commensurable and finite being, and having a personality of 
its own; it remained as an impersonal unreality in the essence of the self- 
existent God. Being separated afterwards from its source, it had a different 
appellation given to it. (This is the Holy spirit or ghost in one sense, as also 
the Divine Logos in another, and in whom there was life). 


44. As Brahma the all extended and infinite soul, became the definite living 
soul at will, so the living spirit, became the mind by its volition afterwards. 
(There is a trinity or triple division of the soul into soma or the universal soul, 
the pneuma or anima or the living spirit, and the nous or mens or mind). 


45. The mind which was the principle of intellection, took a form of its own; 
and so likewise the life assumed an airy form in the midst of vacuity. (The 
mind is the state of the impersonal soul with a sense of its personality, and life 
is animation or the vital principle in the form of the vital breath). 


46. The wakeful living god, (who had no twinkling of his eyes), whereby we 
measure time was yet conscious of its course by means of his thoughts, and 
had the notion of a brilliant icicle of the form of the future mundane egg in his 
mind. See Manu’s Genesis of the World. I. 


47. Then the living soul felt in itself the sense of its consciousness, and by 
thinking, ‘what am I,’ was conscious of its egoism. (Why is the non-ego of the 
objective world put before the ego? The objective orb of the world should 
follow the subjective consciousness). 


48. This god next found in his understanding the knowledge of the word taste, 
and got the notion of its becoming the object of a particular organ of sense, to 
be hereafter called, “the tongue.” (Rasand or the instrument of the perception 
of rasa or flavour. Rasa abiding in water is reckoned first of the elements on 
account the Spirit of God resting on it before creation, wherefore God is 
himself called rasa in the Sruti, — rasa vaitat). 


49. The living soul then found out in his mind the meaning of the word, 
‘light,’ which was afterwards to sparkle in the eye, — the particular organ of 
sight. 


(The Bible says, lux fiat et lux fit, — Light to be the first work of creation; 
though the Vedas give Priority to water as in the passages, “apa eva 
sasarjddau,’ Manu. Yasrishtih Srasturddyd. Sakuntala). 


50. Next the god came to know in his mind the property of smell, and the 
organ of smelling, as also the substance of earth to which it appertains as its 
inseparable property. (The Nyaya says: prithvi gandhavati, — the earth is 
smelling. It followed the creation of light). 


51. In this manner the living soul, came to be acquainted at once with the 
other sensations, and the organs to which they appertain as their inseparable 
properties and objects. (The word bhavitd means the spontaneous growth of 
these faculties in the soul or mind, and kdkatdliya signifies the simultaneous 
occurrence of the senses, and sensible objects, and their sensations in the 
mind). 


52. The unsubstantial living spirit which derives its being from the essence of 
the substantial Brahma, comes next to acquire the knowledge of sound, the 
object of the organ of hearing, and the property of air. (So Nyaya: — “dkdsh 
sabdddharah’; and “yd Sruti visaya gunadh” — Sakuntala). 


53. It then comes to understand the meaning of the word touch, (twak), as the 
medium of feeling, as also to know the tongue as the only organ of taste. 
(According to schoolmen, taste is the object of the palate and not of the 
tongue). 


53. It finds the property of colour to be the peculiar object of the eye, — the 
organ of sight; and that of smell to be an object peculiar to the nose, — the 
organ of the sense of smelling, (ghrdnendriya). 


54. The living soul is thus the common receptacle of the sensations, and 
source of the senses, which it develops afterwards in the organs of sense in the 
body. It perceives the sensation of sensible objects through the perceptive 
holes, that convey their perceptions into the sensorium of the mind. (The 
common sensory is variously placed in Western philosophy, such as the heart, 
brain, pineal gland, the ventrialis, efc.). 


55. Such, O Rama! as it was with the first animated being, is still so with all 
living animals, and all these sensations are represented in the Soul of the 
world, — anima mundi, in its spiritual form, — dtivahika, known as the 
suikshma or lingadeha, — the subtle body. (The spiritual body has 17 organs 


of sense, viz, 5 Internal, 5 External, the mind and Intellect and others (called 
the saptadasha lingdtmaka linga sarira)). 


56. The nature of this abstruse essence, is as undefinable as that of the spirit, it 
appears to be in motion, when it is really at rest, as in our idea of the soul. 
(Spiritual bodies are said to move and fly about, because the spirit is the 
motive, and life the animating principle as the soul is that of consciousness). 


57. As measure and dimensions are foreign, to our notion of Brahma, — the 
all conscious soul, so are they quite apart from that of the spirit also, which is 
no more than the motive power of the soul. (Magnitude, figure, motion, rest, 
number, place, distance, position, efc. are all objects of the senses). 


58. As the notion of the spiritual, is distinct from that of all others which are 
material and corporeal, so the notion of Brahma is quite apart from 
everything, except that of his self-consciousness. 


(God says in the Scripture, “I am that I am,” which proves his consciousness 
of himself to constitute his essence). 


59. Rama said: — If consciousness is self-same with Brahma, and our 
consciousness of ourselves as Brahma, make us identic with Brahma Himself, 
then what is the use of devising a duality of the soul, (as the divine and human 
souls), or of talking of the liberation and final absorption of the one in the 
other? (If what the Sruti says, Brahmasmi — I am Brahma; as the scripture 
declares — “In Him we live and move,” then what means our redemption or 
return to Him?). 


60. Vasishtha replied: — Rama, your question is irrelevant at this time, when 
I was going to prove another thing. Nothing can be appropriate out of its 
proper time and place, as the untimely offering of flowers to gods is not 
acceptable to them. (A question beside the mark is apropos de bottes, and 
brought in by the head and shoulders). 


61. A word full of meaning, becomes meaningless out of its proper place, like 
the offering of flowers to gods and guests, out of their proper season. (So all 
intempestivous acts, go mal a propos, unless they are done in proper time). 


62. There is a time for the introducing of a subject, and another to hold silence 
over it, so everything becomes fruitful in its proper season. (Tempus coronat 


opus). 


63. But to resume our subject, the living soul afterwards appeared from Him, 
as the human soul appears in dreaming, and thought in himself that he was the 
great father of created beings in time to come. (i.e., He would become the 
Maker of the world). 


64. He uttered the syllable Om (on or ens), and was conscious of the 
verification of its meaning in his mind, which soon displayed all forms of 
beings to his mental vision. (i.e., The All One became many, which displayed 
themselves in the mind of the living God as visions in a dream). 


65. All these were unrealities, that were displayed in the empty sphere of the 
divine mind, and the shadowy world seemed as a huge mountain, floating 
before him in the air. 


66. It was neither born of itself, nor was made by Brahma, nor is it destroyed 
at any time by any other power. It was Brahma himself, appearing as the 
phantom of an aerial city. 


67. As the living Brahma and other spiritual beings, are unreal in their nature, 
so also are the essences of other beings, from the big giant to the little emmet, 
but mere unrealities in their substance. 


68. It is our erroneous understanding, that represents these unrealities as real 
ones unto us, but the clear understanding will find all things, from the great 
Brahma down to the minutest insect, to vanish entirely from its sight. (Errors 
of the mind breed errors in the brain, and these lead to errors of vision again). 


69. The same cause that produces Brahma, produces the insects also, and it is 
the greater depravity of the mind, that causes its transmigration, into the 
contemptible forms of worms. 


70. The living being that is possessed of a rational soul, and is devoted to the 
cultivation of the mind, attains to the state of man, and then acts righteously 
for attaining a better state in after life. (These are the states of gods and angels 
in heaven). 


71. It is wrong to suppose one’s elevation, to be owing to the merit of his acts, 
and his degradation to the condition of worms, to result from his former acts 
of demerit, because there is the same particle of intellect in both of them, and 
this being known, will destroy the mistaken difference between the great and 
small. 


72. The notions of the measurer, measure and measurable, are not separate 
from the intellect, (or mind), therefore the controversy of unity and duality, is 
as futile as the horns of a hare or a lake of lotuses in the air. (This means the 
ideas of the producer, production, and product, are always one in the Absolute 
subjective. — Schelling). 


73. It is our misconception of the blissful Brahma, that produces the wrong 
notion of solid substances in us, and this imagination of our own making, 
binds us as fast as the silk-worms are fast bound in the cocoons, formed by 


their own serum (or ichor or serosity). 


74. It is the case of the knower, to perceive everything in his mind, as it is 
revealed in it by Brahma; and also to meet with everything as it is allotted by 
God to his share. (God is the revealer and giver of all things. Or — Man meets 
his fate, as it is meted to him by his Maker). 


75. It is the immutable law of nature, that nothing can be otherwise than what 
it is ordained to be, and there is nothing in nature, which can change its nature 
for a minute in a whole Kalpa-age. (Nature derives her power from the will of 
her Maker, and her course is, according to the immutable order, fixed by the 
ordainer of all). 


76. And yet this creation is a false phantom, and so is the growth and 
dissolution of all created beings, as also our enjoyment of them. (All visible 
Nature is the working of the invisible Spirit). 


77. Brahma is pure, all pervading, infinite, and absolute. It is for our misery 
only, that we take him for the impure matter and unreal substance, and as the 
definite and limited pluralities. 


78. It is the vitiated imagination of boys, that fancies the water and its waves 
as different things, and makes a false distinction between them which are 
really the same things. (Hence whatever differences there appear in objects, 
they are all as the fallacy of a snake in the rope with the unknowing. There is 
no difference of antagonistic powers felt in the spirit of Brahma, who is equal 
in all, and to whom all things are equal, though there seems a constant 
opposition in the natures of things). 


79. It is His undivided self which expanded itself in visible nature, and which 
appears as a duality, like that of the waves and the sea, and the bracelets and 
gold. Thus, He of himself appears as other than himself. (7.e., The difference 
appearing in the visibles, disappears in the indifference of the Divine Mind). 


80. We are led to imagine the visible and mutable world, to have sprung from 
the invisible and immutable spirit, which manifested itself in the form of the 
mind that produced the Ego. Thus, we have the visible from the invisible, and 
the mind and the ego from the same source. (The absolute Brahma 
manifesting itself in two forms, the mind or ego and nature or non-ego. The 
Ego of the mind is infinite, which produced the finite ego or human soul, 
personified as the first male, (Adimapurusha or Adam)). 


81. The mind joined with the ego, produced the notions of elementary 
principles or elemental particles, which the living soul combined with its 
intellect, derived from the main source of Brahma, and of which it formed the 


phenomenal world. (These notions were the intentive concepts of the formal 
and reflexive world, existing primordially in the essence of Brahma, as its 
material cause or (updddnam). So says the Vedanta: — Yato viswamvd imdmi 
bhutani, etc.). 


82. Thus the mind being realised from Brahma, sees before it whatever it 
imagines, and whatever the intellect thinks upon, whether it is a reality or 
unreality, the same comes to take place. The reflexion verily passes into 
reality. (The imagination is the faculty representative of the phenomena of 
internal and external worlds. It is both productive and reproductive. — Sir 
Wm. Hamilton. Here intellect means the Supreme Intellect, the wisdom of 
God and his design in the works of creation. All beings and things are 
manifestations of one Eternal and original mind God). 


CHAPTER LXVIII. 


Description of a Rakshasi (or female fiend). 


Argument. Story of Karkati the female fiend, and her austerities for 
extirpation of Human Kind. 


Note: — The black Rdkshasas were believed to have been a colony of African 
Negroes in southern India and Ceylon. The Rakhs is Rax, as Sycorax of 
Shakespeare. 


Note: — The whole story of the fiendish Stchi is an allegory of the human 
mind, and its rapacity. The transformation of the huge to the thin pinnate 
body, and again its assumption of the big form, are allegorical of the change 
of the corporeal and spiritual bodies, — the Sthila and Sikshma sariras, in the 
course of the repeated transmigrations of the soul from its gross to subtle 
forms by the desire of the mind. Tired of the world, the mind forsakes the 
gross body upon death, and assumes the finer spiritual form, but being soon 
dissatisfied with it, reverts to its former gross form again. It is also explained 
to be the two states of animd and garimd, the minuteness and bulkiness, 
which the Yogi attains by his yoga. 


Vasishtha said: — Hear me relate to you, Rama! an old anecdote bearing upon 
this subject, and relating to a difficult proposition adduced by the Rakshashi 
for solution. 


2. There lived on the north of Himalaya, a heinous Rdakshashi, by name of 
Karkati, — a crooked crab, who was as dark as ink and stalwart as a rock, 
with limbs as strong as could split the sturdy oak. 


3. She was also known by the title of Vistichi or cholic pain, by which she was 
ever afflicted, and which had reduced her frame like that of the Vindhya hill, 
which was cowered down (by the curse of Agastya). 


4. Her eye-balls were as blazing as fires, and her stature reaching half way to 
the sky, was girt by a blue garment, like the shade of night wrapping the 
atmosphere. 


5. A white mantle formed the covering of her head, like the fragment of a 
cloud, and the long erect hairs of her head, stood like a sable cloud on her 
crest. 


6. Her eyes flashed as lightnings, and her sharp hooked nails glistened as 
sapphires, her legs were as long as tamdla trees, and her loud laughter was as 
a burst of frost. 


7. A string of dried bones decorated her body, like a wreath of flowers, and 
the relics of dead bodies, adorned every part of her body. 


8. She frolicked in the company of Vetdlas, with human skulls hanging down 
her ears as ear-rings, and stretched out her arms aloft, as if she was going to 
pluck the sun from his sphere. 


9. Her huge body being in want of its necessary aliment, caused her culinary 
fire to blaze like the sub-marine flame, which the waters of the deep are 
unable to quench. (The latent heat in water). 


10. Nothing could ever satiate the insatiable hunger of this big bellied 
monster, nor satisfy her lickerish tongue, which was always stretched out like 
a flame of fire. 


11. She thought in herself saying: — Oh! if I could but once go to the 
Jambudwipa, — the land of Asia, I would devour all its men in one swoop, 
and feast on them continually, like the sub-marine fire upon the waters. 


12. As the clouds cool the burning sands by their rain, so will I allay the 
burning fire of my hunger there. It is settled as the best plan to support my 
life, at this critical moment. 


13. All men are well guarded by means of their mantras, medicines, 
austerities, devotions, and charities, from all evils of the world, whence it is 
impossible for anybody to destroy the indestructible devotee. (My all 
destructive devotion will destroy all, but render me indestructible). 


14. I will perform the most rigorous austerities, with an unflinching heart and 
mind, because it is by intensity of painstaking, that we may gain what is 
otherwise hard to be had. Undustria vincit omnia. — Labour conquers all). 


15. Having thought so, she repaired to an inaccessible mountain, for the 
purpose of destroying all animal beings. (The Rdkshasa cannibals are 
devourers of all flesh, and are of the omnivorous kind). 


16. She climbed to the top of the mountain, by scrambling over it with her 
hands and feet, and stood on it with her body resembling a cloud, and her eye- 
balls flashing as lightnings. (i.e., Her body and eyesight, were similar to the 


cloud and lightning on the mountain top). 


17. Having got to the summit, she made her ablution and then sat at her 
devotion, with her steadfast eyeballs resembling the two orbs of the sun and 
moon, and fixed on one object. 


18. She passed there many a day and month, and saw the course of many a 
season and year. She exposed her huge body to the rigor of heat and cold, like 
the hill itself (on which she sat). 


19. She with her huge black body, remained unmoved as a thick sable cloud, 
on the mountain top, and her jet black hairs stood up as if to touch the sky. 


20. Seeing her body beaten by the blasts, and covered with nothing but her 
ragged skin, and her hairs standing up to their end, to be tossed to and fro by 
the raging winds, while the twinklings of her eyelids, shed a whitish glare on 
her sable frame, the god Brahma made his appearance before her. 


CHAPTER LXIX. 


Story of Visichika — (continued). 


Argument. Brahma’s boon to Vistichi, and the mantra against her Power. 


Vasishtha resumed: — After the lapse of a thousand years, Brahma appeared 
to her, in order to put an end to the ardour of her austerities, and crown her 
with success or the reward of her devotion. (Ardent devotion has the power of 
displacing even the gods from their heavenly seats). 


2. She saluted him internally in her mind, and remained fixed in her position, 
thinking about the boon she should beg of him, for allaying her keen appetite. 


3. She soon recollected a certain request, which she should prefer to her 
complying god, and it was to transform her soft and flexible form to the shape 
of an inflexible iron-nail, wherewith she could torment all living beings. (i.e., 
To make her fleshy form as stiff as a poker, so as to be able to pierce all others 
without being pierced herself). 


4. At Brahma’s bidding, she bethought in herself: — “I will become as thin as 
a minute pin, in order to enter imperceptibly into the hearts of animals, as the 
odor of flowers enters the nostrils.” 


5. “By this means will I suck the heart-blood of beings, to my heart’s 
satisfaction; in this way will my hunger be satiated, and the gratification of my 
appetite, will give the greatest delight to my soul.” 


6. As she was thinking in this manner, the God discovered her sinister 
motives, contrary to the character of a Yogi, and accosted her in a voice 
resembling the roaring of clouds. 


7. Brahma said: — Daughter Karkati, of the Rakshasa race, that sittest here 
like a cloud on the inaccessible top of this mountain, know that I am pleased 
with thy devotion, and bid thee now to raise thyself, and receive the boon that 
thou desirest of me. 


8. Karkati answered: — “O Lord of the past and future! If thou art inclined to 


grant my request, then please to confer on me the boon, of transforming my 
uniron-like body to the form of an iron needle.” 


9. Vasishtha said: — The God pronounced, “Be it so,” and joined, “thou wilt 
be as a pin, and shalt be called the cholic pain, for thy giving pain to all 
bodies.” 


10. “Thou shalt be the cruel cause of acute pain and pang to all living being, 
and particularly to the intemperate and hard-working fools, and loose 
libertines, who are destined to be thy devoted victims.” 


11. “Moreover shalt thou molest the dwellers of unhealthy districts, and the 
practicers of malpractices, by entering their hearts with thy infectious breath, 
and by disturbing their sleep, and deranging the liver and other intestinal parts 
of the body.” 


12. “Thou shalt be of the form of wind (in the bowels), and cause bile and 
flatulence under the different names of colic diseases, and attack the 
intemperate both among the wise and unwise.” 


13. “The wise when attacked by thee, will be healed by repeating this runic 
mantra, which I will here propound for their benefit.” 


14. The mantra runs thus: — “There lives Karkati, the Rdkshasi, in the north 
of the snowy mountain; her name is Vistichik4, and it is for repelling her 
power that I repeat this mantra; “Om, I bow to hring, hrang and ring, rang, 
— the powers of Vishnu, and invoke the Vaishnavi powers to remove, 
destroy, root out, drive away this colic pain, far beyond the Himalayas, and 
afar to the orb of the moon. Om, (amen) and swdhd, (soho), be it so.” Let 
these lines be held on the left arm as an amulet. 


15. “Then rub the painful part with the palm of that hand, and think the colic 
Karkati to be crushed under the mallet of this amulet, and driven back beyond 
the hills with loud wailing.” 


16. “Let the patient think the medicinal moon to be seated in his heart, and 
believe himself to be freed from death and disease, and his faith will save his 
life and heal his pain.” 


17. “The attentive adept, who having purified himself with sprinkling the 
water in his mouth, repeats this formula, he succeeds in a short time to remove 
the colic pain altogether.” 


18. The lord of the three worlds then disappeared in the air, after delivering 
this efficacious amulet to the Siddhas attending upon him. He went to his 
splendid seat in heaven, where he was received by the god Indra, who 


advanced to hail him with his hosannas. 


CHAPTER LXX. 


Conduct of Vistchi, or the Adventures of the 
Needle. 


Argument. The gradual leanness of Stichi, and her entrance in Human bodies. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now this Stchi who had been as tall as a mountain- 
peak, and a Rakshasi of the blackest kind, resembling a thick and dark cloud 
of the rainy season, began gradually to fade away, and grow leaner and leaner 
day by day. 


2. Her gigantic cloud-like form, was soon reduced to the shape of the branch 
of a tree, which afterwards became of the figure of a man, and then of the 
measure of a cubit only. 


3. It next became of the length of a span in its height, and then of a finger’s 
length in all. Growing by degrees thinner and thinner like a corn or grain, it 
became at last as lean as a needle or pin. 


4. She was thus reduced to the thinness of a needle, fit only to sew a silken 
robe, and became as lean as the filament of the lotus flower by her own desire, 
which can change a hill to a grain of sand. (This passage bears reference to the 
microcosm of human soul). 


5. The unmetallic Suichi, was thus transformed to the form of a black and 
slender iron needle, which containing all her limbs and organs of her body in 
it, conducted her in the air and everywhere as she liked. (Thus the gross 
human body being reduced to its subtle dtivdhika or spiritual form, it is 
possible for the Yogi to traverse through the air, as we perceive in the course 
of our minds). 


6. She viewed her person as an iron pin, and having neither any substance nor 
length or breadth of her body. (The false idea of length and breadth of the soul 
is a fallacy of our understanding, because the soul like a geometrical line, has 


no dimension nor substance whatever in it). 


7. Her mind with its power of thought, appeared as bright as a golden needle 
(pointing to the point), and as a streak of the sapphire impregnated by solar 
ray. 


8. Her rolling eye-balls, were as dark as the spots of black clouds, moved to 
and fro by the winds, and her sparkling pupils were gazing at the bright glory 
(of God), piercing through their tenuous pores. (It is explained also as fixing 
the eye-sight to some chink (as that of a wall or other), through which the 
light of God enters the sensory of sight, and then penetrates into the soul as in 
Yoga meditation). 


9. She had observed the vow of her taciturnity (mauna-vrata), for reducing the 
plumpness of her person, and was gladdened in her face, to become as lean as 
the filament of a feather. (The vow of keeping silence is said to be of great 
good, by increasing the power of thought, for he who speaks little thinks 
much, and who so talks much, must talk in vain. It is the practice of munis or 
saints to remain silent, whence the vow has its name). 


10. She beheld a light alighting on her, from the air at a distance; and she was 
glad in her face to find her inward spirit, to be sublimated as air. (The internal 
light and lightness of the body are results of Yoga practice). 


11. With her contracted eye brows, she beheld the rays of light extending to 
her from afar, which caused the hairs on her body, to stand up like those of 
babies at bathing. 


12. Her grand artery called Brahmanadi or susumna, was raised about its 
cavity in the head called the Brahma-randhra, in order to greet the holy light, 
as the filaments of the lotus, rise to receive the solar light and heat. 


13. Having subdued the organs of her senses and their powers, she remained 
as one without her organic frame, and identified with her living soul, and 
resembled the intelligent principle of the Bauddhas and Tarkikas, which is 
unseen by others. (i.e., In her spiritual form only). 


14. Her minuteness seemed to have produced the minutiae of minute 
philosophers, called the siddharthas, and her silence was like that of the wind 
confined in a cave. Her slender form of the puny pin, resembled the breath of 
animal life, which is imperceptible to the eye. 


15. The little that remained of her person, was as thin as the last hope of man 
(which sustains his life). It was as the pencil of the extinguished flame of a 
lamp, that has its heat without the light. 


16. But alas! how pitiable was her folly, that she could not understand at first, 
that she was wrong to choose for herself the form of a slender pin, in order to 
gratify her insatiable appetite. 


(This is a ridicule to Yogis and students, that emaciate themselves with intense 
study and Yoga, only with a desire to pamper their bodies afterwards, with 
luxuries and carnal enjoyments). 


17. Her object was to have her food, and not the contemptible form of the pin, 
her heart desired one thing, and she found herself in another form, that was of 
no use to her purpose. 


18. It was her silliness, that led her make the injudicious choice of needleship 
for herself, and so it is with the short witted, that they lack the sense of 
judging beforehand, about their future good. 


19. An arduous attempt to accomplish the desired object, is often attended by 

a different result, and even success on one hand, becomes a failure on another, 
just as the mirror is soiled by the breath, while it shows the face to the looker. 

(Disappointment lurks in many a shape, and often stings us with success). 


20. How be it, the Rakshasi soon learnt to be content with her needleship, 
after she had relinquished her gigantic form, although she viewed her 
transformation as worse than her dissolution itself. (Utter annihilation is more 
desirable to the Yogi than his metamorphosis to meaner forms). 


21. Lo! the contrariety in the desires of the infatuated, who distaste in a trice, 
what they fondly wished at one time, as this fiend was disgusted at her pinship 
in lieu of her monstrous figure. (And so they wilfully shun the object of their 
former fondness, as the suicides and dying people quit their fond bodies 
without remorse). 


22. As one dish of food is easily replaced by another, suiting the taste of the 
voluptuary, so this fiend did not hesitate to shun her gigantic body, which she 
took to taste the heart blood of animals in her pinnate form. 


23. Even death is delectable to the giddy headed, when they are overfond of 
something else, as the minim of a meagre needle was desirable to the 
monstrous fiend for the gratification of her fiendish desire. 


24. Now this needle took the rarefied form of air, and moved about as the 
colic wind, (colica flatulenta), after all living beings, in quest of her suction of 
animal gore. 


25. Its body was that of fiery heat, and its life the vital breath of animals; its 
seat was in the sensitive heart, and it was as swift as the particles of solar and 


lunar beams. 


26. It was as destructive as the blade of the deadly sword, and as fleet as the 
effluvia flying in air. It penetrated into the body in the form of the minutiae of 
odor. 


27. It was ever bent to do evil, like an evil spirit, as she was now known by 
that name, and her sole object was to kill the lives of others at her pleasure. 


28. Her body was afterwards divided into two halves, one of which was as 
fine as a silken thread, and the other as soft as a thread of cotton. 


29. Suchi ranged all about the ten sides of the world, in these two forms of 
hers, and pierced and penetrated into the hearts of living beings, with all her 
excruciating pains. 


30. It was for the accomplishment of all these purposes of hers, whether they 
be great or little, that Karkati forsook her former big body, and took the form 
of the acute and small needle. (Because humbleness and acuteness are the 
means of success in every project). 


31. To men of little understanding, a slight business becomes an arduous task, 
as the foolish fiend had recourse to her austerities, in order to do the mean 
work of the needle. 


32. Again men, however good and great, can hardly get rid of their natural 
disposition, and it was for this reason that the great Rakshasi, performed her 
austere devotion, in order to become a vile pin for molesting mankind. 


33. Now as Stichi was roving about in the sky, her aerial form which was big 
with her heinous ambition, disappeared in air like vapour, or as a thick cloud 
in autumn. 


34. Then entering in the body of some sensualist or weak or too fat a person, 
this inward colic flatulence of Stchi, assumed the shape of Vistchika or 
cholera. 


35. Sometimes she enters in the body of some lean person, as also in those of 
healthy and wise people, and appearing at first as a colic pain, becomes a real 
cholera at last. 


36. She is often delighted, to take her seat in the hearts of the ignorant, but is 
driven back afterwards by the good acts and prayers, and mantras and 
medicines of the wise. 


37. In this manner she continued many years in her rambles, her bipartite 
body kept sometimes flying up in the air, and oftentimes creeping low on the 


ground. 


38. She lies concealed in the dust of the ground, and under the fisted fingers of 
hands, she hides herself in the sun-beams, in air and in the threads of cloths. 
(All this refers to the pestilential air). 


39. She is hid in the intestines, entrails, and genitals, and resides in the bodies 
of pale and ash coloured persons; she abides in the pores, lines and lineaments 
of the body, as also in dry grass and in the dried beds of rivers. (All these are 
abodes of malaria). 


40. She has her seat among the indigent, and in the naked and uncovered 
bodies of men, as also in those which are subject to hard breathings. She 
dwells in places infested by flies and of obstructed ventilation, as also in green 
verdures excepting only of the mango and woodapple, (bel), trees. 


41. She lurks in places scattered with bones and joints of animal bodies, and 
such as are disturbed by violent winds, and gusts of air, she lies in dirty 
places, and in cold and icy grounds, and likewise, in polluted cloths and 
places polluted by them. 


42. She sits in holes and hollow places, withered trees, and spots infested by 
crows, flies, and peacocks. Also in places of dry, humid and high winds, and 
in benumbed fingers and toes. 


43. As also in cloudy regions, in cavernous districts of the form of rotten 
bodies, in regions of melting and driving snows, and in marshy grounds 
abounding in ant hills and hills of mdlura trees. (Mdliura is Kapitha or kath- 
bel, which is deemed unwholesome). 


44. She exhibits herself in the mirage of desert sand, and in wildernesses 
abounding with ravenous beasts and snakes. Sometimes she is seen in lands 
infested by venomous reptiles, and disgusting leeches and worms. 


45. She frequents the stagnate pools, soiled by dry leaves and those chewed 
by the Pisdchas, and haunts the hovels beside the cross ways, where 
passengers halt and take shelter from cold. 


46. She rambles in all places, ever where the leeches suck the blood of men, 
and vile people tear them with their nails and hold them in their fists for 
feeding upon them. (Here is a relation between the blood sucking Stichi or 
Needle and the leeches). 


47. In this manner she passes in all places, that we view in the landscape of 
cities in drawings, until she is tired with her long journey through them. 


48. She then stops in her course like a tired bullock, whose body is heated by 


travelling through towns, with loads of cotton and utensils on their backs. 


49. She afterwards lays her down to rest in some hidden place, like a needle 
tired with continued sewing, and there drops down like it, from its bridling 
thread in the hand of the sewer. 


50. The hard needle held in the hand of the sewer, never hurts his finger, 
because a servant, however sharp he may be, is never faithless or is injurious 
to his master. 


51. The iron needle growing old in its business of stitching, was at last lost by 
itself, like the rotten plank of a boat, bearing the burthensome ballast of stones 
in it. 

52. It wandered about on all sides of its own accord, and was driven to and fro 
like chaff by the driving winds, according to the course of nature (with all 
things). 


53. Being taken up by someone, it is fed with the fag end of a thread put into 
its mouth, as the malady of cholera is caught by those human parasites, who 
glut themselves with food supplied by the sap of another. 


54. The malady of colic, like the needle, is ever fond of feeding on the pith of 
others with its open mouth, and continually finds the thread-like heartstring of 
some body put into its hole. 


55. Thus the strong bodies of greedy and heinous beings, are nourished by the 
sap of the weak and innocent, as the colic disease preys on the lean bodies of 
the poor, and the sharp needle is supported by the thin thread of the needy, 
(who cannot afford to buy new suits). 


56. Though the heart of Stichi like the hole of the needle, was to receive the 
thread-like sap of the patient’s heart, yet her power to pierce it, was like that 
of the sewing needle, which is as potent as the piercing sun-beams, to 
penetrate into the toughest substances. 


57. At last, Siich{ came to find on a sudden, the fault of her wrong choice of 
the puny body (of the needle), which was to be filled with her scanty fare of a 
bit of thread, and then she began to repent for her folly. 


58. She continued, however, with all her might, to trudge on in her wonted 
course, of pricking and piercing the bodies of others, and notwithstanding her 
great regret, she could not avoid the cruelty of her nature. 


59. The sewing man cuts and sews the cloth, agreeably to his own liking; but 
the weaver of destiny weaves the long loom of lengthened desires in all 
bodies, and hides their reason under the garb of her own making. 


60. The colic Stichi went on like the sewing needle, in her business of piercing 
the hearts of people by hiding her head, as it is the practice of robbers to carry 
on their rogueries, by covering their faces. (All the three are sly boots, and 
carry on their trades under the seal of secrecy). 


61. She like the needle with the sewing thread behind it, raises her head to 
make and look at the loop-hole, that she should penetrate in the manner of 
burglars, making and marking the holes in the wall for their entry. 


62. She entered alike in the bodies of the weak and strong, like the needle 
stitching cloths of all textures (whether silken, linen or fibrous), as it is the 
custom of the wicked to spare neither the just nor unjust (from their calumny 
and villainy). 


63. The colic pain like the piercing needle, being pressed under the fingers, 
lets off its griping, like the thread of the needle in its act of sewing. (So the 
wicked when caught in the act, let out and give up their wickedness). 


64. The acute and unfeeling colic, being as ignorant as the stiff and heartless 
needle of the softness or dryness of the object, pierces the hardiest breast, 
without deriving any sweetness from it. (So the unfeeling ruffians molest the 
moneyless, to no benefit to themselves). 


65. The needle is compared with a rich widow, being both equally stern and 
full of remorse, both equally veiled and speechless, and with their eye of the 
needle, are empty in their joyless hearts. 


66. The needle hurts no body, (but rather does good in clothing mankind, by 
mending their tattered habits), and yet she is dragged by the thread, which is 
no other than the thread of her fate (woven by the fatal sisters for her 
drudgery). 


67. Slipt from the finger of her master, the needle sleeps in peace after her 
trudging, in company with her fellows of dirt and dregs, for who is there that 
does not deem himself blest, in the company of his equals, when he is out of 
employ? 


68. The herd of common people, is ever fond of mixing with the ignorant 
rabble in their modes of life, because there is no body that can avoid the 
company of his equals. (Kind flies with its own kind, or, Birds of one feather 
fly together). 


69. The lost needle when found by a blacksmith and heated in the hearth, flies 
to heaven by the breath of the bellows, after which it disappears in the air. (So 
the society of the good elevates one to heaven, which leads at last to his final 
liberation). 


70. In this manner, the current of vital airs, conducts the breath of life in to the 
heart, which becomes the living spirit, by force of the acts of its prior states of 
existence. 


71. The vital airs being vitiated in the body, cause the colic pains known by 
different names, such as flatulence, bile and the like. 


72. The colic caused by vitiation of the Vyana air, produces many diseases, 
and affects all the members of the body with a watery fluid. When it comes by 
breathing of the lungs, it causes the Vaya sila or pulmonary colic of lungs, 
and is attended by disfigurement of the body, and insanity or hysteria known 
as the hysteric colic. 


73. Sometimes it comes from the hands of sheep-keepers, and by the smell of 
the sheep’s wool in blankets, and at others it seizes the fingers of children, and 
causes them to tear their bed cloths therewith. 


74. When it enters the body by the foot, it continues in sucking the blood, and 
with all its voracity, becomes satisfied with very little food. 


75. It lies in the glandular vessel of the faeces, with its mouth placed 
downward, and takes at pleasure any form it likes to assume as its prerogative. 


76. It is the nature of the malicious, to show the pervertedness of their hearts 
by doing injury to others, as it is characteristic of the base people to raise a 
row for their pleasure, and not for any gain or good to themselves. 


77. The miserly think much of their gain of even a single cowry, so deep- 
rooted is the avaricious selfishness of human nature. (All little gain is no gain, 
compared with the wants of men). 


78. It was but for a particle of blood, or as much as could be picked out by the 
point of a pin, that the colic Siichi was bent on the destruction of men, so the 
wise are fools in their own interests, (and so do cut-throats kill others for a 
single groat). 


79. How great is my master-stroke, says the needle, that from stitching the 
shreds of cloth, have come to the pitch of piercing the hearts of men, so be it, 
and I am happy at my success. 


80. As the rust of the lazy needle passes off in sewing, without being rubbed 
with dust, so must it take the rust, unless it is put in the action of piercing the 
patient and passive shreds. (The rolling stone gathers no moss). 


81. The unseen and airy darts of fate, are as fatal as the acts of the cruel 
Vistichi, though both of them have their respite at short intervals of their 
massacres. 


82. The needle is at rest after its act of sewing is done, but the wicked are not 
satisfied, even after their acts of slaughter are over. 


83. It dives in the dirt and rises in the air, it flies with the wind and lies down 
wherever it falls, it sleeps in the dust and hides itself at home and in the 
inside, and under the cloths and leaves. It dwells in the hand and ear-holes, in 
lotuses and heaps of woolen stuffs. It is lost in the holes of houses, in clefts of 
wood and underneath the ground. (Compare the adventures of a pin in Gay’s 
Fables). 


84. Valmiki added: — As the sage was speaking in this manner, the sun went 
down in the west, and the day departed to its evening service. The assembly 
broke after mutual salutations, to perform their sacred ablution, and joined 
again on the next morning, with the rising beams of the sun to the royal 
palace. 


CHAPTER LXXI. 


Remorse of Sichi. 


Argument. Remorse of Karkati at her transformation to a Needle from her 
former gigantic form. 


Vasishtha continued: — After the carnivorous fiend, — Karkati, had feasted 
for a long period on the flesh and blood of human kind, she found her 
insatiable voracity to know no bounds, and never to be satisfied with anything. 


2. She used to be satisfied erewhile, with a drop of blood in her form of the 
needle, and she now became sorry, at the loss of the insatiable thirst and 
appetite of her former state. 


3. She thought in herself, O pity it is! that I came to be a vile needle, with so 
weak and slender a body, that I can take nothing for my food. 


4. How foolish I have been to forego my former gigantic form, and change my 
dark cloudy figure for something as the dry leaf of a forest tree. 


5. O wretch that Iam, to have foregone my dainty food of flesh flavoured with 
fat. (The Raskshasa cannibals are raw flesh-eaters and feeders on the fat of 
animals). 


6. Iam doomed to dive in dirt, and drop down on the ground, to be trodden 
and trampled over under the feet of people, and soiled and sullied in the filth. 


7. Ome miserable, helpless, and hopeless thing, and without any support or 
status of mine, from one woe I fall to another, and one danger is succeeded by 
another unto me! 


8. [have no mistress nor maidservant, nor my father nor mother; I have got no 
son nor brother, nor any one to serve or befriend me. 


9. [have no body nor abode, nor any refuge nor asylum anywhere, nor have I 
a fixed dwelling in any spot, but am driven about, like the fallen leaves of 


forest trees by the driving winds. 


10. Iam subject to all accidents, and exposed to every kind of calamity; I wish 
for my extinction, but it wishes not to approach unto me. (Death flies from the 
destitute). 


11. What else have I done to have given away my own big body, in the 
foolishness of my heart, than parted like a madman, with a precious jewel for 
a paltry piece of glass. 


12. One calamity is enough to turn the brain out of order, but what will be my 
case when it is followed by other calamities in endless succession. 


13. lam hung up (with the cloth) to be suffocated by the smoke, and dropped 
down in the streets to be trodden under foot; I am cast away with the dirt, and 
hid under the grass to my great distress. 


14. I serve at another’s will, and am guided by my guide; I am stark naked 
while I sew for others, and am ever a dependent on another’s guidance. 


15. Long do I drudge and trudge for a paltry gain, and stitching alone is all the 
work that I have to perform for life. O unlucky that I am, that my ill luck even 
is so very luckless. 


16. I see the demon of despair rising before me, upon my penitence of this 
day, and threatening to make an end of this body, of which I have made an 
offering to him. 


17. What better fate can await on me, after my loss of so big and bulky a body 
by my foolishness, than to be annihilated into nothing, rather than be a thing 
which is good for nothing. 


18. What man will pick me up, who am as lean as a mollusk (or thread worm), 
from the heap of ashes, under which I lie buried by the wayside. 


19. No keen-sighted man will take into his consideration a wretched and a 
forlorn being, as nobody living on a high hill, ever stoops to take notice of the 
grass growing on the ground below. 


20. I cannot expect to raise myself higher, while I am lying in the sea of 
ignorance; what blind man can perceive the glorious sun-light, who is guided 
by the flash of fireflies? 


21. I know not, therefore, how long I shall have to labour under my 
difficulties, when I find myself already drowned in a sea of misery. 


22. When shall I be restored again to the form of the daughter of Anjanagiri 
mountain, and will stand as a pillar over the ruins of the nether and upper 


worlds? 


23. When shall I have my arms reaching to the clouds, and my eyes flashing 
as lightning, my garb becoming as white as snow, and my hairs touching the 
sky. 


24. My big belly resembling a huge cloud, and my long breasts hanging below 
as pillows, shaking with the motion of my body, in its dancing like the pinions 
of a peacock. 


25. The ash-white light emitted by my laughter, cast the light of the sun into 
the shade, and my former high stature, threatened to devour the terrible god of 
death. 


26. My hollow sockets deep as the holes of mortars, flashed erewhile with 
living fire, like the rays of the sun, and my large legs moved as two 
monumental pillars in my rambling. 


27. When shall I have my big belly, with its large cavity like a pot-belly, and 
when shall I have again my soft black nails, resembling the dark and humid 
clouds of autumn. 


28. When will those tender smiles return to me, whereby I moved the great 
Rdkshasas to my favour, and when shall I dance in my giddy circles, at the 
music of the tabor amidst the forests. 


29. When will that big belly of mine, be filled with potfuls of fattened liquor, 
and be fed with heaps of the flesh and bones of dead bodies. 


30. When shall I get me drunk, with drinking the blood of human gores, and 
become merry and giddy, until I fall fast asleep. 


31. It was I who destroyed my former brilliant body, by my bad choice of 
austerities, and accepted this petty needlish form, like one taking the sulphate 
of gold, instead of that precious metal. 


32. Ah! where is that huge body which filled all sides, and shone as the sable 
hill of Anjanagiri, and what is this puny and pinny form of the shape of a 
spider’s leg, and as thin and lean as a tender blade of grass. 


33. The ignorant are found to throw away a golden jewel, as useless on the 
ground as a piece of glass, and so have I cast aside my shining body, for a bit 
of this blackest needle. 


34. O great Vindhya, with thy hollow and snow covered caves! why dost thou 
not destroy thy dull elephants by thy native lions? It is I that am as silly as an 
elephant, — gaja miurkha. 


35. O my arms! which used to break down mountain peaks, why do ye fail to 
pluck the butter-like moon with thy moony nails? 


36. O my breast! which was as fair as the side of the snowy mountain, even 
without my glassy ornaments; why dost thou not show thy hairs, which were 
as large as leeches that feed on lion’s flesh? 


37. O my eyes! that used to dispel the darkness of the darkest night, and 
kindle the dry fuel with your glaring fire; why do ye cease to lighten the air 
with your effulgence? 


38. O my shoulder blades! are ye broken down and levelled with the earth? or 
are ye crushed and smashed or mouldered and worn out by age? 


39. O my moon-bright face! why dost thou not shine over me with thy bright 
beams, resembling the everlasting light of the orb of the moon, now at an end 
forever? 


40. O my hands! where is your strength fled today? See ye not, how I am 
transformed to an ignoble needle, that is moved about by the touch of the foot 
of a fly? 


41. Alas! the cavity of my navel, which was as deep as a well, and beset by 
hairs resembling rows of beautiful plants about it, and my protuberant 
posteriors, which likened to the bottom of the Vindhya hills. 


42. Where is that towering stature reaching to the sky, and what is this new 
earned contemptible form of the needle; where is that mouth, hollow as the 
vault of the sky, and what is this hole of the needle? Where is that heap of my 
flesh meat, and what is this drop of watery food? Ah! how lean have I grown, 
but who is to be blamed for an act of my own doing? 


CHAPTER LXXII. 


Fervour of Suchi’s Devotion. 


Argument. Ardour of Stichi’s austerities and Indra’s Inquiry of it. 


Vasishtha continued: — Afterwards Suchi became silent and motionless, and 
thought of resuming her austerities for the sake of regaining her long lost 
body. 


2. With this intention she returned to the Himdlayas, and there abstaining from 
her desire of human gore, she sat reiterating her castigations. 


3. She saw in her mind her form of the needle, entering into her heart with her 
breathings. 


4. Thus meditating on her mental form of the needle, she was wafted by her 
vital breath to the top of the hill, and alighted on it like a vulture from high. 


5. There she remained alone and apart from all living beings, and sat amidst 
burning fires, with her form of an ash-coloured stone, (i.e., besmeared by 
ashes like a Yogi). 


6. She sat there as a sprout of grass, springing in that dry and grassless spot, 
but soon faded away, to a blade of withered hay in the sandy desert. 


7. She remained standing on tip-toe of her only one foot, and continued in the 
castigation of her own self. (Standing of the one-legged needle, represented 
the posture of devotees standing on one leg). 


8. She lightly touched the ground with her tiptoe stature, and avoiding all 
sidelong looks, gazed on the upper sky with her upraised face and uplifted 
eyes. 


9. The acute point of the black iron needle, firmly preserved its standing 
posture by penetrating the ground, while it fed itself upon the air, which it 
inhaled by its uplifted mouth. 


10. The scarcity of food in the forest, made it look up as in quest of some prey 
coming from a distance, while its lower part shaking with the wind, enticed 
the unwary to approach towards it. 


11. The ray of light issuing as a pencil from the needle hole, became like its 
attendant guard on the hinder part. 


12. As men are kindly disposed towards the mean, that are favourites to them, 
so was the needle attached to the pencil of ray, that became its constant 
attendant. 


13. The needle had another constant companion, of its devotion in its own 
shadow, but the blackness of its person, made it always to remain behind the 
back. (The shadow of a thing ever remains behind it). 


14. Thus the shadowy needle and pencil of ray, having firmly adhered 
themselves to the iron needle, these three have always become intimate 
friends, like all good people mutually assisting one another. 


15. The trees and plants of the mountain forest, felt compassion for Suchi on 
seeing her in this plight, for who is there, that bears no sympathy for the pious 
devotee, or her penances and austerities? 


16. The needle that was thus stuck fast to the ground by its foot, and had 
sprung up like some faculty of the mind, was fed with the fragrance of the 
fruitage, blown and borne by the breeze to its uplifted mouth. 


17. The woodland gods and demi-gods, continued to fill its mouth with the 
dust of blown and unblown flowers in the woods. 


18. But it did not swallow the powdered dust of meat, which the god Indra 
had caused to be thrown into its mouth, for the purpose of frustrating the 
efficacy of its devotion. 


19. Its fixity of purpose, did not permit it to swallow the delicious powder, 
because a person, however mean he may be, is sure of success by his firmness 
of mind. 


20. The god of winds, with his power of uprooting the mountains, was 
astonished to find the needle, averse to swallow the food, ministered to it in 
the form of the pollen of flowers. 


21. The resolute devotee is never to be shaken from his purpose, though he is 
plunged in the mud or drowned in water, or scattered by the winds and thrown 
into the burning fire. 


22. Or when he is shattered by showers of hailstones, or struck by the 


lightning or battered by rain drops, and intimidated by thunder claps. 


23. The resolute mind is not changed in a thousand years, and the feet of the 
firm, like those of the drowsy and dead drunk, never move from their place. 


24. The holy hermit who is devoted to his purpose, loses in time the motion of 
his external organs, but obtains by the exercise of his reason, the light of true 
knowledge in his soul. 


25. Thus did Stchi gain the light of knowledge, and become a seer of the past 
and future. She became cleansed of the dross of her sins, and her Vistichi, or 
impurity, was turned to Stichi, or purity. 


26. She came to know the truly knowable, in her own understanding, and she 
felt true bliss in her soul, after the removal of her sins by devotion. 


27. She continued for many thousand years in her austere devotion, to the 
great astonishment of seven times seven worlds, that got affrighted at her 
austerities. (The cause of their fright was, lest she should take possession of 
their happy states, by the merit of her devotion). 


28. The great mountain was set in a blaze by the fervour of her devotion, and 
that flame spread to all the worlds, like the blaze of a portentous meteor. 


29. This made Indra the god of heaven, to ask Narada respecting the cause of 
this intense devotion, saying, “Who is it that engrosses to her the fruition of 
worlds, by her austere devotion?” To whom Narada thus replied: — 


30. “It is Sachi, who by her continued devotion of thousands of years, has 
attained her highest state of enlightenment, and it is that light that now 
enflames all the worlds.” 


31. It is Sichi’s devotion, O lord of gods, that makes the Nagas to sigh and 
the hills to tremble. It causes the celestials to fall down, and the sea to 
overflow on earth. It dries up all things, and casts to shade the bright orb of 
the sun itself. 


CHAPTER LXXIIl. 


Narada’s Relation of Sichi’s Devotion. 


Argument. Description of Stichi’s austerities, and Indra’s Inquiry about them. 


Vasishtha related: — Indra having learnt about the austere devotion of 
Karkati, had the curiosity to know more of her through Narada, whom he 
asked about the matter. 


2. Indra said: — I know Stchi to have acquired her fiendish practice (of blood 
sucking), by means of her devotion, but who is this apish Karkati that is so 
greedy of her gain (of flesh and bones). 


3. Narada replied: — It is Karkatf the malevolent fiend, that became Jiva 
Suichi or colic pain of the living, and assumed the shape of an iron needle as 
its support or fulcrum. 


4. Having afterwards forsaken that prop, it entered into the human body as its 
landing place, and then it flew up to the heart on the vehicle of vital breath, 
and is seated in the car of the current air in atmosphere. (The resting place 
locus standi, point d’appui or powsto of the diseases of life). 


5. This colic of life, — Jiva Stichi, having entered into the bodies of vicious 
lives, passes through the canals of their entrails and the pores of their flesh, fat 
and blood, and then nestles as a bird in the interior part. 


6. It enters the intestines with the breath of the air, and there settles in the 
form of flatulent colic, afterwards being seated at the end of the nyagrodha 
artery, it forms the plethoric colic with fulness of blood and inflammation. 


7. It also enters the body through other parts and organs, and receives different 
names according to its situation, and then feeds itself upon their flesh and 
marrow (as the best food for living beings). 


8. Fastened to the knots of wreathed flowers and stuck to the leafy garlands, 
decorating the breasts and cheeks of fond damsels, she steeps enraptured with 


them, on the bosoms of their loving spouses. (i.e., The menial needle is 
blessed in the company of her mistress). 


9. She flies to the bodies of birds in wood-land retreats, which are free from 
worldly sorrow and strife, and flutters on the tops of flowers of the Kalpa 
arbours of Paradise, or rolls on beds of lotuses in the lakes. 


10. She flies over the high hills of the gods, in the forms of fluttering bees, and 
sips the honey drops, perfumed with the fragrance of the pollen of mandara 
flowers. 


11. She devours in the form of vultures, the entrails of the dead bodies of 
warriors, through the notches made in them, by blades of swords in warfare. 


12. She flies up and down in the pellucid and glassy paths of the firmament, 
and pierces through all the pores and arteries or inlets into the human body, as 
the inflated winds pass in every creek and corner on all sides. 


13. As the universal vital air, (prdna-vdyu), runs in the heart of every living 
being, in the form of the pulsation of air, so does Stichi oscillate in every 
body, as it were her own habitation. 


14. As the intellectual powers are lodged in every person, in the manner of 
blazing lamps in them, so does she reside and blaze as the mistress of every 
body, answering her dwelling house. 


15. She sparkles as the vital spark in the particles of blood, and flows as 
fluidity in liquid bodies; she rolls and trolls in the bowels of living beings, as 
whirl pools whirl about in the bosom of the sea. 


16. She rests in the milk white mass of flesh, as Vishnu reclines on his bed of 
the serpent Vasuki; she tastes the flavour of the blood of all hearts, as the 
goddess, (K4li), drinks the liquor of her goblet of wine. 


17. She sucks the circulating red hot blood of hearts, as the winds absorb the 
internal and vivifying juice, from the hearts of plants and trees. 


18. Now this living Stchi, intending to become a devotee, remains as 
motionless as an immovable substance, and as fixed and steady in her mind. 


19. The iron-hearted needle, being now rarefied as the invisible air, is 
traversing to all sides, on the swift wings of winds resembling its riding 
horses. 


20. It goes on feeding on the flesh and drinking the blood of all living beings, 
and carrying on its various acts of giving and receiving, and dancing and 
singing all along. 


21. Though the incorporeal Suichi has become aeriform and invisible as 
vacuum, yet there is nothing which she is unable to accomplish by the powers 
of her mind, outstripping the swiftness of the winds. 


22. But though she runs mad with her meat, and turns about giddy with her 
drink, yet she is curbed by fate, like an elephant in chains from running at 
random. 


23. The living body like a running stream, moves apace with billows in its 
course, and the painful and destructive diseases under which it labours, are as 
greedy sharks lying hid underneath. 


24. This frail body like the formless Stichi, being disabled by infirmity to 
gorge its fleshy food, begins to lament its fate, like old and sickly rich folks, 
for their want of hunger and appetite. 


25. The body with its members, moves about like the beasts of the forest (for 
their prey), and it plays its parts like an actress on the stage, with goodly 
apparel and ornaments on her person. 


26. The body is moved to and fro by its internal and external winds, and its 
natural weakness, (immobility), is always in need of being moved by the vital 
airs, as the immovable fragrance requires to be wafted by the breeze. 


27. Men in vain rely in mantras and medicines, in austerities and charities, 
and in the adoration of idols for relief, while their bodies are subject to 
diseases like the sea to its surges. 


28. The unseen force of mobility, is soon lost in the solid body, as the light of 
the lamp is lost in darkness. So the living Stichf came to be lost in the iron 
needle, in which she had her rest. (i.e., The living body is lost and transformed 
to a spirit, wherein it finds its rest after death). 


29. Every one aspires to a state according to his natural propensity, as the 
inclination of the Rakshasi led her to choose the needleship upon herself. 


30. A man being tired by travelling far and wide, returns at last to take his rest 
at home, so the big and living Stich turned to the form of the thin iron Stchi 
to execute her repose; but like ignorant people, who prefer the grosser 
pleasure of the body to the nicer delights of the soul, she still panted for her 
grosser enjoyments, that were now lost to her. 


31. With the intention of satisfying her thirst, she travelled to all parts and 
quarters (in her form of the poor needle), but derived more of the mental 
pleasure of experience, than the satisfaction of her corporeal appetites. 


32. When the container is in existence, it is possible to fill it with its contents 


and not otherwise, so one having his body, can seek and get every pleasurable 
object to give it delight. 


33. Remembering now the past enjoyments of her former body, she became 
sorrowful in her mind, that was so highly pleased and satisfied with filling its 
belly before. 


34. She was then resolved to betake herself to austere devotion, for the 
purpose of recovering her former body, and with this object in view, she 
chose for herself the proper situation for her castigations. 


35. The living soul of Stichi, thought of entering into the heart of a young 
vulture flying in the air, and thus soared to it and rested herself in the air like 
that bird, by the help of her vital breath. (i.e., The greedy spirit was turned to 
the form of a hungry vulture to shriek and seek for carrion). 


36. The vulture being thus filled with the malevolent spirit of the colic Stichi 
in itself, began to think of executing the purposes that Suichi had in her mind. 


37. Thus the vulture bearing the insatiate Sichi within its body, flew to its 
intended spot on the mountain. It was driven there like a cloud by the wind, 
and it was in this place that Stiichi was to be released from her needleship. 


38. It sat there on a spot of the solitary forest in its state of asceticism, 
seeming to be freed from all desires of the world. 


39. It stood there on one of its legs, supported on the tip of its toe and 
appeared as the statue of some deity, consecrated on the top of the mountain 
by someone in the form of Garuda. 


40. There standing on one leg, supported on an atom of dust, she remained as 
the mountain peacock, that stands on one leg with the head raised to the sky. 


41. The bird seeing the living Stchi coming out of his body, and standing on 
the mountain as a statue, fled away and disappeared from that place. 


42. Stchi issued from the body of the bird, in the manner of the spirit coming 
out of it, and the intellect aspiring to higher regions, and as the particles of 
fragrance fly upon the wings of winds, in order to meet the breath of the 
nostrils to be borne into the nose. 


43. The vulture fled to his own place after leaving Suchi at that place, like a 
porter disburthening himself of his load; and found himself relieved of his 
lickerish diseases on his return. 


44. Now the iron Stichi, being seated in her devotion, in the form of the living 
Stichi, appeared as graceful as a right man engaged in the performance of his 


proper duty. 


45. And as the formless spirit is unable to do anything, without a formal 
support or instrument, so the living Suchi supported herself on the tip of her 
toe, for performance of her devotion. 


46. The living Stchi has sheathed the iron needle (in her heart), as an evil 
spirit, (Pisachi), enwraps a Sinsapa tree, and as the winds enfold the particles 
of odor, which they bear away in their bosom. 


47. Thenceforwards, O Indra! has she betaken herself to her protracted 
devotion, and passed many years in the solitary wilderness in her steady 
position and posture of body. 


48. It now behoves you, O Indra! that art skilled in stratagems, to devise some 
plan, in order to delude her from her object, or else her devotion will destroy 
the people you have so long preserved. 


49. Vasishtha said: — Indra having heard these words of Narada, sent Maruta, 
(Eolus), the god of winds to her search, in all quarters of the globe. 


50. The god Maruta then proceeded in quest of her, in his spiritual form of 
intelligence, and having traversed the ethereal regions, alighted upon the 
nether world. The winds and all other elemental and physical powers, are 
believed to be endued with intelligence also, and not as mere brute forces, on 
account of the regular discharge of their proper functions, which they could 
never do without intelligence. 


(Hence the imagination and adoration of the Marutgana in the elemental 
worship of the Veda). 


51. He beheld everything instantly at a glance of his intelligence, which 
perceived all things at one view, as the sight of the Supreme Spirit sees 
through all bodies without exception or hindrance. (i.e., The sight of the spirit 
like its breath, sees through and supports all things). 


52. His sight stretched to the Lokaéloka mountain in the polar circle, far 
beyond the seven seas of the earth, where there is a large tract of land 
abounding with gems. (It is doubtful whether the polar mountain or sea 
abounds with gems). 


53. He viewed the circle of the Pushkara continent, surrounded by a sea of 
sweet water, and containing mountains with their dales and valleys. 


54. He next saw the Gomeda islands, surrounded by the sea of liquor with its 
marine animals, and the land abounding with cities and towns. 


55. He beheld also the fertile and peaceful continent of Kraunchadwipa, 
bounded by the sweet Saccharine sea, and beset by a range of mountains. 


56. Further on was the Swetadvipa, (Albion island), with its subsidiary isles 
surrounded by the Milky (Atlantic) ocean, and having the temple of Vishnu in 
the midst of it, (meaning perhaps the ancient Kelts to be colony of the 
Hindus). 


57. After that appeared the sea of butter, surrounding the Kushadwipa island, 
and having chains of mountains and cities with buildings in them. (Butter 
milk efc., are fictitious names and not this really). 


58. Then came the SAkadwipa in view amidst the ocean of curds, containing 
many countries and many large and populous cities in them. (The sdkadwipa 
is said to be Scythia or the land of the saccae or sakas). 


59. Last appeared the Jambudwipa girt by the sea of salt, having the Meru and 
other boundary mountains, and many countries in it. (This is Asia stretching 
to the polar mountains on the north and south). 


60. Thus the intelligence of air, (Marut), having alighted on earth upon the 
wings of winds, spread himself afterwards to its utmost ends with rapidity (or 
spread himself rapidly to its utmost limits afterwards). 


61. The god of air then directed his course to Jambudwipa, (Asia), and having 
arrived there, he made his way to the summit of the snowy mountain. 
(Himalaya, where Stiichi was performing her devotion). 


62. He saw a great desert on the highest top of the summit, which was as 
extensive as the expanse of the sky, and devoid both of living creatures and 
the vestiges of animal bodies. (i.e., There were neither any living being nor 
fossil remains to be found on the mountain peak). 


63. It was unproductive of greens or grass owing to its nighness to the sun, 
and was covered over with dust, like that composing this earth. 


64. There spread a wide ocean of the mirage to excite the thirst, like the lucid 
waters of a river, and allure the longings of men by its various hues, 
resembling the variegated colours of the rainbow. 


65. Its wide expanse reaching almost to infinity, was unmeasurable even by 
the regents of the quarters of heaven, and the gusts of wind, blowing upon it, 
served only to cover it with a canopy of dust. 


66. It resembled a wanton woman, besmeared with red powder as the 
sunbeams, and sandal paste like the moonbeams, and attentive to the 
whistlings of the breeze. (Thinking them to be hissings of men). 


67. The god of the winds having travelled all over the seven continents and 
their seas, and being tired with his long journey on the surface of the earth, 
rested his gigantic body which fills the infinite space in all directions, on the 
top of that mountain, like a butterfly resting on the twig of a tree, after its 
wearied flight in the air. 


CHAPTER LXXIV. 


Consummation of Stchi’s Devotion. 


Argument. Return of the god of winds to the Indra, and his narration of the 
Devotion of Stichi and her desired Boon. 


The god of the winds beheld Stichi standing erect, like a crest on the summit 
of the mountain, amidst that vast tract of the desert all around. 


2. She stood upon one leg fixed in her meditation and roasted by the burning 
sun over her head, she was dried up to a skeleton by her continued fasting, 
and her belly was contracted to the shrunken skin. (i.e., She was threadbare as 
skin in all her body and belly). 


3. Now and then, she inhaled the hot air with her open mouth, and then 
breathed it out, as her heart could not contain the repeated influx of air. 
(Respiration of air is practised by Yogis, to sustain their lives therewith for 
want of solid food). 


4. She was withered under the scorching sunbeams, and battered in her frame 
by the hotter winds of the desert, yet she moved not from her stand-point, as 
she was relieved every night by the cold bath of moonbeams. 


5. She was content with covering her head under the particles of dust, and did 
not like to change her state for a better fortune. (i.e., She preferred her poverty 
to high dignity). 


6. She gave up the possession of her forest to other living beings, and lived 
apart from all in the form of a crest of hair. Her breathings being withdrawn to 
the cranium, appeared out of it as a tuft of hairs or bushes clapped on her 
head. (Air confined in the cranium, is said to keep the body alive for ages). 


7. The god of air was astonished to see Stichi in this state, he bowed down to 
her and was struck with terror as he beheld her more earnestly. (The 
countenance of the holy is awful to the sight of the unholy). 


8. He was so overawed by the blaze of her person, that he durst not ask her 
anything, such as: — “O saintly Stichi! why dost thou undertake thyself to 
these austerities?” 


9. He only exclaimed, O holy Stichi, how wondrous is this sight of thy 
devotion! Impressed with veneration for her holiness, the god made his 
departure to heaven whence he came. 


10. He passed the region of the clouds, and reached the sphere of the still air, 
(sthira vdyu), and then leaving the realm of the Siddhas behind him, he 
arrived to the path of the sun, — the ecliptic. 


11. Then rising higher in his airy car, he got into the city of Indra, where he 
was cordially embraced by the lord of gods, for the merit of his sight of Stchi. 
(Visit to sacred persons and holy shrines, is believed to impart a share of 
holiness to the visitant). 


12. Being asked what he saw, he related all that he had seen, before the 
assembled gods in the synod of Sakra or Indra. 


13. Pavana said: — There is the King of mountains, the high Himalaya, 
situate in the midst of Jambudwipa, (in Asia), who has the lord Siva, that 
bears the crescent of the moon on his forehead, for his son-in-law. 


14. On the north of it, is a great peak with a plain land above it, where the 
holy Stchi holds her hermitage, and performs her rigorous devotion. 


15. What more shall I relate of her, than that she has abstained herself even of 
her sustenance of air, and has made a mess of her entrails coiled up together. 


16. She has contracted the opening of her mouth to a needle hole, and stopped 
even that with a particle of dust, in order to restrain it even from the reception 
of a cold dewdrop for its food. 


17. The fervour of her devotion, has made the snowy mountain to forsake its 
coldness, and assume an igneous form which it is difficult to approach. (The 
blaze of holiness is said to set mountains on fire, as the presence of the Holy 
spirit set the sacred mount of Sinai on flame). 


18. Therefore, let all of us rise and repair soon to the great father of creatures 
for redress, or know this fervent devotion of hers must prove to our 
disadvantage in its result. 


19. Hearing these words pronounced by Pavana, the lord Indra in company 
with the other gods, proceeded to the abode of Brahma, and prayed unto him 
for their safety. 


20. Brahma answered: — “I am going even now to the summit of the snowy 
Himalaya, to confer to Stchi her desired boon.” Upon this assurance of 
Brahmé, the gods all returned to their celestial abodes. 


21. During this time, Siichi became perfect in her holiness, and began to glow 
with the fervour of her devotion on the mountain of the immortals. 


22. Sichi perceived very clearly the revolution of the time (of her castigation), 
by fixing her open eyes on the sun, and by counting the days by the rays of 
solar light penetrating the opening of her mouth: — the needle hole. 


23. Stchi, though flexible as a bit of thread, had yet attained the firmness of 
the mountain Meru, by her erect posture. 


24. She beheld by the ray of sun light, which penetrated the eye of the needle, 
that the shadowy attendant upon her erect posture, was the only witness of her 
upright devotion. 


25. The shadow of Stichi which was the only attendant on her devotion, hid 
herself under her feet for fear of the midday heat, so do people in difficulty 
find their best friends forsake their company in times of adversity. 


26. The union of the three persons of the iron, the ascetic and shadowy Stchf, 
like the meeting of the three rivers, (Asi, Varana, and Ganga from three 
sides), described a triangle in the form of the sacred city of Benares, (or a 
delta of Ganga or the triune divinity). 


27. This union of the three, like the confluence of three rivers of a Triveni, (as 
Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati), purifies the sins of men by the three different 
hues of their waters, viz. the blue, black and white. 


28. A person becomes acquainted with the unknown cause of all, only by 
suchana or reasoning in his own mind, and by means of his self- 
consciousness (of the truth or untruth of a thing). It is the cogitation of one’s 
own mind that is best guide in all things or else, O Rama! there is no other 
better preceptor for men. 


CHAPTER LXXV. 


Suchi’s regaining her former frame. 


Argument. Brahma’s appearance, admonition and blessing to Stichi and her 
resuscitation to life. 


Vasishtha continued: — After the lapse of a thousand years of long and 
painful devotion, the great father of creation, (Brahma), appeared to her under 
his pavilion of the sky, and bade her accept the preferred boon. 


2. Suchi, who was absorbed in her devotion, and her vital principle of life 
remaining dormant in her, wanted the external organs of sense (to give 
utterance to her prayer), and remained only to cogitate upon the choice she 
should make. 


3. She said to herself: — “I am now a perfect being, and am delivered from 
my doubts; what blessing therefore is it, that I have need of asking (either for 
myself or others), beyond this state of beatitude, which I already possess in 
my peace and tranquility, and the bliss of contentment and self-resignation.” 


4. [have got the knowledge of all that is to be known, and am set free from 
the web of errors; my rationality is developed, and what more is requisite to a 
perfect and rational being? 


5. Let me remain seated as I am in my present state, I am in the light of truth, 
and quite removed from the darkness of untruth; what else is there for me to 
ask or accept? 


6. I have passed a long period in my unreasonableness, and was carried away 
like a child, by the demon of the evil genius of earthly desires. (As a child 
wants to have everything he sees, not knowing whether it is good or bad for 
him to have it). 


7. This desire is now brought under subjection by my power of ratiocination, 
and of what avail are all the objects of my desire to my soul? (There is 


nothing of any good to the soul, for nothing temporal is of any spiritual good). 


8. The lord of creatures kept looking on Stich sitting with her mind fixed in 
her silent meditation, and resigned to her destiny, and quite abstracted from all 
external sensations, and the use of her bodily organs. 


9. Brahma with the kindness of his heart, again accosted the apathetic dame, 
and said unto her: — “Receive thy desired blessing, and live to enjoy for 
some time longer on earth.” 


10. Then having enjoyed the joys of life, thou shalt attain the blissful state 
from which thou shalt have no more to return here, and this is the fixed decree 
destined for all living beings on earth. 


11. Be thy desire crowned with success, by merit of this devotion of thine, O 
best of the woman-kind! Resume thy former corpulence, and remain as a 
Rakshasi in this mountain forest. 


12. Regain thy cloud-like shape whereof thou art deprived at present, and 
revive as a sprout from thy pinnate root, to become like a big tree growing out 
of its small root and little seed. 


13. Thou shalt get an inward supply of serum from thy pinnate tendon, as a 
plant gets its sap from the seeded grain, and the circulation of that juice will 
cause thy growth like that of a germ from the ingrained seed. 


14. Thy knowledge of truth has no fear of following into the difficulties of the 
world, while on the contrary, the righteousness of thy soul will lead thee like a 
huge cloud, that is heavy, with its pure water high in the heaven, 
notwithstanding the blasting gusts of wind. (i.e., The pure and contrite spirit 
goes on its wonted course, in spite of the tribulations of the world). 


15. If by thy constant practice of Yoga meditation, thou hast accustomed 
thyself to a state of habitation, (death like Samadhi), for thy intellectual 
delight, and hast there by become assimilated to the anaesthesia of thy 
meditation (to the state of a stock and stone). 


16. But thy meditativeness must be compatible with thy worldly affairs, and 
the body like the breeze, is nourished best by its constant agitation. (i.e., 
Meditation must be joined with utility, and the body with its activity). 


17. Therefore my daughter! thou dost act contrary to nature, by withstanding 
the action which thy nature requires, nor can there be any objection to thy 
slaughter of animal life under proper bounds. (Because the carnivorous are 
made to live upon flesh, as the omnivorous man upon all kinds of food). 


18. Act therefore within the bounds of justice, and refrain from all acts of 


injustice in the world, and stick steadfastly to reason, if thou shouldst like to 
live liberated in this life. (Justice is the source of liberty, but injustice leads to 
bondage). 


19. Saying so far, the god disappeared from below to his heavenly sphere, 
when Stichi said to him, “be it so, and I have nothing to oppose to this.” Then 
thinking in her mind, that she had no cause to be dissatisfied with the decree 
of the lotus-born Brahma, found herself immediately in possession of her 
former body. 


20. She came to be of the measure of a span at first, and then of a cubit, and 
next a full fathom in length, and increasing fastly in her height, she grew up as 
a tree, till at last she was of the form of a cloud. She had all the members of 
the body added to her instantly, in the manner of the growth of the arbour of 
human desire. (Our growing desires and their increase, are compared with the 
growth and ramifications and fructification of trees). 


21. From the fibrous form of Stchi, (the needle), which was without form or 
feature, body, blood, bones, flesh, or strength, there grew up all the parts and 
limbs at once. Just so the fancied garden of our desire, springs up on a sudden 
with all its verdant foliage and fruits and flowers from their hidden state. 


CHAPTER LXXVI. 


Refraining from Unlawful Food. 


Argument. Advice of the god of winds to Karkatf; and her resort to the Abode 
of Kirata, — flesh eaters. 


Vasishtha continued: — Stichf the needle now became the fiend Karkatf again, 
and her leanness turned to bulkiness, in the manner of a flimsy cloud, 
assuming a gigantic form in the rainy season. 


2. Now returning to her natal air and element, she felt some joy in herself, but 
renounced her fiendish nature by the knowledge she had gained, as a snake 
throws off its old slough. (She was regenerated to a new life in the very same 
body). 


3. There seated in her /otiform posture, she continued to reflect on her future 
course, and relying on the purity of her new life and faith, she remained fixed 
as a mountain peak. (Unmoved by the stormy temptations of the world). 


4. After six months of her continued meditation, she got the knowledge of 
what she sought, as the roaring of clouds rouses the peacock, to the sense of 
an approaching rain. 


5. Being roused to her sense, she felt the pains of her thirst and hunger, 
because the nature of the body never forsakes its appetites as long as it lasts in 
the same state. (There cannot be a thorough change of innate nature in the 
same person). 


6. She was sorrowful at last, not to find out what food she should take to 
herself, because she thought the killing of animal life for food, was unlawful 
and repugnant to her nature. 


7. The food forbidden by the respectable and got by unjust means, must be 
rejected even at the expense of one’s valuable life. (Respectable men abhor 
the flesh of unclean animals and forbidden meat). 


8. If my body, said she, should perish for want of lawful food, I do not 
transgress the law in that, but the guilt lies in my taking of unlawful food, for 
the sustenance of my life. (Hence no man is guilty of his legal gain and lawful 
food). 


9. Whatever is not obtained according to the customary rules of society, is not 
worth taking; and if I should die without my proper food, or live upon 
improper fare, it amounts to the same thing whether I live or die, (because 
unrighteous living is moral death). 


10. I was only the mind before, to which the body is added as a base 
appendage. It vanishes upon the knowledge of self; hence its care and neglect 
are both alike. (The soul forming our true essence, must be preserved pure in 
expense of the impure body). 


11. Vasishtha resumed: — As she was uttering these words in silence to 
herself, she heard a voice in the air, coming from the god of winds, who was 
pleased at the renunciation of her fiendish disposition. 


12. “Arise Karkati,” it said, “and go to the ignorant and enlighten them with 
the knowledge thou hast gained, for it is the nature of the good and great, to 
deliver the ignorant from their error. 


13. “Whosoever will not receive this knowledge (of lawful food), when it is 
imparted to him by thee, make him verily the object of thy derision, and take 
him as being a right meat and proper food for thee.” 


14. On hearing these words, she responded, “I am much favoured by thee, 
kind god!’; and so saying, she got up and descended slowly from the height of 
the craggy mountain. 


15. Having passed the heights, she came to the valley at the foot of the 
mountain, and thence proceeded to the habitation of the Kirata people, who 
inhabit the skirts at the bottom of the hills. 


16. She saw those places abounding in provisions of all sorts, such as human 
kind and their cattle with their fodder and grass. There were vegetable as well 
as animal food, with various kinds of roots and plants. There were eatables 
and drinkables also, with the flesh of deer and fowls, and even of reptiles and 
insects. 


17. The nocturnal fiend then walked her way, under the shade of the deep 
darkness of night, towards the habitation at the foot of Himalaya, in her form 
of the sable mount of Anjanagiri, (unperceived by the inhabitants). 


CHAPTER LXXVII. 


Deliberation of Karkati. 


Argument. Description of the dark night. The Rakshasi’s meeting a raja and 
his minister. Her trial of and argumentation with them. 


Vasishtha resumed: — It was a deep dark night, black as ink and as thick as 
tangible pitch, hiding the habitation of the Kiratas under its nigrescent 
umbrage. (Kiratas are the present Kirantis of the Himalayas, and the ancient 
Kerrhoides of Ptolemy). 


2. The sky was moonless, and overcast by a veil of sable clouds; the 
woodlands were obscured by tamdla trees, and thick masses of black clouds 
were flying about in the air. 


3. The thick furze and bushes besetting the hilly villages, obstructed the 
passages by their impervious darkness, and the flitting light of fireflies gave 
the homesteads an appearance of the bridal night. 


4. The thick darkness spreading over the compounds of houses, shut out the 
passage of the light of lamps, which made their way of or from the chinks of 
the dwelling in which they were burning. 


5. Karkati beheld a band of Pisachis, dancing about her as her companions, 
but she became motionless as a block of wood, on seeing the giddy Vetdlas, 
moving about with human skeletons in their hands. 


6. She saw the sleeping antelopes by her, and the ground matted over by the 
thick snow falls, while the drizzling drops of dew and frost, were gently 
shaken by the breeze on the leaves of trees. 


7. She heard the frogs croaking in the bogs, and the night ravens cawing from 
the hollows of trees, while the mingled noise of jocund men and women, were 
issuing from the inside of the houses. 


8. She saw the ignis fatuus burning in the swamps, with the lustre of 


portentous meteors, and found the banks and bournes, thick with thorns and 
thistles, growing by their sides, and washed by the waters gliding below them. 


9. She looked above and saw the groups of stars shining in the firmament, and 
beheld the forest about her shaking their fruit and flowers by the breeze. 


10. She heard the alternate and incessant cries of owls and crows in the 
hollows of trees, and listened also to the shouts of robbers in the skirts, and 
the wailings of the villagers at a distance. 


11. The foresters were silent in their native woods, and the citizens were fast 
asleep in the cities; the winds were howling in the forests, and the birds were 
at rest in their sylvan nests. 


12. Furious lions lay in their dens, and the deer were lying in their caves also. 
The sky was full of hoarfrost, and the woodlands were all still and quiet. 


13. The lightnings flashing from amidst the dark inky clouds, resembled the 
reflexions of rays from the bosom of a crystal mountain. The clouds were as 
thick as solid clay, and the darkness was as stiff as it required to be severed by 
a sword. 


14. Blown by the storm, the dark cloud fled like the sable Anjana mountain in 
the air, and it deluged a flood of pitchy rain, like a water-fall from the bosom 
of a mountain. 


15. The night was as dark as the pit of a coal-mine, and as jet black as the 
wing of the black bee-bhramara; and the whole landscape lulled to sleep, 
appeared as the world lying submerged under ignorance. (Sleep and ignorance 
are twin brothers, and a reversion of the comparison of ignorance with sleep. 
Such reversed similes are not uncommon in oriental poetry, as that of the 
moon with the beauteous face etc.). 


16. In this dreadful dead of night, she saw in the district inhabited by Kiratas, 
a prince and his minister, wandering together in the forest. 


17. The prince was named Vikrama, and was as brave and valorous as his 
name and conduct implied him to be. He came out undaunted from within the 
city, after the citizens had fallen fast-asleep. 


18. Karkatf beheld them roving in the forest with the weapons of their valour 
and fortitude, and searching the Vetdlas infesting the neighbourhood. 


19. Seeing them, she was glad to think that she had at last got her proper food, 
but wanted to know beforehand, whether they were ignorant folks or had any 
knowledge of their souls, or whether their weariness under the burthen of their 
bodies, had exposed them to the dangers of the darksome night. 


20. The lives of the unlearned, (said she), are verily for their perdition in this 
world and the next; it is therefore meet to put an end to these, rather than 
leave them to live to their peril in both worlds. (The earlier the ignorant die, 
the sooner do they rid themselves of their miseries and responsibilities). 


21. The life of the untutored is death, without spiritual knowledge, and 
physical death is preferable, in as much as it saves the dying soul from its 
accumulation of sin. (Living in the sinful world is sin, unless it is averted by 
spiritual knowledge). 


22. It is the primeval law ordained by our prime father, — the lotus-born 
Brahma, that ignorant souls and those without knowledge of their selves, 
should become the food of the heinous. (i.e., Of voracious and envious 
animals, which devour the body and not the soul). 


23. Therefore, there is no harm in my feeding upon these two persons, who 
have offered themselves for my food, because it is silliness to let slip, a ready 
prize or proffered gift from the hand. (A bird in the hand is worth two in the 
bush. Or a self-given gift is not to be lost). 


24. But lest they should prove to be men of parts and good and great souls, I 
cannot in that case feel disposed of my own nature, to put an end to their 
valuable lives. 


25. I must therefore make a trial of them, and see if they are possessed of such 
parts, that I may decline from making my mess of them, because I feel averse 
to molest the intelligent. 


26. For those that expect to have true glory and real happiness, with the length 
of their lives on earth, must always honour the learned with honorariums, 
adequate to their parts and desires. 


27. I should rather suffer my body to perish with hunger, than destroy the 
intelligent for its supportance, because the soul derives more satisfaction from 
the counsels of the wise, than bare life without knowledge, can possibly 
afford. 


28. The learned are to be supported even at the expense of one’s own life, 
because the society of the wise affords a physic to the soul, (psyches iatrion), 
though death should deprive us of our bodies, (for it ameliorates even the 
pangs of death). 


29. Seeing me a man-eater Rdakshasi, so favorably disposed to the preservation 
of the wise, what reasonable man is there, that must not make a breast-plate of 
the wise for himself. (i.e., The wise are ornaments to human beings however 
inhumane they may be to others of their fellow creatures. Hence the most 


cruel tyrants were the greatest supporters of learning). 


30. Of all embodied beings, that move about on the surface of the earth, it is 
the man of profound understanding only, who sheds his benign influence like 
cooling moon-beams all around him. (The light of knowledge is compared 
with the gentle moonbeams). 


31. To be despised by the wise is death, and to be honoured by the learned is 
true life; because it is the society of the sapient only, that makes the life bring 
forth its fruits of heavenly bliss and final beatitude. 


32. I will now put a few questions for their examination, and know whether 
they are men of parts, or gilded on the surface with sapient looks, like copper 
by a chemical process. 


33. Upon examination and ascertainment of the qualifications if they prove to 
be wiser than the examiner, in that case one should avail of their instruction, 
or otherwise there is no harm to make an end of them as they best deserve. 


CHAPTER LXXVIII. 


Argument. The undaunted valour of the Prince, the Rdakshasi’s Questions and 
the Minister’s solution of them. 


Vasishtha continued: — Afterwards, the Rékshasi, who was an offshoot of the 
great garden of the Rakshasa race, made a loud and tremendous yell like the 
deep roarings of a cloud. 


2. After her deep roar she muttered in a clattering voice, like the rattling of a 
thunder clap following the rumbling of clouds. 


3. She said: — Ho, ho? what are ye, that venture abroad in this dread and 
dreary desert, dark as the great delusion of Maya, and which without the light 
of the sun and moon, is as gloomy as the gloom of ignorance. What are ye 
crawling here for like insects bred in stones? 


4. What men of great minds are ye, to have come here as the weak minded 
aberrants that have lost their way? You have become an easy prey to me, and 
must meet your fate in my hands in a moment. 


5. The Prince replied: — O thou demon, what art thou and where is thy stand. 
If thou beest an embodied being, show thyself unto us, or who is to be 
terrified by thy bodiless form buzzing like a bee? 


6. It is the business of the brave to pounce at once like a lion upon his prey, 
(and not to bark as a dog at a distance). Therefore, leave off thy bragging and 
show us thy prowess at once. 


7. Tell me what thou dost want of us, and whether thou dost terrify us by thy 
vain vauntings, or utterest these words from thy own fear of us. 


8. Now measure thy body according to thy speech, (i.e., let them conform 
with one another), and confront thyself to us without delay, because the 
dilatory gain no good, save the loss of their time. 


9. On hearing the prince’s speech she thought it was well said, and 
immediately showed herself to them, uttering her loud shout with a grinning 


laughter. 


10. The prince heard her voice to fill the air, and resound in the woods, and 
saw her huge and hideous person, by the light of her open mouth and ivory 
teeth, in the act of her loud laughter. 


11. Her body was as a huge cliff, hurled down by the thunder bolt of the last 
doomsday, (when high mountains were rent and thrown into the sea to form 
their hidden rocks). The flashes of her eyeballs blazed in the sky like a pair of 
bangles or conch shells. 


12. The darkness of her appearance, cast into shade, the deep dark waters of 
the deep at the universal deluge, which hid the flame of the sub-marine fire 
under them, and her voice was as hoarse as the growling of clouds on the high 
heads of hills. 


13. Her statue was like that of a monumental pillar standing between the 
heaven and earth, while the gnashing of her teeth struck the night-rovers with 
the terror of being grinded under them to death. 


14. Her figure inspired like those of the nocturnal goblins, Yakshas, Rakshas 
and Pisdchas, with the dread of dire disaster, by its erect hairs, muscular 
limbs, dingy eyes, and coal black colour of the body. 


15. The air she breathed in the lungs, snored as the horrible snorting of the 
nostrils of horses, while the tip of her nose was as big as a mallet, and its sides 
as flat as a pair of bellows or winnowing fans. 


16. She stood with her jet black body like a rock of dark agate, and that joined 
with her loud laugh, gave her the appearance of the all subduing night of 
dissolution. (Kalaratri, — the night of universal doom, is an attribute of Kali, 
— the goddess of destruction). 


17. Her bulky body resembling a thick cloudy night, approached to them like 
an autumnal cloud, moving in the forest of the sky. 


18. The huge body appeared as a demon rising from underneath the ground, 
and approaching to devour them as the eclipse ingulfs the orbs of the sun and 
moon. 


19. Her ebon breasts were hanging down, like two pendant clouds of sombre 
sapphires, or more like the two mortars or water pots, with her necklaces 
hanging on them. 


20. Her two arms were suspended to her bulky body, like a couple of stout 
branches to the sturdy oak, or like two logs of burnt wood to her coal like 
body. 


21. Seeing her thus, the two valiant men remained as steadfast, as those 
standing on the firm ground of certainty, are never led away by doubts. 


22. The Minister said: — O great friend! what causes this rage and fury in thy 
great soul? It is the mean and base only, that are ever violent even in trifling 
matters. 


23. Lay aside this great ado for nothing, which does not become thee, because 
the wise pursue their business with coolness to crown it with success. 


24. Know the soft and slow breath of our moderation, has driven away in the 
air, swarms of such flies like thyself, as the slight breath of the wind scatters 
about the dry leaves and straws. 


25. Setting aside all hauteur and ardour of spirit, the wise man conducts his 
business with the calm coolness of the mind, assisted by reason and practical 
wisdom. 


26. One must manage his affairs with slowness, whether it prove effectual or 
not, because the overruling destiny has the disposal of all events, which 
human ardour has no power to prevent. 


27. Now let us know thy desire and what is thy object with us, because no 
suitor of ours, has been refused of his prayer, nor let to return in 
disappointment. 


28. Hearing these words, the Rakshasi pondered in her mind, and said: — O 
the serene composure of these lion-like men and the affability of their conduct 
with others? 


29. I do not think them to be men of the ordinary kind, and the more 
wonderful it is, that their inward soul is exprest in the outward gestures of 
their faces and eyes, and in the tone and tenor of their speech. (This is a truth 
of the Samudrika science of physiognomy). 


30. The words, the face and eyes, are expressive of the inward thoughts of the 
wise, and these go together like the salt and water of the sea (which are 
inseparable from one another. So Chanakya). — FAA Ta HHS 
ASIA | WAR PAA HAVA GIA || The mind, the word and act of 
the wise all agree. But those of fools disagree in all the three. 


31. My intention is already known to them, as is theirs also to me; they cannot 
be destroyed by me when they are indestructible themselves by their moral 
excellence. (So the Sdstra: — The virtuous may endure or live forever — 
chiranjivati dharmdtmd.) 


32. L understand them to be acquainted with spiritual knowledge also, without 


which there cannot be a good understanding. Because it is the knowledge of 
the indestructibility of the spirit, that takes away the fear of death which is 
wanting in these men. 


33. I shall therefore ask them, about something wherein I am doubtful, 
because they that fail to ask the wise what they know not, must remain dunces 
throughout their lives. 


34. Having thought so, she opened her mouth to make her queries, by 
suppressing her roaring voice and her loud laughter for a while. 


35. Tell me, O ye sinless men, that are so brave and valiant, who you are and 
whence ye come, because your very sight has raised my regard for you, as the 
good hearted become friends with one another, even at their first sight. 


36. The minister said: — This is the king of the Kiratas, and I his counsellor; 
we have come out tonight in our nightly round, for apprehending malicious 
beings like thyself. 


37. It is the duty of princes to punish the wicked, both by day and night, for 
such as trespass the bounds of their duty, must be made as fuel to the fire of 
destruction. 


38. The Rakshasi said: — Prince! thou hast a good minister, but a bad one 
unbecomes a prince; all good princes have wise counsellors, and they make 
the good prince. 


39. The wise minister is the prince’s guide to justice, and it is he who elevates 
both the prince and his people. Justice is the first of the four cardinal virtues, 
(justice, temperance, prudence and frugality), and it is the only virtue of a 
ruler, who is thence called the Dharma avatara or personification of justice. 


40. But kings must have spiritual knowledge also, because it is the highest of 
human knowledge. The king having this knowledge, becomes the best of 
kings, and the minister who knows the soul, can give the best counsel for the 
guidance of other souls. (For it is said: — Ndndhenaiva niyamdna 
yathandhah, the blind cannot lead the blind. So the Gospel: — one blind man 
cannot lead another). 


41. It is the fellow feeling for others that makes a ruler, whoever is 
unacquainted with this rule, is not fit to be either a ruler or his minister. (The 
rule is: — Rule others as ye rule yourselves. Sadhi swdtmda vadanyan). 


42. If ye know this polity, itis good and ye shall prosper, or else ye wrong 
yourselves and your subjects, in which case ye must be made a prey to me. 
(Because if you have no regard for your own souls and those of others, why 


should I have any regard for yours?) 


43. There is but one expedient for you two lads, to escape from my clutches, 
and it is by your solution of my intricate questions, according to your best 
wits and judgment. (The queries are said to be prasna pinjara or the cage or 
prison-house of dilemmas; in which sense the text should read viddrayasi for 
vichdrayasi, to mean that, if you cannot break the knots, I will not stop to 
break your necks). 


44. Now do you, O prince and you his counsellor, give me the solution of the 
questions that I require of you. If you fail to give the proper answers as you 
have agreed to do, you must then fall under my hands, as anybody that fails to 
keep his words. (The breach of a promise was punishable with death by the 
old Hindu law. Hence the first question, “Why am I obliged in keeping my 
word,” in Paley’s Moral philosophy). 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 


Interrogatories of the ‘Rakshas?’. 


Argument. Seventy questions of Karkati, which are hard for the unlearned but 
too plain to the wise. They are intricate for their riddling nature to boys, but 
plain by their double sense to the learned. 


Vasishtha continued: — After saying so, the fiend began to put forth her 
queries, and you should be attentive to them Rama, like the prince who told 
her to go on. 


2. The Rakshasi resumed: — What is that atomic minim which is one yet 
many, and as vast as the ocean, and which contains innumerable worlds like 
the bubbles of the sea? (It is a minim for its minuteness, an atom, — owing to 
its imperceptibility, one, — as regards its unity, many, — on account of its 
attributes, (upddhis), and vast in respect to its infinity, containing the passing 
worlds as the evanescent bubbles of water). 


3. What is that thing which is a void yet no-void, which is something yet 
nothing? What is it that makes myself, and thyself, and wherein do I or thou 
dost abide and subside? (It is nothing in appearance, but something in our 
consciousness, and is both the subjective and objective). 


4. What is it that moveth unmoved and unmoving, and standeth without 
stopping; what is it that is intelligent yet as dull as a stone; and what is it that 
presents its variety in the vacuity of the understanding? (Another text reads, 
vyomni chitra krit, which means: — who paints the sky with variegated hues). 


5. What is it that has the nature of fire without its burning quality; and what is 
that unigneous substance which produces the fire and its flame. (This passage 
refers to the glory and light of God which shines without burning). 


6. Who is he that is not of the nature of the ever-changing solar, lunar, and 
stellar lights, but is the never-changing enlightener of the sun, moon and stars; 


and who is that being who having no eyes, gives the eye its sight? 


7. Who is he that gives eyesight to the eyeless vegetables, and the blind 
mineral creation? (Whereby they perceive the light of the luminaries of 
heaven as the sunflower moonflower, — helioselini and others). 


8. Who is the maker of heavens, and who is the author of the natures of 
things; who is the source of this gemming world, and whose treasure are all 
the gems contained in it? (Man foolishly owns them for a time, but leaves at 
last to their true possessor and maker). 


9. What is that monad which shines in darkness, and is that point which is and 
is not; what is that iota which is imperceptible to all, and what is that jot 
which becomes an enormous mountain? (A geometrical monad is a point 
without dimension. In the Monadology of Leibnitz, it is the elementary 
particle of vital force acting not mechanically, but from internal principle. It is 
the entelechy of Aristotle, whose essence consists in force). 


10. To whom is a twinkling of the eye, as long as a Kalpa millennium, and a 
whole age but a moment? Who is he whose omnipresence is equal to his 
absence, and whose omniscience is alike his total ignorance? (i.e., To whom 
eternity is a moment, and whose omnipresence and omniscience are unknown 
to us). 


11. Who is called the spirit, but is no air in itself; and who is said to be the 
sound or word, but is none of them himself? He is called the All, but is none 
at all of all that exists; and he is known as Ego, but no ego is he himself. 
(Spiritus or the breathing of ventus-wind-prdna and the sabda-sonus or Sruti 
are not God; nor is he one and all in his person, nor the ego and non-ego, I not 
I, and /e moi et non le moi, das Ich und nicht Ich, the subjective and objective, 
and having no personality of his own). 


12. What is it that is gained by the greatest application, of a great many births 
(lives), and when gained at last, is hard to be retained (owing to the spiritual 
carelessness of mankind)? (Liberation by final extinction, — nirvana, is hard 
to be had owing to the interminable metempsychosis of the soul, according to 
the doctrine of the pre-existence and immortality of souls). 


13. Who being in easy circumstances in life, has not lost his soul in it; and 
who being but an atom in creation, does not reckon the great mountain of 
Meru as a particle? i.e., the egotist. (It is harder for the easy rich to enter the 
kingdom of heaven, than for a camel to enter the eye of a needle. — Gospel. 
The pride of egotism levels mountains to dust, and its ambition soars above 
them). 


14. What is that which being no more than an atom, fills a space of many 
leagues; and who is an atomic particle, that is not contained (measured) in 
many miles? (It is the atomic theism of Kandéda’s Vaiseshika system and of 
Ecphantus and Archelaus. The mind is included in the atomism of 
Empedocles and Anaxagoras. Epicurus added morality to it, and Lucretius 
added to it the beauty of poetry also. See also the Ateistic Atomic systems of 
Leucippus and Democritus). 


15. At whose glance and nod is it, that all beings act their parts as players; and 
what is that ace which contains in its bosom many a mountain chain? (The 
mountain was produced from and is contained in the atom of the divine mind; 
and so every grain of the human brain, contains in it the form of a prodigious 
mountain). 


16. Who is it, that is bigger than the mount Meru in his minuteness; and who 
is it that being, lesser than the point of a hair, is yet higher than the highest 
rock? (So the Sruti: — Anor-aniyan mahato mahiydn: i.e., Minuter than the 
minutest and bigger than the biggest). 


17. Whose light was it, that brought out the lamp of light from the bosom of 
darkness; and what minute particle is it, that contains the minutiae of ideas ad 
infinitum in it? (God said, “Lux fiat et lux fit.” — Genesis. Hail holy light 
Heaven’s first born. — Milton. Eternal ideas of immaterial forms of possible 
existences in the Divine Mind, the archetype of the Ectypical world. These are 
the Types of things, — Plato; Forms of ditto. — Cicero. Eternal exemplars of 
things. — Seneca etc.). 


18. Which having no flavour in it, gives savour to all things; and whose 
presence being withdrawn from all substances, reduces them to infinitesimal 
atoms, (i.e., by destruction of cohesion. So the Sruti. — Raso vai tat. — He is 
flavour etc. Attraction of all kinds, is a manifestation of Divine power, — 
dkrishti, personified in the form of Krishna, — the regent of the sun, whose 
gravity supports the solar world). 


19. Who is it that by his self-pervasion, connects the particles composing the 
world, (as by their power of attraction); and what imperceptible power is it, 
that rejoins the detached particles, after their separation and dissolution for 
recreation of the new world? (The atomic powers of attraction and repulsion 
of particles and bodies). 


20. Who being formless, has a thousand hands and eyes; and a twinkling of 
whose eye, comprehends the period of many cycles together? (The divine 
hypostases of Viraj, is endowed with a thousand hands and eyes, as in the 
Purusha Stikta: — Sahasra sirsha, sahasra vadhu sahasrdxa etc.). 


21. In what microscopic mite does the world subsist as an arbor in its seed, 
and by what power do the unproductive seeds of atoms, become productive of 
worlds? 


22. Whose glance is it, that causes the production of the world, as from its 
seed; and who is it that creates the world without any motive or material? 
(The motives are the subjective or internal cause and the objective or external 
objects of creation. And material means the matter of unisubstantism of 
materialists). 


23. What is that being, who without his visual organs, enjoys the pleasure of 
seeing, — Drishti; and is the viewer, — drashtd, of Himself, which he makes 
the object of his view, (drishya). i.e., God sees all things in himself as the 
receptacle of all in the eternal ideas of them in his mind. Or. The Ego 
meditates on itself both subjectively as the viewer, and objectively as the 
view. (So Milton, — “And God saw his works were good,” answering his fair 
idea). 


24. Who is he that having no object of vision before him, sees nothing without 
him, but looks upon himself as an infinity void of all visibles within it. (This 
is the subjective reflection of the Yogi, like that of God on his ownself, as 
abstracted from the thought of all other things. The Mind is the subjective 
reality and matter has no objective reality). 


25. Who is it, that shows the subjective sight of the soul by itself, as an 
objective view, and represents the world as the figure of a bracelet, in his own 
metal? (i.e., The subjective soul and the metal are the true realities, and the 
objective view of the jewel and the world, is but error and delusion. The 
Vedantist, like Berkeley, held all objective reality to be subjective). 


26. Who is it that has nothing existent beside himself, and in whom all things 
exist, like the waves existing in the waters; and who is it whose will makes 
them appear as different things? (The one being no more than fluctuations of 
the other, and substantially the same). 


27. Both time and space are equally infinite and indivisible, as the essence of 
God wherein they subsist, why then do we try to differentiate and separate 
them like the water from its fluidity? 


28. What is the inward cause in us, which makes the believer in the soul, to 
view the unreal world as real, and why does this fallacy continue at all times? 


29. The knowledge of the worlds whether as present, past or in futuro, is alla 
great error; and yet what is that immutable being, which contains in it the seed 
of this phenomenal wilderness? 


30. What being is that, which shows these phenomena without changing itself, 
such as in the shape of the seed of the world, before it develops itself in 
creation, and sometimes in the form of a developed forest of created beings? 


31. Tell me, O prince! on what solid basis does the great Meru, stand like a 
tender filament of the lotus; and what gigantic form is that, which contains 
thousands of Merus and Mandaras within its capacious womb? 


32. Tell me, what is that immeasurable Intellect, which has spread these 
myriads of intelligences in all these worlds; what is that which supplies thee 
with thy strength for ruling and protecting thy people, and in conducting 
thyself through life; and what is it in whose sight, thou dost either lose thyself 
or thinkest to exist? Tell me all these, O clear sighted and fair faced prince, 
for the satisfaction of my heart. 


33. Let thy answer melt down the doubt, that has covered the face of my heart 
as with snows. If it fail to efface this dirt of doubt altogether from the surface 
of my heart, I will never account it as the saying of the wise. 


34. But if thou fail to lighten my heart of its doubts, and set it at ease, then 
know for certain, that thou shalt immediately be made a fuel to the fire of my 
bowels at this very moment. 


35. I shall then fill this big belly of mine with all the people of thy realm, but 
shouldst thou answer rightly, thou shalt reign in peace, or else thou shalt meet 
thy end like the ignorant, who are surfeited with the enjoyments of life. 


36. Saying so, the nocturnal fiend made the loud shout of a roaring cloud, 
expressive of her joy, and then sat silent with her fearful features, like a light 
hearted cloud in autumn (which is of gigantic shape, but empty of rain waters 
within). 


CHAPTER LXXxX. 


Solution of the Questions. 


Argument. First the Counsellor’s reply to the Questions. 


Vasishtha continued: — After the giant-like progeny of the Rdkshasa had 
proposed her occult questions, in the deep gloom of night in that thick forest, 
the good and great counsellor began to give his replies. (The repetition of the 
word great in the original, expresses the solemnity of the occasion, as the 
disquisitions concerning the Great God in the Aranyakas or forest lectures of 
the vedic Rishis, were conducted with great solemnity in their holy hermitage 
in forests. So was the Sermon on the Mount of Jesus). 


2. The Counsellor said: — Hear, me! thou dark and cloud like form! to 
unravel thy riddling questions, with as great ease as the lion foils the fury of 
gigantic elephants. 


3. All thy questions relate to the Supreme Spirit, and are framed in thy 
enigmatical language, to try the force of our penetration into their hidden 
meanings. 


4. The soul, which is Self-same with the intellect which is minuter than a 
particle of air, is that atomic principle that thou dost inquire into, because it is 
a nameless minim imperceptible by the six organs of sense, and unintelligible 
to the mind. (Answer to the first question about the atom. 31J). 


5. Underlying the atomic intellect, is the minute seed which contains this 
universe, but whether it is a substantial or unsubstantial reality, nobody can 
say. (This is the answer to the second question, with regard to the mundane 
seed). 


6. It is called a reality from our notion of its being the soul of all by itself, and 
it is from that soul that all other existences have come in to being. (Answer 
about the nature of God). 


7. Itis a void from its outward inanity, but it is no void as regards its intellect 
(which is a reality); it is said to be nothing from its imperceptibility, but it is a 
subtle something from its imperishableness. (All finite bodies are unreal, the 
immortal soul is real, and identic with the Supreme soul). 


8. It is not a nothing from its being permeated in all things, (i.e., though all 
pervading yet it is an absolute entity), for all things are but reflexions of the 
minute Intellect, and its unity shines forth in the plurality, all which is as 
unreal, as the formal bracelet formed of the substantial gold. 


9. This minutial is the transcendental vacuum, and is imperceptible owing to 
its minuteness; and though it is situated in all things, yet it is unperceived by 
the mind and external senses. 


10. Its universal pervasion cannot make it void and null, because all that is 
(existent) is not that (Intellect), which alone is known as the thinking 
principle, that makes us speak, see and act. 


11. No kind of reasoning can establish the non-entity of the real Ens, (sat), 
because of it is not being seen by anybody. Yet the universal soul is known in 
its hidden form, like the unseen camphor by its smell. 


12. The unlimited soul resides in all limited bodies, and the atomic intellect 
pervades the vast universe, and it is in the same manner as the mind fills all 
bodies, in its purely subtle state unknown to the senses. 


13. It is one and all, the unity as well as plurality, by its being the soul of each 
and all, both singly as well as collectively, and its supporting and containing 
each and all by and within itself. 


14. All these worlds are as little billows in the vast ocean of the divine 
Intellect, whose intelligence, like a liquid body, shows itself in the form of 
eddies in the water. (Hence nothing is different from the Supreme). 


15. This minutiae of the intellect being imperceptible to the senses and the 
mind, is said to be of the form of vacuity; but being perceived by our 
consciousness, it is not a nothing, although of the nature of a void in itself. 


16. 1am That and so art thou, by our conviction of the unity (of the spirit); but 
neither am I That nor thou art He, by believing ourselves as composed of our 
bodies only. (It is in answer of what art thou? etc. Spiritually considered, all 
souls are the same with the supreme, but being viewed in the body, all bodies 
are different from one another, and quite apart from their unity with the 
Divine spirit). 


17. Our egoism and tuism being got rid of by our knowledge of truth, we 


cease to be the ego and tu, and so all other persons lose all their properties, 
(svayam or suum) in the sole Unity. (This is an enlargement of the preceding 
answer to the question, — What art thou? etc.). 


18. This particle of the intellect is immovable, though it moves thousand of 
miles over; and we find in our consciousness many a mile to be composed in 
this particle. (The mind notwithstanding its wide range, never stirs from its 
seat in the soul). 


19. The mind is firmly seated in the vacuous intellect, from which it never 
stirs, though it goes to all places where it is never located. (This is the answer 
of what moveth not?). 


20. That which hath its seat in the body can never go out of it, as a baby 
hanging on the breast of its mother, cannot look to another place for its rest. 


21. One though free to range over large tracts at will, will never start from his 
own abode, where he has the liberty and power to do all he likes. 


22. Wherever the mind may rove, it is never affected by the climate of that 
place, as a jar taken to a distant country with its mouth shut, does not yield 
any passage to the light and air of that region into it. (In answer to what 
remains in a place so as it does not remain there?). 


23. The cogitation and incogitancy of the intellect, being both perceived in our 
minds, it is said to be both intellection as well as dullness of the intellect. 
(This is the answer to, “of what is ever active, yet as dull as a block of 
stone?’’). 


24. When our intellection is assimilated into the solid substance of Divine 
Intellect, then is our intellect said to become solidified as a stone. (By 
forgetting one’s self to a stone. — Pope). 


25. The worlds which the intellect of the Supreme Being has spread in the 
infinite space, are the most wonderful as they are his increate creations. 
(These being but manifestations of his inborn essence). 


26. The Divine Soul is of the essence of fire, and never forsakes its igneous 
form. It inheres in all bodies without burning them, and is the enlightener and 
purifier of all substances. (This answers the question, “what is fiery without its 
inflammability?’”’). 


27. The blazing intelligence of the divine soul, which is purer than the 
ethereal sphere, produces the elemental fire by its presence. (As the burning of 
mount Sinai in the Bible and Taurus in the Koran, and the fiery form of 
Brahma the creator and regent of vulgar fire). 


(This is in answer of, “what unigneous entity produces the substance of 
fire?’’). 


28. The intellect which is the light of the soul, and enlightener of the lights of 
the luminous sun, moon and stars, is indestructible and never fades, although 
the light of the luminaries, is lost on the last day of universal doom. (In 
answer to, “what unextinguishable fire is the kindler of planetary lights?’). 


29. There is an inextinguishable light, (glory), known as ineffably 
transcendental, which the eye cannot behold, but is perceptible to the mind as 
its inward illumination, and presenting all things to its view. (Answer to, 
“what light imperceptible to the eye, brings all things to view?” This is 
spiritual light). 


30. Thence proceeds the intellectual light, which transcends the sensible and 
mental lights, and presents before it wonderful pictures of things invisible to 
visual light. (It is luminous by itself and shows things lying hid in darkness, as 
one walking in the dark, makes himself known to another by telling him, “it is 
YT’). 


31. The eyeless vegetable creation, is sensible of an inward light within them, 
causing their growth and giving them the capability of bearing their fruits and 
flowers. (In answer to the question regarding the light and life of vegetable 
creation, which are also classed under animated nature). 


32. With regard to time, space and action and existence of the world, all 
which are but the percepta or perceptions of sense, and have no master or 
maker, father or supporter except the Supreme Soul in whom they subsist, as 
mere modifications of himself and are nothing of themselves. (It is in answer 
to the question, “who is the maker of the skies? etc.”’). 


33. The atomic spirit is the casket of the bright gem of the world, without 
changing its minuteness. The divine spirit is its measure and measurer, beside 
which there is no separate world of itself. (Answer to the question, “who is the 
holder and measurer of the world?’). 


34. It is that Spirit which manifests itself in everything in all these worlds, but 
it shines as the brightest gem, when all the worlds are compressed in it (at the 
universal dissolution). 


35. From the unintelligibleness of his nature, he is said to be a speck of 
obscurity, as he is called to be a ray of light, from the brightness of his 
intellect. He is known as existent by our consciousness of him, as he is said to 
be non-existent from his being removed from our visual sight. 


36. He is said to be afar from his invisibleness to our eyes, and to be near us 


from his being of the nature of our intellect. He is represented as a mountain 
for his being the totality of our consciousness, although he is minuter than any 
perceptible particle. (In answer to, “what is minute yet vast?’’). 


37. It is his consciousness that manifests itself in the form of the universe; the 
mountains are not real existences, but subsist like the Meru in his atomic 
substratum. (In answer to the question, “how an atom contains and expands 
itself as a hill? etc.’’). 


38. A twinkling is what appears as a short instant, and a Kalpa is the long 
duration of an age. (It is definitive proposition of identity, that a nimesha is a 
nimesha and a Kalpa is a Kalpa). 


39. Sometimes a twinkling, — instant represents a Kalpa, when it is fraught 
with the acts and thoughts of an age, as an extensive country of many leagues, 
is pictured in miniature or in a grain of the brain. 


40. The course of a long Kalpa, is sometimes represented in the womb of a 
nimesha instant, as the period of the building of a great city, is present in the 
small space of the mind’s remembrance, as it is in the bosom of a mirror. 


41. As little moments and Kalpa ages, high mountains and extensive yojanas, 
may abide in a single grain of the intellect, so do all dualities and pluralities 
unite and meet in the unity of God. 


42. That, ‘I have done this and that before’, is an impression derived from the 
thought of our actual actions and activity at all times, but the truth thereof 
becomes as untrue as our doings in the dream. (This to prove that all 
vydvahdrika or customary events, are real untruths, being but pratibhdsika or 
phenomenal appearances only). 


43. It is calamity that prolongs the course of time, as our prosperity on the 
other hand diminishes its duration, as the short space of a single night, 
appeared as a period of twelve long years to king Haris Chandra in his misery. 
(The fallacy of human conception of the length or shortness of time). 


44. Anything appearing as a certain truth to the mind, stamps the same 
impression in the soul, as the sense of some golden jewelry, becomes more 
impressive in the soul than the idea of its gold. (The fallacy of our 
perceptions, creating errors in the judgement of the understanding). 


45. There is nothing as a moment or an age or as near or afar to the soul; it is 
the conception in the minute intellect (or the working of the mind), that 
creates their length or brevity and their nearness and remoteness. (As a year of 
men is a day of Gods, and such a year of these makes a day of Brahma, while 
there is no measure of time or space in the infinity of the Divine mind). 


46. The contraries as light and darkness, nearness and distance, and a moment 
and an age, being but varied impressions on the unvaried percipient mind, 
have no real difference in them. (They are as unreal as the various evanescent 
hues of the recipient and reflexive clouds. So no colour is real chromatics or 
Science of colours). 


47. All things or objects which are perceptible to the senses, are called to be 
evident or apparent, and those which lie beyond them, are said to be 
imperceptible or unapparent. But visual sensation is not self-evident, except 
the vision of the intellect, which is the real essence. (In answer to the 
question, “What is perceptible and unreal?” Answer, — All what is apparent, 
is untrue). 


48. As long as there is the knowledge of the jewel, there is the knowledge of 
the gem also, that of the real gem, being lost under the apparent form. (So 
reliance on ocular evidence, presents an obstruction to the vision of the 
intellect). 


49. It is by reversion of the attention from the visible form of the jewel to the 
real essence of the gem, that one is led to the sight of the pure light of the only 
One Brahma. (So says a poet: — Forsake the visible to see the invisible). 


50. Brahma is viewed as Sat or reality, when He is considered as pervading all 
things, and He is said to be Asat or unreal, because He is not the object of 
vision. So is the Intellect said to be a reality from its faculty of intellection, 
otherwise it is a stolid or dull matter. (Answers to, “what reality appears as 
unreal, and what intellect as the absence of intellect?’’). 


51. The intellect is the wonderful property of the Divine Spirit, in which it is 
present as its object, (chetya), but how can a man have a view of it, whose 
mind fixed to the sight of the world, which is a shadow of the Intellect, and 
moves as a tree which is shaken by the wind? 


52. As a mirage is the reflexion of the dense light of the sun, so is the world a 
shadow of the solid light of the Divine intellect. 


53. That which is rarer than the rays of the sun and never decays, is ever as 
uniform as it was before creation and disjoined from it. Hence its existence is 
tantamount to its nonexistence. 


54. As the accumulation of sunbeams, exhibits the formation of a gold mine in 
the sky, so the golden appearance of the world, prevents the deluded to look to 
the knowable object of the intellect. 


55. Like the appearance of a visionary city in dream, the sight of this world is 
neither a reality nor altogether unreal, because it is a reflexion of the intellect, 


as the dream is that of images in the memory. It is but a continued medley of 
error. 


56. Knowing it as such, men should consider everything by the light of 
reason, and proceed to the knowledge of truth by their intellectual culture. 


57. There is no difference between a house and a void, than that the one is the 
object of vision, and the other of consciousness. Again, all nature teeming 
with life, is said to live in God, who is light and life of all for evermore. 


58. But all these living beings have no room in the empty sphere of Divine 
Intellect. They live and shine like the solar rays, proceeding imperceptibly 
from that luminous orb. 


59. There appears a difference in these rays both from the original light, and 
also from one another, (in different beings), by a curious design of 
Providence; but it is yet the same in all, like the forms of the trees growing out 
of the same kind of seed. 


60. As the tree contained in the seed, is of the same kind with the parent seed, 
so the innumerable worlds contained in the vacuous seed of Brahma, are also 
void and vacuum as Brahma himself. 


61. As the tree which is yet undeveloped in the seed, is not in esse without 
development of its parts, (so the world in the womb of Brahma, was 
discernible only to the Divine Intellect, in the form of the ideal or spiritual 
world to be in future). 


62. There is but one God, who is one and increate, calm, and quiet, without 
beginning, middle, or end, and without a body and its parts. He has no duality 
and is one in many. He is of the form of pure light, and shines forever with 
everlasting and undiminished lustre. 


CHAPTER LXXXI. 


Congeries of Spiritual Doctrines. 


Argument. The Prince’s Answers to the Remaining Questions of the Rdkshasi. 


The Rdkshasi said: — Well said, O counsellor! Thy sayings are sanctifying 
and fraught with spiritual doctrines; now let the prince with his eyes like 
lotus-leaves answer to the other queries. 


2. The Prince answered: — He whose belief consists in the relinquishment of 
all reliance in this world, and whose attainment depends upon forsaking all 
the desires of the heart: — 


3. He whose expansion and contraction causes the creation and extinction of 
the world, who is the object of the doctrines of Vedanta, and who is 
inexpressible by words or speech of humankind: — 


4. Who is betwixt the two extremities of doubt, (whether he is or is not), and 
is the midst of both extremities, (that both he is and is not), and the pleasure, 
(Will), of whose mind, displays the world with all its movables and 
immovables to view: — 


5. He whose Universal pervasion does not destroy his unity, who being the 
soul of all is still but one; it is he alone, O lady! who is truly said to be the 
eternal Brahma (so far the Exordium). 


6. This minute particle is erroneously conceived as spirit, (air), from its 
invisibleness to the naked eye, but it is in truth neither air nor any other thing 
except the only pure Intellect. (Answer to the question, “what is it of the form 
of air and not air?”’). 


7. This minim is said to be sound, (or the words), but it is error to say it so, 
because it is far beyond the reach of sound or the sense of words. (So the 
Sruti, — ‘natatravdkgacchati’, no word (vox or voice) can reach unto him, — 
express his nature. (In answer to the query, “what is sound and no sound?’)). 


8. That particle is all yet nothing, it is neither I, thou, or he. It is the Almighty 
soul and its power is the cause of all. (The gloss explains pratibha as sakti or 
power, in preference to the other meanings of the word, as — knowledge, 
design, light, reflexion and influence. (This is in answer to, “who is all yet no 
one omnium et nullum, and what are I, thou and he, which are viewed as the 
ego, tu, and ille, the subjective and objective realities’). 


9. It is the soul that is attainable with great pains, (i.e., the knowledge of 
which is gained with pains of Yoga), and which being gained adds nothing to 
our stock, (as we are already in possession of our souls), but its attainment is 
attended with the gain of the supreme soul, than which there is no better gain. 
(So the Sruti, — yalaldbhat naparamlabha. In answer to, “what gain is no 
gain?’). 


10. But ignorance of the soul, stretches the bonds of our worldliness and 
repeated transmigrations, with their evils growing like the rankest weeds in 
spring, until they are rooted out by spiritual knowledge. 


11. And those who are in easy circumstances in life, lose their souls by 
viewing themselves only as solid bodies, which rise fastly to view like the 
dense mirage by light of the sun. (It is easier for a camel to enter the hole of a 
needle, than for the rich to enter the kingdom of heaven. — Gospel). 


12. It is the particle of self-consciousness, which contains the Meru and the 
three worlds, like bits of straw in itself. They are as disgorged from it in order 
to present their delusive appearances unto us. (This answers the question: — 
“what particle hides in it the world as a straw?” and means the mind to be the 
container of the universe). 


13. Whatever is imprinted in the intellect, the same appears expressed without 
it. The fond embrace of passionate lovers in dream and imagination, serves to 
exemplify this truth. 


14. As the intellect rose of itself with its omnipotent Will at the first creation 
of the world, so it exercises the same volition in its subsequent formations 
also, like the sprigs rising from the joints of reeds and grass. (i.e., The eternal 
Will, (Fiat), is productive of all things for ever). 


15. The hobby that has entered in the heart, shows itself on the outside also, as 
in the instance of the whims of children. (The phrases, “the wish being father 
to the thought,” and, “every one delights in his hobby horse,” correspond with 
the purport of the passage). 


16. The iota of the intellect, which is as minute as an atom, and as subtle as 
air, fills the whole universe on all sides. (The three words, paramdnu, anu and 


suikshma, respectively signify the minuteness of the intellect with regard to its 
unity, dimension and rarity. — Gloss). 


17. Though but a particle, yet it is not contained in hundreds of leagues, and 
being all-pervasive it is infinite. Having no beginning it is measureless, and 
having no form of itself, it is formless. (In answer to, “what minutiae is 
immeasurable? etc.’). 


18. As a cunning coxcomb deludes young girls by their becks and calls and 
winks and glances. (Quips and cranks and wanton wiles; Nods and becks and 
wreathed smiles. — Pope): — 


19. So the holy look of the divine intellect, serves as a prelude to the rotatory 
dance of worlds, with all their hills and contents forever, (i.e., a nod and look 
of the Almighty, moves the worlds). 


20. It is that atom of the intellect, which envelops all things within its 
consciousness, and represents also their forms without it, as a picture canvas 
shows the figures of the hills and trees drawn in it, to stand out as in bas-relief. 
(The external world being but a prominent representation of the internal, the 
phenomenal of the noumenal. So Persian: — Suvaribatini and Zahiri). 


21. The divine spirit though as minute as the hundredth part of the point of a 
hair, is yet larger than the hills it hides in itself, and as vast as infinity, being 
unlimited by any measure of space or time. (In answer to, “what is it that 
retains its minuteness and yet comprehends the great Meru?”). 


22. The comparison of the vast vacuity of divine understanding with a particle 
of air (as it is made by the minister), is not an exact simile. It is as a 
comparison of a mountain with a mustard seed, which is absurd. 


23. The minuteness which is attributed to it (in the veda), is as false as the 
attribution of different colours to the plumage of the peacock, and of jewelry 
to gold, which cannot be applicable to the spirit. (The Veda says, anoraniyan. 
He is minuter than the minute, efc., because the spirit admits no attribute). 


24. It is that bright lamp which has brought forth light from its thought, and 
without any loss of its own essential effulgence. (Answer to, “What lamp gave 
light in darkness?” “He was the light of the world, and the light shine forth in 
darkness,” — Gospel). 


25. If the sun and other luminous bodies in the world, were dull and dark in 
the beginning, then what was the nature of the primeval light and where did it 
abide? (This question is raised and answered by the prince himself in the 
next). 


26. The pure essence of the mind which was situated in the soul, saw the light 
displayed on the outside of it, by its internal particle of the intellect. Gloss: — 
That light existed inside the intellectual atom before creation, and its 
preceding darkness; it was afterwards set forth by itself without it, when it 
shone amidst the darkness. (So the passage, /ux fiat et lux fit, and then the 
mind beheld it, and said it was good). 


27. There is no difference in the lights of the sun, moon, and fire from the 
darkness, out of which these lights were produced; the difference is only that 
of the two colours black and white. (Gloss: — Both of them are equally 
insensible things). 


28. As the difference of the cloud and snows, consists in the blackness of the 
one and whiteness of the other, such is the difference of light and darkness in 
their colours only, and not in their substance (as they have no real 
substantiality in them). 


29. Both of these being insensible in their natures, there is no difference 
between them, and they both disappear or join with one another before the 
light of intellect. They disappear before the intellectual light of the Yogi, who 
perceives no physical light or darkness in his abstract meditation under the 
blaze of his intellect. They join together as light and shade, — the shadow 
inseparably following the light. The adage goes, Zer cheragh tariki: — there 
is darkness beneath the lighted lamp. 


30. The sun of the intellect, shines by day and night without setting or 
sleeping; It shines in the bosom even of hard stones, without being clouded or 
having its rise or fall. 


31. The light of this blazing soul, has lighted the sun, which diffuses its light 
all over the three worlds; it has filled the capacious womb of earth with a 
variety of provisions, as they lay up large panniers of food in a store-house. 
(i.e., It is the sun-light that grows and ripens all things for our food). 


32. It enlightens darkness without destroying itself, and the darkness that 
receives the light, and becomes as enlightened as light itself. (This passage is 
explained both in a physical as well as spiritual sense. The light dispelling 
ignorance and the gloom of nature). 


33. As the shining sun brings the lotus-buds to light, so the light of the Divine 
Spirit, enlightens our intellects, amidst the gloom of ignorance which 
envelopes them. 


34. And as the sun displays himself by making the day and night by his rise 
and fall, so does the intellect show itself by its development and reticence by 


turns. 


35. All our notions and ideas are contained in the particle of the intellect, as a 
healthy seed contains the leaves and fruits and flowers of the future tree in its 
breast. 


36. These and all the powers of the mind, develop themselves in their proper 
times, as the fruits and flowers make their appearance in spring and proper 
seasons, — khandas. (The Hindu festivals of Khanda palas, are celebrated in 
honour of the returning seasons, and continue as a relic of the primitive 
agricultural state of society). 


37. The particle of divine spirit is altogether tasteless, being so very vapid and 
void of qualities, yet it is always delectable as the giver of flavour to all 
things. (The gloss explains the spirit as spiritual knowledge, which is 
unpalatable to all, owing to its abstruse and subtle nature, but which becomes 
tasty when blended with all other knowledge, which mainly depends on 
spiritual science. This is in answer to, “What particle is that which is entirely 
tasteless, yet always tasted with zest?”’). 


38. All savours abide in the waters, (water being the receptacle of taste), as a 
mirror is the recipient of a shadow; but the savour like the shadow is not the 
substance, it is the essence of the spirit that gives it the flavour. (The Nyaya 

says, “jaleparamdnurasah,” the atom of the spirit is the savour of the water). 


39. All bodies existing in the world, are forsaken by the atomic spirit of the 
supreme, by their unconsciousness of Him; but they are dependent upon him, 
by the consciousness of the divine particle, shining in their souls. (Ze., 
Consciousness is the connecting link between the human and Divine souls). In 
answer to, “who are forsaken by and supported by the Divine Spirit?” 


40. It is He who being unable to wrap up himself, enwraps the world in him, 
by spreading out the vesture of his atomic intellect over all existence. (In 
answer to, “who being uncovered himself covers the whole?’). 


41. The supreme Spirit which is of the form of infinite space, cannot hide 
itself in anything within its sphere, which would be like the hiding of an 
elephant in the grass. 


42. Yet this all knowing spirit encompasses the world, knowing it to be a 
trifle, just as a child holds a particle of rice in his hand. This is an act of maya 
or delusion. (Here delusion like destiny is represented to exercise its influence 
on omniscience itself). 


43. The spirit of God exists even after the dissolution of the world, by relying 
in his chit or intellect, just as plants survive the spring by the sap they have 


derived from it. 


44. It is the essence of the Intellect which gives rise to the world, just as the 
garden continues to flourish by the nourishment of the vernal season. 


45. Know the world is verily a transformation of the intellect, and all its 
productions to be as plants in the great garden of the world, nourished by the 
vernal juice of the intellect. 


46. It is the sap supplied by the intellectual particle, that makes all things grow 
up with myriads of arms and eyes, in the same manner as the atom of a seed, 
produces plants with thousand branches and fruits. (In answer to, “What 
formless things take a thousand forms?”). 


47. Myriads of Kalpas amount to an infinitesimal part of a twinkling of the 
atomic intellect, as a momentary dream presents a man all the periods of his 
life from youth to age. In answer to, “What twinkling of the eye appears as 
many thousand Kalpas etc.” 


48. This infinitesimal of a twinkling even, is too long for thousands of Kalpas, 
the whole duration of existence is as short as a flash of his eye. 


49. It is the idea only that makes a twinkling, appear a Kalpa or many, just as 
the idea of satiety in starvation, is a mere delusion to the deluded soul. 


50. It is concupiscence only, that makes the famishing to feed upon his 
thoughts of food, as it is the despair of one’s life, that presents his death 
before him in his dream. 


51. All the worlds reside in the intellectual soul within the atom of its 
intellect, and the outward worlds are only reflexions, (réchauffé), of the inner 
prototype. (The phenomenal is an ectype of the original noumenal). 


52. Whatever object appears to be situated anywhere, it is but a representation 
of its like model in some place or other, and resembles the appearance of 
figures in bas-relief on any part of a pillar; but the changes occurring in the 
external phenomena, are no results of the internal, which as the serene 
vacuum is subject to no change. 


53. All existences, which are present in the intellect at this moment, are the 
same as they have existed, and will ever exist inwardly like trees in their 
seeds. 


54. The atom of the intellect, contains the moments and ages of time, like 
grains within the husk; it contains these (as its contents) in the seed within the 
infinite soul of god. (The soul is the unconscious container of the intellect, 
which is conscious of the ideas contained in it). 


55. The soul remains quite aloof as if retired from the world, (uddsina), 
notwithstanding the subsistence and dependence of the latter upon the former. 
The Divine soul is unconcerned with its creation and its sustentation at all 
times. (In answer to, “who is the cause of the world without any motive or 
causality in him?” This is the doctrine of perfect bliss of the soul without 
being ruffled or disturbed by any motivity or activity. So the man imitating 
divine perfection, is required to be apathetic and callous to all worldly affairs). 


56. The essence of the world springs from the atom of the pure Intellect, 
which however remains apart from both the states of action and passion itself, 
(the intellect being the thinking principle, has only its perceptivity, without 
sensitivity of passion, or the Will or volition for action). 


57. There is nothing created or dissolved in the world by anybody at any time, 
all apparent changes are caused by the delusion of our vision, (and it is the 
province of Vedanta to remove the error of conceiving the unreal worlds as a 
reality). 


58. (Viewed in its spiritual light), this world with all its contents, is as void as 
the vault of the vacuous atmosphere; the word world applied to the 
phenomena, is but an insignificant term signifying a nothing. 


59. It is the particle of intellect that is led by the delusion of mdyd, to view the 
scenes situated in the Divine soul, in the outward appearance of the 
phenomenal world. (Answer to what thing that has eyes, views on its outside 
what is contained in the soul?). 


60. The words external and internal as applied to the world, are meaningless 
and not positive terms; there is no inside or outside of the divine soul, they are 
contrived to explain its different views by the intellect for the instruction of 
pupils. (Brahma has no inside nor outside. — Sruti). 


61. The viewer looking into the invisible being within himself, comes to see 
the soul; but he who looks on the outside with his open eyes, comes to view 
the unreal as real. 


62. Therefore, whoever looks into the soul (as the true reality), can never view 
the false phenomena as realities as others do. 


63. It is the internal sight of the intellect that looks into the inward soul, which 
is without all desires, while the external eyes are mere organs to look upon the 
false appearance of outward objects. (i.e., The eye of the mind, is the true eye 

to see the real nature of the soul, but the outer eyes are no eyes, that feed only 

upon the falsities of nature). 


64. There can be no object of sight, unless there is a looker also, as there can 


be no child without its parent. This duality (of their mutual dependence upon 
one another), proceeds from the want of knowledge of their unity. (i.e., The 
viewer, the view, and the vision, (drashtd, drishya and darsana), being one 
and the same thing, as the parent and the offspring, and the seed and its sprout, 
are the same substance. The doctrine of the Vedantic unity, thus attempts to 
reduce and unite all varieties to their primitive simplicity). 


65. The viewer himself becomes the view as there can be no view without its 
viewer. Nobody prepares any food, unless there be somebody to feed upon it. 
(It is the agent that makes the act, as there can be no act without its agent). 


66. It is in the power of the intellect, (imagination), to create the views of its 
vision; as it lies in the capacity of gold, to produce all the various forms of 
jewelry. (Z.e., Fancy paints and moulds itself in many colours and shapes. The 
creations of phantasy are mere phantoms, — phantasia et phantasmos). 


67. The inanimate view never has nor can have the ability of producing its 
viewer; as the golden bracelet has no power of bringing the gold into being. 


68. The intellect having the faculty of intellection, (chetana), forms the 
thoughts of intelligibles, (chetyas), within itself, which however unreal are 
erroneously viewed as real entities by its intellectual vision to its own 
deception, as it is caused by the appearance of jewelry in gold. 


69. That the viewer, (the divine intellect), being transformed to the view (of 
the visible world), is no more perceptible in it, than as the jewelry of gold and 
not gold itself. (.e., The formal part of the world and jewel, hides the material 
part of the intellect and gold which formed them). 


70. Thus the viewer becoming the view, (i.e., the subject being turned to the 
object), still views himself as the viewer, as gold transformed to a jewel, is 
always looked upon as gold. 


71. One unity alone being apparent in all nature, it is useless to talk of the 
duality of the viewer and view. A word with a masculine affix cannot give the 
sense of a neuter noun, (so the masculine noun, /ntellectus, cannot apply to 
the neuter phenomenon). 


72. The viewer who feasts his eyes with a view of the outer visible world, 
cannot have the sight of the inner soul with the internal eyes of his intellect; 
but when the viewer shuts out the outer view, all its realities appear as unreal. 


73. When the viewer perceives the unreality of the visibles by the light of his 
understanding, he then comes to see the true reality. So by retracting the mind 
from viewing the figure of the jewel, one comes to see the nature of its gold 
only. 


74. The visibles being present, there must be their viewers also to whose view 
they are apparent. It is the absence of both, (the viewer and the view), and the 
knowledge of their unreality, that produce the belief of unity. (The 
disappearance of the visible, causes the withdrawal of the viewer, like the 
removal of the umbrella, drives away its shade). 


75. The man who considers all things in the contriteness of his conscious soul, 
comes at last to perceive something in him, which is serenely clear, and which 
no words can express. 


76. The minute particle of the intellect, shows us the sight of the soul as 
clearly as a lamp enlightens everything in the dark. (Answer to, “who shows 
the soul as clearly as a visible thing?’’) 


77. The intelligent soul is absolved of its perceptions of the measure, 
measurer, and measurables, (i.e., of the forms and properties of things), as 
liquid gold when dissolved of its form of an ornament. (Answer to, “what 
thing is absolved of its properties like gold of its jewelry?’’). 


78. As there is nothing which is not composed of the elementary bodies of 
earth, water, efc., so there is nothing in nature which is apart from the nature 
of the atomic intellect. (Answer to, “what is that from which nothing is 
apart?’’). 


79. The thinking soul penetrates into all things in the form of their notions; 
and because all thoughts concentrate in the intellect, there is nothing apart 
from it. 


80. Our desires being the parents of our wished for objects, they are the same 
with our prospects in our view, therefore, there is no difference between our 
desires and desired objects, as there is none between the sea and its waves. (In 
refutation of the question, “what is that which is distinct from the wish?’). 


81. The Supreme Soul exists alone unbounded by time and space. Being the 
universal soul, it is the soul of all, and being omniscient, it is no dull matter at 
all. (Answer to, “what is the undivided duality and plurality?”). 


82. The Ens being but intelligence, is not perceptible to sight; there is unity 
and no duality in it; but all forms unite into one in the great self of the 
Supreme. 


83. If there be a duality, it is the one and its unity. The unity and duality of the 
universal soul, are both as true as the light and its shade joined together. 


84. Where there is no duality or any number above it, there unity also can 
have no application to any; and where there is no unit, there cannot be any 


two or more over it, which are but repetitions of the unit, (except an 
indeterminate all or whole). 


85. Anything which is so situated, is in itself such as it is; it cannot be more or 
less than itself; but is identic with itself like water and its fluidity. (Its plurality 
is but a repeated unity). 


86. The multiplicity of forms which it exhibits, blends into a harmonic whole 
without conflicting with one another. The multifarious creation is contained in 
Brahma, like a tree with all its several parts in the embryonic seed. 


87. Its dualism is as inseparable from it as the bracelet from its gold, and 
although multiformity of nature, is evident to the comprehensive 
understanding, yet it is not true of the true entity (of God). 


88. Like fluidity of water, fluctuation of air, vacuity of the sky, is this 
multiformity an inseparable property of the Godhead. 


89. Disquisition of unity and duality is the cause of misery to the restless 
spirit, it is the want of this distinction that consummates the highest 
knowledge. 


90. The measure, measurement and measurer of all things, and the viewer, 
view, and vision of the visible world, are all dependent on the atom of the 
intellect which contains them all. (i.e., The divine mind is the maker and 
pattern of the great fabric of the universe, which it contains and views in 
itself). 


91. The atom of the divine intellect, spreads out and contracts in itself, like its 
limbs, these mountainous orbs of the world, by an inflation of its spirit as it 
were by a breath of air. 


92. O the wonder, and the great wonder of wonders! that this atom of the 
intellect, should contain in its embryo, all the three regions of the worlds, 
above and below one another. 


93. O! it is an incredible delusion that must ever remain an inexplicable 
riddle, how the monstrous universe is contained in the minute atom of the 
Intellect. 


94. As a pot contains in it, the seed, with a huge tree within its cell, so does 
the divine soul contain the atom of the intellect, containing the chains of 
worlds (outstretched within itself). 


95. The all-seeing eye sees at once all the worlds, situated within the bosom of 
the intellect, as the microscopic sight discovers the parts of the future tree 
concealed in the seed. 


96. The expansion of the world in the atom of the Intellect, is analogous to the 
enlargement of the hidden parts of the seed, into leaves and branches, fruits, 
and flowers. 


97. As the multiformity of the future tree, is contained in the uniform 
substance within the seed, it is in like manner, that the multiplicity of worlds, 
is situated in the unity of the atomic Intellect, and as such it is seen by anyone 
who will but look into it. 


98. It is neither an unity nor a duality, not the seed or its sprout, neither is it 
thin or thick, nor is born nor unborn, (but ever the same as it is). 


99. He is neither an entity nor nonentity, nor graceful nor ungraceful, (but a 
vacuity), and though it contains the three worlds with the ether and air, yet is 
nothing and no substance at all. 


100. There is no world nor a not-world beside the intellect, which is all of 
itself, and is said to be such and such in any place or time, as it appears so and 
so to us there and then. 


101. It rises as if unrisen, and expands in its own knowledge; it is self-same 
with the supreme soul, and as the totality of all selves, it spreads through the 
whole vacuum as air. 


102. As a tree springs from the ground according to its seed, so the world 
appears to sight in the form, as it is contained in the seed of the intellect. 


103. The plant does not quickly quit its seed, lest it would be dried up and die 
away for want of its sap; so the man that sticks to the soul and seed of his 
being, is free from disease and death. 


104. The mount Meru is like the filament of a flower, in respect to the 
vastness of that atom; all visibles have their place in that invisible atom. (In 
answer to the question, in respect to whom is the great Meru but a filament?) 


105. The Meru is verily a filament of the atomic flower of the divine soul, and 
myriads of Merus resemble the cloudy spots, rising in the sphere of the 
intellect. 


106. It is that one great atom that fills the world, after having made it out of 
itself; and given it a visible, extended and material form in its own hollow 
sphere. (Answer to, “By whom is the world created, extended efc.”’). 


107. As long as the knowledge of duality is not driven out of the mind, so 
long does it find the charming form of the world, as in its dream upon waking. 
But the knowledge of unity, liberates the soul from its stay in and return to the 
world, which it beholds as a mass of the divine essence. 


CHAPTER LXXXII. 


Friendship of the Rakshasi. 


Argument. The Rdkshas? s account of herself, and her reconciliation with the 
Prince. 


Vasishtha continued: — The apish Karkati of the forest, having heard the 
speech of the prince, pondered well in herself the sense of the words, and 
forsook her levity and malice. 


2. She found the coolness and tranquility of her heart after its fervour was 
over, in the manner of the peacock at the setting in of the rains, and the lotus 
bed at the rising of moonbeams. 


3. The words of the prince delighted her heart in the same manner, as the cries 
of cranes flying in the sky, gladden the passing clouds in the air. 


4. The Rakshasi said: — O how brightly shines the pure light of your 
understanding, it glows as serenely by its inward effulgence, as it is 
illuminated by the sun of intelligence. 


5. Hearing the grains, (words), of your reasoning, my heart is as gladdened, as 
when the earth is cooled by the serene beams of the humid moon-light. 


6. Reasonable men like yourself are honoured and venerated in the world, and 
I am as delighted in your company, as a lake of lotuses with her full-blown 
buds under the moon-beams. 


7. The society of the virtuous, scatters its blessings, as a flower garden spreads 
its fragrance all around, and as the brightness of sun-beams, brings the lotus 
buds to bloom. 


8. Society with the good and great, dispels all our woes, as a lamp in the hand, 
disperses the surrounding darkness. 


9. [have fortunately obtained you as two great lights in this forest; you both 


are entitled to my reverence here, and deign now to acquaint me, with the 
good intent which has brought you hither. 


10. The prince answered: — O thou sprout of the savage race of Rakshas! the 
people of this province are always afflicted in their hearts by a certain evil. 


11. It is the obdurate disease of Vishuchi or cholic pain, which troubles the 
people of this part, I have therefore come out with my guards to find her out in 
my nightly rounds. 


12. This cholic pain is not removed from the hearts of men by any medicine, 
so I have come out in search of the mantra revealed to her for its cure. 


13. It is my business and professed duty, to persecute such wicked beings as 
thyself, that infest our ignorant subjects in this manner, and this is all that I 
have to tell thee and do in this place. 


14. Therefore, O good lady! do thou promise to me in thy own words, that 
thou shalt never injure any living being in future. 


15. The Rakshasi replied: — Well! I tell thee in truth, my lord! that I shall 
hence forward never kill anybody. 


16. The prince replied: — If it be so, O thou liver on animal flesh! tell me how 
shalt thou support thy body by thy abstaining from animal food? 


17. The Rakshasi replied: — It is now passed six months, O prince! that I 
have risen from my entranced meditation, and fostered my desire for food, 
which I wholly renounce today. 


18. I will again repair to the mountain top, and betake myself to my steadfast 
meditation, and sit there contented as long as I like, in the posture of an 
unmoving statue. 


19. I will restrain myself by unshaken meditation until my death, and then I 
shall quit this body in its time with gladness. This is my resolution. 


20. I tell you now, O prince! that until the end of this life and body of mine, I 
shall no more take away the life of any living being, and you may rely assured 
upon my word. 


21. There is the mount Himalaya by name, standing in the heart of the 
northern region, and stretching in one sweep, from the eastern to western 
main. 


22. There had I dwelt at first in a cave of its golden peak, in the shape of an 
iron statue, and also as the fragment of a cloud, and borne the appellation of 
Karkati the Rakshasi: — (the crablike crooked Sycorax). 


23. There I obtained the sight of Brahma by the austerity of my devotion, and 
expressed my desire of killing mankind, in the shape of a destructive needle. 


24. I obtained the boon accordingly, and passed a great many years in the act 
of afflicting living beings, and feeding upon their entrails in the form of the 
cholic pain. 


25. I was then prohibited by Brahma to kill the learned, and was instructed in 
the great mantra for my observance. 


26. He then gave me the power of piercing the hearts of men, with some other 
diseases which infest all mankind. 


27. I spread myself far and wide in my malice, and sucked the heart blood of 
men, which dried up their veins and arteries, and emaciated their bodies. 


28. Those whom I left alive after devouring their flesh and blood, they begat a 
race as lean and veinless as they had become themselves. 


29. You will be successful O happy prince in getting the mantra or charm for 
driving the Vistichika pain, because there is nothing impossible of attainment 
by the wise and strong. 


30. Receive of me immediately, O raja! the mantra which has been uttered by 
Brahma for removal of the cholic pain, from the cells of arteries vitiated by 
Vistichika. 

31. Now advance towards me, and let us go to the neighbouring river, and 
there initiate you with the mantra, after you both are prepared to receive it by 
your ablution and purification. 


32. Vasishtha said: — Then the Rdkshasi proceeded to the river side that very 
night, accompanied by the prince and his minister, and all joining together as 
friends. 


33. These being sure of the amity of the Rakshasi, both by affirmative and 
negative proofs, made their ablutions and stood on the bank on the river. 


34. The Rakshasi then communicated to them with tenderness, the effective 
mantra which was revealed to her by Brahma, for the removal of Vistichika 
pain, and which was always successful. 


35. Afterwards, as the nocturnal fiend was about to depart by leaving her 
friendly companions behind, the prince stopped her course with his speech. 


36. The prince said: — O thou of gigantic stature! thou hast become our 
preceptor by thy teaching us the mantra, we invite thee with affection, to take 
thy repast with us at ours tonight. 


37. It does not become thee to break off our friendship, which has grown like 
the acquaintance of good people, at our very first meeting. 


38. Give thy ill-favoured feature a little more graceful figure, and walk along 
with us to our abode, and there reside at thy own pleasure. 


39. The Rakshasi replied: — You can well provide a female of your own kind 
with her proper food, but what entertainment can you give to my satisfaction, 
who am a cannibal by my nature! 


40. It is the food of a giant (Rdkshasa) alone, that can yield me satisfaction, 
and not the little morsel of petty mortals, this is the innate nature of our being, 
and cannot be done away with as long as we carry with us our present bodies. 


41. The prince answered: — Ornamented with necklaces of gold, you shall be 
at liberty to remain with the ladies in my house, for as many days as you may 
like to abide. 


42. I will then manage to produce for your food, the robbers and felons that I 
will seize in my territories, and you will have them supplied to you by 
hundreds and thousands at all times. 


43. You can then forsake your comely form, and assume thy hideous figure of 
the Rdakshasi, and kill and take to your food hundreds of those lawless men. 


44. Take them to the top of the snowy mountain and devour them at thy 
pleasure, as great men always like to take their meals in privacy. 


45. After your recreation by that food and a short nap, you can join your 
meditation, and when you are tired with your devotion, you can come back to 
this place. 


46. You can then take the other offenders for your slaughter, because the 
killing of culprits is not only justifiable by law, but it amounts to an act of 
mercy, to rid them (of their punishment in the next world). 


47. You must return to me when you are tired of your devotion, because the 
friendship which is formed even with the wicked, is not easily done away. 


48. The Rdkshasi replied: — You have well said prince! and we will do as 
you say, for who is there that will slight the words of the wise that are spoken 
to him in the way of friendship? 


49. Vasishtha said: — Saying so, the Rdakshasi assumed a graceful form, and 
wore on her person necklaces and bracelets, and silken robes and laces. 


50. She said, “Well raja, let us go together,” and then followed the footsteps 
of the prince and his counsellor, who walked before her and led the way. 


51. Then having arrived at the royal abode, they passed that night in their 
agreeable repast and discourse together. 


52. As it became morning, the Rakshasi went inside the house, and there 
remained with the women, while the prince and the minister attended to their 
business. 


53. Then in the course of six days, the prince collected together all the 
offenders whom he had seized in his territory, and brought from other parts. 


54. These amounted to three thousand heads which he gave up to her, when 
she resumed her fiercely dark form of the black fiend of night. 


55. She laid hold of thousands of men in her extended grasp, in the manner of 
a fragment of cloud retaining the drops of rain water in its wide spread bosom. 


56. She took leave of the prince and went to the top of the mountain with her 
prey, as a poor man takes the gold, that he happens to get in some hidden 
place. 


57. There she refreshed herself with her food and rest for three days and 
nights, and then regaining the firmness of her under-standing, she was 
employed in her devotion. 


58. She used to rise from her devotion once after the lapse of four or five and 
sometimes seven years, when she repaired to the habitation of men and to the 
court of the prince. 


59. There passing some time in their confidential conversation, she returned to 
her retired seat in the mountain, with her prey of the offenders. 


60. Thus freed from cares even in her lifetime, she continued to remain as a 
liberated being in that mountain etc. etc. 


CHAPTER LXXXIII. 


Worship of Kandara alias Mangala. 


Argument. Deification and Adoration of the Rakshasi for her good Services to 
Mankind. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Rdkshasi thus continued in her devotion, and 
remained on friendly terms with the successive rulers of the Kirata country, 
who kept supplying her with her rations. (The Rakshasi maneater was turned 
to Rakshini or preserver of men). 


2. She continued by the power of her perfection in the practice of Yoga 
meditation, to prevent all portents, to ward off all dread and danger of 
demons, and remove the diseases of the people. (All these were done by the 
Rakshasi vidya now lost, and by supernatural powers gained by Yoga). 


3. In the course of many years of her meditation, she used to come out of her 
cell at certain intervals, and call at the head quarters, for her capture of the 
collection of living creatures kept for her victims. (Man slaughter was not 
blamable on the part of the cannibal Rdkshasi, though practising the Yoga; nor 
was the eating of animal flesh reprehensible in Vasishtha himself, who had 
been a flesh eating Yogi. (See Uttara Rama Charita)). 


4. The practice continues still to be observed by the princes of the place, who 
conduct the animals to be sacrificed to her departed ghost on the hill, as none 
can be negligent to repay the good services of his benefactor. (Hence the 

prevalence of the practice of offering sacrifices to the names of ancestors and 
deified heroes and heroines, and even of demons for their past good services). 


5. At last she became defunct in her meditation, and ceased since long to 
appear to the habitations of men, and lend her aid in removing their diseases, 
dangers and difficulties. (The good genius of the place left it at last). 


6. The people then dedicated a high temple to her memory, and placed in it a 


statue of hers, under the title of Kandara, — caverner, alias Mangala devi, — 
the auspicious goddess. (The whole legend of the Kandaré of Kirdatas, alludes 
to the account of Mangala Chandi, alias Kalika devi, — the black and 
voracious goddess of the Hindus). 


7. Since then it is the custom of the chiefs of the tribe, to consecrate a newly 
made statue in honor of the Kandara devi, — the goddess of the valley, after 
the former one is disfigured and dilapidated. (The Kirantis are said to continue 
in their idolatry to this day, notwithstanding the conversion of their fellow hill 
tribes to Mahomedanism, except the Kafers, — another hill tribe of the 
Himalayas who are idolators still). 


8. Any prince of the place, who out of his vileness, fails to consecrate the 
statue of the Kandara goddess, brings out of his own perverseness, great 
calamities to visit his people. (This sort of retributive justice is expressed in 
the adage “rdjadoshat rdjya nashta”: — “And for the king’s offence the 
people died.” — Pope’s Homer’s Iliad I). 


9. By worshipping her, man obtains the fruits of all his desires, and by 
neglecting it, he exposes himself to all sorts of evils and calamities, as effects 
of the pleasure and displeasure of the goddess to her votaries or otherwise. 
(The two clauses are instances of affirmative and negative enthymemes 
coupled together as anvaya vyatireki. The first enthymeme of the antecedent 
and consequent is affirmative anvayi, and the other a vyatireki or negative 
one). — Gloss. 


10. The goddess is still worshipped by dying and ailing people with offerings, 
for remedy of their illness and securing her blessings; and she in her turn 
distributes her rewards among them, that worship her either in her statue or 
picture. (Raxa Ka4lf is worshipped in statue, but Mongla Chandi is worshipped 
in a ghata or potful of water). 


11. She is the bestower of all blessings to young babes, and weak calves and 
cows, while she kills the hardy and proud that deserve their death. She is the 
goddess of intelligence and favours the intelligent, and presides forever in the 
realm of the Kirata people. (Vasishtha being a theist, reviles like a Vaishnava, 
the black goddess as a Rakshasi, which a Kaula cannot countenance). 


CHAPTER LXXXIV. 


Development of the Germ of the Mind. 


Argument. Reason of the application of the name Karkati, and its simile to a 
crooked crab. 


Vasishtha said: — I have thus related to you Rama, the unblamable legend of 
Karkati, the Rakshasi of Imaus, from its beginning to end in ipso facto. (Imaus 
and Imodus are ranges of the Himalayas. The Gloss interprets Imaus as a 
synonym of Himalayas, by apocope of the latter member of the compound 
word, and by a grammatical rule, that the curtailing of a part of a proper name, 
does not affect the full meaning of the name. So for the omissions of 
agnomens and cognomens). 


2. Rama rejoined: — But how could one born in a cave of Himavatas, 
(Imodus), become a black Rdkshasi, and why was she called Karkati? These I 
want to be clearly explained to me. (Rama’s demand was reasonable, as the 
people of the Himalayas, are always of fair complexions, and the Rakshasas 
were the Negroes of Southern India). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — The Rakshas, (cannibals), are originally of many 
races, some of whom are of dark and others of fair complexions, while many 
have a yellowish appearance and some of a greenish shade. (We know the red 
Rdkshasas of America, but it is impossible for us to account for the green or 
blue Rdakshasas in the text). 


4. As for Karkati, you must know that there was a Rakshasa by name of 
Karkata, from his exact resemblance to a cancer. (Here is a reversion of 
Sycorax the Negro parent, and her crooked son caliban Kaliban, — the black 
Negro, having long arms and legs, with feet and hands furnished with claws 
and long nails like those of beasts). 


5. The reason of my relating to you the narrative of Karkati, was only for her 
queries which I recollected and thought, would serve well to explain the 


omniform God, in our disquisition into spiritual knowledge. (Gloss. — 
Vasishtha adduces a contradiction in the spiritual knowledge of God, by 
calling him a spirit and yet as all forms of things. But this seeming contrariety 
will disappear upon reflecting that, the phenomenal is contained in the 
noumenal, and the forms are viewed only in the spirit as visions in dreams). 


6. It is evident that the pure and perfect unity, is the source of the impure and 
imperfect duality of the phenomena, and this finite world has sprung from its 
Supreme cause, who is without beginning and end. (The One is the cause of 

many, and the Infinite is the source of the finite. Ahamsarvasyam. Andadiradi 

sarvasya). 


7. These float (before our eyes) like the waves upon waters, which are 
apparently of different forms, and yet essentially the same with the element, 
on which they seem to move. So the creations whether present, past or future, 
are all situated in the Supreme Spirit. (The immaterial spirit is the basis and 
substratum of material bodies). 


8. As wet wood when ignited, serves for the purpose of infusing heat, and 
inviting the apes of the forest to warm themselves in cold weather, so the 
externally shining appearance of the world, invites the ignorant to resort to it. 


9. Such is the temporary glow of the ever cool spirit of God, in the works of 
creation, which shows itself in many forms without changing its essence. 


10. The absent world appeared in presence, and its unreality appears as a 
reality to consciousness, like the potential figures carved in wood. (The 
would-be world existed in the eternal ideas in the mind of God, like the 
possible figures in the wood, which were carved out afterwards. And so too 
Aristotle). 


11. As the products, of the seed from its sprout to the fruit, are all of the same 
species, so the thoughts, (chetyas), of the mind, — Chitta, are of the same 
nature as those originally implanted in it. (The homogeneity of the cause with 
all its effects). 


12. By the law of the continuity of the same essence, there is no difference in 
the nature of the seed and its fruit, so the intellect, (chit), and the thoughts, 
(chetyas), differ in nothing except in their forms; like the waves and water 
differing in external appearance, and not in the intrinsicality of their substance 
(Vastu). 


13. No demonstration can show the difference between thoughts and the mind, 
and whatever distinction our judgment may make betwixt them, it is easily 
refuted by right reasoning. (Such as the incapability of an effect being 


produced without its cause, or disagreement between the effects of the same 
or similar causes). 


14. Let this error therefore vanish, as it has come from nothing to nothing, and 
as all causeless falsities fail of themselves. You will know more of this, 
Rama! when you are awakened to divine knowledge. In the meantime, do 
away with error of viewing a duality, which is different from the only existent 
Unity. (Duality being driven out, all will appear one and the same. So Sadi the 
sophist: — duirdcho badar kardam ekebinam ekedamam). 


15. After the knot of your error is cut asunder, by your attending to my 
lectures, you will come to know by yourself, the signification and substance, 
(object), of what is called the true knowledge, which is taken in different 
senses by the various schools, but that which comes of itself in the mind, is 
the intuitive knowledge of divine truth. 


16. You have a mind like that of the common people, (tara), which is full of 
mistakes and blunders, (anarthas), all which will doubtlessly subside in your 
mind, by your attending to my lectures, (because the words of the wise 
remove all errors). 


17. You will be awakened by my sermons to know this certain truth, that all 
things proceed from Brahma into whom they ultimately return. (Brahma is the 
producer, sustainer, and recipient or the first and last of all. He is alpha and 
omega). 


18. Rama rejoined: — Sir, your affirmation of the first cause in the ablative 
case, “that all things proceed from Brahma,” is opposed to the negative 
passage in the Sruti in the same case, that, “nothing is distinct from Him’; and 
is inconsistent in itself (in as much as, there cannot be all things, and again 
nothing but Brahma; and to say, “the same thing comes from the same,” 
would be a palpable absurdity). 


19. Vasishtha answered: — Words or significant terms are used in the Sdstras 
for instruction of others, and where there appears any ambiguity in them, they 
are explained in their definitions. (Hence the ablative form, “from Brahma,” is 
not faulty, for what is in the receptacle, the same comes out of it, or as they 
say, “what is in the bottom, the same comes upon the surface,” and the one is 
not distinct from the other, as the wave differs not from the water whence it 
rises. This is downright pantheism). 


20. Hence it is the use though not in honest truth, to make a difference of the 
visibles from the invisible Brahma (for the purpose of instruction), as it is 
usual to speak of ghosts appearing to children, though there be no such things 
in reality. (It is imagination that gives a name to airy nothing, and it is the 


devise of language to use words for negative ideas, as the word world to 
denote a duality and darkness for want of light, and not anything in itself). 


21. In reality, there is no duality connected with the unity of Brahma, as there 
is no dualism of a city and the dream that shows its apparition in sleep. Again, 
God being immutable in his nature and eternal decree, it is wrong to apply the 
mutations of nature and the mutability of Will to Him. (Volition is 
accompanied by nolition, (Volo and nolo), in mutable minds, but there is no 
option Vikalpa in the sankalpa, — suo arbitrio of the unchangeable Mind). 


22. The Lord is free from the states of causality and the caused, of 
instrumentality and instruments, of a whole and its part, and those of 
proprietorship and property. (The attribution of cause and effect or any other 
predicate or predicable, is wholly inapplicable to him, who is devoid of all 
attributes). 


23. He is beyond all affirmative and negative propositions, and their legitimate 
conclusions or false deductions and elenches. (i.e., Nothing can be truly 
affirmed or denied or ascertained or negated of Him, by any mode of 
reasoning. Naisatarkendnaneyah). 


24. So the attribution, of the primary volition to the Deity, is a false 
imputation also. Yet it is usual to say so for the instruction of the ignorant, 
though there is no change in his nature from its nolliety to velleity. (So it is 
usual to attribute sensible properties of speech and sight, to the immaterial 
spirit of God, by a figure of speech, and for the instruction of the vulgar, who 
cannot comprehend the incomprehensible). 


25. These sensible terms and figurative expressions, are used for the guidance 
of the ignorant, but the knowing few, are far from falling into the fallacy of 
dualism. All sensible conceptions ceasing upon the spiritual perception of 
God, there ensues an utter and dumb silence. (We become tongue-tied, and 
our lips are closed and sealed in silence, to speak anything with certainty of 
the unspeakable). 


26. When in time you come to know these things better, you shall arrive at the 
conclusion, that all this is but one thing, and an undivided whole without its 
parts, and having no beginning nor end. (The world is therefore, self-same and 
co-eternal and co-existent, with the eternal and self-existent God). 


27. The unlearned dispute among themselves from their uncertainty of truth, 
but their differences and dualisms are all at an end, upon their arriving to the 
knowledge of the true unity by instructions of the wise. (The reality is 
precisely in the indifference of the subject and object. — Schelling). 


28. Without knowledge of the agreement of significant words with their 
significates, it is impossible to know the Unity, for so long as a word is taken 
in different senses, there will be no end of disputes and difference of opinions. 
Dualisms being done away, all disputes are hushed up in the belief of unity. 
(i.e., All words expressive of the Deity, refer to his unity and signify the one 
and the same Lord of all, which ends all controversy on the point). 


29. O support of Raghu’s race! place your reliance on the sense of the great 
sayings of the vedas; and without paying any regard to discordant passages, 
attend to what I will tell you at present. (Such as: — Brahma is used in one 
place in the ablative and in another in the locative case, and also in the 
nominative and as the same with the world). 


30. From whatever cause it may have sprung, the world resembles a city 
rising to view in a vision, just as the thoughts and ideas appearing before the 
mirror of the mind, from some source of which we know nothing. (They are 
as puppet shows of the player, behind the screen). 


31. Hear Rama! and I will relate to you an instance for your ocular evidence, 
how the mind, (chitta), spins out the magical world, (mdyika), from itself. 
(This ocular instance called the drishtdnta-drishtdvedana, is that of the 
spider’s thread, (urnandbha-tantu), woven of itself, and given in the Sruti). 


32. Having known this, O Rama! you will be able to cast away all your 
erroneous conceptions, and being certain of the certitude, you will resign your 
attachment to, and your desires in this enchanted and bewitching world. 
(Hence the certainty, of God’s being aloof from the false world, as it is said 
Deus ex machina). 


33. All these prospective worlds are machinations or the working of the mind. 
Having forsaken these false fabrications of fancy, you will have the tranquility 
of your soul, and abide in peace with yourself forever. (Exemption from all 
worldly cares and anxieties of the past, present and future lives, leads to the 
peace of mind). 


34. By paying your attention to the drift of my preachings, you will be able to 
find out of your own reasoning, a mite of the medicine, for curing all the 
maladies of your deluded mind. (Right reason by the art of reasoning, 
furnishes the true medicine (psyches iatrion) to remove the errors of the 
understanding). 


35. If you sit in this manner (in your silent meditation), you will see the whole 
world in your mind, and all outward bodies will disappear (in your abstract 
contemplation), like drops of oil in the sand. (All things are presented to the 
mind by intuition, and are present in the memory, — the great keeper or 


master of Rolls of the soul). 


36. The mind is the seat of the universe as long as it is not vitiated by passions 
and affections and afflictions of life; and it is set beyond the world (in 
heavenly bliss), no sooner it gets rid of the turmoils of its present state. (The 
mind, says Milton, can make a heaven of hell and a hell of heaven). 


37. The mind is the means to accomplish anything; it is the store-keeper to 
preserve all things in the store-house of its memory; it is the faculty of 
reasoning; and the power to act like a respectable person. It is therefore to be 
treated with respect, in recalling, restraining, and guiding us to our pursuits 
and duties. (Facultates sunt quibus facilius fit, sine quibus omnino confici non 
potest. — Cicero). 


Note. — The mind is what moves and acts by its active and cognitive 
faculties, and is more to be regarded than the body, which move entirely as it 
is moved by the mind. Hence God is called the Mind of the world, — Anima 
mundi? 


38. The mind contains the three worlds with all their contents, and the 
surrounding air in itself, and exhibits itself as the plenum of egoism, and 
plenitude of all in its microcosm. (The mind is the synthesis of all its 
attributes, and man is living synthesis of the world with regard to his mind. — 
Paracelsus. Its memory is both a capacity and a power by its retention and 
ready reproduction of everything). 


39. The intellectual part of the mind, contains the subjective self- 
consciousness of ego, which is the seed of all its powers, while its other or 
objective part, bears the erroneous forms of the dull material world in itself. 
(The former is called the drashtd or viewer ego, and the latter the drishta or 
the view non ego. The subjective is the thinking subject ego, and the objective 
is the object of thought the non ego). 


40. The self-born Brahma saw the yet increate and formless world, as already 
present before his mind in its ideal state, like a dream at its first creation. He 
saw it (mentally) without seeing it (actually). (i.e., The eternal ideas of 
immaterial forms of possible things in the Divine Mind. The eternal 
exemplars of things and Archetypes of the Ectypal world. Thus the passage in 
the Bible, “And God saw his works were good.” i.e., answer those in his fair 
idea. — Milton). 


41. He beheld the whole creation in the self-consciousness, (samvitti), of his 

vast mind, and he saw the material objects, the hills efc., in the samvid of his 
gross personal consciousness. At last, he perceived by his sukshma vid subtle 
sightedness (clairvoyance), that all gross bodies were as empty as air and not 


solid substantialities. (Consciousness being the joint knowledge of the 
subjective and objective, i.e., of ourselves in connection with others; the one 
is called superior or subjective self-consciousness, and the other or objective 
personal-consciousness). 


42. The mind with its embodying thoughts, is pervaded by the omnipresent 
soul, which is spread out as transpicuously as sun-beams upon the limpid 
water. (The soul is the chit or intellectual part of the mind, (chitbhdga of 
chitta), and the root of all mental activities. The chidbhdga has the power of 
giving knowledge which moves the other faculties of the mind. — Gloss). 


43. The mind is otherwise like an infant, which views the apparition of the 
world in its insensible sleep of ignorance; but being awakened by the intellect, 
chit, it sees the transcendent form of the self or soul without the mist of 
delusion, which is caused by the sensitive part of the mind, and removed by 
the reasoning faculties of the intellect, — Chidbhaga. 


44. Hear now Rama! what I am going to tell of the manner, in which the soul 
is to be seen in this phenomenal world, which is the cause of misleading the 
mind from its knowledge of the unity to the erroneous notion of the duality. 
(The sensitivity of the mind of objective phenomenals, misleads it from its 
intellection of the subjective noumenal part which is a positive unity. — 
Gloss). 


45. What I will say, cannot fail to come to your heart, by the opposite similes, 
right reasoning, and graceful style, and good sense of the words, in which they 
shall be conveyed to you, and by hearing of these, your heart will be filled 
with delight, which will pervade your senses, like the pervasive oil upon the 
water. 


46. The speech which is without suitable comparisons and graceful 
phraseology, which is inaudible or clamorous, and has inappropriate words 
and harsh sounding letters, cannot take possession of the heart, but is thrown 
away for nothing, like butter poured upon the burnt ashes of an oblation, and 
has no power to kindle the flame. 


47. Whatever narrative and tales there are in any language on earth, and 
whatever compositions are adorned with measured sentences and graceful 
diction, all these are rendered perspicacious by conspicuous comparisons, as 
the world is enlightened by the cooling beams of the moon. Hence every sloka 
almost in this work, is embellished with a suitable comparison. 


CHAPTER LXXXV. 


Interview of Brahma and the Sun. 


Argument. — Brahma intending to create the world, sees the orbs of light, and 
invokes the luminous Sun. 


Vasishtha continued: — I will relate to you Rama, agreeably to your request, 
the story that was narrated to me of old by Brahma himself, (the personified 
mind of God and the lord of creatures). The manas or mind produced Manu, 
— the progeny of the mind, who begat the Manujas otherwise called mdnavas 
or manushyas, or men, — the offspring of the mind. 


2. [had asked the lotus-born god once before, to tell me how these hosts of 
creation had come to being. (Vasishtha the offspring of Brahma, had his 
communion with his father, — the first great patriarch of mankind). 


3. Then Brahma the great progenitor of men, granted my request, and related 
to me the apologue of Aindava in his sonorous voice. (The oracles of God 
were delivered in the loud noise of thunders, — brihad-vachas). 


4. Brahma said: — All this visible world is the manifestation of the divine 
mind, like the circling whirl-pools and rippling curls of water on the surface 
of the sea. (Referring to the revolutions of heavenly bodies in the air). 


5. Hear me tell you, said he, how I, (the personified mind), awoke at first on 
the day of creation in a former Kalpa, with my volition to create (expand) 
myself. (The volitive mind rose out of the sleeping intelligence on the 
dawning day of creation). 


6. Erewhile I remained alone, and quietly intent upon the One at the end of the 
prior day (or Kalpa), by having compressed the whole creation in the focus of 
my mind, and hid it under the gloom of the primeval night. (Old chaos or 
darkness that reigned over the surface of the deep before the dawn of light. 
Tama Gsit, tamasdgidhamagra. There was darkness enveloping all things. — 


Sruti). 


7. At the end of the chaotic night I awoke as from a deep sleep, and performed 
my matins as it is the general law (of all living beings). I opened my eyes with 
a view to create, and fixed my look on the vacuum all about me. 


(When that spirit sleeps it is night, and when it awakes, it is a day of 
recreation (resurrection). — Manu). 


8. As far as I viewed, it was empty space and covered by darkness, and there 
was no light of heaven. It was unlimitedly extensive, all void and without any 
boundary. (Infinite space existed ere creation came into existence. — Sruti. 
All was teom and beom or tama and vyoma). 


9. Being then determined to bring forth the creation, I began to discern the 
world in its simple (ideal) form within me, with the acuteness of my 
understanding. (i.e., I looked into the prototypes or models of things contained 
in the Mind). 


10. I then beheld in my mind the great cosmos of creation, set unobstructed 
and apart from me in the wide extended field of vacuity. (The archetypes of 
our ideas, are the things existing out of us. — Locke. Our ideas though seen 
within us, form no part of ourselves or our being). 


11. Then the rays of my reflexion stretched out over them, from amidst the 
lotus-cell of my abode, and sat in the form of ten lotus-born Brahmas over the 
ten orbs (planets) of this world, like so many swans brooding upon their eggs. 
(The spirit of God that dove-like sat, brooding over the deep. — Milton). 


12. Then these separate orbs, (mundane eggs), brought forth, to light 
multitudes of beings, amidst their transparent aqueous atmospheres. (All 
worlds girt by their covercles of watery ether or nebulous clouds, teemed with 
productions of every kind). 


13. Thence sprang the great rivers and the roaring seas and oceans; and thence 
again rose the burning lights and blowing winds of the firmament. (The 
atmospheric water is the source of all things). 


14. The gods began to sport in the ethereal air, and men moved about on the 
earth, and demons and serpents were confined in their abodes underneath the 
ground. (The gods are called devas from their sporting in the regions of light, 
— dividevah divyanti. Men are pdarthivas from prithvi, the earth, and demons 
are called infernal from their abode in the infrapdtdla or antipodes). 


15. The wheel of time turns with the revolution of seasons and their produce, 
and it adorns the earth with her various productions by change of the seasons. 


16. Laws were fixed for all things on all sides, and human actions were 
regulated in the Smritis as right or wrong, and producing as their fruits, the 
reward of heaven or the torments of hell. (And Brahma appointed to all beings 
their several laws. — Manu. And there is no single atom that goes beyond its 
appointed law, — nature or dharma, which is an attribute of the Great God). 


17. All beings are in pursuit of their enjoyments and liberty, and the more they 
strive for their desired objects, the better they thrive in them. (The gloss 
makes the pursuit of earthly enjoyments to be the cause of pain and hell, and 
that of liberation from them to be productive of heavenly bliss). 


18. In this way were the sevenfold worlds and continents, the septuple oceans 
and the seven boundary mountains brought to existence, and they continue to 
exist until their final dissolution at the end of a Kalpa period, (which is 
determined by the Kalpa or will of God). 


19. The primeval darkness fled before light from the face of open lands, and 
took its refuge in mountain caverns and hollow caves; it abides in some places 
allied with light, as in the shady and sunny forest lands and lawns. 


20. The azure sky, like a lake of blue lotuses, is haunted by fragments of dark 
clouds, resembling swarms of black-bees on high; and the stars twinkling in it, 
liken the yellow filaments of flowers shaken by the winds. 


21. The huge heaps of snow setting in the valleys of high hills, resemble the 
lofty simula trees beset by their pods of cotton. 


22. The earth is encircled by the polar mountains serving as her girdles, and 
the circles of the polar seas serving as her sounding anklets and trinkets. She 
is girt by the polar darkness as by a blue garment, and studded all about with 
gems, growing and glowing in the bosoms of her rich and ample mines and 
seas. 


(The lokaloka or polar mountain, is so called from its having eternal light and 
night on either side, turned towards or beyond the solar light). 


23. The earth covered over by the garniture of her verdure, resembles a lady 
sitting begirt by her robes, and having the produce of paddy for her victuals, 
and the busy buzz of the world for her music. 


24. The sky appears as a bride veiled under the sable mantle of night, with the 
glittering chains of stars for her jewels. The season fruits and flowers hanging 
in the air, resemble wreaths of lotuses about her person. 


25. The orbs of worlds appear as the beautiful fruits of pomegranates, 
containing all their peoples in them, like the shining grains of granites in the 


cells of those fruits. 


26. The bright moon-beams stretching both above and below and all around 
the three sides, appear as the white sacred thread, girding the world above and 
below and all about; or as the stream of Ganga running in three directions in 
the upper, lower and nether worlds. 


27. The clouds dispersing on all sides with their glittering lightnings, appear 
as the leaves and flowers of aerial forests, blown away by the breezes on all 
sides. 


28. But all these worlds with their lands and seas, their skies and all their 
contents, are in reality as unreal as the visionary dreams, and as delusive as 
the enchanted city of the Fairy land. 


29. The gods and demons, men and serpents, that are seen in multitudes in all 
worlds, are as bodies of buzzing gnats, fluttering about the dumbura-fig trees. 
(Udumbara is the ficus religiosus-yajnadumbura or sacred fig tree. It is by the 
orthographical figure aphaeresis or elision of the initial, that udumbara is 
made dumbura, vulgo). 


30. Here time is moving on with his train of moments and minutes, his ages, 
Yugas and Kalpas, in expectation of the unforeseen destruction of all things. 
(Time devours and destroys all things). 


31. Having seen all these things in my pure and enlightened understanding, I 
was quite confounded to think, whence could all these have come into being. 
(The first inquiry into the cause and origin of beings). 


32. Why is it that I do not see with my visual organs, all that I perceive, as a 
magic scene spread out in the sphere of my Mind? 


33. Having looked into these for a long time with my steadfast attention, I 
called to me the brightest sun of these luminous spheres and addressed him, 
saying: — (The first address of Brahma to the sun, corresponds with Adam’s 
address to that luminary. “Thou glorious sun, nature’s first born and the light 
and life etc.’”” — Milton). 


34. Approach to me, O god of gods, luminous sun! I welcome thee to me! 
Having accosted him thus, I said: — 


35. Tell me what thou art and how this world with all its bright orbs came to 
being; if thou knowest aught of these, then please reveal it to me. 


36. Being thus addressed, he looked upon me, and then having recognized me, 
he made his salutation, and uttered in graceful words and speech. 


37. The sun replied: — Thou lord! art the eternal cause of these false 
phenomena, how is it then that thou knowest it not, but askest me about the 
cause thereof? 


38. But shouldst thou, all knowing as thou art, take a delight in hearing my 
speech, I will tell thee of my unasked and unthought of production, which I 
beg thee to attend to. 


39. O great Spirit! this world being composed of reality and unreality in its 
twofold view, beguiles the understanding to take it sometimes for a real and at 
others for an unreal thing. It is the great mind of the Divine Soul, that is thus 
employed in these incessant and unceasingly endless creations for its 
diversion. (The soul is the animating power, and the mind is the principle of 
action. Metaphysically, the soul is an individual name; the mind is a generic 
term or genus. The soul is opposed to body, the mind to matter. The soul is 
the principle of animation, the mind of volition. The soul is the mind of a 
certain being, the mind is the soul without its personality). 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 


Story of Indu and His Sons. 


Argument. The Sun’s Narrative of Indu and his Devotion. 


The Sun continued: — It was, my lord! only the other day of one of thy by 
gone Kalpas, and at the foot of a mount, beside the table-land of mount 
Kailasa standing in a corner of the continent of Jambudvipa: — (A Kalpa is 
one day of Brahma, and occupies the whole duration of a creation from its 
beginning to the end, which is called the Kalpanta or night of the god. This 
agrees with the seven days of creation in the book of Genesis, which are 
supposed to embrace so many long ages of creation). 


2. That there lived a man by name of Suvarnajata, together with all his sons 
and their progeny, who had rendered that spot a beautiful and pleasant 
habitation. (The gloss says they were the patriarchs of mankind, settled first 
on the table-land and at the foot of the Himalayas). 


3. There lived among them a Brahman by name of Indu, a descendant of the 
patriarch Kasyapa, who was of a saintly soul, virtuous and acquainted with 
divine knowledge. 


4. He resided in his residence with all his relatives, and passed his time 
agreeably in company with his wife, who was dear to his heart as his second 
self. (That, woman is ardhdnga or half of the body of man, is established in 
Hindu law; and represented in mythology in the androgyne figures of Hara- 
Gauri and Uma-Maheswara). 


5. But there was no issue born of this virtuous pair, as there grows no grass in 
a sterile soil; and the wife remained discontented at the unfruitfulness of her 
efflorescence or seed. 


6. With all the purity and simplicity of their hearts, and the beauty and 
gracefulness of their persons and manners, they were as useless to the earth, 


as the fair and straight stem of the pure paddy plant, without its stalk of corn. 
The discontented pair then repaired to the mountain, in order to make their 
devotion for the blessing of progeny. 


7. They ascended the Kailasa mountain, which was unshaded by shady trees, 
and unpeopled by living beings, and there they stood fixed on one side, like a 
couple of trees in the barren desert. 


8. They remained in their austere devotion, subsisting upon liquid food which 
supported the trees also. They drank but a draught of water, which they held 
in the hollow of their palms, from a neighbouring cascade at the close of the 
day. (There is no single word for a gandusha or chuluka of water in English; 
the word handful being equivalent to mushthi and prastha). 


9. They remained standing and unmoved as immovable trees, and continued 
long in that posture, in the manner of an erect wood in heat and cold. 
(Varkshivritti means intense meditation conducted by forgetting one’s self to 
wood or stone). 


10. They passed in this manner the period of two ages, before their devotion 
met with the approbation of the god, who bears the crescent of the moon on 
his forehead. (This crescent was no doubt the missile disk, which the war-like 
god Siva held on his head in the manner of the Seiks). 


11. The god advanced towards the parching pair, with the cooling moon- 
beams on his forehead, as when that luminary casts her dewy light on the 
dried trees and scorched lotuses, under the burning sun beams of a summer 
day. 


12. The god, mounted on his milk-white bull, and clasping the fair Uma on his 
left, and holding the beaming moon on his head, appeared to them, as the 
vernal season was approaching to a green wood, (or furze), with strewing 
flowers upon them. (There is an alliteration of soma and soma in the double 
sense of Uma and the moon. This kind of play upon words is very 
characteristic of metaphysical writers in all ages, as Alethes melethon.-- Lewis 
Hist. Phil. I. 69). 


13. They with brightening eyes and faces beheld the god, as the lotuses hail 
the appearance of the comely moon, and then bowed down to the god of the 
silvery bow and snow white countenance. (Kalidasa in his Mahapadya, has 

heaped all these and many more ensigns of whiteness on the hoary Hara of 

Himalaya). 


14. Then the god rising to their view like the full moon, and appearing in the 
midst of the heaven and earth, spoke smilingly unto them in a gentle and 


audible voice, the breath of which refreshed them, like the breath of spring 
reviving the faded plants of the forest. 


15. The god said: — I am pleased with thy devotion, O Brahman! prefer thy 
prayer to me, and have thy desired boon granted to thee immediately. 


16. The Brahman replied: — O Lord of gods, deign to favour me with ten 
intelligent male children. Let these be born of me to dispel all my sorrows (for 
want of a male issue). 


17. The sun rejoined: — The god said, be it so, and then disappeared in the 
air, and his great body passed through the ethereal path, like the surge of the 
sea with the tremendous roar of thunders. 


18. The Braéhmanic couple then returned to their home with gladness of their 
hearts, and appeared as the reflexions of the two divinities Siva and Uma in 
their persons. (The god Siva, otherwise called Hara, bears every resemblance 
to Hercules, (Harakula), the son of Jove, (Siva), and his consort Uma to 
Omphale the wife of Hercules. — Todd’s Rajasthan). 


19. Returning there, the Brahmani became big with child, by the blessing she 
had got of her god Siva. 


20. She appeared as a thick cloud heavy with rain water, in the state of her full 
pregnancy, and brought forth in proper time (of child-birth), a boy as beautiful 
as the digit of the new moon. 


21. Thus there were born of her ten sons in succession, all as handsome as the 
tender sprouts of plants, and these grew up in strength and stature, after they 
had received their sacramental investitures. 


22. In course of a short time, they attained their boyhood, and became 
conversant in the language of the gods, (Sanskrit), as the mute clouds become 
sonorous in the rainy season. (The Sanskrita, says Sir W. Jones, is more 
sonorous than Latin. It is the voice of gods, which is as high sounding as the 
roaring of clouds). 


23. They shone in their circle with the lustre of their persons, as the 
resplendent orbs of the sky burn and turn about in their spheres. 


24. In process of time these youths lost both their parents, who shuffled off 
their mortal coil to go to their last abode. (i.e., To be amalgamated with the 
person of Brahma, with which they were acquainted by their proficiency in 
Yoga divinity). 


25. Being thus bereft of both their parents, the ten Brahman lads left their 
home in grief, and repaired to the top of the Kailaésa mountain, to pass there 


their helpless lives in mourning. 


26. Here they conversed together about their best welfare, and the right course 
that they should take to avoid the troubles and miseries of life. 


27. They parleyed with one another on the topics, of what was the best good, 
(Summum bonum), of humanity in this world of mortality, and many other 
subjects (which form the common places in ethics), such as: — 


28. What is true greatness, best riches and affluence, and the highest good of 
humankind? What is the good of great power, possessions, chiefship and even 
the gain of a kingdom? What forms the true dignity of kings, and the high 
majesty of emperors? 


29. What avails the autocracy of the great Indra, which is lost in one moment, 
(a moment’s time of Brahma). What is that thing which endures a whole 
Kalpa, and must be the best good as the most lasting? 


30. As they were talking in this manner, they were interrupted by the eldest 
brother, with a voice as grave, as that of the leader of a herd of deer to the 
attentive flock. 


31. Of all kinds of riches and dignities, there is one thing that endureth for a 
whole Kalpa, and is never destroyed, and this is the state of Brahma, which I 
prize above all others. 


32. Hearing this, the good sons of Indu exclaimed all in one voice saying: — 
Ah! well said; and then they honoured him with their mild speeches. 


33. They said: How, — O brother, can it be possible for us to attain to the 
state of Brahma, who is seated on his seat of lotuses, and is adored by all in 
this world? 


34. The eldest brother then replied to his younger brothers saying: — O you 
my worthy brothers, do you do as I tell you, and you will be successful in that. 


35. Do you but sit in your posture of padmdsana, and think yourselves as the 
bright Brahma and full of his effulgence; and possessing the powers of 
creation and annihilation in yourselves. (Padmdsana is a certain posture with 
crossed legs for conducting the Yoga). 


36. Being thus bid by the eldest brother, the younger brothers responded to 
him by saying, “Amen”; and sat in their meditation together with the eldest 
brother, with gladness of their hearts. 


37. They remained in their meditative mood, like the still pictures in a 
painting, and their minds were concentrated in the inmost Brahma, whom they 


adored and thought upon, saying: — 


38. Here | sit on the pericarp of a full-blown lotus, and find myself as Brahma, 
— the great god, the creator and sustainer of the universe. 


39. I find in me the whole ritual of sacrificial rites, the Vedas with their 
branches and supplements and the Rishis; I view in me the Saraswati and 
Gayatri mantras of the Veda, and all the gods and men situated in me. 


40. I see in me the spheres of the regents, of the world, and the circles of the 
Siddhas revolving about me; with the spacious heaven bespangled with the 
stars. 


41. I see this terraqueous orb ornamented with all its oceans and continents, 
its mountains and islands, hanging as an ear-ring in the mundane system. 


42. I have the hollow of the infernal world, with its demons, and Titans, and 
serpents and dragons within myself; and I have the cavity of the sky in 
myself, containing the habitations and damsels of the immortals. 


43. There is the strong armed Indra, the tormentor of the lords of peoples; the 
sole lord of the three worlds, and the receiver of the sacrifices of men. 


44. I see all the sides of heaven spread over by the bright net of the firmament; 
and the twelve suns of the twelve months dispensing their ceaseless beams 
amidst it. 


45. I see the righteous regents of the sky and the rulers of men, protecting 
their respective regions and peoples with the same care, as the cowherds take 
for protection of their cattle. 


46. I find every day among all sorts of beings, some rising and falling, and 
others diving and floating, like the incessant waves of the sea. (Everything is 
changing in the changeful world). 


47. It is I, (the Ego), that create, preserve, and destroy the worlds, I remain in 
myself and pervade over all existence, as the lord of all. 


48. I observe in myself the revolution of years and ages, and of all seasons 
and times, and I find the very time, to be both the creator and destroyer of 
things. 


49. I see a Kalpa passing away before me, and the night of Brahma, 
(dissolution), stretched out in my presence, while I reside forever in the 
Supreme soul, and as full and perfect as the Divine Spirit itself. (Immortality 
of the human soul and its unity with the Divine). 


50. Thus these Brahmans, — the sons of Indu, remained in this sort of 


meditation, in their motionless postures like fixed rocks, and as images hewn 
out of stones in a hill. 


51. In this manner, these Brahmans continued for a long period in their 
devotion, being fully acquainted with the nature of Brahma, and possessed of 
the spirit of that deity in themselves. They sat in their posture of the 
padmasana on seats of kusa grass, being freed from the snare of the fickle and 
frivolous desires of this false and frail world. 


It is evident from this instance of the Brahmans’ devotion, that it consisted of 
the contemplation of everything in the world in the mind of man, like that of 
the whole universe in the mind of God. It is the subjective view of the 
objective that forms what is truly meant by Yoga meditation and nothing 
beside. 


CHAPTER LXXXVII. 
Analecta of the Celestial Spheres. 


Argument: — The Spiritual body or soul, is not destroyed by destruction of 
the material Body. 


The Sol said: — O great father of creation! thus did these venerable 
Brahmans, remain at that spot, occupied with these various thoughts (of 
existence) and their several actions in their minds for a long time. (This sort of 
Yoga meditation is called Sdrupya, or approximation of one to the divine 
attribute, of thinking on the States and functions of all things in the world in 
one’s self). 


2. They remained in this state (of abstraction), until their bodies were dried up 
by exposure to the sun and air, and dropped down in time like the withered 
leaves of trees. (This is called the Samddhi Yoga or absorption in meditation, 
until one’s final extinction or Euthanasia in the Spirit). 


3. Their dead bodies were devoured by the voracious beasts of the forest, or 
tossed about as some ripe fruits by the monkeys on the hills (to be food for 
greedy vultures and hungry dogs). 


4. These Brahmans, having their thoughts distracted from outward objects, 
and concentrated in Brahmdhood, continued in the enjoyment of divine 
felicity in their Spirits, until the close of the Kalpa age at the end of the four 
Yugas. 


(The duration of a day of Brahma extends over a Kalpa age composed of four 
Yugas, followed by his night of kalpdnta, when he becomes extinct in his 
death-like sleep, the twin brother of death. Ho hupnos esti didumos adelphos 
thanatow). 


5. At the end of the Kalpa, there is an utter extinction of the solar light, by the 
incessant rains poured down by the heavy Pushkara and Avartaka clouds at 
the great deluge, (when the doors of heaven were laid open to rain in floods on 
earth. — Genesis). 


6. When the hurricane of desolation blew on all sides, and buried all beings 
under the Universal ocean, (which covered the face of the earth). 


7. It was then thy dark night, and the previous creation slept as in their Yoga- 
nidrd or hypnotic trance in thy sleeping self. Thus thou continuing in thy 
spirit, didst contain all things in thee in their spiritual forms. (Darkness 
reigned on the deep, and the spirit of God viewed everything in itself). 


8. Upon thy waking this day with thy desire of creation, all these things are 
exhibited to thy view, as a copy of all that was in thy inmost mind or Spirit 
already. (So it is upon our waking from sleep, we come to see a facsimile of 
all that lay dormant in the sleeping mind). 


9. [have thus related to you O Brahma! how these ten Brahmans were 
personified as so many Brahmas; these have become the ten bright orbs 
situated in the vacuous sphere of thy mind. (An English poet has expressed 
the holy soul to appear as a luminary in heaven). 


10. Iam the one eldest among them, consecrated in this temple of the sky, and 
appointed by thee, O lord of all! to regulate the portions of time on earthly 
beings. 


11. Now I have given you a full account of the ten orbs of heaven, which are 
no other than the ten persons united in the mind of Brahma, and now 
appearing as detached from him. (Mentally viewed, everything is found 
situated in the mind, but when seen with open eyes, it seems to be set apart 
from us. Have therefore your thoughts or your sights as you may choose). 


12. This beautiful world that you behold, appearing to your view, with all its 
wonderful structures, spread out in the skies, serves at best as a snare to entrap 
your senses, and delude your understanding, by taking the unrealities as 
realities in your mind. (Brahma the Demiurgus, being but architect of the 
world, and a person next to or an emanation of the mind of God, had not the 
intelligence of the soul, to discern the innate ideas, which represented 
themselves in the outer creation). 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 


Indifference of Brahma. 


Argument. — That God expects nothing from his creation. 


Brahma said: — O Brahman! that art the best of Brahmists, (Brahmos), the 
God Sol having thus spoken of the ten Brahmanas to Brahma (me), held his 
silence. (Here is a tautology of the word Brahman in the fashion of 
metaphysicians in its several homonymous significations. This is an address 
of Brahma to Vasishtha, — the Brahman and Brahmist, relating the 
Brahmanas). 


2. I then thought upon this for some time in my mind, and said afterwards, O 
Sol, Sol! do thou tell me at present what I am next to create. (Brahma’s asking 
the sun about what he was next to create, bears allusion to his works of 
creation during the six days of genesis, which was directed by the course of 
the sun, — his morning and evening), 


3. Tell me thou sun, what need is there of my making any more worlds, after 
these ten orbs have come into existence. (These ten orbs are the ten planetary 
bodies belonging to the solar system). 


4. Now O great sage! the sun having long considered in his mind about what I 
wanted him to tell, replied to me in the following manner in appropriate 
words. 


5. The sun said: — What need hast thou of the act of creating, my lord! that 
art devoid of effort or desire? This work of creation is only for thy pleasure 
(and not for any use to thee). 


6. Thou lord that art free from desires, givest rise to worlds, as the sunbeams 
raise the waters, and the sunshine is accompanied by the shadow (as its 
inseparable companion). 


7. Thou that art indifferent to the fostering or forsaking of thy body, (i.e., 


either to live or die), needst have nothing to desire nor renounce for thy 
pleasure or pain. (No gain or loss can add to the joy or grief of the apathetic 
philosophic mind). 


8. Thou, O Lord of creatures! dost create all these for the sake of thy pleasure 
only, and so dost thou retract them all in thyself, as the sun gives and 
withdraws his light by turns. (Creation and annihilation are the acts of 
expansion and subtraction of all things, from and in the supreme spirit). 


9. Thou that art unattached to the world, makest thy creation out of the work 
of love to thee, and not of any effort or endeavour on thy part. 


10. If thou desist from stretching the creation out of the Supreme Spirit, what 
good canst thou derive from thy inactivity? (Wherefore it is better to do and 
produce something than nothing). 


11. Do thy duty as it may present itself to thee, rather than remain inactive 
with doing nothing. The dull person, who like the dirty mirror, does not reflect 
the image, comes to no use at all. 


12. As the wise have no desire of doing anything which is beyond their reach, 
so they never like to leave out anything which is useful, and presents itself 
before them. (Nor long for more, nor leave out your own. Or, Act well thy 
part, efc.). 


13. Therefore, do thy work as it comes to thee, with a cheerful heart, and 
calmness of mind, with a tranquil soul, as if it were in thy sleep, and devoid of 
desires which thou canst never reap. 


14. As thou dost derive pleasure, O Lord of worlds! in forming the orbs of the 
sons of Indu, so the lord of gods will give thee thy reward for thy works of 
creation. 


15. The manner in which, O lord, thou seest the worlds with the eyes of thy 
mind, nobody can see them so conspicuously with their external organs of 
vision, for who can say by seeing them with his eyes, whether thy are created 
or increate. 


16. He who has created these worlds from his mind, it is he alone that can 
behold me face to face, and no other person with his open eyes. 


17. The ten worlds are not the work of so many Brahmas as it appeared to 
thee before, and nobody has the power to destroy them, when they are seated 
so firmly in the mind. (It may be easy to destroy all visible objects, but not to 
efface the impressions of the mind, (memory)). 


18. It is easy to destroy what is made by the hand, and to shut out the sensible 


objects from our perception, but who can annul or disregard what is 
ascertained by the mind. 


19. Whatever belief is deep-rooted in the minds of living beings, it is 
impossible to remove it by anybody, except by its owner, (by change of his 
mind or its forgetfulness). 


20. Whatever is habituated to confirmed belief in the mind, no curse can 
remove it from the mind, though it can kill the body. 


21. The principle that is deeply rooted in the mind, the same forms the man 
according to its stamp; it is impossible to make him otherwise by any means, 
as it is no way possible to fructify a rock by watering at its root like a tree. 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 


Story of Indra and Ahalya. 


Argument. A Rooted Belief is not to be shaken by others as in the case of 
Lovers. 


The Sol said: — The mind is the maker and master of the world; the mind is 
the first supreme Male: Whatever is done by the Mind, (intentionally), is said 
to be done; the actions of the body are held as no acts. 


2. Look at the capacity of the mind in the instance of the sons of Indu, who 
being but ordinary Brahmans, became assimilated to Brahma, by their 
meditation of him in their minds. 


3. One thinking himself as composed of the body, (i.e., a corporeal being), 
becomes subject to all the accidents of corporeality; But he who knows 
himself as bodiless, (an incorporeal being), is freed from all evils which are 
accidental to the body. 


4. By looking on the outside, we are subjected to the feelings of pain and 
pleasure; but the inward-sighted Yogi, is unconscious of the pain or pleasure 
of his body. (Lit. of what is pleasant or unpleasant to the body). 


5. It is thus the mind that causes all our errors in this world, as it is evidenced 
in the instance of Indra and his consort Ahaly4, (related in the ancient 
legends). 


6. Brahma said: — Tell me, my Lord Sol, who was this Indra, and who that 
Ahalya, by the hearing of which my understanding may have its clear- 
sightedness. 


7. The sun said: — It is related my lord! that there reigned in former times a 
king at Magadha, (Behar), Indra-dyumna by name, and alike his namesake (in 
prowess and fame). 


8. He had a wife fair as the orb of moon, with her eyes as beautiful as lotuses. 


Her name was Ahaly4 and she resembled Rohini, — the favourite of the 
moon. 


9. In that city there lived a palliard at the head of all the rakes; he was the 
intriguant son of a Brahman, and was known by the same name of Indra. 


10. Now this queen Ahalya came to hear the tale of the former Ahalya wife of 
Gotama, and her concupiscence related to her at a certain time. 


11. Hearing of that, this Ahalya felt a passion for the other Indra, and became 
impatient in the absence of his company, thinking only how he should come 
to her. 


12. She was fading as a tender creeper thrown adrift in the burning desert, and 
was burning with her inward flame, on beds of cooling leaves of the watery 
lotus and plantain trees. 


13. She was pining amidst all the enjoyments of her royal state, as the poor 
fish lying exposed on the dry bed of a pool in summer heat. 


14. She lost her modesty with her self possession, and repeated in her phrensy, 
“here is Indra, and there he comes to me.” 


15. Finding her in this pitiable plight, a lady of her palace took compassion on 
her, and said, I will safely conduct Indra before your ladyship in a short time. 


16. No sooner she heard her companion say, “I will bring your desired object 
to you,” than she opened her eyes with joy, and fell prostrate at her feet, as 
one lotus flower falls before another. 


17. Then as the day passed on, and the shade of night covered the face of 
nature, the lady made her haste to the house of Indra, — the Brahman’s boy. 


18. The clever lady used her persuasions as far as she could, and then 
succeeded to bring with her this Indra, and present him before her royal 
mistress forthwith. 


19. She then adorned herself with pastes and paints, and wreaths of fragrant 
flowers, and conducted her lover to a private apartment, where they enjoyed 
their fill. 


20. The youth decorated also in his jewels and necklaces delighted her with 
his dulcet caresses, as the vernal season renovates the arbour with his luscious 
juice. 

21. Henceforward this ravished queen, saw the world full with the figure of 


her beloved Indra, and did not think much of all the excellences of her royal 
lord, — her husband. 


22. It was after sometime, that the great king came to be acquainted of the 
queen’s amour for the Brahman Indra, by certain indications of her 
countenance. 


23. For as long as she thought of her lover Indra, her face glowed as the full- 
blown lotus, blooming with the beams of her moon like lover. 


24. Indra also was enamoured of her with all his enraptured senses, and could 
not remain for a moment in any place without her company. 


25. The king heard the painful tiding of their mutual affection, and of their 
unconcealed meetings and conferences with each other at all times. 


26. He observed also many instances of their mutual attachment, and gave 
them his reprimands and punishments, as they deserved at different times. 


27. They were both cast in the cold water of a tank in the cold weather, where 
instead of betraying any sign of pain, they kept smiling together as in their 
merriment. 


28. The king then ordered them to be taken out of the tank, and told them to 
repent for their crimes; but the infatuated pair, was far from doing so, and 
replied to the king in the following manner. 


29. Great King! As long as we continue to reflect on the unblemished beauty 
of each other’s face, so long are we lost in the meditation of one another, and 
forget our own persons. 


30. We are delighted in our persecutions, as no torment can separate us from 
each other, nor are we afraid of separation, though, O King, you can separate 
our souls from our bodies. 


31. Then they were thrown in a frying pan upon fire, where they remained 
unhurt and exclaimed, we rejoice, O King! at the delight of our souls in 
thinking of one another. 


32. They were tied to the feet of elephants, to be trampled down by them, but 
they remained uninjured and said, King we feel our hearty joy at the 
remembrance of each other. 


33. They were lashed with rods and straps, and many other sorts of scourges, 
which the king devised from time to time. 


34. But being brought back from the scourging ground, and asked about their 
suffering, they returned the same answer as before, and moreover, said Indra 
to the King, this world is full with the form of my beloved one. 


35. All your punishments inflict no pain on her also, who views the whole 


world as full of myself. (We see our beloved in every shape. — Hafiz. A 
thousands forms of my love, I see around me. — Urfi. “berundaruna man sad 
surate O paidast’ id). 


36. Therefore, all your punishments to torment the body, can give no pain to 
the mind, (soul), which is my true self, and constitutes my personality, 
(purusha), which resides in my person (purau sete). 


37. This body is but an ideal form, and presents a shadowy appearance to 
view; you can pour out your punishments upon it for a while, but it amounts 
to no more than striking a shadow with a stick. (The body is a thing that my 
senses inform me, and not an occult something beyond the senses. — 
Berkeley. Man can inflict the (unsubstantial) body, and not the (substantial) 
spirit within. — Gospel). 


38. No body can break down the brave (firm) mind, then tell me great king! 
what the powers of the mighty amount to? (The mind is invulnerable, and no 
human power can break its tenor). 


39. The causes that conspire to ruffle the tenor of the resolute mind, are the 
erroneous conceptions of external appearances. It is better therefore, to 
chastise such bodies which mislead the mind to error. (The certainty of the 
uncertainty of our bodies, is the only certain means for the certitude of our 
minds and safety of our souls, and better is it for us that our bodies be 
destroyed, in order to preserve our minds and souls intact). 


40. The mind is firm for ever that is steadfast to its fixed purpose. Nay it is 
identified with the object which it has constantly in its thoughts. (This is 
called mental metamorphosis or assimilation to the object of thought, as there 
is a physical transformation of one thing to another form by its constant 
contact with the same, such as by the law of chemical affinities, which is 
termed Yoga also in Indian medical works). 


41. Being and not being are words applicable to bodies, (and are convertible 
to one another), but they do not apply to the mind, since what is positive in 
thought, cannot be negatived of it in any wise. 


42. The mind is immovable and cannot be moved by any effort like mobile 
bodies. It is impregnable to all external actions, and neither your anger or 
favour, (barasdpa), can make any effect on it. 


43. It is possible for men of strong resolutions to change the course of their 
actions, but where is such a strong minded man to be found, who is able to 
withstand or change the current of his thought? 


44. It is impossible to move the mind from its fixed fulcrum, as it is 


impracticable for tender stags to remove a mountain from its base. This black- 
eyed beauty is the fixed prop of my mind. (The black-eyed beauty of India 
and Asia, is very naturally opposed to the blue-eyed maid of Homer and 
Europe). 


45. She is seated in the lofty temple of my mind, as the goddess Bhavani, 
(Juno) on the mount Kaildsa, (Olympus); and I fear nothing as long I view this 
beloved preserver of my life and soul before me. (The Persian poet Urfi uses 
the same simile of the temple and mind in the hemistich or distich. “I see her 
image in my inward shrine, as an idol in the temple of an idolatrous land).” 


46. I sit amidst the conflagration of a burning mountain in summer’s heat, but 
am cooled under the umbrage of her showering cloud, wherever I stand or 
fall. 


47. I think of nothing except of that sole object of my thought and wish, and I 
cannot persuade myself, to believe me as any other than Indra the lover of 
Ahalya. 


48. It is by constant association, that I have come to this belief of myself, nor 
can I think of me otherwise than what is in my nature; for know, O King! The 
wise have but one and the same object in their thought and view. (So says 
Hafiz: — If thou wilt have her, think not of another). 


49. The mind like the Meru, is not moved by threat or pity; it is the body that 
you can tame by the one or other expedient. The wise, O King! are masters of 
their minds, and there is none and nothing to deter them from their purpose. 


50. Know it for certain, O King, that neither these bodies about us, nor these 
bodies and sensations of ours are realities. They are but shows of truth, and 
not the movers of the mind, but on the contrary, it is the mind which supplies 
the bodies, and senses with their powers of action, as the water supplies the 
trees and branches with their vegetative juice. 


51. The mind is generally believed as a sensuous and passive principle, 
wholly actuated by the outward impressions of senses, but in truth it is the 
mind, which is the active and moving principle of the organs of action. 
Because all the senses become dormant in absence of the action of the mind, 
and so the functions of the whole creation are at a stop, without the activity of 
the Universal Mind, — anima mundi. (See Psychology and Mental 
Philosophy). 


CHAPTER LXXXxX. 


Love of the Fictitious Indra and Ahalya. 


Argument. Curses have power on the body, and not upon the mind. 


The Sol said: — The lotus-eyed king thus defied by this perverse Indra, 
addressed the sage Bharata, who was sitting by him (in the court-hall). 


2. The king spoke: — Lord, you are acquainted with all morality, and seest 
this ravisher of my wife, and hearest the arrogant speech, that he utters before 
our face. 


3. Deign, O great sage! pronounce thy fulmination upon him without delay, 
because it is a breach of justice to spare the wicked, as it is to hurt the 
innocent. 


4. Being thus besought by the great king, Bharata the best of the wise munis, 
considered well in his mind, the crime of this wicked soul Indra. 


5. And then pronounced his imprecation by saying: — “Do you, O reprobate 
sinner, soon meet with thy perdition, together with this sinful woman, that is 
so faithless to her husband.” 


6. Then they both replied to the king and his venerable sage, saying, — “what 
fools must ye be, to have thus wasted your imprecation, the great gain of your 
devotion, on our devoted heads,” (knowing that our souls are invincible). 


7. The curse you have pronounced, can do us very little harm, for though our 
bodies should fall, yet it cannot affect our inward minds and spirits (which are 
unchangeable). 


8. The inner principle of the soul, can never be destroyed by anybody and 
anywhere, owing to its inscrutable, subtle and intellectual nature. 


9. The Sol added: — This fascinated pair, that were over head and ears in 
love, then fell down by effect of the denunciation, as when the lopped 


branches fall upon the ground from the parent tree. 


10. Being subjected to the torment of transmigration, they were both born as a 
pair of deer in mutual attachment, and then as a couple of turtle doves in their 
inseparable alliance. 


11. Afterwards, O lord of our creation, this loving pair came to be born as 
man and woman, who by their practice of austerities, came to be reborn as a 
Brahman and Brahman at last. 


12. Thus the curse of Bharata, was capable only of transforming their bodies, 
and never to touch their minds or souls which continued in their unshaken 
attachment in every state of their transfiguration (or metamorphosis of the 
body only, and no metempsychosis of the soul). 


13. Therefore, wherever they come to be reborn in any shape, they always 
assume by virtue of their delusion and reminiscence, the form of a male and 
female pair. 


14. Seeing the true love which subsisted between this loving pair in the forest, 
the trees also become enamoured of the other sex of their own kinds. (This 
refers to the attachment of the male and female flowers, long before its 
discovery by Linnaeus). 


CHAPTER LXXXXI. 


Incarnation of the Living Soul or Jiva. 


Argument. The Mind is the cause of all its creations. 


The Sol continued: — Therefore I say, my lord! that the mind like time, is 
indestructible of its nature, and the inavertible imprecation of the sage, could 
not alter its tenor. 


2. Therefore, it is not right for thee, O great Brahma! to destroy the ideal 
fabric of the air-drawn world of the sons of Indu, because it is improper for 
great souls, to put a check to the fancies of others, (but rather to let everyone 
to delight in his own hobby horse and romantic visions). 


3. What thing is there, O lord of lords! that is wanting in thee in this universe 
of so many worlds, that should make thy great soul, to pine for the air built 
worlds of Indu’s sons? (It is not for noble minds to pine for the greatness of 
others, nor repine at the loss which they may sustain). 


4. The mind is verily the maker of worlds, and is known as the prime Male- 
Purusha, (the Demiurgus or Protogonus). Hence the mind that is fixed to its 
purpose, is not to be shaken from it by the power of any imprecation or by 
virtue of any drug or medicine, or even by any kind of chastisement. 


5. The mind which is the image of every body, is not destructible as the body, 
but remains forever fixed to its purpose. Let therefore the Aindavas continue 
in their ideal act of creation, (as so many Brahmas themselves). 


6. Thou lord that hast made these creatures, remain firm in thy place, and 
behold the infinite space which is spread out before thee, and commensurate 
with the ample scope of thy understanding, in the triple spheres of thy intellect 
and mind, and the vast vacuity of the firmament. (i.e., The infinitude of the 
ethereal vacuum is co-extensive with the amplitude of Brahma’s mind, and 
the plenitude of creations). 


7. These three fold infinities of ethereal, mental, and intellectual spaces, are 
but reflexions of the infinite vacuity of divine intellect, and supply thee, O 
Brahma, with ample space for thy creation of as many worlds at thy will. 


8. Therefore, thou art at liberty to create ad libitum, whatever thou likest and 
think not that the sons of Indu, have robbed thee of anything, when thou hast 
the power to create everything. 


9. Brahma said: — After the sun had spoken to me in this manner, concerning 
the Aindava and other worlds, I reflected awhile on what he said, and then 
answered him, saying: — 


10. Well hast thou said, O sun, for I see the ample space of air lying open 
before me; I see also my spacious mind and the vast comprehension of my 
intellect, I will therefore go on with my work of creation forever. 


11. I will immediately think about multitudes of material productions, 
whereof, O sun! I ordain thee as my first Manu or progeny, to produce all 
these for me. (The sun light was the first work of creation, and the measure of 
all created beings, by his days and nights or mornings and evenings). 


12. Now produce all things as thou wilt, and according to my behest, at which 
the refulgent sun readily complied to my request. 


13. Then this great luminary stood confest with his bipartite body of light and 
heat, with the first of which he shone as the sun in the midst of heaven. 


14. With the other property of the heat of his body, he became my Manu or 
agent in the nether worlds. (The solar heat or calor, is the cause of growth 
upon earth). 


15. And here he produced all things as I bade him do, in the course of the 
revolutions of his seasons. 


16. Thus have I related to you, O sagely Vasishtha! all about the nature and 
acts of the mind, and omnipotence of the great soul, which infuses its might in 
the mind in its acts of creation and production. 


17. Whatever reflexion is represented in the mind, the same is manifested in a 
visible form, and becomes compact and stands confest before it. (The ideal 
becomes visible or the noumenal is exprest in the phenomenal). 


18. Look at the extraordinary power of the mind, which raised the ordinary 
Aindava Brahmans to the rank of Brahma, by means of their conception of the 
same in themselves. 


19. As the living souls of the Aindavas, were incorporated with Brahma, by 


their intense thought of him in them (or by their mental absorption of 
themselves in him); so also have we attained to Brahmahood, by means of our 
mental conception of that spiritual light and supreme intellect in ourselves. 


20. The mind is full of its innate ideas, and the figure that lays a firm hold of 
it, the same appears exprest without it in a visible shape; or else there is no 
material substance beside one’s own mind. (This is the doctrine of 
conceptionalists, that all outward objects are but representations of our inborn 
ideas, in opposition to the belief of sensationalists, that the internal notions are 
reflections of our external sensations). 


21. The mind is the wonderful attribute of the soul, and bears in itself many 
other properties like the inborn pungency of the pepper. (These inborn 
properties are the memory, imagination, and other faculties of the mind). 


22. These properties appear also as the mind, and are called its hyperphysical 
or mental faculties; while it is a downright mistake on the part of some to 
understand them as belonging to the body. (The sankhya materialists 
understand the internal faculties as products of the body and matter). 


23. The self-same mind is termed also the living principle, — Jiva, (Zoa), 
when it is combined with its purer desires; and is to be known after all to be 
bodiless and unknown in its nature. (The life being combined with gross 
desires, assumes the body for its enjoyment of them, but loosened from its 
fetters, it resumes its purer nature. Hence the future spiritual life, is free from 
grosser wishes). 


24. There is no body as myself or any other person in this world, except this 
wondrous and self-existent mind, which like the sons of Indu, assumes the 
false conception of being real Brahmas themselves. 


25. As the Aindavas were Brahmas in their minds, so my mind makes me a 
Brahma also; it is the mind that makes one such and such, according to the 
conception that he entertains of himself. (We are in reality nothing, but what 
our minds inform us to be). 


26. It is only by a conceit of my mind, that I think myself situated as a 
Brahma in this place; otherwise, all these material bodies, are known to be as 
unreal, as the vacuity of the soul wherein they abide. 


27. The unsullied mind approximates the Divine, by its constant meditation of 
the same; but being vitiated by the variety of its desires, it becomes the living 

being, which at last turns to animal life and the living body. (This is called the 
incarnation of the living soul or the materialization of the spirit). 


28. The intelligent body shines as any of the luminous orbs in the world of the 


Aindavas, it is brilliant with the intelligent soul, like the appearance of a 
visionary creation of the mind. (The body is a creature of the mind like a 
figure in its dream). 


29. All things are the productions of the mind and reflexions of itself, like the 
two moons in the sky, the one being but a reflexion of the other, and as the 
concepts of the Aindava worlds. 


30. There is nothing as real or unreal, nor a personality as I or thou or any 
other; the real and unreal are both alike, unless it be the conception which 
makes something appear as a reality which has otherwise no reality of itself. 


31. Know the mind to be both active and inert, (i.e., both as spirit and matter). 
It is vast owing to the vastness of its desires, and is lively on account of its 
spiritual nature of the great God, but becomes inert by its incorporation with 
material objects. 


32. The conception of phenomenals as real, cannot make them real, any more 
than the appearance of a golden bracelet, can make it gold, or the 
phenomenals appearing in Brahma, can identify themselves with Brahma 
himself. 


33. Brahma being all in all, the inert also are said to be intelligent, or else all 
beings from ourselves down to blocks, are neither inert nor intelligent. 
(Because nothing exists besides Brahma, wherefore what exists not, can be 
neither one nor the other). 


34. It is said that the lifeless blocks, are without intelligence and perception; 
but everything that bears a like relation to another, has its perception also like 
the other. (Hence all things being equally related to Brahma, are equally 
sentient also in their natures). 


Note: So says a spiritualistic philosopher: — Think you this earth of ours is a 
lifeless and unsentient bulk, while the worm on her surface is in the 
enjoyment of life? No, the universe is not dead. This life, — jiva, what is it 
but the pervading afflux of deific love and life, vivifying all nature, and 
sustaining the animal and vegetable world as well as the world of mind? 
These suns, systems, planets, and satellites, are not mere mechanisms. The 
pulsations of a divine life throb in them all, and make them rich in the sense 
that they too are parts of the divine cosmos. Should it be objected that it 
proves too much, that it involves the identity of the vital principle of animals 
and vegetables, let us not shrink from the conclusion. The essential unity of 
all spirit and all life with this exuberant life from God, is a truth from which 
we need not recoil, even though it bring all animal and vegetable forms within 
the sweep of immortality. — Epes Sargent. 


35. Know everything to be sentient that has its perception or sensitivity; 
wherefore all things are possessed of their perceptivity, by the like relation, 
(sddrisya-sambandha), of themselves with the supreme soul. 


36. The terms, inert and sensitive, are therefore meaningless, in their 
application to things subsisting in the same divine spirit; and it is like 
attributing fruits and flowers to the arbors of a barren land. The barren waste 
refers to the vacuum of the divine mind, and its arbours to its unsubstantial 
ideas, which are neither inert nor sentient like the fruits or flowers of those 
trees. 


37. The notion or thought, which is formed by and is an act of the intellect, is 
called the mind; of these the portion of the intellect or intellectual part, is the 
active principle, but the thought or mental part is quite inert. 


38. The intellectual part consists of the operation of intellection, but the 
thoughts or thinkables, (chetyas), which are the acts of the chit or intellect are 
known to be inert; and these are viewed by the living soul in the erroneous 
light of the world, (rising and sitting before it like the sceneries of a 
phantasmagoria). 


39. The nature of the intellect-chit, is a pure unity, but the mind, — chitta, 
which is situated in the same, and thence called chit-stha or posited in the 
intellect, is a réchauffé or dualism of itself, and this appears in the form of a 
duality of the world. 


40. Thus it is by intellection of itself as the other form, that the noumenal 
assumes the shape of the phenomenal world; and being indivisible in itself, it 
wanders through the labyrinth of errors with its other part of the mind. 


41. There is no error in the unity of the intellect, nor is the soul liable to error, 
unless it is deluded by its belief of pluralities. The intellect is as full as the 
ocean, with all its thoughts rising and sitting in it as its endless waves. 


Note: The unity of all phenomena was the dream of ancient philosophy. To 
reduce all this multiplicity to a single principle, has been and continues to be 
the ever recurring problem. To the question of a unity of substance, the Greek 
science repeatedly applied itself; and so did the sophists of Persia and India. It 
was the craving for unity, which led the white men of Asia, the ancient Aryan 
race, to the conception of God as the one substance immanent in the universe. 
At first, they were polytheists, but with the progress of thought their number 
of gods diminished, and became the authors of Veda. At last arrived to the 
conception of a unity of forces, of a divine power as the ultimate substratum 
of things. They regarded the beings of the world, as in effect, composed of 
two elements; the one real and of a nature permanent and absolute, and the 


other relative, flowing and variable and phenomenal; the one spirit and the 
other matter, and both proceeding from an inseparable unity, a single 
substance. Ibid. According to Vasishtha this single substance is the chit or 
divine intelligence, which produces the Mind, which is conversant with 
matter. 


42. That which you call the mental part of the intellect, is full of error and 
ignorance; and it is the ignorance of the intellectual part, that produces the 
errors of egoism and personality. 


43. There is no error of egoism or personality in the transcendental category 
of the divine soul, because it is the integrity of all consciousness, as the sea is 
the aggregate of all its waves and waters. 


44. The belief of egoism rises as any other thought of the mind, and is as 
inborn in it as the water in the mirage, which does not exist really in it. 


45. The term ego is inapplicable to the pure and simple internal soul, which 
being vitiated by the gross idea of its concupiscence, takes the name of ego, as 
the thickened coldness is called by the name of frost. 


46. It is the pure substance of the intellect which forms the ideas of gross 
bodies, as one dreams of his death in his sleep. The all-pervading intelligence 
which is the all inherent and omnipotent soul, produces all forms in itself, and 
of which there is no end until they are reduced to unity. 


47. The mind manifests various appearances in the forms of things, and being 
of a pure ethereal form, it assumes various shapes by its intellectual or 
spiritual body. 


48. Let the learned abstain from the thoughts of the threefold forms of the 
pure intellectual, spiritual, and corporeal bodies, and reflect on them as the 
reflexions of the divine intellect in his own mind. 


49. The mind being cleansed of its darkness like the mirror of its dirt, shows 
the golden hue of spiritual light, which is replete with real felicity, and by far 
more blissful than what this earthly clod of body can ever yield. 


50. We should cleanse the mind which exists for ever, rather than the body 
which is transient and non-existent, and as unreal as the trees in the air, of 
which no one takes any notice. 


51. Those who are employed in the purification of their bodies, under the 
impression that the body also is called the dtmd or soul (in some Sdstra), are 
the atheistic charvakas, who are as silly goats among men. 


52. Whatever one thinks inwardly in himself, he is verily transformed to its 


likeness, as in the instance of the Aindava Brahmans, and of Indra and Ahalya 
cited before. 


53. Whatever is represented in the mirror of the mind, the same appears in the 
figure of the body also. But as neither this body nor the egoism of any one, is 
lasting forever, it is right to forsake our desires. 


54. It is natural for everybody to think himself as an embodied being, and to 
be subject to death, (while in reality it is the soul that makes the man, who is 
immortal owing to the immortality of the soul). It is as a boy thinks himself to 
be possessed of a demon of his own imagination, until he gets rid of his false 
apprehension by the aid of reasoning. 


CHAPTER LXXXXII. 


On the Powers of Mind. 


Argument. Force of the Faculties of the Mind and Energy of Men. 


Vasishtha added: — Now hear, O support of Raghu’s race! what I next 
proposed to the lotus-born lord Brahma, after we had finished the preceding 
conversation. 


2. asked him saying: — Lord! you have spoken before of the irrevocable 
power of curses and imprecations, how is it then that their power is said to be 
frustrated again by men? 


3. We have witnessed the efficacy of imprecations, pronounced with potent 
Mantra, — anathemas, to overpower the understanding and senses of living 
animals, and paralyze every member of the body. (This speaks of the 
incantations and charms of the Atharva Veda). 


4. Hence we see the mind and body are as intimately connected with each 
other, as motion with the air and fluidity with the sesamum seed, (because the 
derangement of the one is attended by the disorganization of the other: i.e., of 
the body and mind). 


5. Or that there is no body except it but be a creation of the mind, like the 
fancied chimeras of visions and dreams, and as the false sight of water in the 
mirage, or the appearance of two moons in the sky. 


6. Or else why is it that the dissolution of the one, brings on the extinction of 
the other, such as the quietus of the mind is followed by the loss of bodily 
sensations? 


7. Tell me, my lord! how the mind is unaffected by the power of imprecations 
and menace, which subdue the senses and say whether they are both 
overpowered by these, being the one and same thing. 


8. Brahma replied: — Know then, there is nothing in the treasure-house of 


this world, which is unattainable by man by means of his exertions in the right 
way. 


9. And that all species of animal being, from the state of the highest Brahma, 
down to minute insects, are bicorpori or endowed with two bodies the mental 
and corporeal. (i.e., The mind and the body). 


10. The one, that is the mental body, is ever active and always fickle; and the 
other is the worthless body of flesh, which is dull and inactive. 


11. Now the fleshy part of the body which accompanies all animal beings, is 
overpowered by the influence of curses and charms, practised by the art of 
incantation, — abhichdra Vidyd. (Exorcism, the Mumbo Jumbo of the 
Tantras). 


12. The influence of certain supernatural powers stupifies a man, and makes 
him dull and dumb. Sometimes one is about to droop down insensible, as spell 
bound persons are deprived of their external senses, and fall down like a drop 
of water from a lotus-leaf. 


13. The mind which is the other part of the body of embodied beings, is ever 
free and unsubdued, though it is always under the subjection of all living 
beings in the three worlds. 


14. He who can control his mind by continued patience on one hand, and by 
incessant vigilance on the other, is the man of an unimpeachable character, 
and unapproachable by calamity. 


15. The more a man employs the mental part of his body to its proper 
employment, the more successful he is in obtaining the object he has in view. 
(Omnium vincit vigilentia vel diligentia). 


16. Mere bodily energy is never successful in any undertaking (any more than 
brute force); it is intellectual activity only, that is sure of success in all 
attempts. (The head must guide the body). 


17. The attention of the mind being directed to objects unconnected with 
matter, it is as vain an effort to hurt it, (an immaterial object), as it is to pierce 
a stone with an arrow (or to beat the air). 


18. Drown the body under the water or dip it in the mud, burn it in the fire or 
fling it aloft in air, yet the mind turneth not from its pole; and he who is true to 
his purpose, is sure of success. (The word, tatkshandt phalitah, or gaining 
immediate success, is an incredible expression in the text). 


19. Intensity of bodily efforts overcomes all impediments, but it is mental 
exertion alone which leads to ultimate success in every undertaking, (for 


without the right application of bodily efforts under guidance of reason, there 
can be no expectation of prospering in any attempt). 


20. Mark here in the instance of the fictitious Indra, who employed all his 
thoughts to the assimilation of himself into the very image of his beloved, by 
drowning all his bodily pains in the pleasure of her remembrance. 


21. Think of the manly fortitude of Mandavya, who made his mind as callous 
as marble, when he was put to the punishment of the guillotine, and was 
insensible of his suffering. (So it is recorded of the Sophist Mansur, who was 
guillotined for his faith in the anal Haq, “I am the True One,” and of the 
martyrs who fell victims to their faith in truth). 


22. Think of the sage who fell in the dark pit, while his mind was employed in 
some Sacrificial rite, and was taken up to heaven in reward of the merit of his 
mental sacrifice. (Redemption is to be had by sacrifice of the soul, and not of 
the body). 


23. Remember also how the sons of Indu obtained their Brahmahood, by 
virtue of their persevering devotion, and which even I have not the power to 
withhold. (i.e., Even Brahma is unable to prevent one’s rising by his inflexible 
devotedness). 


24. There have been also many such sages and master-minds among men and 
gods, who never laid aside their mental energies, whereby they were crowned 
with success in their proper pursuits. 


25. No pain or sickness, no fulmination nor threat, no malicious beast or evil 
spirit, can break down the resolute mind, any more than the striking of a lean 
lotus-leaf, can split the breast of a hard stone. 


26. Those that you say to have been discomfited by tribulations and 
persecutions, I understand them as too infirm in their faiths, and very weak 
both in their minds and manliness. 


27. Men with heedful minds, have never been entrapped in the snare of errors 
in this perilous world; and they have never been visited by the demon of 
despair, in their sleeping or waking states. 


28. Therefore, let a man employ himself to the exercise of his own manly 
powers, and engage his mind and his mental energy to noble pursuits, in the 
paths of truth and holiness. 


29. The enlightened mind forgets its former darkness, and sees its objects in 
their true light; and the thought that grows big in the mind, swallows it up at 
last, as the fancy of a ghost lays hold of the mind of a child. 


30. The new reflexion effaces the prior impression from the tablet of the mind, 
as an earthen pot turning on the potter’s wheel, no more thinks of its nature of 
dirty clay. 


(One risen to a high rank or converted to a new creed, entirely forsakes and 
forgets his former state). 


31. The mind, O muni! is transmuted in a moment to its new model, as the 
inflated or aerated water rises high into waves and ebullitions, glaring with 
reflexions of sun-light. (Common minds are wholly occupied with thoughts of 
the present, forgetful of the past and careless of the future). 


32. The mind that is averse to right investigation, sees like the purblind, 
everything in darkness even in broad day light, and observes by deception two 
moons for one in the moonshine. (The uninquisitive are blind to the light of 
truth). 


33. Whatever the mind has in view, it succeeds soon in the accomplishment of 
the same. And as it does aught of good or evil, it reaps the reward of the same, 
in the gladness or bitterness of his soul. 


34. A wrong reflector reflects a thing in a wrong light, as a distracted lover 
sees a flame in the moonbeams, which makes him burn and consume in his 
state of distraction. (This is said of distracted lovers, who imagine cooling 
moon-beams and sandal-paste as hot as fire, and inflaming their flame of 
love). 


35. It is the conception of the mind, that makes the salt seem sweet to taste, by 
its giving a flavour to the salted food for our zest and delight. 


36. It is our conception, that makes us see a forest in the fog, or a tower in the 
clouds, appearing to the sight of the observer to be rising and falling by turns. 


37. In this manner whatever shape the imagination gives to a thing, it appears 
in the same visionary form before the sight of the mind; therefore, knowing 
this world of your imagination, as neither a reality nor unreality, forbear to 
view it and its various shapes and colours, as they appear to view. 


CHAPTER LXXXXIiIl. 


A View of the Genesis of the mind and Body. 


Argument. First Birth of the Mind, and then that of Light. Next grew the Ego, 
and thence came out the World. 


Vasishtha said: — I will now tell you Rama! What I was instructed of yore, 
by lord Brahma himself. (The prime progenitor of mankind and propounder of 
the Vedas). 


2. From the unspeakable Brahma, there sprang all things in their undefinable 
ideal state, and then the Spirit of God being condensed by His Will, it came to 
be produced of itself in the form of the Mind. (The volitive and creative 
agency of God). 


3. The Mind formed the notions of the subtle elementary principles in itself, 
and became a personal agent (with its power of volition or creative will). The 
same became a luminous body and was known as Brahma the first Male. 
(Purusha or Protogonus-Pratha-janya or Prathamajanita). 


4. Therefore, know Rama, this same Brahma to be the Parameshthi or situated 
in the Supreme, and being a personification of the Will of God, is called the 
Mind. 


5. The Mind therefore known as the Lord Brahma, is a form of the Divine 
essence, and being full of desires in itself, sees all its wills, (in their ideal 
forms), present before it. 


6. The mind then framed or fell of itself, into the delusion, (avidyd), of 
viewing its ideal images as substantial (as one does in his delirium), and 
thence the phenomenal world (with whatever it contains), is said to be the 
work of Brahma. 


7. Thus the world proceeding in this order from the Supreme essence, is 
supposed by some to have come into being from another source, of dull 


material particles. (Doctrine of Hylotheism or the Materialistic system of 
Sankhya Philosophy), 


8. It is from that Brahma, O Rama! that, all things situated in this concave 
world, have come to being, in the manner of waves rising on the surface of the 
deep. 


9. The self-existent Brahma that existed in the form of intellect, (chit), before 
creation, the same assumed the attribute of egoism, (ahankdra), afterwards, 
and became manifest in the person of Brahma. (Thence called Swayambhu or 
self-born). 


10. All the other powers of the Intellect, which were concentrated in the 
personality of the Ego, were tantamount to those of Omnipotence. (The 
impersonal Intellect and the personal Ego or Brahma, are both of them equally 
powerful). 


Note: The powers of the Intellect are, perception, memory, imagination, and 
judgment. Ego is the subject of thoughts, or the subjective and really existent 
being. The personal God Brahma is an emanation of God according to the 
Gnostics, and is like the Demiurgus of Plato next to God and soul of the 
world. — Plotinus. 


11. The world being evolved from the eternal ideas in the Divine Intellect, 
manifested itself in the mind of the great father of all, — Brahma. (/ntellectus 
noster nihil intelligit sine phantasmata); it is the mind which moves and 
modifies them, and is the Intelligence, (logos-Word), of the One, and the 
manifestation of its power. 


12. The Mind thus moving and modeling all things is called the Jiva living 
soul or Nous. (The Scholiast says: — The Mind is the genus, — Samashti, the 
soul is an individual name, (Vyashti), of every individual living being. The 
Mind is soul without personality; the soul is the mind of a certain being. The 
Mind is the principle of volition, and the soul is that of animation). 


13. These living souls rise and move about in the vacuous sphere of the 
infinite Intellect, (chiddkdsa). These are unfolded by the elementary particles 
of matter, and pass in the open space surrounded by air. They then reside in 
the fourteen kinds of animated nature, according to the merit and demerit of 
their prior acts. They enter the bodies through the passage of their vital breath, 
and become the seeds of moving and immoving beings. 


14. They are then born of the generative organ, (foetus), and are met on a 
sudden by the desires of their previous births (which lay waiting on them). 
Thus, led on by the current of their wishes, they live to reap the reward or 


retribution of their good or bad acts in the world. 


15. Thus bound fast to action and fettered in the meshes of desire, the living 
souls enchained in their bodies, continue to rove about or rise and fall in this 
changeful world by turns. 


16. Their wish is the cause of their weal or woe, says the Sruti, and which is 
inseparable from the soul as volition from the mind. (The wish is the inactive 
desire of the soul, and volition the active will of the mind). 


17. Thousands of living souls, are falling off as fast as the leaves of forest 
trees, and being borne away by the force of their pursuits, they are rolling 
about as the fallen leaves wafted by the breeze in the valleys. (The aberration 
of living souls from the Supreme). 


18. Many are brought down and bound to innumerable births in this earth, by 
their ignorance of the Chit or Divine Intellect, and are subjected to 
interminable transmigrations in various births. 


19. There are some who having passed many mean births in this earth, have 
now risen high in the scale of beings, by their devotedness to better acts, (and 
are likely to have their liberation in the course of their progression to the 
best). 


20. Same persons acquainted with spirituality, have reached their state of 
perfection, and have gone to heaven, like particles of sea-water, carried into 
the air above by the blowing winds. 


21. The production of all beings is from the Supreme Brahma, but their 
appearance and disappearance in this frail world, are caused by their own 
actions. Hence the actionless Yogi, is free from both these states. (God made 
everything perfect; Man’s sin brought his death and woe). 


22. Our desires are poisonous plants, bearing the fruits of pain and 
disappointment, and lead us to actions which are fraught with dangers and 
difficulties. (Cursed was the ground for man’s unrestricted desires, which 
sowed it with thorns and thistles). 


23. These desires drive us to different countries, to distant hills and dales in 
search of gain. (Else man could live content with little and on his native 
plain). 


24. This world, O Rama! is a jungle of withered trees and brambles, and 
requires the axe of reason to clear away these drugs and bushes. So are our 
minds and bodies but plants and trees of our woe, which being rooted out by 
the axe of reason, will no more come to grow by their transmigration in this 


earth. (The mind and body are rooted out by Suppression of their desires and 
passions). 


CHAPTER LXXXXIV. 


Brahma the Origin of All. 


Argument. Description of the twelve species of Human beings and the ways 
of their liberation. 


Vasishtha said: — Hear me now relate to you, Rama! the several classes of 
higher, lower, and middling species of beings, and the various grades of their 
existence here and elsewhere in the scale of creation. (i.e., The spontaneous 
production of beings, swo motu, when they were not bound by karma-vipdka 
or acts of a prior life, to be born in any particular form or state on earth). 


2. They were the first in their production, and are known as the idam- 
prathama, — or the first class in their birth, whose long practice in a course of 
virtuous actions in prior states, has secured to them the property of goodness, 
— satva-guna only. (These are the holy saints and sages, who are entitled to 
their liberation in life time, and upon separation from their bodies). 


3. The second grade is called the guna pivari or state of sound qualities, which 
is attained by the prosperous, and leads them to meritorious deeds, to the 
acquisition of their desired objects, and their right dealing in the affairs of the 
world. 


(This meritorious state becomes entitled to liberation after some births in this 
earth). 


4. The third grade is termed the sasatwd, or the state of substantiality of men 
of substance. It is attended with like results, proportioned to the righteous and 
unrighteous acts of men, who may obtain their liberation after a hundred 
transmigrations of their souls on earth. 


5—6. The fourth grade comprises infatuated people called atyanta tamasi, 
who are addicted to their varying desires in this changeful world, and come to 
the knowledge of truth, after passing a thousand lives in ignorance and sin, 


and suffering the effects proportionate to their good or evil deeds. 


7. The fifth grade is composed of men of a baser nature, called adhama-satwa 
by the wise, and who may possibly have their liberation, after a course of 
numberless births in different shapes and forms. 


8. The sixth grade is composed of those extremely benighted men, (atyanta 
tdmasi), who are doubtful of their liberation, (Sandigdha-moksha), and 
continue in the vicious course of their past lives. 


9. Those who after passing two or three previous births in other states, are 
born afterwards with the quality of gentleness, these are reckoned as the 
seventh grade, and are denominated the Rajashi, — gentry or gentility. 


10. Those who remain mindful of their duties, and are employed in discharge 
of them in this state of life, are said by the wise to be entitled to their 
liberation, soon after their demise. 


11. Those among the Rajashi, — gentility, whose acts are commensurate with 
those of gentlemen and the nobility, are included in the eighth class, and are 
called Raja Sdtwiki, — or noble gentlemen, and are entitled to their liberation 
after a few births on earth. 


12. The ninth class comprises the rdja-rdjashi or right gentlemen, whose 
actions conform with their title, and who obtain their long longed-for 
liberation, after a course of hundred births in the same state. 


13. The next or tenth class is composed of the rdjatdmasi or blinded gentry, 
who act foolishly under their infatuation, and who are uncertain of their 
liberation, even after a thousand births. 


14. The most giddy of this class is called atyanta-rdja-tamashi, or the 
excessively infatuated gentry, whose conduct in life correspond with their 
name, and whose transmigration does not cease at any time. 


15. Then the lower classes comprise the children of darkness or ignorance, — 
tamas, of whom the tdmasas form the eleventh grade, and are said to be 
deprived of their liberation forever more. (These are the Raékshasas and 
demons of various orders). 


16. There have been a few however among them, who have obtained their 
salvation by means of their divine knowledge, and their good acts during their 
life time, (such as Prahlada, the son of a demon, and Karkotaka, — the son of 
a Naga). 


17. Next follows the twelfth order of tamasa-rdjasa, who combine in them the 
qualities of darkness and enlightenment, and who are liberated after a 


thousand births in their former demoniac state, and one hundred births in their 
progressive improvements. 


18. Then comes the thirteenth order of tamas-tdmasi or those in darkest 
darkness, who have to transmigrate for millions of years both in their prior 
and later births, before they can have their liberation from the bondage of 
body. 


19. Last comes the fourteenth order of beings, who continue in their state of 
gross ignorance, (atyanta — tdmasi) forever, and it is doubted whether they 
can have their liberation at all. 


(All these classes of human beings have proceeded from Brahma, whose life 
and spirit circulate in all of them, else they could neither live nor breathe). 


20. All other masses of living beings also, have proceeded from the body of 
the great Brahma, as the moving waves rise from the great body of waters. 


21. And as the lamp flickering by its own heat, scatters its light on all sides, so 
does Brahma glowing in himself, irradiate his beams in the shape of scintilla, 
to spread all over the universe, (which is the vacuity of Brahma’s mind, and 
comprises the cosmos within it). 


22. And as the sparks of fire are flung about by force of the burning flame, so 
do these multitudes of produced beings rise from the substance of Brahma 
himself. 


23. As the dust and filaments of mandara flowers, fly to and fill the air on all 
sides; and as the beams of the moon shoot out of its orb, to fill the four 
quarters of heaven and earth, so the minutiz of Divine essence emanate from 
the Deity, and spread throughout the universe. 


24. As the variegated arbor, produces its leaves and flowers of various hues 
from itself, so the varieties of created beings, spring from one Brahma, — the 
source of all. 


25. As the gold ornaments are in relation to the metal gold of which they are 
made, and wherein they subsist, so Rama! are all things and persons in 
relation to Brahma, out of whom they have sprung and in whom they abide. 


26. As the drops of water, are related to the pure water of the cascade, so 
Rama, are all things related to the increate Brahma, whence they issue as 
drizzling drops. 


27. As the air in a pot and about a basin, is the same with the surrounding air 
of heaven, so are all individual objects the same, with the undivided spirit of 
the all-pervading Brahma. 


28. As the drops of rain-water, and those of water spouts, whirlpools and 
waves, are identic with their parent waters, so are all these phenomenal sights, 
the same with the great Brahma, whence they spring, and wherein they exist 
and subside. 


29. As the mirage presents the appearance of a billowy sea, by the fluctuation 
of sunbeams on sand, so do all visible objects show themselves to the sight of 
the spectator, beside which they have no figure or form of themselves. 


30. Like the cooling beams of the moon, and the burning light of the sun, do 
all things shine with their different lustres derived from Brahma. 


31. It is He, from whom all things have risen, unto him they return in their 
time, some after their transmigrations in a thousand births, and others after 
longer periods of their revolutions in various bodies. 


32. All these various forms of beings in the multiform world are moving in 
their respective spheres by the will of the Lord. They come and go, rise, and 
fall, and shine in their transitory forms, like the sparks of fire, fluttering and 
sparkling for a moment, and then falling and becoming extinct forever. 


CHAPTER LXXXXvV. 


Identity of the Actor and his Action. 


Argument. It is for persuasion of men addicted to Acts that the Actor is 
identified with his Acts. 


Vasishtha said: — There is no difference of acts, from the agent, as they have 
sprung together from the same source of their creator; they are the 
simultaneous growth of nature like flowers and their odour. (The Gita says: — 
The actor, act, and its effect, are naturally united together). 


2. When human souls are freed from their desires, they are united with the 
supreme soul of Brahma, as the blueness of the sky which appears distinct to 
the eyes of the ignorant, is found to be joined with the clear firmament. (The 
human soul is a shadow of the supreme, as blueness is a shade of vacuity). 


3. Know, O Rama! that it is for the understanding of the ignorant, that the 
living souls are said to have sprung from Brahma, when they are in reality but 
shadows of the same. 


4. Wherefore it is not right on the part of the enlightened to say that such and 
such things are produced from Brahma, when there is nothing that exists apart 
or separate from him, (on account of the unity of all existences and identity of 
the actor and the act). 


5. It is a mere fiction of speech to speak of the world as creation or 
production, because it is difficult to explain the subject and object of the 
lecture, without the use of such fictitious language (as the actor and act, the 
creator and the created, etc.). 


6. Hence the language of dualists and pluralists is adopted in monotheistic 
doctrines, as the expressions, this one is Brahma, or divine soul, and these 
others are the living souls, as they are in use in the popular language. 


7. It has been seen, (explained), that the concrete world has sprung from the 


discrete Brahma, because the production of something is the same with its 
material cause, though it seems different from it to common understandings. 


8. Multitudes of living beings rising like the rocks of Meru and Mandara 
mountains, are joined with the main range from which they jut out. (All are 
but parts of one undivided whole. — Pope.) 


9. Thousands and thousands of living beings, are incessantly produced from 
their common source, like the innumerable sprigs of forest trees, filling the 
woodland sky with their variegated foliage. (So are all creatures but off-shoots 
of the parent tree of the Supreme Soul). 


10. An infinity of living beings will continue to spring from the same, like 
blades of grass sprouting from the earth below, and they will likewise be 
reduced to the same, like the season plants of spring, dying away in the hot 
weather of Summer. 


11. There is no counting of the living creatures that exist at any time, and 
what numbers of them, are being born and dying away at any moment (and 
like waves of water are rising and falling at each instant). 


12. Men with their duties proceed from the same divine source, like flowers 
growing with their fragrance from the same stem, and all these subside in the 
same receptacle whence they had their rise. 


13. We see the different tribes of demons and brutes, and of men and gods in 
this world, coming into existence from non-existence, and this is repeated 
without end. 


14. We see no other cause of their continuous revolution in this manner, 
except the forgetfulness of their reminiscence, which makes them oblivious of 
their original state, and conform with every mode of their metempsychosis 
into new forms. (Otherwise, the retention of the knowledge of its original state 
and former impressions, would keep it alive in the same state of primeval 
purity, and exempt it from all transmigrations). 


15. Rama said: — For want of such reminiscence, I think that, obedience to 
the dictates of the infallible Sdstras, which have been promulgated by the 
sages, and based on the authority of the Vedas, is the surest way for the 
salvation of mankind. 


16. And I reckon those men as holy and perfect, who are possessed of the 
virtues of the great, and have magnanimity and equanimity of their souls, and 
have received the light of the unknowable Brahma in them. (Such men are 
exempt from the pain of transmigration). 


17. reckon two things as the two eyes of the ignorant, for their discernment 
of the path of salvation. The one is their good conduct, and the other their 
knowledge of the Sdstras, which follows the former. 


18. Because one who is righteous in his conduct only, without joining his 
righteousness with his knowledge also, is never taken into account, and is 
slighted by all to be plunged into insignificance and misery. (The unlearned 
virtuous, is as despicable as the learned vicious). 


19. Again Sir, — it is the joint assent of men and the Veda, that acts and their 
actors come one after the other, and not as you said of their rising 
simultaneously from their divine origin. (That is to say, that the morals 
established by the wise, and the virtues inculcated by the holy scriptures, are 
the guides of good acts and their observers, which are not the spontaneous 
growth of our nature or intention). 


20. It is the act which makes the actor, and the actor who does the work. Thus 
they follow one another on the analogy of the seed and the tree which produce 
one another. This mutuality of both is seen in the practice of men and 
ordinances of the Veda. 


21. Acts are the causes of animal births, as the seed gives birth to the sprouts 
of plants; and again works proceed from living beings as the sprouts produce 
the seeds. (Thus both are causes and effects of one another by turns, and never 
grown together). 


22. The desire that prompts a person to his particular pursuit in his prison 
house of this world, the same yields him the like fruits and no other. (Men get 
what they have in their hearts and nothing besides). 


23. Such being the case, how was it Sir, that you said of the production of 
animals from the seed of Brahma, without the causality of their prior acts, 
which you say to be simultaneous with the birth of animal beings. 


24. On one hand you have set at naught the law of antecedence and sequence 
of birth and action to one another, by your position of their simultaneity. 


25. And again to say, that Brahma is not the origin of actions, and that 
Brahma and other living beings are subjected to their several actions, are self 
contradictory propositions and opposed to common sense. (For the acts do not 
originate from Brahma, they cannot be binding on others, and if the actions do 
not proceed from that source, whence do they come to take place). This 
question upsets the doctrine of Free Will. 


26. And also to say that living beings are born together with their actions, (by 
predestination), and are bound to them to no purpose, would be to apply to 


them the analogy of fishes which are caught by the baits they cannot devour, 
but cause their death. (So men must be bound in vain to the baits of their 
actions, if they are to go without reaping their fruition). 


27. Therefore, please to tell me Sir, about the nature of acts, for you are best 
acquainted with the secrets of things, and can well remove my doubts on the 
subject. 


28. Vasishtha replied: — You have well asked, my good Rama! about this 
intricate subject, which I will now explain to you in a manner that will 
enlighten your understanding. 


29. It is the activity of the mind which forms its thoughts and intentions, 

which are the roots or seed of actions, and it is its passivity, which is the 

recipient of their results. (So says the Sruti: — whatever is thought in the 
mind, the same is expressed in words and done in action). 


30. Therefore, no sooner did the principle of the mind spring from the essence 
of Brahma, than it was accompanied by its thoughts and actions in the bodies, 
which the living beings assumed, according to their prior deserts and in-born 
desires. 


31. As there is no difference between the self-same flower and its fragrance, in 
the same manner there is no distinction of the mind, from its actions which are 
one and the same thing. 


32. It is the exertion of bodily activity, which we call an action here, but it is 
well known to the wise to be preceded by a mental action, which is called its 
thought in the mind, (chitta of the chit or the thought of the thinking 
principle). 


33. It is possible to deny the existence of material objects, of the air and water, 
the hill and others, but it is impossible to deny the operations of our mental 
faculties, of which we have subjective evidence in ourselves. 


34. No deliberate action of the present or past life goes for nothing; all human 
actions and efforts are attended with their just results, to which they are 
properly directed. (Sdvadhdnam anushthitdn). 


35. As the ink ceases to be ink, without its inky blackness, so the mind ceases 
to exist, without the action of its mental operations. 


36. Cessation of mental operation, is attended with desinence of thought, and 
quiescence of the mind, is accompanied with discontinuance of actions. The 

liberated are free from both of these; but the unemancipate from neither. (i.e., 
The liberated are devoid of the thoughts and actions, which are concomitants 


with one another). 


37. The mind is ever united with its activity as the fire with its heat, and the 
want of either of these, is attended to worldlings with the extinction of both. 


38. The mind being ever restless in itself, becomes identified with the actions 
proceeding from its activity. The actions also whether good or bad, become 
identified with the mind, which feels their just rewards and punishments. 
Hence you see Rama! The inseparable connection of the mind and acts, in 
reciprocating their actions and reactions upon each other. 


CHAPTER LXXXXVI. 


Inquiry into the Nature of Mind. 
As the Ego, the subjective and really existent entity. 


Argument. The Faculties of the Mind, and their Various Functions and 
appellations. 


Vasishtha said: — The mind is mere thought, and thought is the mind in 
motion, (literally, having the property of fluctuation). Its actions are directed 
by the nature of the thoughts, (lit. according to the nature of the objects of 
thought), and the result of the acts is felt by everybody in his mind. 


2. Rama said: — Sir, I pray you will explain in length, regarding the 
immaterial mind as opposed to the material body, and its inseparable property 
of will or volition, (contrary to the inertness of dull matter). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — The nature of the mind is known to be composed of 
the property of Volition, which is an attribute of the infinite and almighty 
power of the Supreme soul. (i.e., The mind is the volitive principle of the 
soul). 


4. The mind is known to be of the form of that self-moving principle, which 
determines the dubitation of men between the affirmative and negative sides, 
(as whether it is so or not dwikotika). i.e., The principle of rationality or the 
Reasoning faculty, consisting of the two great alternatives; — 1. The principle 
of contradiction, or of two contradictory propositions of which one is true, and 
the other untrue, i.e., Is, or, is not. 2. Raison determinantic or determining by 
a priori reasoning, as, why so and not otherwise. 


5. The mind is known to be of the form of Ego, which is ignorant of the self- 
manifesting soul of God, and believes itself as the subject of its thoughts and 
actions. 


6. The mind is of the nature of imagination, (Kalpana), which is ever busy in 


its operations, hence the inactivity of the mind is as impossible in this world, 
as the insapience of the sapient man. (Imagination is an active faculty, 
representing the phenomena of the internal and external worlds, — Sir W. 
Hamilton. It is an operation of the mind consisting of manifold functions, such 
as; — 1. of receiving by the faculty of conception. 2. of retaining by the 
faculty of memory. 3. of recalling by the power of reproductive fancy; 4. of 
combining by productive fancy. In modern philosophy, it is the power of 
apprehending ideas, and combining them into new forms). 


7. As there is no difference in the essence of fire and heat, so there is no 
difference whatever between mind and its activity, and so betwixt the mind 
and soul, (i.e., the living soul). 


8. The mind is known by many names in the same person and body, according 
to its various faculties and functions, its various thoughts and desires, and 
their manifold operations and consequences. (The mind, soul, and intellect 
taken together as the same thing, comprise all the powers of intellect and 
intelligence). 


9. The Divine Mind is said to be distributed into all souls by mistake and 
without any reason, since the All, — to pan is without any substance or 
substratum, and indivisible in its nature. It is a mere fabrication of our desires 
and fancies to diversify it in different persons. (The Divine mind being the 
Anima mundi, contains all within itself, and having no container of it). 


10. Whoever has set his desire in anything as if it were a reality, finds the 
same to be attended with the like fruit as he had expected of it. (It means 
either that Association of ideas in the mind, introducing as by a chord, a train 
of kindred consecutive ideas, which are realised by their constant repetition, 
or that the primary desires of our nature, which are not factitious, but rising 
from our constitutions, are soon satisfied). 


11. It is the movement of the mind, which is said and perceived by us to be 
the source of our actions, and the actions of the mind are as various as the 
branches, leaves and fruits of trees. (So it is said, the tree of desire has the 
mind for its seed, which gives force to the action of bodily organs, resembling 
its branches, and the activities of the body, are the causes which fructify the 
tree of desire). 


12. Whatever is determined by the mind, is readily brought into performance 
by the external organs of action (Karmendriya); thus because the mind is the 
cause of action, it is identified with the effect. (By the law of the similarity of 
the cause and effect, in the growth of one seed from another. Or that the 
efficient cause a quo, is the same with the final-propter-quod by inversion of 


the causa cognoscendi, — in the effect being taken for the cause). 


13. The mind, understanding, egoism, intellect, action, and imagination, 
together with memory, or retentiveness, desire, ignorance, exertion, and 
memory, are all synonyms of the mind. (The powers of the mind, constitute 
the mind itself). 


14. So also sensation, nature, delusion, and actions, are words applied to the 
mind for bewilderment of the understanding. (Many words for the same thing, 
are misleading from its true meaning). 


15. The simultaneous collision of many sensations, (like the Kdkdtdli 
sanyoga), diverts the mind from its clear sight of the object of its thought, and 
causes it to turn about in many ways. 


16. Rama asked: — How is it Sir, that so many words with their different 
significations, were invented to express the transcendent cause of our 
consciousness, (the mind), and heap them on the same thing for our confusion 
only? 


17. Vasishtha replied: — As man began to lose sight of his consciousness, and 
laboured under suppositions about his-self, it was then that he found the mind 
to be the waking principle within him. (i.e., It is after one has lost the 
knowledge of his conscious soul, that he thinks himself to be composed of the 
mind. Or it was after man’s degradation from his spiritual nature, that he came 
to consider himself as an intellectual being with no higher power than his 
mental faculties, the manas; (whence he derives his name as man, mdnava or 
manusha)). 


18. When man after considering himself and other things comes to understand 
them in their true light, he is then said to have his understanding, — buddhi. 
(We understand with or by means of reason, as we say, — a proposition is 
right by its reasons, hetuvdda; but not reason on anything without 
understanding it, as we cannot judge of a thing without knowing what it is). 


19. When man by false conception of himself, assumes a personality to him 
by his pride, he is called an egoist, with the principle of ego or egoism in him, 
causing his bondage on earth. Absolute egoism is the doubting of everything 
beside self-existence. Persona est rationalis naturae individua substantia. — 
Boethius. 


20. It is called thought which passes from one object to another in quick 
succession, and like the whims of boys, shifts from one thing to another 
without forming a right judgement of any. (Thoughts are fickle and fleeting, 
and flying from one subject to another, without dwelling long upon any). 


21. The mind is identified with acts, done by the exercise of a power 
immanent in itself as the agent, and the result of the actions, whether physical 
or moral, good or bad, recurs to the mind in their effects. (The mind is the 
agent and recipient of the effects of all its various internal and external 
actions, such as right or wrong, virtuous or vicious, praiseworthy or blamable, 
perfect or imperfect and the like). 


22. The mind is termed fancy for its holding fast on fleeting phantasies by 
letting loose its solid and certain truths. It is also the imagination, for giving 
various images or to the objects of its desire, — ihita Kalpana. It is called 
Kakatdliya Sanyoga or accidental assemblage of fancied objects. It is defined 
as the agglutinative and associative power to collect materials for imagination 
which builds up on them. (maginari est quan rei corporae figuram 
contemplari. — Descartes). 


23. The Memory or retention is that power of the mind, which retains an 
image whether known or unknown before, as if it were a certainty known 
already, and when it is attended with the effort of recalling it to the mind, it is 
termed as remembrance or recollection. (Memory is the storehouse of ideas 
preconceived or thought to be known before in the mind. Retention is the 
keeping of the ideas got from sensation and reflection. Remembrance is the 
spontaneous act of the mind, and recollection and reminiscence, are 
intentional acts of the will. All these powers and acts of the mind, are singly 
and collectively called the mind itself, as when I say, I have got it in mind, I 
may mean, I have it in memory, remembrance, etc. etc.) 


24. The appetence which resides in the region of the mind, for possession of 
the objects of past enjoyment, as also the efforts of the mind for attainment of 
other things, are called its desires. (Appetites or desires are common to all, 
and are sensitive and rational, irascible, etc. — Vide Reed and Stewart. The 
mind is the same as desire, as when I say, I have a mind to do a thing, I mean, 
I have a desire to do it). 


25. When the mind’s clear sight of the light of the soul or self, is obscured by 
the shadow of other gross things, which appear to be real instead of the true 
spiritual, it is called ignorance, and is another name of the deluded 
understanding. (It is called avidyd or absence of Vidyd or knowledge of 
spiritual truth. It becomes Mahdvidya or incorrigible or invincible ignorance, 
when the manners and the mind are both vitiated by falsehood and error). 


26. The next is doubt, which entraps the dubious mind in the snare of 
scepticism, and tends to be the destruction of the soul, by causing it to 
disbelieve and forget the supreme spirit. (To the sceptic, doubts for 


knowledge rise, but they give way before the advance of spiritual light). 


27. The mind is called sensation, because all its actions of hearing and feeling, 
of seeing and smelling, thinking and enjoying, serve to delight the senses, 
which convey the impressions back to the mind. (The doctrine that all 
knowledge is derived originally from senses, holds the single fact of sensation 
as sufficient for all mental phenomena. It is the philosophy of Condillac, 
called Dirt philosophy by Fichte). 


28. The mind that views all the phenomena of nature in the Supreme Spirit, 
and takes outward nature as a copy of the eternal mind of God, is designated 
by the name of nature itself. (Because God is the Natura naturans or the 
Author of Nature, and the works of nature, — matter and mind, are the Natura 
naturata. Hence the mind knowing its own nature and that of its cause, is said 
to be an union of both natures, and is the personality of Brahma the Demiurge, 
who is combined of nature and mind). 


29. The mind is called mdyd or magic, because it converts the real into unreal, 
and the unreal into real. Thus showing the realities as unrealities, and the vice- 
versa by turns. It is termed error or mistake of our judgement, giving ascent to 
what is untrue and the contrary. The causes of error are said to be ignorance, 
(avidyd), and passions, (tamas). 


30. The sensible actions are seeing and hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling, 
of the outward organs of sense, but the mind is the cause both of these actions 
and their acts. (The mind moves the organs to their actions, as also feels and 
perceives their acts in itself). 


31. The intellect, (chit), being bewildered in its view of the intellectual world, 
(chetyas), manifests itself in the form of the mind, and becomes the subject of 
the various functions which are attributed to it. (The intellect having lost its 
universality, and the faculty of intellection or discernment of universal 
propositions, falls into the faults of sensitivity and volition, by employing 
itself to particular objects of sense and sensible desires). 


32. Being changed into the category of the mind, the intellect loses its original 
state of purity, and becomes subject to a hundred desires of its own making 
(by its volitive faculty). 


33. Its abstract knowledge of general truths being shadowed by its percipience 
of concrete and particular gross bodies, it comes to the knowledge of numbers 
and parts, and is overwhelmed by the multiplicity of its thoughts and the 
objects of its desires. (i.e., Having lost the knowledge of the universal whole 
and discrete numbers, the mind comes to know the concrete particulars only). 


34. It is variously styled as the living principle and the mind by most people 
on earth, but it is known as intellection and understanding, (chitta and 
buddhi), by the wise. 


35. The intellect being depraved by its falling off from the sole supreme soul, 
is variously named by the learned according to its successive phases and 
functions, owing to its being vitiated by its various desires, and the variety of 
their objects. 


36. Rama said: — O Sir! that art acquainted with all truths, please tell me, 
whether the mind is a material or immaterial thing, which I have not been able 
to ascertain as yet. (It is said to be matter by materialists and as spirit by 
spiritualists). 


37. Vasishtha replied: — The mind, O Rama! is neither a gross substance nor 
an intelligent principle altogether; it is originally as intelligent as the intellect, 
but being sullied by the evils of the world and the passions and desires of the 

body, it takes the name of the mind. (From its minding of many things). 


38. The intellect, (chit), which is the cause of the world, is called the chitta or 
heart, when it is situated in the bosom of sentient bodies, with all its affections 
and feelings, (avildm). It then has a nature between goodness and badness (by 
reason of its moral feelings and bad passions). 


39. When the heart remains without a certain and uniform fixity to its purpose, 
and steadiness in its own nature, it feels all the inner changes with the 
vicissitudes of the outer world, and is as a reflector of the same. (The text 
says, the fluctuations of the heart, cause the vicissitudes of the world. But how 
can the heart be subjective, and the world the objective? Is the heart author of 
its feelings without receiving them from without? Yes). 


40. The intellect hanging between its intelligence and gross objects, takes the 
name of the mind, when it is vitiated by its contact with outward objects. 


41. When the action of the Intellect or the faculty of intellection, is vitiated by 
sensitivity, and becomes dull by reason of its inward dross, it is then styled the 
mind, which is neither a gross material thing, nor an intelligent spiritual 
principle. 


42. The intellectual principle is variously designated by many such names, as 
the mind, the understanding, the ego, and the living soul or principle of 
animation. 


43. The mind bears its different appellations according to the variety of its 
functions, just as an actor in the theatre, appears under different names and 
garbs of the dramatic personages on the stage. (The world is a stage, where 


one man acts many parts. — Shakespeare). 


44. As a man passes under many titles, according to his various occupations 
and professionsm, so the mind takes different appellations according to the 
various operations of its nature. (Thus one man is a scholar, a householder, an 
officer, a subject, and many others at once). 


45. Besides the names that I have mentioned regarding the mind, the 
disputants in mental philosophy, have invented many others agreeably to their 
diverse theories. 


46. They have attributed to the mind many designations, according to the 
views in which they designed to exhibit its nature, such as some calling it the 
intellect, another the understanding, the sensation and so forth. 


47. One takes it as dull matter, and another as the living principle; someone 
calls it the ego, while others apply the term understanding to it. (As Manas or 
Manu is the father of and of the same nature with all mankind, so is the mind 
manas or mens, similar in its nature and names with every one and all its 
operations). 


48. Ihave told you, Rama that egoism, mind, and the light of understanding, 
together with the volition of creation, are but different properties of the one 
and same internal principle. (Ego, — the subjective, mind, — the motive, 
understanding, — the thinking, and the volitive powers, all relate to the same 
soul. All these are different faculties having the one and same common root, 
— the one universal soul). 


49. The Nyaya philosophy has taken the mind etc., in different lights 
according to its own view of them, and so the Sankhya system explains the 
perception and senses in a way peculiar to itself. (Namely: the Nyaya says, the 
Ego to be a dravya or substance; the living soul as God; the mind a sensitive 
particle and internal organ; and understanding as a transitory property of the 
mind. The Sankhya has the understanding as a product of matter, and egoism 
a resultant of the same, and the mind as the eleventh organ of sense). 


50. In this manner are all these terms taken in very different acceptations, by 
the different systems of Mimamsa, Vaiseshika, Arhata and Buddhist 
philosophy. The Pancharatra and some other systems, have given them 
particular senses disagreeing with one another. (See Rakhaldasa Nyayaratna’s 
tract on the identity of the mind and the soul, dtmd; and Hirdlal’s reply to and 
refutation of the same). 


51. All these various doctrines, arising at different times and in distant 
countries, lead at last to the same supreme Being, like the very many different 


ways, leading their passengers to the same imperial city. (All systems of 
philosophy, like every scheme of religion and its different sects and schisms, 
lead their followers to the same truth of one Superintending power or Deity). 


52. It is ignorance of this supreme truth or misunderstanding of the discordant 
doctrines, that causes the votaries of different systems and sects, to carry on 
an endless dispute among themselves with bitter acrimony. (All party 
contentions, are but effects of ignorance of the various terminology bearing 
the same sense). 


53. The disputants maintain their particular positions by their respective 
dogmatism, just as passengers persist in their accustomed paths as the best 
suited to them. (Bias has a stronger basis in the mind and has a faster hold of 
the human heart, than the best reason and the surest truth). 


54. They have spoken falsely, whose words point out everything as the fruit of 
our acts, and direct mankind only to the performance of their actions. It is 
according to the various prospects that men have in view, that they have given 
their reasons in their own ways. (Ask of the learned, the learned are blind, this 
bids you shun, and that to love mankind. — Pope). 


55. The mind receives its various names from its different functions as a man 
is called a Snataka or early bather, and a data, — donor, from his acts of 
sacred ablutions and religious gifts. 


56. As the actor gets his many titles, according to the several parts which he 
performs, so the mind takes the name of a Jiva or living being, from its 
animation of the body and its desires. (The mind is repeatedly said to be the 
animating and volitive principle). 


57. The mind is said to be the heart also, which is perceived by everybody to 
reside within himself. A man without the heart, has no feeling nor sensation. 


58. It is the heart which feels the inward pleasure or pain, derived from the 
sight or touch, hearing or smelling, and eating and drinking of pleasurable and 
painful things. 


59. As the light shows the colours of things to the sight, so the mind is the 
organ, that reflects and shows the sensations of all sensible objects in the 
cranium and sensory. 


60. Know him as the dullest of beings, who thinks the mind to be a dull 
material substance, and whose gross understanding cannot understand the 
nature of the Intellect. 


61. The mind is neither intelligence, (chetana), nor inert matter, (jada), it is 


the ego that has sprung amidst the various joys and griefs in this world. (The 
pure intelligence knows no pleasure nor pain, but the mind which is the same 
with the conscious ego, is subjected to both in this world). 


62. The mind which is one with the divine Intellect, (i.e., sedately fixed in the 
one Brahma), perceives the world to be absorbed into itself, but being polluted 
with matter, (like fresh water with soil), it falls into the error of taking the 
world for real. (The clear mind like clear water is unsullied with the soil of the 
material world, but the vitiated mind, like foul water, is full of the filth of 
worldliness). 


63. Know Rama, that neither the pure immaterial intellect, nor gross matter as 
the inert stone, can be the cause of the material world. (The spirit cannot 
produce matter, nor can dull matter be productive of itself). 


64. Know then, O Raghava, that neither intelligence nor inertia, is the cause of 
the world; it is the mind that is the cause of visible objects, as it is the light 
which unfolds them to the view. (Intelligence is the knowledge of the self- 
evident, and not their cause). 


65. For where there is no mind, there is no perception of the outer world, nor 
does dull matter know of the existence of anything; but everything is extinct 
with the extinction of the mind. (A dead body like a dull block, is insensible 
of everything). 


66. The mind has a multiplicity of synonyms, varied by its multifarious 
avocations, as the one continuous duration undergoes a hundred homonyms, 
by the variations of its times and seasons. 


67. If egoism is not granted to be a mental action, and the sensations be 
reckoned as actions of the body, yet its name of the living principle, answers 
for all the acts of the body and mind. (Egoism or knowledge of the self, is 
attributed to the soul by some schools of philosophy, and sensations are said 
to be corporeal and nervous actions; yet the moving and animating power of 
the mind, must account for all bodily and mental actions.) 


68. Whatever varieties are mentioned of the mind, by the reasonings of 
different systems of philosophy, and sometimes by the advocates of an 
opinion, and at others by their adversaries: — 


69. They are neither intelligible nor distinguishable from one another, except 
that they are all powers of the self-same mind, which like the profluent sea, 
pours its waters into innumerable outlets. 


70. As soon as men began to attribute materialistic powers and force to the 
nature of the pure (immaterial) consciousness, they fell into the error of these 


varieties of their own making. 


71. As the spider lets out its thread from itself, it is in the same manner that 
the inert has sprung from the intellect, and matter has come into existence 
from the ever active spirit of Brahma. 


(The Sruti says: — Everything comes out of the spirit as the thread from the 
spider, the hairs and nails from the animal body, and as rocks and vegetables 
springing from the earth). 


72. It is ignorance (of the said Sruti), that has introduced the various opinions 
concerning the essence of the mind, and hence arose the various synonymous 
expressions, significant of the Intellect among the opponents. 


73. The same pure Intellect, is brought to bear the different designations of the 
mind, as understanding, living principle and egoism; and the same is 
expressed in the world by the terms intelligence, heart, animation and many 
other synonyms, which being taken as expressive of the same thing, must put 
an end to all dispute. (So all metaphysical disputes owe their origin to the 
difference of terminology. Such as, Kant regarded the mind under its true 
faculties of cognition, desire, and moral feeling, called as 
Erkenntni®Bvermégen or Denkvermégen, Begehrungsvermégen, and 
Gefiihlsvermégen. Instead of multiplying the synonyms of Mind here, I refer 
the reader to Roget’s Thesaurus for them). 


CHAPTER LXXXXVII. 


The Magnitude of the Sphere of the Intellect. 


Argument. The Intellectual, Mental and Material Spheres, and their 
representations in the Mind. 


Rama said: — I come to understand, O venerable sage! from all you have 
propounded, that this grandeur of the universe being the work of the Divine 
Mind, is all derived from the same. (Here the creation of the world by the 
Divine mind, is viewed in the pantheistic light of Emanation). 


2. Vasishtha answered: — The Mind, as already said, having assumed a 
substantial form, manifested itself in the form of water in the mirage, raised 
by the shining blaze of its own light. (This passage embodies both theories, 
that light was the first work of God, and the Spirit of God moved on the 
surface of the waters. O ruh Eloim marhapeth-fi pene al maim. — Genesis. 
Apa eva Sasarjddan. — Manu). 


3. The mind became amalgamated, (identic), with the contents of the world, in 
the Spirit of Brahma, now showing itself in the form of man, and now 
appearing as a God. (i.e., the mind reflected on these images which were 
evolution of itself in itself; because the thought or product of the mind, was of 
the same substance with itself). (This accords with the pantheistic doctrine, 
that God and Nature are one substance, and the one is a modification of the 
other). 


4. Somewhere he showed himself as a demon and at another place like a 
Yaksha, (yakka); here he was as a Gandharva, and there in the form of a 
Kinnard. (All these were the ideal manifestations of the Divine Mind). 


5. The vast expanse of the Mind, was found to comprise in it the various tracts 
of land, and the pictures of many cities and habitable places. (Because the 
mind is the reservoir of all their images). 


6. Such being the capacity of the mind, there is no reckoning of the millions 
of bodies, which are contained in it, like the woods and plants in a forest. All 
those are not worth our consideration in our inquiry about the mind. (They are 
as useless to the psychologist as botany is to the geologist). 


7. It was this mind which spread out the world with all its contents, beside 
which there exists naught but the Supreme Spirit. (The mind is the container 
of the archetypes of the ectypal world, or the recording power of knowledge; 
but the Supreme Soul is the disembodied self-consciousness, having the 
principle of volition or Will; while the Spirit is the animating faculty of the 
soul). 


8. The soul is beyond every category, it is omnipresent and the substratum of 
all existence, and it is by the power of this soul, that the mind doth move and 
manifest itself. (The mind is the soul incorporated with bodies, but the soul is 
quite apart from these). 


9. The Mind is known as the cause of the body, which is work of the mind; it 
is born and becomes extinct with the body, which the soul does not, nor has it 
any such quality which belongs to the mind. 


10. The mind is found by right reasoning to be a perishable object, and no 
sooner doth it perish, than the living soul succeeds to obtain its final 
liberation. For the desires of the mind are the bondage of its transmigration, 
but the dissolution of the mind with its desires, secures its liberation. (Volition 
and velleity, are the active and inactive acts of the mind for its eternal 
bondage). 


11. After decadence of the mental desires there is no more any exertion for 
acts. This state is called the liberation of living souls, from their release from 
trouble and care, and the mind thus released, never comes to be born and die 
again. (Free from desire, is freedom from deadly sin). 


12. Rama said: — Sir! You have said before, that human nature is principally 
of three kinds, viz: — the good, the gentle, and the base, (Satva, rajas, and 
tamas); and it is owing to the good or bad nature of their minds, that men 
differ from one another. 


13. Now please tell me, how could the wondrous mind originate from the pure 
intellect with its good or bad propensities, which are wanting in the Divine 
Intellect. 


14. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, that there are three spheres of the 
infinite vacuity, at immense distances from one another, and these are the 
intellectual, mental, and the physical spheres. 


15. These spheres are common to all mankind, and are spread out everywhere, 
and they have all sprung and come to being from the essence of the Chit or 
Divine Intellect. (The first is the space of Divine Infinity, the second is the 
spatium dunamia or potential space and may be filled by bodies; and the third 
is the place energeia or actually occupied by bodies). 


16. That space which is both in the inside and outside of everything, and 
denotes its occupation or otherwise by some substance or its absence, and 
pervades through all nature, is called the inane sphere of the Intellect. 


17. That is called the sphere of the Intellect, which embraces all space and 
time which has spread out the other spheres, and which is the highest and best 
of all. 


18. The physical sphere contains all created beings, and extends to the circuit 
of the ten sides, all about and above and below us. It is a continued space 
filled with air, which supports the clouds and waters above the firmament. 


19. Then the vacuity of the mental sphere, which has also sprung from the 
intellectual sphere, has likewise the intellect for its cause like the others, as 
the day is the source of all works and animal activities. (Here the word works 
has the double sense of the works of creation, which were made in the week 
days, and the daily works of men and their religious duties, all which are done 
in the day time. The night being the time to sleep). 


20. The vitiated Intellect which views itself as a dull thing, amidst the gross 
material objects of the physical sphere, the same is termed the mind, which 
thinks of both spheres, whence it is born and where it is placed. 


21. It is for the understanding of the unenlightened, that I have made use of 
the metaphor of the spheres, because figures are used for the instruction of the 
unenlightened, and not to lighten the enlightened. (These serve for ocular 
demonstrations in mathematical and not in metaphysical sciences). 


22. In the intellectual sphere, you will see one Supreme Brahma, filling its 
whole space, and being without parts or attributes, and intelligible only to the 
enlightened. 


23. The ignorant require to be instructed in appropriate words and precise 
language, showing the demarkation between monotheism and ditheism, which 
is unnecessary for the instruction of the enlightened. 


24. I have contrived to explain to you the nature of divine knowledge, by the 
parable of the three spheres, which will enlighten you as long as you are in 
dark on the subject. 


25. The intellectual sphere being obscured by ignorance, we are led to look 
into the mental and physical spheres, not knowing that they are as delusive as 
the sunbeams in a mirage, and as destructive as the flames of a conflagration. 


26. The pure intellect being changed to the state of the changeful mind, takes 
a debased figure; and then being confounded in itself, weaves the magic web 
of the world to entangle itself in the same. 


27. The ignorant that are guided by the dictates of their perverted minds, 
know nothing concerning the nature of the Intellect, which is identic with the 
Supreme. So the witless that unwittingly take the white shells for bright silver, 
are seen to labour under their delusion, until they are freed from it, by the 
clear light of their understanding. 


Note: The allegory of the three spheres, means no more than the triple state of 
man, as a spiritual, an intellectual and a physical or corporeal being. The 
intellectual state in the text, is properly the spiritual and highest state of a 
human being. The mental is next to the intellectual or midmost state of man, 
and the physical or corporeal state, is the lowest condition, in which the 
elevated nature of humanity is subjected like an inferior animal, to grovel 
upon the earth. 


CHAPTER LXXXXVIII. 


History of the Human Heart. 


Argument. The wide extent of the Heart and its ultimate Dissolution. 


Whatever may be the origin and nature of the human heart, (which some take 
for the mind), it should be always inquired into in seeking out one’s own 
liberation. (The heart called antahkarana, — an inner organ, is often supposed 
as the same with the mind; its cravings after worldliness, are to be suppressed 
under its longing for liberation from worldly cares). 


2. The heart being fixed in the Supreme, becomes purified of its worldly 
desires and attachments; and then O Rama! it perceives that soul in itself, 
which transcends all imaginations of the mind. (Kalpands are imaginary 
attributes of God in the mind, who can only be seen in the heart). 


3. It is the province of the heart, to secure the sedateness of the world in itself, 
and it lies in the power of the heart, either to make its bondage or get its 
freedom, from the desires and troubles of the world. 


4. On this subject there hangs a curious tale relating the legend of the heart, 
which was revealed to me of yore, by Brahma himself, and which I will now 
relate to you, Rama, if you will listen to it with attention. 


5. There is a long, open and dreary desert, Ramatavi by name, which was 
quite still and solitary and without an inhabitant, in it, and so vast in its extent, 
as to make a pace of a league of it. (Or rather to make a league of a pace of it). 


6. There stood a man of a terrific and gigantic figure in it, with a sorrowful 
visage and troubled mind, and having a thousand arms and a thousand eyes. 


7. He held many clubs and maces in all his manifold arms, with which he was 
striking his own back and breast, and then running away in this direction and 
that, (as if for fear of being caught by someone). 


8. Then having struck himself fast and hard with his own hands, he fled afar a 


hundred leagues for fear of being laid hold by some body. 


9. Thus striking and crying and flying afar on all sides, he became tired and 
spent, and lank in his legs and arms. 


10. He fell flat with his languid limbs in a large blind pit, amidst the deep 
gloom of a dark night, and in the depth of a dire dark cave (from which he 
could not rise). 


11. After the lapse of a long time, he scrambled out of the pit with difficulty, 
and again continued to run away, and strike himself with his own hands as 
before. 


12. He ran again a great way, till at last he fell upon a thorny thicket of 
Karanja plants, which caught him as fast in its brambles, as a moth or 
grasshopper is caught in a flame. 


13. He with much difficulty extricated himself from the prickles of the 
Karanja furze, and began again to beat himself as before, and run in his 
wonted course as usual. 


14. Having then gone a great way off from that place, he got to a grove of 
plantain arbour under the cooling moonbeams, where he sat for a while with a 
smiling countenance. 


15. Having then come out of the plantain grove, he went on running and 
beating himself in his usual way. 


16. Going again a great way in his hurriedness, he fell down again in a great 
and darksome ditch, by being exhausted in all his limbs and his whole body. 


17. Rising from the ditch, he entered a plantain forest, and coming out from 
that spot, he fell into another ditch and then in another Karanja thicket. 


18. Thus he was falling into one ditch after rising from a thorny furze, and 
repeatedly beating himself and crying in secret. 


19. I beheld him going on in this way for a long time, and then I, with all my 
force, rushed forward and stopped him in his way. 


20. I asked him saying: — Who are you Sir, and why do you act in this 
manner? What business have you in this place, and why do you wail and 
trouble yourself for nothing? 


21. Being thus asked by me, O Rama! he answered me, saying: — I am 
nobody, O sage! nor do I do any such thing as you are telling me about. 


22. 1am here stricken by you, and you are my greatest enemy; I am here 
beheld and persecuted by you, both to my great sorrow and delight. 


23. Saying so, he looked sorrowfully into his bruised body and limbs, and 
then cried aloud and wept a flood of tears, which fell like a shower of rain on 
the forest ground. 


24. After a short while, he ceased from his weeping, and then looking at his 
limbs, he laughed and cried aloud in his mirth. 


25. After his laughter and loud shouts were over, hear, O Rama! what the man 
next did before me. He began to tear off and separate the members of his big 
body, and cast them away on all sides. 


26. He first let fall his big head, and then his arms, and afterwards his breast 
and then his belly also. 


27. Thus the man having severed the parts of his body one after another, was 
now ready to remove himself elsewhere with his legs only, by the decree of 
his destiny. 


28. After he had gone, there appeared another man to my sight, of the same 
form and figure with the former one, and striking his body himself as the 
other. 


29. He kept running with his big legs and outstretched stout arms, until he fell 
into the pit, whence he rose again, and betook to his flight as before. 


30. He fell into a pond again, and then rose and ran with his body wringing 
with pain, falling again in hidden caves, and then resorting to the cooling 
shade of forest trees. 


31. Now ailing and now regaling, and now torturing himself with his own 
hands, and in this way I saw him for some time with horror and surprise in 
myself. 


32. I stopped him in his course, and asked about what he was doing, to which 
he returned his crying and laughter for his answers by turns. 


33. Finding at last his body and limbs decaying in their strength, he thought 
upon the power of destiny, and the state of human lot, and was prepared to 
depart. 


34. came again to see another succeeding him in the same desert path, who 
had been flying and torturing himself in the same way as the others gone 
before him. 


35. He fell in the same dark pit in his flight, where I stood long to witness his 
sad and fearful plight. 


36. Finding this wretched man not rising above the pit for a long time, I 


advanced to raise him up, when I saw another man following his footsteps. 


37. Seeing him of the same form, and hastening to his impending fall in the 
doleful pit, Iran to stop his fate, by the same query I made to the others 
before. 


38. But, O lotus-eyed Rama! the man paid no heed to my question and only 
said, you must be a fool to know nothing of me. 


39. You wicked Brahman! he said to me, and went on in his course, while I 
kept wandering in that dreadful desert in my own way. 


40. Isaw many such men coming one after the other to their unavoidable ruin, 
and though I addressed to all and every one of them, yet they softly glided 
away by me, like phantoms in a dream. 


41. Some of them gave no heed to my saying, as a man pays no attention to a 
dead body, and some among the pit-fallen had the good fortune of rising 
again. 


42. Some among these had no egress from the plantain grove for a long while, 
and some were lost forever, amidst the thorns and thistles of Karanja thickets. 


43. There were some pious persons among them, that had no place for their 
abode, though that great desert was so very extensive as I have told you 
already, (and capable of affording habitations for all and many more of them). 


44. This vast desert is still in existence, together with these sorts of men 
therein, and that place is well known to you, Rama, as the common range of 
mankind. Don’t you remember it now, with all the culture of your mind from 
your early youth? 


45. O that dreadful desert is this world, filled with thorns and dangers on all 
sides. It is a dark desert amidst a thick spread darkness, and nobody that 
comes herein, finds the peace and quiet of his heart, except such as have 
acquired the divine knowledge, which makes it a rose garden to them. (See 
the pit-falls in the bridge of Addison’s Vision of Mirza). 


CHAPTER LXXXXIX. 


History of the Heart Continued. 


Argument. Explanation of the preceding Allegory. 


Rama said: — What is that great desert, Sir, and when was it seen by me, and 
how came it to be known to me? What were those men there, and what were 
they about? 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Attend O great-armed Rama! and I will tell you all: 


That great desert is not distant nor different from this wilderness of the world. 


3. That which bears the name of the world, is a deep and dark abyss in itself. 
Its hollowness is unfathomable and unfordable; and its un-reality appearing as 
reality to the ignorant, is to be known as the great desert spoken of before. 


4. The true reality is obtainable by the light of reason only, and by the 
knowledge of one object alone. This one is full without its union with any 
other, it is one and only by itself. 


5. The big bodied men, that you beheld wandering therein, know them to be 
the minds of men, and bound to the miseries of the world. 


6. Their observer was Reason personified in myself, and it was I only and no 
other person, that could discern the folly of their minds by my guiding reason. 


7. Itis my business to awaken those drowsy minds to the light of reason, as it 
is the work of the sun to open the lotus-buds to bloom, by his enlivening rays. 


8. My counsels have prevailed on some minds and hearts, which have 
received them with attention, and have turned them away from earthly broils, 
to the way of true contentment and tranquility. 


9. But there were others that paid no attention to my lectures through their 
great ignorance, but fell down into the pit, upon being chid by me with 


reproofs and rebukes. 


10. Those deep and dark pits were no other than the pits of hell and the 
plantain groves of which I have told you, were the gardens of Paradise. 


11. Know these to be the seats of those minds which long for heavenly joys, 
and the dark pits to be the abode of hellish hearts, which can never get their 
release from those darksome dungeons. 


12. Those who having once entered the plantain grove, do not come out any 
more from it; know them to be the minds of the virtuous, and fraught with all 
their virtues. 


13. Those which having fallen into the Karanja thickets, were unable to 
extricate themselves from the thorns; know them to be the minds of men, that 
are entangled in the snares of the world. 


14. Some minds which were enlightened with the knowledge of truth, got 
released from the snares; but the unenlightened are bound to repeated 
transmigrations in different births. 


15. The souls which are subjected to metempsychosis, have their rise and fall 
in repetition, from higher to lower births, and the vice-versa likewise. 


16. The thick thicket of Karanja brambles, represents the bonds of conjugal 
and family relations; they are the source of various human desires, which are 
springs of all other woe, difficulty and dangers. 


17. The minds that have been confined in the Karanja bushes are those, that 
are repeatedly born in human bodies, and are repeatedly entangled into 
domestic attachments from which all other animals are quite at large. 


18. O support of Raghu’s race! the plantain grove which I told you was 
cooling with moonbeams, know the same to be the refreshing arbour of 
heaven, which gives delight to the soul. 


19. Those persons are placed here, who have their bodies fraught with 
virtuous deeds and edified by persevering devotion and austerities, and whose 
souls are elevated above others. 


20. Those ignorant, thoughtless, and unmindful men, that slighted my advice, 
were themselves slighted by their own minds, which were deprived of the 
knowledge of their own souls and of their reason. 


21. Those who told me, “we are undone at your sight, and you are our greatest 
enemy,” were demented fools, and melting away with their lamentations (for 
having disregarded my counsels). 


22. Those who were loudly wailing, and let fall a flood of tears in their 
weeping, were men who bitterly deplored in their minds for being snatched 
from the snare of pleasures, to which they had been so fondly attached. 


23. Those having a little sense and reason, but not arriving to the pure 
knowledge of God, were bitterly complaining in their hearts, for being obliged 
to forsake their fond enjoyments of life. 


24. Those who came to their understanding, now wept over the pains which 
they had inflicted on their bodies, for the supportance of their families, and 
were grieved in their minds to leave behind the objects of their care, for whom 
they had taken such pains. 


25. The minds that had some light of reason, and had not yet arrived to divine 
knowledge, were still sorrowing for having to leave behind their own bodies, 
wherein they had their late abode. 


26. Those who smiled in the cheerfulness of their hearts, were men who had 
come to the light of reason, and it was their reason which gave consolation to 
their hearts. 


27. The reasonable soul that is removed from its bondage of the world, exults 
with joy in its mind, to find itself liberated from the cares of life. 


28. Those men who laughed to scorn their battered and shattered bodies, were 
glad to think in their minds, how they got rid of the confines of their bodies 
and limbs, the accomplices of their actions. 


29. Those who laughed with scorn to see the falling members of their bodies, 
were glad to think in their minds, that they were no better than instruments to 
their various labours in the world. 


30. Those who had come to the light of reason, and had found their rest in the 
supreme state of felicity, looked down with scorn upon the former abodes of 
their meanness from a distance. 


31. The man who was stopped by me on his way and asked with concern 
(about what he was going to do), was made to understand how the power of 
wisdom could outbrave the desperate. 


32. The weakened limbs, that gradually disappeared from sight, meant the 
subjection of the members of the body, under the control of the mind, that is 
freed from its venality of riches. 


33. The man that is represented with a thousand arms and eyes, is a symbol of 
the covetous mind, which looks to and longs after everything, and wants to 
grasp all things, as with so many hands. (The ambition of Alexander is 


described to count the spheres, and grasp the earth and heaven in his arms). 


34. The man that was striking himself with his blows, meant the torments 
which a man inflicts on his own mind, by the strokes of his anxieties and 
cares. 


35. The man who had been running away with striking hard blows upon his 
body, signified how the mind runs all about, being lashed at every moment by 
the strokes of his insatiate desires. 


36. The man that afflicts himself by his own desires, and then flies to this way 
and that, signifies his fool-heartedness to hunt after everything, and be a 
runaway from himself. 


37. Thus every man being harassed by his ceaseless desires, pants in his mind 
to fly to his Maker, and set his heart to Yoga meditation. 


38. All these ceaseless woes are the making of one’s own mind, which being 
worried at last by its incessant anxieties, strives to retire from them, to find its 
final repose in Yoga. 


39. The mind is entrapped in the net of its own wishes, as the silk worm is 
entwined in the cocoon by the thread of its own making. 


40. The more is the mind of man afflicted by troubles, the more busily is it 
employed in its foibles; just as a boy indulges himself in his playfulness, 
unmindful of the evils waiting upon it. 


41. The mind of man is in the same plight as that of the foolish ape, which in 
striving to pull out the peg of a half split timber, lost its life by the smashing 
of its testes in the crevice. (See the story of the ape and its pulling the peg in 
the Hitopadesa and its Persian version of the Anvarsoheli). 


42. No flight can release the mind, unless it is practised to resignation, 
restrained from its other pursuits, and constrained to the continued practice of 
pious meditation, which can only relieve its sorrows. 


43. It is the misjudgment of the mind, that is the cause of accumulated woes, 
which increase in height as the peak of a mount; so it is the government of the 
mind which melts our woes, like the hoarfrost under sunbeams. 


44. Accustom your mind to the righteous ways pointed out by the Sdstras in 
all your life time. Restrain your appetites, and govern your passions, and 
observe the taciturnity of holy saints and sages. You will at last arrive to the 
holy state of holies, and rest under the cooling umbrage of holiness, and shall 
no more have to grieve under the calamities which betide all mankind. 


CHAPTER C. 
Healing of the Heart. 


Argument. Arguing the Omnipotence of the Deity from the powers of the 
mind; and showing ignorance and knowledge to be the different causes of 
Human bondage and liberation in life. 


Vasishtha continued: — I have told you of the origination of the mind from 
the essence of the Supreme being; it is of the same kind, and yet not the same 
with its source, but like the waves and waters of the sea. (The mind being but 
an attribute of the Divine soul). 


2. The minds of the enlightened are not different from the Divine Mind, as 
those that have the knowledge of the community of waters, do not regard the 
waves to differ from the waters of the sea. 


3. The minds of the unenlightened are the causes of their error, as those not 
knowing the common property of water, find a difference in the waters of the 
waves and the sea. 


4. It is requisite for the instruction of the unlearned, to acquaint them of the 
relation between the significant words and their significations, (as the relation 
of water between the waves and the sea). 


5. The Supreme Brahma is omnipotent, and is full and perfect and undecaying 
forever. The mind has not the properties that belong to the omnipresent soul. 


6. The Lord is almighty and omnipresent, and distributes his all diffusive 
power, in proportion as he pleases to everyone he likes. 


7. Observe Rama, how the intellectual powers are distributed in all animated 
bodies (in their due proportion), and how his moving force is spread in the air, 
and his immobility rests in the rocks and stones. 


8. His power of fluidity is deposited in the water, and his power of 
inflammation is exhibited in fire; his vacuity is manifested in vacuum, and his 
substantiality in all solid substances. 


9. The omnipotence of Brahma, is seen to stretch itself to all the ten sides of 
the universe; his power of annihilation is seen in the extinction of beings; and 
his punishment is evident, in the sorrows of the miserable. 


10. His felicity is felt in the hearts of the holy, and his prowess is seen in the 
persons of giants; his creative power is known in the works of his creation, 
and his power of destruction in the desolation of the world, at the end of the 
great Kalpa age. 


11. Everything is situated in Brahma, as the tree is contained in the seed of the 
same kind, and afterwards develops in its roots and sprouts, its leaves and 
branches, and finally in its flowers and fruits. 


12. The power called the living principle, is a reflexion of God, and is of a 
nature between the thinking mind and dull matter, and is derived from 
Brahma. 


13. The nature of God is unchangeable, although it is usual to attribute many 
varieties to him, as we call the same vegetable by the different names of a 
germ, a sprout, a shrub, a plant and a tree at its different stages of growth. 


14. Know Rama, the whole world to be Brahma, who is otherwise termed the 
Ego. He is the all pervading soul, and the everlasting stupendous fabric of the 
cosmos. 


15. That property in him which has the power of thinking, is termed the mind, 
which appears to be something other than the Soul, thus we erroneously see 
peacock’s feathers in the sky, and froths in the eddies of water, (and suppose 
them as different things from the sky and water). 


16. The principles of thought and animation, — the mind and life, are but 
partial reflexions of the Divine Soul, and the form of mind is the faculty of 
thought, as that of life is the power of animation. (The one is called the 
rational and the other animating soul). 


17. Thus the mind being but the thinking power of Brahma, receives the 
appellation of Brahma, and this power appearing as a part of the impersonal 
Brahma, is identified with Ego, (the personal Brahma). 


18. It is our error which makes a difference between the soul and mind, and 
Brahma and Brahma; because the properties which belong to the mind, are the 
same with those of the self-existent soul. 


19. That which is variously named as the principle of mind or thought, is the 
same power of omnipotence which is settled in the mind (which is the 
repository of the thinking powers). 


20. So are all the properties of the living soul, contained in and derived from 
the universal soul of Brahma, as all the properties of vegetation, blossoming 
and fructification of trees, are contained in the season of spring, and are 
dispensed among the plants, agreeably to their respective soil and climate, and 
other circumstances (of their culture, efc.). 


21. As the earth yields its various fruits and flowers in their season, so the 
hearts and minds of men, entertain their thoughts and passions in their proper 
times; some appearing at one time and others at another, (like the paddies and 
other grains of particular seasons). 


22. And as the earth produces its harvests, according to their particular soil 
and season, so the heart and mind exhibit their thoughts and feelings of their 
own accord, and not caused by another. 


23. The numbers and forms which convey determinate ideas, as distinguished 
from others of the same kind (as the figures in arithmetic and geometry), are 
all expressed in words coined by the mind from the mint of the mind of 
Brahma, the original source of ideas. 


24. The mind adopts the same image as the reflexions which it receives from 
without, or the thoughts and imaginations it forms of itself, and as the instance 
of the Aindava brothers, serves to support this truth (of the double power of 
intuition and perception of the mind, to see into its own inner operations, and 
receive the impressions from without). 


25. The animating principle, (jiva-zoa), which is the cause of this creation, 
resides in the Supreme Spirit, like the fluctuation which is seen in the 
unagitated waters of the oceans. 


26. The intelligent soul sees these hosts of creation to be moving in the 
essence of Brahma, as he beholds the innumerable waves, billows, and surges 
of the sea, rolling on the surface of the waters. 


27. There is no other reality that bears a name or form or figure or any action 
or motion except the supreme spirit, in which all things move about as the 
waves of the sea water (and which is the real source of the unreals). 


28. As the rising and falling and continuation and disappearance of waves, 
occur on the surface of the sea by the fluctuation of its waters, so the creation, 
sustentation and annihilation of the universe, take place in Brahma, by the 
agency of Brahma himself. 


29. It is by the inward heat of his spirit, that Brahma causes this world to 
appear as a mirage in himself; and whatever varieties it presents in its various 
scenes, they are all expansions and manifestations of the Divine Spirit. 


30. All causality and instrumentality, and their resultants as well as the 
production, continuance, and destruction of all things, take place in Brahma 
himself, beside which there is no other cause whatever. 


31. There is no appetence nor pleasure, nor any desire or error in him, who 
relies his dependence in the Supreme; for how can one have any desire or 
error in himself who lives in the Supreme self, who is devoid of them? 


32. The whole is a form of the Supreme soul, and all things are but forms of 
the same; and the mind also is a form of it, as a golden ornament is but a form 
of the gold. 


33. The mind which is ignorant of its Supreme origin, is called the living soul, 
which from its ignorance of the Supreme soul, resembles a friend who has 
alienated himself from his true friend. 


34. The mind which is misled by its ignorance of the all-intelligent God, to 
imagine its own personality as a reality, is as one who believes his living soul 
to be the production of vacuum; (or as something produced from nothing). 


35. The living soul although it is a particle of the Supreme soul, shows itself 
in this world as no soul at all, (but a form of mere physical vitality). So the 
purblind see two moons in the sky, and are unable to distinguish the true 
moon from the false one. 


36. So the soul being the only real entity, it is improper to speak of its 
bondage and liberation; and the imputation of error to it, is quite absurd in the 
sight of lexicographers, who define it as infallible. 


37. It is a wrong impression to speak of the bondage of the soul, which is ever 
free from bonds, and so it is untrue to seek the emancipation of the soul, 
which is always emancipate. 


38. Rama asked: — The mind is known sometimes to arrive at a certainty, 
which is changed to uncertainty at another; how then do you say that the mind 
is not under the bondage of error? 


39. Vasishtha answered: — It is a false conceit of the ignorant to imagine its 
bondage, and their imagination of its emancipation, is equally a false 
conception of theirs. 


40. It is ignorance of the Smriti Sdstra, that causes one to believe in his 
bondage and emancipation, while in reality there are no such things as 
bondage and liberation. 


41. Imagination represents an unreality as reality, even to men of enlightened 
understandings, as a rope presents the appearance of a snake even to the wise. 


42. The wise man knows no bondage or liberation, nor any error of any kind; 
all these three are only in the conceptions of the ignorant. 


43. At first the mind and then its bondage and liberation, and afterwards its 
creation of the unsubstantial material world, are all but fabulous inventions 
that have come into vogue among men, as the story of the boy of old, (or as 
the old grand-mother’s tale). 


Note: — The conclusion of this chapter concerning the negation of bondage 
and liberation of the soul, and its error and enlightenment, efc., rests on the 
text of a Sruti; which negates everything in the sight of one who has come to 
the light of the universal soul. The passage is: — 4 frelelt Talcaha: Frag) TI 
area: | AAAs Hard Scar Uae: 


CHAPTER CI. 


Story of the Boy and three Princes. 
(An Allegory of the Hindu Triads). 


Argument. The old Nurse’s tale of the three Princes or Powers of the Soul, in 
elucidation of the Fabrications of Imagination. 


Rama said: — Relate to me, O chief of sages! the tale of the boy, in 
illustration of the Mind (and the other principles of our intellectual nature). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me Rama, tell you the tale of a silly and jolt- 
headed boy, who once asked his nurse, to recite to him some pretty story for 
his amusement. 


3. The Nurse then began to relate her fine wrought story for the pleasure of the 
boy, with a gladsome countenance, and in accents sweet as honey. 


4. There were once on a time, some three high-minded and fortunate young 
princes, in a desolate country, who were noted for their virtues and valour. 
(The three princes were the three hypostases of the holy trinity, dwelling in 
the land of inexistence or vacuity, asali-pure. i.e., These triple powers were in 
being in empty space, which is co-eternal with them). 


5. They shone in that vast desolate land resembling the spacious sky, like stars 
in the expanse of the waters below. Two of them were unbegotten and 
increate, and third was not born of the mother’s womb. (These three uncreated 
princes, were the principles of the soul and the mind, and the living soul, — 
jiva, which is not procreated in the womb with the body). 


6. It happened once on a time, that these three, started together from their 
dreary abode (of vacuum), for the purpose of finding a better habitation 
somewhere else. They had no other companion with them, and were sorrowful 
in their minds, and melancholy in their countenances, as if they were 
transported from their native country. (This means the emigration of these 


principles, from the eternal and inane sphere of Brahma, to the mundane 
world of mortality, which was very painful to them). 


7. Having come out of that desert land, they set forth with their faces looking 
forward, and proceeded onward like the three planets Mercury, Venus, and 
Jupiter in their conjunction. 


8. Their bodies which were as delicate as Sirisha flowers, were scorched by 
the powerful sun shining on their backs; and they were dried like leaves of 
trees by the heat of the summer day on their way. (i.e., Their tender spiritual 
bodies melted under the heat of the solar world). 


9. Their lotus like feet were singed by the burning sands of their desert path, 
and they cried aloud like some tender fawns, going astray from their herd 
saying: — “O Father save us.” (The alienated soul and mind, which are 
doomed to rove about in this world are subjected to endless pains, causing 
them to cry out like the tormented spirit of our Lord: — Eli Eli Lama 
Sabachthani; — Lord, Lord, hast thou forsaken me’). 


10. The soles of their feet were bruised by the blades of grass, and the joints 
of their bodies, were weakened by the heat of the sun, while their fair forms 
were covered with dust flying from the ground on their lonesome journey. 
(Their pilgrimage in the thorny and sunny paths of the world of woes). 


11. They saw the clump of a leash of trees by the way side, which were 
braided with tufts of spikes upon them, and loaded with fruits and flowers 
hanging downward, while they formed a resort for flights of the fowls of air, 
and flocks of the fauna of the desert, resting both above and around them. 
(The copse of the three trees, means the triple states of Dharma, Artha and 
Kama, or virtue, wealth and their fruition, which are sought after by all). 


12. The two first of these trees did not grow of themselves, (but were reared 
by men); and the third which was easy of ascent, bore no seeds to produce 
other plants in future. (7.e., Virtue and wealth require to thrive by cultivation, 
and enjoyment which is delectable to taste, is not productive of any future 
good or reward). 


13. They were refreshed from the fatigue of their journey, under the shade of 
these trees; and they halted there like the three Deities Indra, Vaya, and Yama, 
under the umbrage of the Parijata arbour of Paradise. (The three gods, — 
Jupiter, Eolus, and Pluto, were the regents of the three regions of heaven, sky 
and the infernal world: — swar, bhuvar, and bhur, composing the three 
spheres of their circuit). 


14. They eat the ambrosial fruits of these trees, and drank their nectarious 


juice to their fill; and after decorating themselves with guluncha chaplets, they 
retook themselves to their journey. (i.e., The intellectual powers are supported 
by the fruits of their acts in their journey through life). 


15. Having gone a long way, they met at the mid-day a confluence of three 
rivers, running with its rapid currents and swelling waves. (The three streams 
are the three qualities of satva, rajas, and tamas or of goodness, mediocrity, 
and excess, which are commingled in all the acts of mankind). 


16. One of these was a dry channel and the other two were shallow and with 
little water in them; and they looked like the eyes of blind men with their 
blinded eye-balls. (i.e., The channel of satva or temperance was almost dried 
up, and that of rajas or mediocrity had become shallow for want of righteous 
deeds; but the stream of tamas or excess was in full force, owing to the 
unrighteous conduct of men). 


17. The princes who were wet with perspiration, bathed joyfully in the almost 
dried up channel, as when the three gods Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva lave their 
sweating limbs, in the limpid stream of Ganges. (The three powers of the soul, 
like the three persons of the Purdanic trinity, were respectively possessed of the 
three qualities of action; and yet their pure natures preferred to bathe in the 
pure stream of goodness, — satva, as in the holy waters of heavenly Ganga, 
— the hallowed Mandakinf). 


18. They sported a long while in the water, and drank some draughts of the 
same, which was as sweet as milk, and cheered their spirits with full 
satisfaction of their hearts, (meaning that satwika or good conduct is sweeter 
far to the soul, than any other done as unjust or showy, — rajas or tamas). 


19. They resumed their journey, and arrived at the end of the day and about 
sunset, to their future abode of a new-built city, standing afar as on the height 
of a hill. (This new-built city was the new-made earth, to which the spirits 
descended from their Empyrean). 


20. There were rows of flags fluttering like lotuses, in the limpid lake of the 
azure sky, and the loud noise of the songs of the citizens was heard at a 
distance. 


21. Here they saw three beautiful and goodly looking houses, with turrets of 
gold and gems shining afar, like peaks of mount Meru under the blazing sun. 
(These were the human bodies, standing and walking upright upon the earth, 
and decorated with crowns and coronets on their heads). 


22. Two of these were not the works of art, and the third was without its 
foundation; and the three princes entered at last into the last of these. (The two 


first were the bodies of men in their states of sleep and deep sleep, called 
swdpa sopor or swapnas-somnus and sushupti-hupnos or hypnotes, which are 
inborn in the soul; but it is the ja@grata or waking body which is the unstable 
work of art). 


23. They entered this house, and sat and walked about in it with joyous 
countenances, and chanced to get three pots as bright as gold therein. 


(These pots were the three sheaths of the soul, mind and of the vital principle, 
called the pradnamdyd-kosha). 


24. The two first broke into pieces upon their lifting, and the third was 
reduced to dust at its touch. The far-sighted princes however, took up the dust 
and made a new pot therewith? It means, that though these sheaths are as 
volatile as air, yet it is possible to employ the vital principle to action. 


25. Then these gluttonous princes cooked in it a large quantity of corn for 
their food, amounting to a hundred dronas minus one, for subsistence of their 
whole life-time. (It means that the whole life-time of a hundred years, allotted 
to man in the present age of the world, is employed in consuming so many 
measures of food, except perhaps one Drona, which is saved by his occasional 
fasts during his long life). 


26. The princes then invited three Brahmans, (childhood, youth, and age), to 
the fare prepared by them, two of whom, (childhood and youth), were 
bodiless, and the third, (i.e., old age), had no mouth wherewith to eat. 


27. The mouthless Brahman took a hundred dronas of the rice and eat it up, 
because he devoured the child and youth, and the princes took the remainder 
of the Brahman’s food for their diet, (which was nothing). 


28. The three princes having refreshed themselves with the relics of the 
Braéhman’s food, took their rest in the same house of their next abode, and 
then went out in their journey of hunting after new abodes (or repeated 
transmigrations). 


29. Thus I have related to you, O Rama! the whole of the story of the boy and 
princes; now consider well its purport in your mind, and you will become 
wise thereby. 


30. After the nurse had finished her relation of the pretty parable, the boy 
seemed glad at what he had heard (though it is plain without understanding its 
import). 


31. [have told you this story, O Rama! in connection with my lecture on the 
subject of the mind, and it will serve to explain to you, the fabrication of the 


mind of this imaginary being of the world. 


32. This air-built castle of the world, which has come to be taken for a reality, 
is like the story of the body, but a false fabrication of the old nurse’s 
imagination. (Or old grand-mother’s tale, and giving a name and form to an 
airy nothing). 


33. It is the representation of the various thoughts and ideas of our minds, 
which exhibit themselves to view, according to the notions we have of them in 
our states of bondage and liberation. (i.e., Our bondage to gross bodies, 
exhibits them in their grosser form, and our liberation from the materialistic, 
shows them in their subtle and immaterial shapes). 


34. Nothing is really existent except the creations of our imagination, and it is 
our fancy which fashions all the objects in their peculiar fantastic forms. 
(Everything appears to us as we fancy it to be; whereby the same thing is 
viewed in a different light, not only by different persons, but by the same 
person in a different state of mind). 


35. The heavens, earth, sky, and air, as also the rivers, mountains, and the 
sides and quarters of the sky, are all creations of our fancy, like the visions in 
our dreams, which join and disjoin and fashion the views in their phantastic 
forms. (Imagination or phantasy, is a faculty representative of the phenomena 
of internal or external worlds. — Sir William Hamilton). 


36. As the princes, the rivers, and the future city, were mere creations of the 
nurse’s imagination, so the existence of the visible world, is but a production 
of the imaginative power of man. (The nurse’s representations of the princes, 
etc., were rather the prosopopceia or personifications of her abstract thoughts; 
as the material world is a manifestation of the ideal, and called by the sufis 
suwari manavi and suwari zahiri). 


37. The imaginative power manifests all things all around, as the moving 
waters, show the rise and fall of the waves in the sea. “It gives a shape of airy 
nothing.” “It is the power of apprehending ideas and combining them into 
new forms and assemblages.” 


38. It was this imaginative power of God, which raised the ideas of things in 
his omniscient and all comprehensive soul; and these ideals were afterwards 
manifested as real by his omnipotence; just as things lying in the dark are 
brought to view by the light of the day. Umaginatio est rei corporae figuram 
contemplari. — Descartes and Addison. It is a lively conception of the objects 
of sight. — Reid. It recalls the ideas by its reproductive fancy, and combines 
them by its productive power). 


39. Know hence, O Rama! the whole universe to be the network of 
imagination, and your fancy to be the most active power of the mind. 
Therefore, repress the thickening phantoms of your fleeting fancy, and obtain 
your tranquility by your sole reliance on the certainty of the immutable soul of 
souls. 


“Retire the world, shut out, imagination’s airy wings repress; call thy thoughts 
home, etc.” — Young’s Night thoughts. 


THE CO-ORDINATE TRIADS. 


. Jupiter. 
. Mercury. 

. Venus. 

. Bhtir — Earth. 


WWN 


‘Tike TA areas; 
. Brahma of creation. 
. Vishnu sustentation. 
. Siva dissolution. 
. Kama — Fruition. 


1 
2 
3 
3 


. Childhood Neutral. 
2. Youth Active. 
3. Old age co-operation. 


CHAPTER CII. 


On the Indivisibility and Immortality of the Soul. 


Argument: — Fallacy of Egoism, and Rational Investigation into the nature of 
the Soul. The Means of curbing Egotism, and the flight of Fancy. 


Vasishtha continued: — The ignorant are subject to errors caused by their 
false fancies, from which the wise are entirely free; and they by imagining and 
attributing perishable properties to the imperishable soul, beguile themselves 
like children, by taking their dolls for men. (It is the attributing of sensible 
properties to the conscious soul). 


2. Rama rejoined: — What is this perishable property, which is imagined of 
and imputed to the imperishable soul? Tell me, also, O greatest of 
theologians! what is that misrepresentation, which misleads the mind to the 
erroneous conception, of the unreal world for a reality. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — The soul by its continued association with unreal and 
perishable things, thinks itself as one of them, and takes upon it the title of an 
unreal and perishable egoism, as a boy by association of his thoughts 
imagines a false apparition to be a real ghost. (Egoism and tuism and suism, 
means the personality or personal reality of the three persons, I, thou, and this, 
— aham, twam, and sah, which in all systems of mystic philosophy, is denied 
of all finite beings. The absolute Ego is the supreme soul, and all other souls 
are but reflections of it). 


4. All things being situated in one absolute reality, it is hard to account for 
one’s personal egoism, and to say how and whence this conception came to be 
in vogue. (The impersonal and universal soul is the true Ego, and has no 
personal existence what ever). 


5. In fact there is no egoism beside that of the supreme soul; and yet is the 
nature of the injudicious to make a difference of a finite and infinite Ego, and 
of a mortal and immortal soul, as we see two streams of water in the sun- 


beams in a sandy desert. (The human soul is no other, than a particle of the 
supreme). 


6. The mind is a spacious mind (of richest gems) in this extensive creation, 
and depends for its support on the supreme soul, as the waves are dependent 
on the waters of the sea, for their rise and subsistence. (The mind is the 
individual soul, but the soul is the universal and undivided spirit and opposed 
to the European doctrine of the minds being a generic and the soul an 
individual name). 


7. Therefore, give up, O Rama! your erroneous view of the reality of the 
world and your reliance on the baseless fabric of the universe, and rely with 
delight on your judicious view of the true substratum and support of all. 


8. Inquire now into the nature of Truth, with a rational understanding; and 
being freed from all error and bias, discard all that is false and untrue. 


The idea of Tritheism and faith in the mystic number three, is as deeply rooted 
in the Hindu mind, as we find it in the Alexandrine triad of old, and the 
Trinity of modern Christians. We have already given an ample exposition of 
the various triads in Hindu theology and other sciences in our introduction to 
this work. (Vol. I. Sect XI. p. 61). Besides those we meet herewith some other 
triads which are conveyed in the allegorical story of the old nurse to her infant 
care for his early instruction, though it is doubtful that the boy could either 
understand or derive any benefit thereby. It will be worthwhile to mention 
here the Alexandrian Triad of the three hypostases of the one Being in the 
psyche, — eternal soul, nous, — the mind, and Zoa — Jiva — life or activity. 
This last is the same with the logos — Word, the manifestation of Divine 
power in whom there was life also. Others formed their Triad of matter, soul, 
and force, as the three principia in nature. The Christian Trinity, which some 
maintain as an imitation of the Alexandrians, presents many differences 
respecting some portion of this doctrine, which resulted in the heresies of 
Arianism, Sabellianism, Nestorianism efc. see further particulars on this head 
in Lewe’s History of Philosophy, Vol. 1, p. 391. 


9. Why do you think the unconfined soul to be confined in the body? It is vain 
to suppose the nature of the infinite soul, to be confined in any place. 


10. To suppose the one as many, is to make a division of and create a variety 
in the nature of the Supreme Spirit. Again, the Divine essence being diffused 
alike in all, it cannot be said to be confined in one thing and absent in another. 


11. The body being hurt, the soul is supposed to be hurt likewise, but no pain 
or hurt or sickness of any kind, can appertain to the unchanging soul. 


12. The body being hurt or weakened or destroyed, there is no injury done to 
the soul, as the bellows (of the blacksmith) being burnt, the wind with which 
it was filled, escapes unconsumed. 


13. Whether the body lasts or falls, it is of no matter to us, (since the soul 
survives its loss), as the flower being destroyed, deposits its fragrance in the 
air. 


14. Let any pain or pleasure befall on the body, as dew-drops falling on lotus- 
leaves; it can affect us no more than it is for the fading lotus, to affect or afflict 
in any manner the flying and aerial bee. 


15. Let the body rise or fall, or fly in smoke and mix with the air; these 
changing forms of it, can have no effect whatever on the soul. 


16. The connection of the body with the soul, is like that between the cloud 
and the wind; and as that of the lotus with the bee. (The former is moved and 
alighted upon by the latter, and not that the latter is preserved by the former). 


17. If the mind which forms a part of all living bodies, is not affected by 
bodily pain, how is it possible that the primary power of intellect which 
resides in the soul, shall ever be subject to death? 


18. If you know, O wise Rama, the soul to be indestructible and inseparable 
(from any place or person), what cause then can you have to sorrow for the 
supposed separation or disappearance of the all-pervading spirit? 


19. After destruction of the body, the soul flies from it, to abide in the infinite 
space of empty air, like the wind mixing with the air after dispersion of the 
clouds, and the bee flying to it after the lotus has faded away. 


20. The mind also is not relaxed with all its enjoyments of life, unless it is 
burnt down by the knowledge of truth; why then speak of the annihilation of 
the soul. 


21. The connection of the perishable body and imperishable soul, is analogous 
to that of a vessel and the fruit it holds, and of a pot and the air in it. (.e., Of 
the container and the contained; the frame-work is fragile, but its component 
is infrangible). 


22. As a plum is held in the hand or it falls into a pit, so the vacuous soul is 
reposed in or deposed from the body. 


23. As a pot being broken, its vacuous part mixes, with the air, so the body 
being dissolved, the soul remains unhurt in the empty space. 


24. The mind and body of living beings, are apt to disappear at times from 


their habitations, and hide themselves under the shroud of death; why then 
should we sorrow for such renegades? 


25. Seeing the death and disappearance of others at all times, no fool learns to 
think for himself, but fears to die like all ignorant fools. 


26. Therefore, renounce, O Rama! Your selfish desires, and know the falsity 
of egoism. Forsake the bond of the body for flying upward, as a new fledged 
bird flies above, and leaves its nest behind. 


27. It is an act of the mind, to lead us to good or evil, as it is another function 
of it, to fabricate the false fabric of the world like appearances in a dream. 


28. It is our incorrigible ignorance, that stretches out these imageries for our 
misery only; and it is our imperfect knowledge, which shows these false- 
hoods as realities unto us. 


29. It gives us a dim sight of things, as we view the sky obscured by a mist; 
and it is the nature of the mind, to have an erroneous view of objects. 


30. The dull and unreal world, appears as a reality to us; and the imaginary 
duration of the universe, is as a protracted dream in our sleep. 


31. It is the thought or idea of the world, that is the cause of its formal 
existence, as it is the blinking of the eye, that shows a thousand disks of the 
sun and moon in the clear sky. 


32. Now Rama, employ your reason to annihilate the formal world from your 
mind, as the sun dissolves the snows by the heat of his beams. 


33. As one wishing to overcome his cold, gets his object at sunrise, so he who 
wishes to demolish his mind, (its errors), succeeds in it at the rise of his 
reason. 


34. As ignorance increases, so it introduces a train of impervious errors and 
evils. It spreads a magic spell around it, as Samvara the sorcerer showered a 
flux of gold dust about him. 


35. The mind makes the way to its own destruction by its worldliness, and 
acts the part of its own catastrophe or self destruction by all its acts. 


36. The mind cares only for keeping itself from destruction; but it is a fool not 
to know beforehand its imminent death. 


37. The mind by its restless desires, hastens itself to a painful death, which the 
reasonable are trying to avoid by their government of the mind. (It is not right 
to trouble the mind with worldly cares). 


38. The mind that is purified by reason, is purged from its volitions and 


nolitions, and resigns itself to the will of the Divine soul, which is ever 
present before it. 


39. The curbing of the mind, is the magnanimity of soul, and gives rise to 
liberation from pain, therefore, try to restrain your mind, and not to give a 
loose rein to it. 


40. The world is a vast wilderness, full of the forests of our weal and woe, and 
beset by the dragons of disease and death on all sides; the irrational mind is as 
the rampant lord of the desert land, and drives us anon to all sorts of dangers 
and difficulties. 


41. As the sage ended his sermon, the day departed to its end, and the sun 
declined to the west to his evening service. The assembly broke after mutual 
salutations, and met again and greeted each other with the parting night and 
rising sun. (This is the Brahma muhurta or dawning day break at 4 A.M.) 


CHAPTER CIII. 


On the nature of the mind. 


Argument. The sufferings of men of ungovernable minds, serving as a lesson 
towards the liberation of the wise. 


Some minds are seen to break-forth in passions like the torrents of oceans, and 
to heave and overflow on earth on every side. (By the unrestrained rage of 
their appetites). 


2. They reduce the great to lowness, and exalt the low also to greatness; they 
make strangers of their friends, as also friends to strangers. (Such is the 
changeful state of the human mind). 


3. The mind makes a mountain of a mote by its thought, and thinks itself a 
lord with its little of a trifle. (These are those that are puffed up with vanity. 
Falsus honor juvat, non sed mendosum and mendacem. — Horace). 


4. The mind being elated by the prosperity, which attends upon it by the will 
of God, spreads a large establishment for a while, and is then reduced to 
poverty in a moment at its loss. (Fortuna nunquam perpetuo est bona: — 
Good luck lasts not forever. The highest spoke in fortune’s wheel, may soon 
turn lowest. Fortuna transmutat incertos honores. Fortune is ever shifting her 
uncertain favours). 


5. Whatever things are seen in this world to be stationary or changeful, are all 
but accidents according to the state of viewing them in that light; Just as a 
passing vessel is thought stationary by its passenger on board, but as moving 
by the spectators on the shore. 


6. The mind is so changeful by the influence of time, place, power and nature 
of acts and things, that it continually shuffles from one feeling to another, like 
an actor personating his many parts on the stage. 


7. It takes the truth for untruth and its reverse for certainty, so it takes one 


thing for another, and its joy and grief are all of its own making. (i.e., The 
creations of its imagination). 


8. The fickle mind gets everything according to its own doing, and all the 
actions of our hands, feet, and other members of the body, are regulated by 
the same. (The mind is the mover of bodily organs). 


9. Hence it is the mind that reaps the rewards of good or evil according to its 
past acts, just as the tree bears its fruits, according as it is pruned and watered 
in time. (Reap as you sow). 


10. As the child makes a variety of his toy dolls at home from clay, so the 
mind is the maker of all its good and bad chances, according to the merit or 
demerit of its past actions. 


11. Therefore, the mind which is situated in the earthen dolls of human 
bodies, can do nothing of its own will, unless it is destined so by virtue of its 
former acts. (The mind that moves the body, is itself moved by the destiny 
derived from its prior acts). 


12. As the seasons cause the changes in trees, so the mind makes differences 
in the dispositions of living beings. (As many men so many minds, and hard 
to have two men of one mind). 


13. The mind indulges in its sport of deeming a span as a league, and vice- 
versa of thinking a long as short, as in the case of the operations of our 
dreams and fancy. 


14. A Kalpa age is shortened to a moment, and so is a moment prolonged to a 
Kalpa, by the different modes of the mind; which is the regulator both of the 
duration and distance of time and place. 


15. The perceptions of the quickness and slowness of motion, and of much or 
little in quantity, as also of swiftness or tardiness of time, belong to the mind 
and not to the dull material body, (though these sensations are derived by 
means of the bodily organs). 


16. So the feelings of sickness and error and of dolor and danger, and the 
passing of time and distance of place, all rise in the mind like the leaves and 
branches of trees. (From its inborn perceptions of them). 


17. The mind is the cause of all its feelings, as water is the cause of the sea, 
and the heat of fire. Hence the mind is the source of all things, and intimately 
connected with whatever is existent in the world. 


18. The thoughts that we have of the agent, effect, and instrument of things, as 
also of the viewer, view, and the instrumentality of sight, all belong to the 


mind. 


19. The mind alone is perceived to be in existence in the world; and its 
representations of the forests and all other things are but variations of itself! 
So the thinking man sees the substance of gold only, in all its various 
formations of bangles and bracelets, which are taken for naught. (All 
objectivity is dependent on the subjective mind, as there is no perception of an 
object independent of the mind. See identity of the subjective and objective in 
the Pantheistic Idealism of Spinoza). 


CHAPTER CIV. 


Story of a Magic Scene. 


Argument. Story of king Lavana and his court, and the Advent of a Sorcerer 
there. 


Vasishtha said: — Hear me relate to you Rama, a very pretty narrative, 
representing the world as an enchanted city, stretched out by magic of the 
magician Mind. 


2. There lies on the surface of this earth a large and populous tract of land by 
name of Northern Pandava, a country full of forests of various kinds. (We 
know the Northern Kuru the Uttara Kuru or Otterokoros of Ptolemy, to be the 
Trans-Himalayan Tartary, which is here termed the North-Pandava, from the 
King Pandu’s rambles and the wanderings of the Pandava princes in it in their 
exile). 


3. The forests were deep and dense, and there dwell in the fastness of these 
woods a number of holy hermits; while the Vidyadhara damsels had wrought 
there many a bower of swinging creepers (for their amusement). 


4. Heaps of rubicund farina, wafted by the breeze from full-blown lotuses, 
rose as high as crimson hills on the ground; which was decorated with wreaths 
and garlands by the loads of flowers, which had fallen thereon from the 
surrounding trees. 


5. Groves of Karanja plants were decorated with bundles of blossoms, to the 
utmost boundaries of the jungle; and the firmament resounded with the 
rustling noise, emitted by the leafy date trees in the villages around. 


6. There was a range of tawny rocks on one side, and fields brown with 
ripened corn on another; while the warbling of cerulean doves re-echoed in 
the resonant groves about. 


7. The shrill cry of the stork resounded in the forest, and the branches of 


tamala and pdtali flowers, hang down like ear-rings of the hills. 


8. Flocks of various birds, were making a chorus with their vocal music; and 
the blooming crimson blossoms of pdribhadra arbors, were hanging over the 
banks, all along the length of the running streams. 


9. Damsels in the cornfields, were exciting the passion of love with their vocal 
music; and the breezes blowing amidst forests of fruits and flowers, dropped 
down the blossoms in copious showers. 


10. The birds, Siddhas and seers were sitting and singing outside their homes 
of mountain caverns, and made the valley symphonious with their celestial 
strains of holy hymns. 


11. The Kinnara and Gandharva concerts, were singing under their bowers of 
plantain trees; and the greyish and gaysome groves of flowers, were filled 
with the hum of the whistling breeze. 


12. The lord of this romantic country, was the virtuous Lavana, a descendant 
of king Harish Chandra; and as glorious as his sire the sun upon earth. (This 
prince had descended of the solar race). 


13. His fair fame formed a white diadem to crown his head, and adorn his 
shoulders with its brightness; it whitened the hills in the form of so many 
Sivas, besmeared with the hoary ashes upon his tufted head and person. 


14. His sword had made an end of all his enemies, who trembled as in a fit of 
fever on the hearing of his august name. 


15. His greatest exertion was devoted to the supportance to respectable men; 
and his name was uttered like that of Hari by all his people. 


16. The Apsara fairies sang with glee the songs of his praise, sitting in the 
celestial seats of the gods on the tops of the Himalayan mountains. 


17. The regent of the skies heard with attention, the songs of the heavenly 
maids, and the aerial swans and cranes of Brahma, were responsive to their 
eulogies with their gabbling cries. (Dhani is the enharmonic diapason of 
Indian music). 


18. His uncommonly magnanimous and wonderous acts, which were free 
from the fault of niggardliness, were unlike to anything that was ever heard or 
seen by anybody. 


19. His nature knew no wiliness, and it was a perfect stranger to pride and 
arrogance; he kept himself steadfast to his magnanimity, as Brahma held 
himself fast to his rudrdksha beads. 


20. He used to take his seat in the royal throne amidst his courtiers, as the lord 
of the day occupies his seat in the sky for the eight parts, (watches), of the 
day. (The Ritual day is divided into eight yamdrdha parts for particular rites 
and duties). 


21. After he was seated there as gladly as the moon in the firmament, his 
chieftains and legions appeared before the throne with their salutations (and 
presenting of arms). 


22. Then, as the royal party was seated in the court-hall, beautiful songstresses 
(that were in attendance), began to sing, and ravish the hearts of the hearers, 
with the music of lutes. 


23. Then a set of handsome maids, waved the beautiful chouries which they 
held in their hands, over the person of the king: and the ministers and 
counsellors, as wise as the preceptors of the gods and demons, (Vrihaspati and 
Sukra), took their seats beside him. 


24. The ministers were then employed in the public affairs pending before 
them; and the dextrous officers were engaged in relating the reports of the 
country to the king. 


25. There were the learned pandits reciting the holy legends from their books, 
and the courteous panegyrists chaunting their sacred eulogies on one side. 


26. There appeared at this time a magician in his fantastic attire, and with his 
blustering vauntings before the Court, in the manner of a roaring cloud, 
threatening to deluge the earth with his showers of rain. 


27. He bowed down to the ruler of the earth, and lowly bent his capped head 
and neck before the court, as a tree hangs down its loads of fruits, at the foot 
of a mountain. 


28. He approached before the king, as a monkey advances to a shady and lofty 
tree, loaded with fruits and flowers. (The artful sorcerer is compared with the 
cunning monkey prying into a fruitful arbour). 


29. The flippant brat then conveyed the fragrance of his sense, with the breath 
of his mouth, and addressed the lofty headed king with his sweet voice, as the 
humble bee hums to the lotus. 


30. Reign, O lord! that sittest on the earthly throne like the moon enthroned on 
high, to mark one wonderful feat of my art, known as the trick of Kharolikika. 


31. Saying so, he began to twirl about his magic staff set with peacocks’ 
feathers, which began to display many wonders like the wonderful works of 
creation. 


32. The king beheld it describing a bright circlet, emitting the particles of its 
rays around, and viewed in the manner, that the god Indra views his 
variegated rainbow sparkling afar in the sky. 


33. As this time a chieftain of Sinde, (who was the master of horse,) entered 
the court, as a cloud appears in the starry heaven. 


34. He was followed by his swift and beautiful courser, as the Uchcha Srava 
horse of Indra follows his master in the celestial regions. (This is the Pegasus 
of the Hindus). 


35. The chieftain brought the horse before the king and said this horse my 
lord! is a match for the Uchcha Srava, who was produced from the milky 
ocean, and flies with the swiftness of the mind. 


36. This horse of mine, O king of the earth! is the best of his kind, and a 
compeer of Uchcha Sravas; he is a personification of the wind in the swiftness 
of his flight. 


37. My master has made a present of this horse to you, my lord, because the 
best of things is a suitable present to the best of men. (Great gifts are for the 
great; or, a donum worthy of the donor and donee). 


38. After he had ended his speech the magician spoke in a voice, as sweet as 
that of the swallow, after the roaring of the cloud is hushed to silence. 


39. Do you my lord ride upon this horse, and wander at your pleasure with 
full lustre on earth, as the sun shines forth in splendour by his revolving round 
the heavens. 


40. Hearing this the king looked at the horse, and ordered him to be brought 
before him, in a voice like that of the peacock answering the roaring cloud. 


41. The king saw the horse brought before him as a figure drawn in painting, 
and gazed upon him with his fixed eyes and without closing his eye-lids, as he 
was himself turned to a painting. (A gift horse is looked in his gait, and not in 
his mouth). 


42. Having looked upon him for a long time, he mounted on his back, and sat 
still with his closed eye-lids, as the sage Agastya was confounded at the sight 
of the sea and its rocks. 


43. He continued for a couple of hours as if he was drowned in his meditation, 
and as insensible saints remain in the enjoyment of their internal and spiritual 
stupor. 


44. He remained as spell-bound and overpowered by his own might, and 


could not be roused from his stupefaction by anybody, but was absorbed in 
some thoughts of his own mind. 


45. The flapping chouries ceased to wave about his person, and the holders of 
the flappers remained as still as the moon beams at night. 


46. The Courtiers remained motionless at seeing his quiescence, as when the 
filaments of the lotus, remain unmoved, by their being besmeared in the mud. 


47. The noise of the people in the Courtyard, was all hushed and quiet, as the 
roaring of the clouds is stopped at the end of the rains. 


48. The ministers were drowned in their thoughtfulness and doubts at the state 
of their king, as the host of the gods were filled with anxiety on seeing the 
club bearing Vishnu fighting with the demons. 


49. The people were struck with terror and dismay, at seeing this apoplexy of 
their prince who remained with his closed eyes, like closed lotuses shorn of 
their beauty. 


CHAPTER CV. 


The breaking of the magic spell. 


Argument. Inquiry of the courtiers into the cause of the king’s apoplexy, and 
his answer thereto. 


Vasishtha continued: — After a couple of hours the king returned to his 
senses, like the lotus flower resuming its beauty, after the mists of the rainy 
weather are over. 


2. He shook his body decorated with ornaments upon his seat, as a mountain 
shakes with its peaks and woods at an earthquake. 


3. His seat also shook under him as he came to his sense and moved his body, 
just as the seat of Siva on the Kaildsa mountain, is shaken by the movement of 
the infernal elephant. 


4. As he was about to fall down from the horseback, he was held up by and 
supported upon the arms of his attendants, as the mount Meru is kept from 
falling, by the hills at its feet and sides. 


5. The attendants bore the prince, in the deranged state of his mind upon their 
arms, as the still waters of the sea bear the figure of the moon that is disturbed 
by the waves. 


6. The king asked them softly saying, what place was it and whose court it 
was, as the bee shut up in the flower cup of the lotus, asked it when it is about 
to sink in the water saying: — Ah! where am I, and where am I going? 


7. The Courtiers then respectfully asked the king, what was the matter with 
him, with a voice as sweet as the lotus utters to the sun when he is eclipsed by 
Rahu. 


8. The attendants also with all the ministerial officers, asked him about his 
case, as the gods terrified at the great deluge, asked the sage Markandeya 
concerning the occurrence. 


9. Lord! we were greatly dismayed, said they, upon seeing you in that plight, 
because the stoutest hearts are broken by accidents proceeding from unknown 
causes. 


10. What were those pleasant objects of your desire, that had so much 
bewitched your mind? Since you know that all the objects which appear 
pleasant for the present, prove to be bitter at the end. Gaudia principium 
nostri sunt saepe doloris. — Ovid. Pleasure is often the introduction to pain, 
and amid the roses fierce Repentence rears her snaky crest. — Thomson. So: 
Pleasure is pain, when drunk without a rein. 


11. How could your clear understanding, which has been pacified by the grand 
doctrines and precepts of the wise, fall in to the false fascinations of the 
foolish? (Falsum gaudium juvat, quem nisi mendosum. False pleasure pleases, 
none but the base). 


12. The minds of fools are fascinated by the trivial and tawdry trifles of 
common people, but they are of no value to the high minded as one like 
yourself. (The good and great are above the reach of the allurements of 
pleasure). 


13. Those who are elated by the pride of their bodies, have their minds always 
excited by ungovernable passions, which take their lead through life. (Pride is 
innate in beauty). 


14. Your mind is elevated above common things, it is calm and quiet and 
enlightened by truth, and fraught with excellent qualities; yet it is strange to 
find it out of its wits. 


15. The mind unpracticed to reasoning, is led away by the currents of time and 
place, but the noble-minded are not subject to the influence of incantations 
and enchanting spells. 


16. It is impossible for the reasoning mind to be weakened or deranged, the 
high mind like the mount towering of Meru, is not to be shaken by the 
boisterous winds. 


17. Thus consoled by his companions, the countenance of the king resumed its 
colour, as the face of the full moon collects its brightness, in the bright 
fortnight of the month. 


18. The moon-like face of the king was brightened by his full open eyes, as 
the vernal season is beautified by the blooming blossoms, after the winter 
frost has passed away. 


19. The king’s face shone forth with astonishment, and it was mixed with fear, 


at the remembrance of the charm of the magician, as the moon shines pale in 
the sky, after her deliverance from the shadow of an eclipse. 


20. He saw the magician and said to him with a smile, as the serpent Takshaka 
addresses his enemy, — the weasel. 


21. You trickster, said he, what was this snare which thou didst entrap me in, 
and how was it that thou didst perturb my tranquil soul by thy wily trick, as a 
gale disturbs the calm of the sea. 


22. How wonderful are the captivating powers of spells, which they have 
derived from the Lord, and whose influence had overpowered on the strongest 
sense of my mind. 


23. What are these bodies of men, that are subject to death and disease, and 
what are our minds that are so susceptible of errors, and lead us to continued 
dangers. 


24. The mind residing in the body, may be fraught with the highest 
knowledge, and yet the minds of the wisest of men, are liable to errors and 
illusion. (Hominis est errare. To err is human). 


25. Hear ye courtiers! the wonderful tale of the adventures, which I passed 
through under this sorcery, from the moment that I had met this magician at 
first. 


26. [have seen so many passing scenes in one single moment under this 
wizard, as had been shown of old by Brahma in his destruction of the theurgy 
of Indra. (The mighty Sakra spread his Indrajala or the web of his sorcery, in 
order to frustrate the attempts of the valiant Bali against him, and was at last 
foiled himself by the Brahma vidya of Brahma). 


27. Having said so, the king began to relate smilingly to his courtiers, the 
strange wonders which he had beheld in his state of hallucination. 


28. The king said: — I beheld a region full with objects of various kinds, such 
as rivers and lakes, cities and mountains, with many boundary hills, and the 
ocean girding the earth around. 


CHAPTER CVI. 


The Talisman of the king’s Marriage with a 
Chandala Maiden. 


(An Allegory of Human Depravity). 


Argument. The king borne on horse-back to the habitation of a huntsman and 
was there married to his maiden daughter. (This adventure resembles that of 
Tajul Maluk in Gule Bakavli.) 


The king related: — This land of mine abounding in forests and rivulets, and 
appearing as the miniature of this orb of the earth. Literally: — as the younger 
twin sister of the earth: — 


2. This land appearing as the paradise of Indra, of which I am the king, and 
where I am now sitting in my court-hall, amidst my courtiers and all these 
citizens. 


3. There appeared here yonder sorcerer from a distant country, like a demon 
rising from the infernal region on the surface of the ground. 


4. He turned round his magic-wand emitting its radiance around, as the 
tempest rends and scatters the rainbow of Indra in fragments in the air. 


5. I was looking intently at the whirling wand, and the horse standing before 
me, and then mounted on the back of the steed in the dizziness of my mind. 


6. I sat on the back of this unmoving horse and seemed to ride on a fleet steed, 
with the swiftness of the Pushkara and Avartaka clouds, riding over the tops 
of immovable rocks. 


7. I then went to a chase in full speed, a pass over an ownerless desert, 
howling as the surges of the boundless ocean. 


8. I was borne afterwards with the horse in the air, as if we were wafted by the 
winds, and dashed onward like common people, who are carried afar by the 
current of the insatiable desires of their minds. 


9. Being then fatigued with my journey, and moving slowly with my wearied 
horse, I reached to the skirt of the desert which was as vacant as the mind of a 
pauper, and as empty as the heart of a woman. (Cares hover over roofs of 
wealth, and secrets from female hearts fly by stealth. Curae laqueata circum 
Tecta volantes. — Hor. Cares that flutter bat-like round fretted roofs. A 
woman is never so weak as in keeping her secrets). 


10. It was as the wilderness of the world burnt down by a conflagration, and 
without even a bird flying over it. It was as a waste of sandy frost, and without 
a tree or any water in it. (A vast desert displayed its barren waste). 


11. It appeared as another sky in its extent, and as the eighth ocean of the 
world. It was as a sea on earth with its bed entirely dried up. (There are in all 
only seven oceans in Indian Geography, the eighth is a myth). 


12. It was as expanded as the mind of a wise man, and as furious as the rage 
of the ignorant. There was no trace of human feet, nor track with any grass or 
herb in it. (Immeasurable and fathomless as the sapient mind.) 


13. My mind was bewildered in this boundless desert, like that of a woman 
fallen into adversity, and having no friend or food or fruit for her supportance. 
(Adversity is the canker of the woman’s breast: asaubhagyan jvardstrindm). 


14. The face of the sky was washed by the waters, appearing in the mirage of 
the sandy desert; and I passed panting in that dreary spot until it was sunset. 


15. It was with great pain and sorrow, that I passed across that vast desert, like 
the wise man who goes across this world, which is all hollow and void within. 


16. After passing this desert, I met a thick forest beyond it, when the sun was 
setting in his setting mountain with his horse, and tired with traversing 
through the hollow sphere of heaven. 


17. Here the birds were warbling amidst the jamb and kadamba trees, and 
were the only friends that the weary travellers could meet with, in their weary 
and lonesome journey. 


18. Here detached plots of long grass, were seen waving their tops, like 
covetous men nodding their heads, on finding some riches to their heart’s 
content. (The poor are pleased with a little, and bow down their heads at petty 
pittances). 


19. This shady forest afforded me a little joy, after my pains in the dry and 


dreary desert, as a lingering disease seems more desirable to men, than the 
pains attending on death. 


20. I then got under the shade of Jambira tree, and felt myself as pleased, as 
when the sage Markandeya got upon the top of the mountain at the great 
deluge. (The Ararat of Noah?). 


21. Then I took shelter under the creepers, descending from its branches, as 
the scorching top of a mount, finds a temporary shadow under the umbrage of 
a dark cloud. 


22. As I was hanging down with holding the pendant roots in my hand, the 
horse slided away from underneath me, as the sins of a man glide under him, 
that puts his trust in the sacred Ganges streams. (The purificatory power of 
Ganges water, resides even in the belief of its holiness, and does not consist 
only in bathing in it). 


23. Fatigued with my travel of the live-long day in the dreary waste, I took my 
refuge under this tree; as a traveller rests under the shelter of a Kalpa tree at 
the setting of the sun. 


24. All this business of the world was stopped, as the sun went down to rest in 
the western hills. (The Hindu ritual prescribing no duty for the night 
consisting of three watches, — triyama rajani). 


25. As the shade of night overspread the bosom of the universe, the whole 
forest below betook itself to its nightly rest and silence. (The vegetable 
creation was known to sleep at night by the Hindu sages). 


26. I reposed myself in the grassy hollow of a branch of that tree, and rested 
my head on the mossy bed like a bird in its nest. (Primeval men slept in the 
hollow of trees like birds, for fear of rapacious animals in the caves of the 
earth below, as also in the caverns of upland hills and mountains). 


27. remained there as insensible as one bitten by a snake, and as a dead body 
that has lost its past remembrance. (Sleep and death are akin to each other, — 
hypnos kai thanatos didumo adelpho). I was as impotent as a sold slave, and 
as helpless as one fallen in a dark ditch or blind pit. Bought slaves, krita- 
ddsas, and their loss of liberty, were in vogue from the earliest times in India. 
(AT HY-H-HAaT = a blind pit). 


28. I passed that one night as a long Kalpa in my senselessness, and I thought 
I was buffeting in the waves like the seer, — Markandeya, at the great deluge. 
(i.e., The body was insensible in the state of sleep; but the mind was active as 
in a dream, which makes an age of a moment). 


29. I passed the night under a train of dangers and difficulties, that invaded me 
as in the state of dreaming; and I had no thought about my bathing or eating or 
worshipping my Maker, (the mind being wholly occupied by the objects of 
the dream). 


30. I passed the night in restlessness and disquiet, shaking like the branch of a 
tree; and this single night of trouble was as long as it was tedious to me, (like 
the time of a lingering disease). 


31. A melancholy overspread my countenance, as darkness had veiled the face 
of the night, and my waking eyes kept watching for the day, like blue-lotuses 
expecting with their watchful eyes the rising moon. 


32. The demoniac noise of wild beasts being hushed in the forest at the end of 
the night, there fell a shivering fit on me with the clattering of my teeth 
through excessive cold. 


33. I then beheld the east, red with the flush of intoxication, as if it was 
laughing at seeing me drowned in my difficulties. 


34. I saw the sun advancing afterwards towards the earth, and to mount on his 
Airavata the regent elephant of that quarter. He seemed to be so full of glee, 
as the ignorant man has in his folly, and the poor man in obtaining a treasure. 


35. Having got up from my mossy bed, I shook off my bed cloth, like the god 
Siva tossing about his elephantine hide at his giddy dance in the evening. (See 
Magh. Book I). 


36. I then began to wander in the wide forestland, as the god Rudra roves 
about the wide world, after its desolation by his demons at the end of Kalpas. 


37. There was no animal of any kind to be seen in the desolate desert, as the 
good qualities of good breeding, are never to be found in the persons of the 
illiterate. 


38. I saw only the lively birds, perching and chirping all about the woods 
without intermission. 


39. It was then at mid-day, when the sun had run his eighth hour, and the 
plants had dried up the dews of their morning baths. 


40. That I beheld a damsel carrying some food and a goblet of water, on the 
way as Hari bore the poisonous liquor to the demons in his disguise in the 
shape of Madhavi. 


41. She was of a swarthy complexion, and dressed in sable black attire, and 
looked askance at me, when I advanced towards her as the bright moon 


appears towards the dark and sable night. 


42. Lasked her to give me some of her food in my great distress, because, I 
told her, one is enriched by relieving the distress of the needy. 


43. O good maid, said I, increasing hunger is consuming my bowels and I 
would take any food, even as the female serpent devours her own brood and 
young, in the excess of her hunger. (Hunger beats down the stony wall, and 
impure food is pure to the hungry). 


44. I begged of thee and yet thou gavest me nothing, but dost remain as 
inexorable as the goddess of fortune, who declines to favour the wretched, 
however they implore her aid. (Fortune turns a deaf ear to the supplications of 
the poor). 


45. Then I kept a long time, following her closely from one wood to another, 
and clinging to her as her shadow, moving behind her in the afternoon. 


46. She then turned to me and said: — Know me, to be a Chandala girl and 
bearing the name of Harakeyuri; we are as cruel as Rdakshasas, and feeders on 
human flesh as on those of horses and elephants. 


47. You cannot, O King! get your food by merely your craving it of me; as it 
is hard to have the favour of men, without first meeting with their desires. 


48. Saying so, she went on trippingly at every step, and then entered into an 
arbour on the wayside and spoke merrily unto me, saying: — 


49. Well, I will give you of this food, if you will consent to be my husband; 
for it is not the business of base and common people to do good to others, 
before securing their own good. 


50. My Chandala father is here ploughing in the field, with his sturdy yoke of 
bulls, and has the figure of a demon, standing in the cemetery with his 
haggardly hungry and dusky stature. 


51. This food is for him, and may be given to you, if you will agree to espouse 
me, because the husband deserves to be served even at the peril of one’s life. 


52. To this I replied, I agree to take thee to my wife, for what fool is there that 
will abide by the usage of his family, when his life is in danger? 


53. She then gave me half of the food she had with her, as Madhavi parted 
with half of her ambrosia to the hungry Indra of old. 


54. Late the Chandala’s food, and drank the beverage of Jambu fruits which 
she gave me, and then rested at that place, and fell to a sleep caused by my 
fatigue and long walking. 


55. Then she approached to me, as a black cloud advances before the sun; she 
held me in her arms, and led me onward with her guiding hand, and as fondly 
as her second self. 


56. She took me to her father, a fat and ugly fellow of a repulsive appearance, 
as the tormenting agony of death, leads a person to the hideous cell of the 
devil. 


57. My companion whispered to his ears the tidings of our case, as the black 
bee hums her tale softly to the ear of an elephant (in order to sip his frontal 
juice or ichor of mada-bari). 


58. This man, said she, is to be my husband, if you, my father, will give your 
consent. To this he expressed his approval by saying, — “Vadham be it so,” 
by the end of this day, (when marriage rites usually take place and is called 
godhuli, or the dusty dusk of returning herds from their pasture grounds). 


59. He loosened the bulls from their yoke, as the regent of death releases his 
hell hounds. And it was in the dusk of the day, when the sky was obscured by 
the evening mist, and rising dust of godhuli, that we were dismissed from the 
demons’ presence, to take our own way. 


60. We passed the great jungle in a short time, and reached the Chandala’s 
abode in the evening, as the demons pass amidst the funeral ground, to rest in 
their charnel vaults at night. 


61. The dwelling had on one side, the slaughtered monkeys, cocks, and crows, 
and swarms of flies flying over them, and sucking the blood sprinkled over the 
ground. 


62. The moist entrails and arteries of the slaughtered beasts, that were hung up 
to be dried in the sun, were chased by the ravenous birds of the air, that kept 
hovering over them, while flocks of birds fluttered over the Jambira trees (to 
pick up the fruits for their food). 


63. There were heaps of fat laid up to be dried in the portico, and ravenous 
birds flying over them; and the skins of the slain animals, which were 
besmeared with blood, lay in piles before their sight. 


64. Little children had bits of flesh in their hands, beset by buzzing flies; and 
there were the veteran Chandalas, sitting by and rebuking the boys. 


65. We then entered the house scattered with disgusting entrails and intestines 
about, and I thought myself as the ghost of a dead man standing beside the 
regent of death. 


66. I had then a seat of a big plantain leaf, given to me with due respect, in 


order to be seated as a welcome guest, in the abominable abode of my new- 
earned father-in-law. 


67. My squint eyed mother-in-law then eyed at me, with her blood-red 
eyeballs, and muttered with gladness in her look, “is this our would-be son-in- 
law?” 


68. Afterwards, we sat on some seats of skin, and I partook of the repast 
which was served before me, as the reward of my sins. (i.e., This fare was as 
unpalatable, as the requital of one’s crimes). 


69. I heard there many of those endearing words, which were the seeds of 
endless misery, as also many such speeches that were unpleasant to my mind, 
for their being of no benefit to me. 


70. Afterwards, it came to pass on one day, when the sky was cloudless and 
the stars were shining, that they presented a dowry of cloths and other articles 
before me, (as ddnadravya). 


71. With these they made over that frightful maiden to me, and we were 
joined together as black and white, and as sin and its torment together, (i.e., 
she was given to torment me for my past sins). 


72. The flesh-eating Chandalas, festivated the marriage ceremony with 
profusion of wine and loud shouts of joy; they beat their sounding tomtoms 
with merriment, as wicked men delight in carrying on the acts of their 
vileness. (The giddy mirth of the rabble, is compared with the revelry of the 
riotous). 


CHAPTER CVII. 


Description of a train of Dangers. 


Argument. The King’s residence at the Chandala’s abode and his adventures 
during sixty years at that place. 


The king continued: — What more shall I say of that festivity, which had 
quite subdued my soul? I was thenceforward named as Pushta-Pukkusha or 
cherished Chandala by my fellows. (Beng-ghar-jdmdi or home-bred 
bridegroom). 


2. After the festivity had lasted for a week, and I had passed full eight months 
at that place, my wife had her pubertal efflorescence, and afterwards her 
conception also (garbhadhana and garbha). 


3. She was delivered of a daughter which is the cause of woe, as a danger is 
the spring of calamities. (The parallel passage is well known, darikd dukhkha 
ddyika, a daughter is the source of grief). This daughter grew up as soon as 
the growth of the cares and sorrows of the ignorant. (The wise neither care nor 
sorrow for any earthly matter). 


4. She brought forth again a black boy in course of three years; as the fruit of 
folly raises the false expectation of fruition. (i.e., We are often frustrated in 
our hopes in our boys). 


5. She again gave birth to a daughter and then to another boy; and thus, I 
became an old Chandala, with a large family in that forest land. 


6. In this manner passed many years with these shoots of my woe in that 
place, as a Brahmicide has to pass long years of torment in hell-fire. (Here is a 
piece of priestcraft in the augmented torment for killing a Brahman as any 
other man). 


7. [had to undergo all the pains of heat and cold, of chill-winds and frost, 
without any help to be had in that dreary forest; and as an old tortoise is 


constrained to move about in the mud of a pool forever. 


8. Being burthen with the cares of my family, and troubled by anxieties of my 
mind, I saw my increasing afflictions like a conflagration rising all about me. 


9. Clad in bark and wrapt in old and ragged cloths, with a covering of grass 
and a straw hat on my head, I bore loads of logs from the woods, as we bear 
the burden of sins on our backs and heads. (See Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress). 


10. had to pass full many a live-long year, under the shade of dhavaii trees, 
with no other cloth or covering on me than an old tattered, dirty and stinking 
Kaupina, which was beset by fleas and leeches. (Kaupina a piece of rag 
covering the lower secret parts of the body as that of Fakirs and Yogis). 


11. I was exposed to the chill cold winds, in all my toils to support my family; 
and lay like a frog in some cave in the woods, under the keen blasts of winter. 


12. The many quarrels and bickerings, and the sorrows and wailings, to which 
I was often exposed at home and abroad, made my blood to gush out in tears 
from my weeping eyes. 


13. We passed the nights on marshy grounds in the jungle, and being deluged 
by the raining clouds, we took our shelter in the caverns of mountains, with no 
other food than the roasted flesh of bears. 


14. Afterwards the rainy season of sowing being over, and the dark drizzling 
clouds having dispersed in air, I was driven from my abode, by the 
unkindness of my relations and continued contention with others. 


15. Being thus in dread of everybody in the neighbourhood, I removed myself 
to the house of another man, where I dwelt with my wife and prattling 
children for some years. 


16. Then vexed by the scolding of the termagant Chandalf, and the threats of 
the villainous Chandalas, my face became as pale as the waning moon under 
the shadow of Rahu, (the ascending node). 


17. I was bit and scratched by the teeth and nails of my wife, as if my flesh 
and muscles were torn and gnawed down under the grinders of a tigress; and I 
was as one caught by or sold to a hellish fiend, and thought myself as changed 
to an infernal being also. 


18. I suffered under the torrents of snow thrown out of the caverns of the 
Himalaya, and was exposed to the showers of frost, that fell continually in the 
dewy season. 


19. I felt on my naked body the iron shafts of rain, as darts let fly from the 


bow of death; and in my sickly and decrepit old age, I had to live upon the 
roots of withered vegetables. 


20. I dug them out plentifully from the woodland grounds and ate them with a 
zest, as a fortunate man has in tasting his dainty dishes of well-cooked meat. 


21. I took my food apart and untouched by any body, for fear of being 
polluted by the touch of a vile and base born family; and because the 
pungency of my unsavoury diet, made my mouth wry at every morsel. 


22. While I was famishing in this manner, I saw others had their venison and 
sheep’s flesh bought from other places for their food; and who pampered their 
bodies also with the flesh they cut out from other living animals and devoured 
raw with great zest. 


23. They bought animal flesh sold in iron pots and stuck in spits, for 
undergoing migrations into as many thousand bodies as they have killed and 
fed upon. (This is the Pythagorean doctrine of metempsychosis of the soul, as 
described in Goldsmith’s Citizen of the World). 


24. I often repaired to the garden grounds of the Chandalas, with my spade 
and basket in the cool of the evening, in order to collect the raw flesh, which 
had been cast about in the dirt, for making any food of them. 


25. But the time seemed to turn favourable to me, when I was about to be cast 
into hell, by leading me to take refuge of the mountain caverns, and seek my 
supportance there by the roots and plants growing therein. 


26. In this state, I was met by my good chance, on some Chandalas appearing 
in person before me, and driving away the village dogs with their clubs from 
before them (to the woods). 


27. They gave my wife and children some bad rice as the villagers used to 
take, and we passed the night under the shade of a palm tree, whose withered 
leaves were rattling with the rain drops, that fell in showers upon them. 


28. We passed the night in company with the sylvan apes, with our teeth 
clattering with cold, and the hairs of our bodies standing on their ends, like a 
thousand thorns through coldness. 


29. The rain drops decorated our bodies with granules of vivid pearls, and our 
bellies were as lean and lank like an empty cloud through hunger and for want 
of food. 


30. Then there rose a quarrel in this diresome forest, between me and my 
wife, and we kept answering one another, with our clattering teeth and ruddy 
eyes by effect of the cold. 


31. My foul and dirty person resembled that of a dark black demon, and we 
roved about the borders of rivers and brooks, to fish with a rod and hook in 
my hand. 


32. I wandered also with a trap in my hand, like Yama with his noose at the 
desolation of the earth, and caught and killed and drank the heart blood of the 
deer in my hunger and thirst. 


33. I sucked the warm heart blood, as the milk of my mother’s breast, at the 
time of famishing; and being besmeared in blood, I stood as a blood sucking 
demon in the cemetery. 


34. The Vetdlas of the woods fled before me, as they do from the furies of the 
forests; and I set my snares and nets in the woods, for catching the deer and 
birds of the air. 


35. As people spread the nets of their wives and children, only to be entangled 
in them in the false hope of happiness, so did I spread my net of thread, to 
beguile the birds to their destruction. 


36. Though worried and worn out in the nets of worldly cares, and surrounded 
on every side by the miseries of our vicious lives, yet do our minds take their 
delight, in the perpetration of cruel and foul acts (to the injury of others). 


37. Our wishes are stretched as far and wide, as a running river overflows its 
banks in the rainy season; but the objects of our desires fly afar from us, as 
snakes hide themselves from the snake eating Karabhas by their own 
sagacity. (The Karabha is a quadruped of the weasel kind, and is called 
gohadgel, — in Bengali). 


38. We have cast off kindness from our hearts, as the snake leaves off his 
slough, and take a delight to let fly the hissing arrows of our malice, as the 
thunder storm betides all animals. 


39. Men are delighted at the sight of cooling clouds, at the end of the hot 
season; but they avoid at a distance the rough briny shore spreading wide 
before them. (So men hail their happiness, and avoid their troubles). 


40. But I underwent many a difficulty, which multiplied as thickly upon me, 
as the weeds growing in dales; and I moved about all the corners of that 
hellish spot, during my destined time. (What is decreed, cannot be avoided). 


41. [have sown the seeds of sin under the rain-water of my ignorance, to 
grow speedily as thorns on my way. I have laid hidden snares for the unwary 
innocent, to secure myself in the mountain caves. 


42. [have caught and killed the innocent deer in the trap, to feed upon its 


flesh; and have killed the chouri kine, to lay my head on the hair hanging 
down their necks. 


43. I slept unconscious of myself in my ignorance, as Vishnu lay on his huge 
hydra; I lay with my out-stretched legs and limbs in the brown cell, 
resounding to the yell of wild beasts abroad. 


44. I lay my body also, on the frost of a cave in the marshy ground of 
Vindhya; and wrapped my swarthy form in a tattered quilt, hanging down my 
neck and full of fleas. 


45. I bore it on my back, as a bear bears the long bristles upon him even in the 
hot season; and suffered the heat of the wild fire, which burnt away many wild 
animals which perished in groups as in the last conflagration of the world. 


46. My wife bore her young ones, both for our pleasure as well as pain, as the 
food of the glutton, is both for his satiety and sickness; and the influence of 
planets, is for our good and evil also. 


47. Thus I, the only son of a king, had to pass sixty painful years of my life, as 
so many Kalpa ages of long duration. 


48. [raved sometimes in my rage, and wept at others in my bitter grief; I fared 
on coarse meals, and dwelt, alas! in the abodes of vulgar Chandalas. Thus I 
passed so many years of my misery at that place, as one fastened to the fetters 
of his insatiable desires, is doomed to toil and moil for naught until his death. 
(Bound to our desires, we are dragged to the grave). 


CHAPTER CVIII. 


Description of a Drought and Dearth. 


Argument. The distress of Chandalas caused by famine and want of Rain. 


The king continued to say: — Time passed away, and old age overtook me, 
and turned my beard to blades of grass covered with hoary frost. 


2. My days glided away in alternate joy and grief, brought on by my fate and 
acts, just as a river flows on with the green and dried leaves, which the winds 
scatter over it. 


3. Quarrels and broils, misfortunes and mischances, befell on me every 
moment, and beset me as thickly and as fastly as the arrows of woe flying in a 
warfare. 


4. My foolish mind kept fluttering like a bird, in the maze of my wishes and 
fancies, and my heart was perturbed by passions, like the sea by its raging 
waves. 


5. My soul was revolving on the vehicle of my wandering thoughts, and I was 
borne away by them like a floating straw, to the whirlpool of the eventful 
ocean of time. 


6. I, that moved about like a worm amidst the woodlands of Vindhya for my 
simple supportance, felt myself in the process of years, to be weakened and 
pulled down in my frame, like a biped beast of burthen. 


7. | forgot my royalty like a dead man, in that state of my wretchedness, and 
was confirmed in my belief of a Chandala, and bound to that hilly spot like a 
wingless bird. 


8. The world appeared to me, as desolate as at its final desolation, and as a 
forest consumed by a conflagration; it seemed as the sea-shore lashed by huge 
surges, and as a withered tree struck by a lightning. 


9. The marshy ground at the foot of Vindhya was all dried up, and left no corn 
nor vegetable, nor any water for food or drink; and the whole group of 
Chandalas, was about to die in dearth and dryness. 


10. The clouds ceased to rain, and disappeared from sight, and the winds blew 
with sparks of fire in them. (The hot winds of the monsoon called agni- 
vrishti). 


11. The forest trees were bare and leafless, and the withered leaves were 
strewn over the ground; wild fires were raging here and there, and the wood- 
lands became as desolate, as the abodes of austere ascetics (dwelling in the 
deserts). 


12. There ensued a formidable famine, and a furious flame of wildfire spread 
all around; it burnt down the whole forest, and reduced the grass and gravels 
all to ashes. 


13. The people were daubed with ashes all over their bodies, and were 
famishing for want of food and drink; because the land was without any 
article of food or even grass or water in it, and had turned to a dreary desert. 


14. The mirage of the desert glistened as water, and deluded the dry buffaloes 
to roll in it (as in a pool); and there was no current of breeze to cool the desert 
air. 


15. The call and cry for water, came only to the ears of men, who were 
parching under the burning rays of the torrid sun (in the Deccan). 


16. The hungry mob, hurrying to browse the branches and herbs, yielded their 
lives in those acts; while others sharpened their teeth, in their acts of tearing 
and devouring one another. 


17. Some ran to bite the gum of catechu, thinking it to be a bit of flesh; while 
others were swallowing the stones, as if they were cakes lying on the ground 
before them. 


18. The ground was sprinkled with blood, by the mutual biting and tearing of 
men, as when blood is spilt in profusion, by the lion’s killing a big and 
starving elephant. 


19. Everyone was as ferocious as a lion, in his attempt to devour another as 
his prey; and men mutually fought with one another, as wrestlers do in their 
contest. 


20. The trees were leafless, and the hot winds were blowing as fire-brands on 
all sides; and wild cats were licking the human blood, that was spilt on the 
rocky ground. 


21. The flame of the wild fire rose high in the air, with clouds of smoke 
whirling with the howling winds of the forest; it growled aloud in every place, 
and filled the forest-land with heaps of brown cinders and burning fire brands. 


22. Huge serpents were burnt in their caves, and the fumes rising from these 
burning bodies, served to grow the poisonous plants on the spot; while the 
flame stretching aloft with the winds, gave the sky an appearance of the glory 
of the setting sun. 


23. Heaps of ashes were lifted like dust, by the high howling winds, and stood 
as domes unsupported by pillars in the open sky; and the little children stood 
crying for fear of them, beside their weeping parents. 


24. There were some men who tore a dead body with their teeth, and in their 
great haste to devour the flesh, bit their own hands and fingers, which were 
besmeared in their own blood. 


25. The vultures flying in the air, darted upon the smoke, thinking it a turret of 
trees, and pounced upon the fire brands, taking them for bits of raw flesh. 


26. Men biting and tearing one another, were flying in all directions; when the 
splitting of the burning wood hit upon their breasts and bellies, and made 
them gory with blood gushing out of them. 


27. The winds were howling in the hollow caves, and the flames of the wild 
fire flashing with fury; the snakes were hissing for fear of these, and the burnt 
woods were falling down with hideous noise. 


28. Thus beset by dangers and horrors, with no other shelter than the rugged 
hollows of rocks, this place presented a picture of this world, with its 
circumambient flames, burning as the twelve zodiacal suns on high. 


29. The winds were blowing hot amidst the burning woods and rocks, and 
drying up all things; and the heat of the fire below and the sunbeams above, 
together with the domestic calamities caused by influence of the planet Saturn, 
made this place a counterpart of this woeful world. 


CHAPTER CIX. 


Migration of the Chandalas. 


Argument. The perilous journey through the Delusive World. 


The king continued: — As these calamities continued to rage in this place, by 
the displeasure of destiny; and the disasters of the last dissolution prematurely 
overtook the forest and mountaineers here: — 


2. Some of these men went out from that place, with their wives and children, 
in search of some new abodes in foreign lands, as the clouds disperse and 
disappear from the sky, after the rainy season is over. 


3. They were accompanied by their wives and children and close relatives, 
who clung to them as the members of their bodies; but the lean and infirm 
were left behind them, like the separated branches of trees. 


4. Some of these emigrants were devoured by tigers, as they went out of their 
houses, as unfledged birds are caught by falcons, as they come out of their 
nests. 


5. Some entered into the fire like moths, to put an end to their miserable lives; 
others fell into the pits, like fragments of rocks falling from the hills. 


6. I separated myself from the connections of my father-in-law and others; 
and depending upon myself, I escaped narrowly from that distressed country, 
with my wife and children about me. 


7. We passed the pit-falls and storms, and the wild beasts and snakes, without 
any harm, and came out of that forest safe from all the deadly perils of the 
way. 


8. Having then arrived at the border of that forest, we got to the shade of some 
palm trees, where I lay down my children from my shoulders as burdens of 
my sin and woes. 


9. [halted here after my tiresome journey and lengthened troubles, as one who 
had fled from the confines of hell, and took my rest like the withering lotus, 
from the scorching sun-beams and heat of summer. 


10. My Chandala wife also slept under the same tree, and my two boys lay 
fast asleep in each other’s embrace, under the cooling shade. 


11. Afterwards, my younger son, Prach’chhaka, who was as dear to us as he 
was the less intelligent, rose up and stood before me. 


12. He said with a depressed spirit, and tears gushing out of his eyes, “Papa 
give me soon some meat-food and drink or else I die.” 


13. The little boy repeatedly made the same request, and said with tears in his 
eyes, that he was dying of hunger. 


14. I told him I had no meat, and the more I said so, the more he repeated his 
foolish craving, which could neither be supplied with nor put down to silence. 


15. I was then moved by paternal affection, and affliction of my heart, to tell 
him, “child, cut off a slice of my flesh, and roast and eat it.” 


16. He agreed to it, and said, “give it then’; because his hunger was so 
pressing and his vitality was so much exhausted, that he could not decline to 
crave my flesh for his food. 


17. Being then overpowered by affection and compassion I thought of putting 
an end to all my grief with my life, which became so intolerable to me at his 
excessive distress. 


18. Being unable to endure the pain of my affection, I despaired of my own 
life, and resolved to resort to death, as my only friend at this last extremity. 


19. I collected some wood, and heaped them together for my funeral pile, and 
having put it on fire, I saw it blaze as I wished. 


20. As I was hastening to throw myself on this pile, I was immediately roused 
from my reverie by the sound of music proceeding from this palace, hailing 
me as king, and shouting my victory jaya. 


21. I understood this conjurer had wrought this enchantment on me, and put 
me to all these imaginable troubles for so long a period. 


22. Like the ignorant, I was subject to a hundred changes of fortune (which 
can never approach the wise). As the great and mighty King, — Lavana, had 
been recapitulating and expostulating on the vicissitudes of fortune: — 


23. The sorcerer suddenly disappeared from his sight, at which the courtiers 
looked around them with their staring eyes, and then addressed the king, 


saying: — 


24. This man was no sorcerer, our liege lord! who had no mercenary views of 
his own in this; but it was a divine magic (theurgy), that was displayed to our 
lord, to represent the lot of humanity and the state of the world. 


25. This world is evidently a creation of the mind, and the imaginary world is 
only a display of the infinite power of the Almighty. (It was a coinage of the 
brain, a stretch of the imagination which gives images to ideals). 


26. These hundreds of worldly systems, display the multifarious powers of 
Omnipotence, which delude even the minds of the most wise, to believe in the 
reality of unrealities, as it were by the spell of magic. 


27. This delusion being so potent on the minds of the wise, it is no wonder, 
that our king would be overpowered by it, when all common minds are 
labouring under the same error. 


28. This delusive magic was not spread over the mind, by any trick or art of 
the conjurer, who aimed at nothing more than his own gain, by the act of his 
sorcery. (It is the divine will, which spreads the illusion alike on all minds). 


29. They that love money, never go away of themselves without getting 
something; therefore, we are tossed on the waves of doubt, (i.e., doubtful), to 
take him for a sorcerer. 


30. Vasishtha said: — Rama! though I am sitting here at this moment, before 
you and others of this assembly, yet I am quite sensible of the truth of this 
story, which is no fiction like the tale of the boy I have told you before, nor is 
it any coining or hearsay of mine. 


31. Thus the mind is enlarged by the various inventions of its imagination, as 
a tree is extended by the expansion of its boughs and branches. The extended 
mind encompasses all things, as an outstretched arbor overspreads on the 
ground. It is the mind’s comprehension of everything, and its conversancy 
with the natures of all things, that serve to lead it to its state of perfection. 
(The amplitude of the mind, consists in the extent of its knowledge). 


CHAPTER Cx. 


Description of Mind. 


Argument. The great Magnitude of mental powers, and government of the 
Mind. 


Vasishtha said: — Since the subjective Intellect, chit, has derived the power 
of knowing the objective Intelligibles, chetyas, from the supreme cause in the 
beginning; it went on to multiply and diversify the objects of its intelligence, 
and thus fell from the knowledge of the one intelligent Universal Ego, to the 
delusion of the particular non egos ad infinitum. (The knowledge of the 
subjective universal soul being lost, the mind is left to be bewildered in the 
objective particulars to no end). 


2. Thus Rama, the faculties of the mind, being deluded by the unrealities of 
particulars, they continue to attribute specialities and differences to the 
general ones to their utter error. (Multiplication and differentiation of objects, 
mislead the mind from the universal unity of the only one). 


3. The mental powers are ever busy to multiply the unrealities to infinity, as 
ignorant children are prone to create the false goblins of their fancy, only for 
their terror and trouble. 


4. But the reality soon disperses the troublesome unrealities, and the unsullied 
understanding drives off the errors of imagination, as the sun-shine dispels the 
darkness. 


5. The mind brings distant objects near it, and throws the nearer ones at a 
distance; it trots and flutters in living beings, as boys leap and jump in bushes 
after little birds. 


6. The wistful mind is fearful, where there is nothing to fear, as the affrighted 
traveller takes the stump of a tree for a demon, standing on his way. 


7. The suspicious mind suspects a friend for a foe, as a drunken sot thinks 


himself lying on the ground, while he is walking along. 


8. The distracted mind, sees the fiery Saturn in the cooling moon; and the 
nectar being swallowed as poison, acts as poison itself. 


9. The building of an aerial castle however untrue, is taken for truth for the 
time being; and the mind dwelling on hopes, is a dreamer in its waking state. 


10. The disease of desire is the delusion of the mind; therefore, it is to be 
rooted out at once with all diligence from the mind. 


11. The minds of men being entangled in the net of avarice like poor stags, are 
rendered as helpless as these beasts of prey, in the forest of the world. 


12. He who has removed by his reasoning, the vain anxieties of his mind, has 
displayed the light of his soul, like that of the unclouded sun to sight. 


13. Know, therefore, that it is mind that make the man and not his body that is 
called as such; the body is dull matter, but the mind is neither a material nor 
immaterial substance (as the spirit). 


14. Whatever is done with the mind or voluntarily by any man, know Rama, 
that act to be actually done by him, (since an involuntary action is indifferent 
by itself); and whatsoever is shunned by it, know that to be kept out in actu. 


15. The mind alone makes the whole world, to the utmost end of the spheres; 
the mind is the vacuum, and it is the air and earth in its greatness. (Since it 
comprehends them all in itself, and none of these is perceptible without the 
mind). 


16. If the mind do not join a thing with its known properties and qualities, 
then the sun and the luminaries would appear to be without their light, (as it is 
with the day-blind bats and owls, that take the day light for darkness, and the 
dark night for their bright day light). 


17. The mind assumes the properties of knowledge and ignorance, whence it 
is called a knowing or unknowing thing; but these properties are not to be 
attributed to the body, for a living body is never known to be wise, nor a dead 
carcass an ignorant person. 


18. The mind becomes the sight in its act of seeing, and it is hearing also 
when it hears anything; it is the feeling of touch in connection with the skin, 
and it is smelling when connected with the nose. 


19. So it becomes taste being connected with the tongue and palate, and takes 
many other names besides, according to its other faculties. Thus the mind is 
the chief actor on the stage of the living animal body. 


20. It magnifies the minute and makes the true appear as untrue; it sweetens 
the bitter and sours the sweet, and turns a foe to a friend and vice-versa. 


21. In whatever manner the mind represents itself in its various aspects, the 
same becomes evident to us both in our perceptions and conceptions of them. 
(i.e., Everybody takes things in the same light, as his mind represents them 
unto him). 


22. It was by virtue of such a representation, that the dreaming mind of king 
Haris Chandra, took the course of one night for the long period of a dozen of 
years. 


23. It was owing to a similar idea of the mind, that the whole city of Brahma 
appeared to be situated within himself. 


24. The presentation of a fair prospect before the imagination, turns the 
present pain to pleasure, as aman bound in chains forgets his painful state, in 
the hopes of his release or installation on the next morning. 


25. The mind being well fortified and brought under the subjection of reason, 
brings all the members of the body and internal passions of the heart under 
our control; but the loose and ungoverned mind, gives a loose rein to them for 
their going astray, as the loosened thread of a string of pearls, scatters the 
precious grains at random over the ground. 


26. The mind that preserves its clear sightedness, and its equanimity and 
unalterableness in all places, and under all conditions, retains its even temper 
and nice discernment at all times, under the testimony of its consciousness, 
and approbation of its good conscience. 


27. With your mind acquainted with the states of all things, but undisturbed 
by the fluctuations of the objects that come under your cognizance, you must 
retain, O Rama! your self-possession at all times, and remain like a dumb and 
dull body, (without being moved by anything). 


28. The mind is restless of its own nature, with all its vain thoughts and 
desires within itself; but the man is carried abroad as by its current, over hills 
and deserts and across rivers and seas, to far and remote cities and countries 
(in search of gain). 


29. The waking mind deems the objects of its desire, to be as sweet as honey, 
and whatever it does not like, to be as bitter as gall, although they may be 
sweet to taste; (i.e., the blindness of sensuous minds in their choice of evil for 
good, and slighting of good as evil). 


30. Some minds with too much self-reliance in themselves, and without 


considering the true nature of things, give them different forms and colours, 
according to their own conceptions and opinions, though they are far from 
truth. (Every man delights in his own hobby horse). 


31. The mind is a pulsation of the power of the Divine Intellect, that ventilates 
in the breeze and glares in luminous bodies, melts in the liquids and hardens 
in solid substances. (Compare the lines of Pope: — “Glows in the sun, efc.” 
The mind is dependent on the intellect, and the mental operations are 
subordinate to the intellectual). 


32. It vanishes in vacuity and extends in the space; it dwells in everything at 
its pleasure, and flies from everywhere at its will. 


33. It whitens the black and blackens the white, and is confined to no place or 
time, but extends through all. (The mind can make a heaven of hell, and a hell 
of heaven). 


34. The mind being absent or settled elsewhere, we do not taste the sweet, 
which we suck or swallow or grind under the teeth or lick with the tongue. 


35. What is seen by the mind, is seen with the eyes, and what is unseen by it, 
is never seen by the visual organs, as things lying in the dark are not 
perceptible to the sight. 


36. The mind is embodied in the organic body, accompanied by the sensible 
organs; but it is the mind that actuates the senses and receives the sensations; 
the senses are the products of the mind, but the mind is not a production of 
sensations. 


37. Those great souls, (philosophers), who have investigated into the manner 
of the connection between the two quite different substances of the body and 
mind, and those learned men who show us their mutual relations, (the 
psychologists), are truly worthy of our veneration. 


38. A handsome woman decked with flowers in the braids of her hair, and 
looking loosely with her amorous glances, is like a log of wood, in contact 
with the body of one, whose mind is absent from himself. (The dalliance of a 
woman is dead and lost, to the unfeeling heart and unmindful man). 


39. The dispassionate Yogi that sits reclined in his abstract meditation in the 
forest, has no sense of his hands being bitten off by a voracious beast from his 
body, owing to the absence of his mind. 


40. The mind of the sage, which is practised in mental abstraction, may with 
ease be inclined to convert his pleasures to pain, and his pains to pleasure. 


41. The mind employed in some other thought and inattentive to the present 


discourse, finds it as a detached piece of wood dissevered by an axe. (The 
presence of the mind joins the parts of a lecture, as its inadvertence disjoins 
them from their consecutive order). 


42. A man sitting at home, and thinking of his standing on the precipice of a 
mountain, or falling into the hollow cave below, shudders at the idea of his 
imminent danger; so also, one is startled at the prospect of a dreary desert 
even in his dream, and is bewildered to imagine the vast deep under the 
clouds. (See Hume on the Association of Ideas). 


43. The mind feels a delight at the sight of a lovely spot in its dream, and at 
seeing the hills, cities, and houses stretching on, the clusters of stars shining in 
the extended plain of the sky. (Objects which are pleasurable or painful to the 
sight, give pleasure and pain to the mind, when it is connected with that 
sense). 


44. The restless mind is busy to stretch many a hill and dale and cities and 
houses in our dreams, as these are the billows in the vast ocean of the soul. 


45. As the waters of the sea display themselves in huge surges, billows, and 
waves, so the mind which is in the body, displays itself in the various sights 
exhibited in our dreams. (Meaning, the dreams to be transformations, 
(Vikdras) of the mind, like the waves of the water). 


46. As the leaves and branches, flowers and fruits are the products of the 
shooting seed; so everything that is seen in our waking dreams, is the 
creations of our minds. 


47. As a golden image is no other than the very gold, so the creatures of our 
living dreams, are not otherwise than the creations of our fanciful mind. 


48. As a drop or shower of rain, and a foam or froth of the wave, are but 
different forms of water, so the varieties, (manatd), of sensible objects are but 
formations of the same mind. (Lit. formations or transformations of the mind). 


49. These are but the thoughts of our minds, that are seen in our waking 
dreams, like the various garbs which an actor puts on him, to represent 
different characters in a play. 


50. As the king Lavana believed himself to be a chandala for some time, so do 
we believe ourselves to be so and so, by the thoughts of our minds. 


51. Whatever we think ourselves to be in our consciousness, the same soon 
comes to pass upon us; therefore, mould the thoughts of your mind in any way 
you like. (i.e., As one thinks himself to be, so will he find himself to become 
in his own conceit). 


52. The embodied being beholds many cities and towns, hills, and rivers 
before him, all which are but visions of waking dreams, and stretched out by 
the inward mind. 


53. One sees a demon in a deity, and a snake where there is no snake; it is the 
idea that fosters the thought, as the king Lavana fostered the thoughts of his 
ideal forms. 


54. As the idea of man includes that of a woman also, and the idea of father 
comprises that of the son likewise, so the mind includes the wish, and the 
wish is accompanied by its action with every person. (As when I say I have a 
mind to do so, I mean I have a wish to do it; and the same wish leads me to its 
execution. Or that the action is concomitant with the will, so the phrase: — 
“take will for the deed.”’) 


55. It is by its wish that the mind is subject to death, and to be born again in 
other bodies; and though it is a formless thing of its nature, yet it is by its 
constant habit of thinking, that it contracts the notion of its being a living 
substance, (jiva). 


56. The mind is busy with its thoughts of long drawn wishes, which cause its 
repeated births and deaths, and their concomitants of hopes and fears, and 
pleasure and pain. (The wish is father of thoughts, and these mould our acts 
and lives). 


57. Pleasure and pain are situated in the mind like the oil in the sesamum 
seed, and these are thickened or thinned like the oil under particular 
circumstances of life. Prosperity thickens our pleasure, and adversity our pain, 
and these are thinned by their reverses again. 


58. As it is the greater or lighter pressure of the oil-mill, that thickens or thins 
the oil, so it is the deeper or lighter attention of the mind, that aggravates or 
lightens its sense of pleasure or pain. (Loss or gain unfelt, is nothing lost or 
gained. The pleasure or pain of which we are ignorant, is no pleasure or pain). 


59. As our wishes are directed by the particular circumstances of time and 
place, so the measurements of time and place, are made according to the 
intensity or laxity of our thoughts. (i.e., The intense application or inattention 
of the mind, prolongs and shortens the measure of time and place to us). 


60. It is the mind that is satisfied and delighted at the fulfilment of our wishes, 
and not the body which is insensible of its enjoyments. (The commentary 
explains the participation of the enjoyment both by the body and mind, and 
not by one independently of the other). 


61. The mind is delighted with its imaginary desires within the body, as a 


secluded woman takes her delight in the seraglio. (The pleasure of 
imagination pleases the inmost soul, when we have no external and bodily 
pleasure to enjoy). 


62. He who does not give indulgence to levities and fickleness in his heart, is 
sure to subdue his mind, as one binds an elephant by its chain to the post. 


63. He whose mind does not wave to and fro like a brandished sword, but 
remains fixed as a post or pillar to its best intent and object, is the best of men 
on earth; all others, (with fickle minds), are as insects continually moving in 
the mind. 


64. He whose mind is freed from fickleness, and is sedate in itself, is united 
with his best object in his meditation of the same. (The unflinching mind, is 
sure of success). 


65. Steadiness of the mind is attended with the stillness of worldly 
commotions, as the suspension of the churning Mandara, was attended with 
the calmness of the ocean of milk. 


66. The thoughts of the mind being embroiled in worldly cares (of gaining the 
objects of desire and enjoyments), become the sources of those turbulent 
passions in the breast, which like poisonous plants fill this baneful world (with 
their deadly breath). 


67. Foolish men that are infatuated by their giddiness and ignorance, revolve 
round the centre of their hearts, as the giddy bees flutter about the lotus-flower 
of the lake; till at last grown weary in their giddy circles, they fall down in the 
encompassing whirlpools, which hurl them in irreparable ruin. 


CHAPTER CXI. 


Healing of the Heart and Mind. 


Arguments. Prompt relinquishment of desires, and abandonment of Egoism, 
as the means of the subjection of the mind and intense application of the 
Intellect. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now attend to the best remedy, that I will tell you to 
heal the disease of the heart, which is within one’s own power and harmless, 
and a sweet potion to taste. 


2. It is by the exertion of your own consciousness by yourself, and by diligent 
relinquishment of the best objects of your desire, that you can bring back your 
refractory mind under your subjection. 


3. He who remains at rest by giving up the objects of his desire, is verily the 
conqueror of his mind, which is reduced under his subjection as an elephant 
wanting its tusks. 


4. The mind is to be carefully treated as a patient by the prescriptions of 
reason, and by discriminating the truth from untruth, as we do good diet from 
what is injurious. 


5. Mould your heated imagination by cool reasoning, by precepts of the 
Sdstras, and by association with the dispassionate, as they do the heated iron 
by a cold hammer. 


6. As a boy has no pain to turn himself this way and that in his play; so it is 
not difficult to turn the mind, from one thing to another at pleasure. 


7. Employ your mind to the acts of goodness by the light of your 
understanding, as you join your soul to the meditation of God by light of your 
spirit. 

8. The renunciation of a highly desirable object, is in the power of one, who 
resigns himself to the divine will; it is a shame, therefore, to that worm of 


human being, who finds this precept difficult for his practice. 


9. He who can take the unpleasant for the pleasurable in his understanding, 
may with ease subdue his mind, as a giant overcomes a boy by his might. 


10. It is possible to govern the mind like a horse, by one’s attention and 
exertion; and the mind being brought to its quietness, it is easy to enter into 
divine knowledge. 


11. Shame to that jackass, (lit.: jackalish man), who has not the power to 
subdue his restless mind, which is entirely under his own subjection, and 
which he can easily govern. 


12. No one can reach the best course of his life, without the tranquility of his 
mind, which is to be acquired by means of his own exertion, in getting rid of 
the fond objects of his desire. (The best course of life, is to live free from care, 
which is unattainable without subjection of our desires). 


13. It is by means of destroying the appetites of the mind, by means of reason 
and knowledge of truth, that one can have his absolute dominion over it, 
without any change or rival in it. (The rival powers in the kingdom of the 
mind, (manordjya), are the passions and the train of ignorance, — moha). 


14. The precepts of a preceptor, the instructions of the Sdstras, the efficacy of 
mantras, and the force of arguments, are all as trifles as straws, without that 
calmness of the mind, which can be gained by renunciation of our desires and 
by the knowledge of truth. 


15. The One All and all-pervading quiescent Brahma can be known then only, 
when the desires of the mind are all cut off by the weapon of indifference to 
all worldly things. 


16. All bodily pains of men are quite at an end, no sooner the mind is at rest, 
after the removal of mental anxieties by means of true knowledge. 


17. Many persons turn their minds to unmindfulness, by too much trust in 
their exertions and imaginary expectations; and disregarding the power of 
destiny, which overrules all human efforts. 


18. The mind being long practised in its highest duty, of the cultivation of 
divine knowledge, becomes extinct in the intellect, and is elevated to its 
higher state of intellectual form. 


19. Join yourself to your intellectual or abstract thoughts at first, and then to 
your spiritual speculations. Being then master of your mind, contemplate on 
the nature of the Supreme soul. 


20. Thus relying on your own exertion, and converting the sensible mind to its 
state of stoic insensibility, you can attain to that highest state of fixedness, 
which knows no decay nor destruction. (Spiritual bliss). 


21. It is by your exertion and fixed attention, O Rama! that you can correct the 
errors of your mind, as one gets over his wrong apprehension of taking one 
thing for another, (such as his mistaking of the east for the west). 


22. Calmness of mind, produces the want of anxiety; and the man that has 
been able to subdue his mind, cares a fig for his subjection of the world under 
him. (For, what is this world, without its perception in the mind?) 


23. Worldly possessions are attended with strife and warfare, and the 
enjoyments of heaven also, have their rise and fall; but in the improvement of 
one’s own mind and nature, there is no contention with anybody, nor any 
obstruction of any kind. 


24. It is hard for them to manage their affairs well, who cannot manage to 
keep their minds under proper control. (Govern yourself ere you can govern 
others. Or: — Govern your mind, lest it govern you). 


25. The thought of one’s being dead, and being born again as a man, 
continually employ the minds of the ignorant with the idea of their egoism, 
(which is a false one, since the soul has no birth or death, nor any personality 
of its own). 


26. So nobody is born here nor dies at any time; it is the mind that conceives 
its birth and death and migration in other bodies and worlds. (i.e., Its 
transmigration and apprehension of its rise or fall to heaven or hell). 


27. It goes hence to another world, and there appears in another form (of the 
body and mind); or it is relieved from the encumbrance of flesh, which is 
called its liberation. Where then is this death and why fear to die, (which is no 
more than progress to a new life?) 


28. Whether the mind roves here, or goes to another world with its earthly 
thoughts, it continues in the same state as before unless it is changed to 
another form (of purity), by its attainment of liberation (from humanity). 


29. It is in vain that we are overwhelmed in sorrow, upon the demise of our 
brethren and dependents, since we know it is the nature of the mind, to be thus 
deluded from its state of pure intelligence to that of error. (It is the deluded 
mind, and not the intelligent soul that is subject to sorrow). 


30. It has been repeatedly mentioned both before and afterwards, and in many 
other places (of this work), that there is no other means of obtaining the pure 


diet of true knowledge, without subduing the mind (and bringing it under the 
control of reason). 


31. I repeat the same lesson, that there is no other way, save by the 
government of the unruly mind, to come to the light of the truly real, clear, 
and catholic knowledge of the Supreme. (By catholic knowledge is meant the 
universally received doctrines of divinity). 


32. The mind being destroyed, (i.e., all its function, being suspended), the soul 
attains its tranquility, and the light of the intellect shines forth in the cavity of 
the heart. 


33. Hold fast the discus of reason, and cut off the bias of your mind; be sure 
that no disease will have the power to molest you, if you can have the good 
sense to despise the objects of pleasure, which are attended by pain. (All 
pleasure is followed by pain. Or: Pleasure leads to pain, and pain succeeds 
pleasure). 


34. By lopping the members of the mind, you cut it off altogether, and these 
being egoism and selfishness which compose the essence of the mind. Shun 
your sense that, “it is I,’ and, ‘these are mine.’ 


35. Want of these feelings, casts down the mind like a tree felled by the axe, 
and disperses it like a scattered cloud from the autumnal sky. 


36. The mind is blown away by its destitution of egoism, (Ahantd), and 
meitatism, (mamatd), like a cloud by the winds. (Unconsciousness of one’s 
egoism and personality, is the tantamount to his utter extinction, and 
unification with the one universal Soul). 


37. It is dangerous to wage a war, against winds and weapons, and fire and 
water, in order to obtain the objects of our worldly desire; but there is no 
danger whatever in destroying the growing soft and tender desires of the 
mind. (It is easier to govern one’s self than to suppress his enemies). 


38. What is good, and what is not so, is well known for certain even to boys; 
(i.e., the immutability of good and evil is plain to common and simple 
understandings); therefore, employ your mind to what is good, as they train up 
children in the paths of goodness. (Sow good betimes, to reap its reward in 
time. If good we plant not, vice will fill the place; and rankest weeds, the 
richest soils deface). 


39. Our minds are as inveterate and indomitable, as ferocious lions of the 
forest; and they are true victors, who have conquered these, and are thereby 
entitled to salvation. (Govern your restless mind, and you govern the rest of 
your kind). 


40. Our desires are as fierce lions, with their insatiable thirst after lucre; and 
they are as delusive as the mirage of the desert, by leading us to dangers. 


41. The man that is devoid of desires, cares for nothing, whether the winds 
may howl with the fury of storms, or the seas break their bounds, or the 
twelve suns (of the Zodiac) rise at once to burn the universe. 


42. The mind is the root, that grows the plants of our good and evil and all our 
weal and woe. The mind is the tree of the world, and all peoples are as its 
branches and leaves, (which live by its sap and juice). 


43. One prospers everywhere, who has freed his mind from its desires; and he 
that lives in the dominion of indifference, rests in his heavenly felicity. 


44. The more we curb the desires of our minds, the greater we feel our inward 
happiness, as the fire being extinguished, we find ourselves cooled from its 
heat. 


45. Should the mind long for millions of worldly mansions in its highest 
ambition, it is sure to have them spread out to view within the minute particle 
of its own essence. (The ambitious mind grasps the whole world within its 
small compass). 


46. Opulence in expectancy, is full of anxiety to the mind, and the expected 
wealth when gained is no less troublesome to it; but the treasure of 
contentment is fraught with lasting peace of mind, therefore, be victorious 
over your greedy mind by abandonment of all your desires. 


47. With the highly holy virtue of your unmindfulness, and with the even- 
mindedness of those that have known the Divine spirit; as also with the 
subdued, moderated, and defeated yearnings of your heart, make the state of 
the increate One as your own. (Sedateness of the mind, resembles the state of 
God). 


CHAPTER CXII. 


The Restlessness of the Mind and its cure. 


Argument. Means of weakening the mind and mental Desires. 


Vasishtha continued: — Whatever be the nature of the object of any man’s 
desire, his mind does not fail to run after it with great avidity in every place. 


2. This eagerness of the mind rises and sets by turns, with the view of the 
desired object, like the clear bubbles of water foaming and bursting of 
themselves with the breath of winds. 


3. As coldness is the nature of frost, and blackness is that of ink, so is 
swiftness or momentum the nature of the mind, as stillness is that of the soul. 


4. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, why the mind is identified with momentum, and 
what is the cause of its velocity; tell me also, if there is any other force to 
impede the motion of the mind. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — We have never seen the motionless quiet of the mind; 
fleetness is the nature of the mind, as heat is that of fire. 


6. This vacillating power of motion, which is implanted in the mind, is known 
to be of the same nature as that of the self-motive force of the Divine mind, 
which is the cause of the momentum and motion of those worlds. 


7. As the essence of air is imperceptible without its vibration, so we can have 
no notion of the momentum of our minds, apart from the idea of their 
oscillation. 


8. The mind which has no motion is said to be dead and defunct; and the 
suspension of mental agitation, is the condition of Yoga quietism and leading 
to our ultimate liberation. 


9. The mortification of the mind, is attended with the subsidence of our woes; 
but the agitated thoughts in the mind, are causes of all our woes. 


10. The monster of the mind, being roused from its rest, raises all our dangers 
and disasters; but its falling into rest and inaction, causes our happiness and 
perfect felicity. 


11. The restlessness of the mind is the effect of its ignorance; therefore, 
Rama! exert your reason to destroy all its desires (for temporal possessions). 


12. Destroy the internal desires of your mind, which are raised by ignorance 
alone; and attain your supreme felicity by your resignation to the divine will. 


13. The mind is a thing that stands between the real and unreal and between 
intelligence and dull matter, and is moved to and fro by the contending 
powers on either side. 


14. Impelled by dull material force, the mind is lost in the investigation of 
material objects; till at last by its habitual thought of materiality, it is 
converted to a material object, resembling dull matter itself. (Such is the 
materialistic mind). 


15. But the mind being guided by its intellectual powers, to the investigation 
of abstract truths, becomes an intelligent and intellectual principle, by its 
continued practice of thinking itself as such. (This is immaterial mind). 


16. It is by virtue of the exertion of your manly powers and activities, and by 
force of constant habit and continued practice, that you can succeed to attain 
anything to which you employ your mind with diligence. (Diligence 
overcomes all difficulties). 


17. You can also be free from fears, and find your rest in your reliance in the 
sorrowless Being, provided you exercise your manly activities therein, and 
curb the proclivities of your mind by your intelligence. 


18. It must be by the force of your intelligent mind, that you must lift up your 
deluded mind, which is drowned in the cares of this world. There is no other 
means that will help you to do so. 


19. The mind only is capable of subduing the mind; for who can subdue a 
king unless he is a king himself? 


20. Our minds are the boats, to lift us from the ocean of this world, where we 
are carried too far by its beating waves, and thrown into the eddies of despair, 
and where we are caught by the sharks of our greediness. 


21. Let your own mind cut the net of the mind, which is ensnared in this 
world, and extricate your soul, by this wise policy, which is the only means of 
your liberation. (i.e., Set your mind to correct your mind). 


22. Let the wise destroy the desires of their minds, and this will set them free 
from the bonds of ignorance. 


23. Shun your desire for earthly enjoyments and forsake your knowledge of 
dualism, then get rid of your impressions of entity and non-entity, and be 
happy with the knowledge of one unity. 


24. The thought of the unknowable, will remove the thoughts of knowables; 
this is equivalent to the destruction of desires, of the mind and ignorance also. 


25. The unknown one of which we are unconscious by our knowledge, 
transcends all whatever is known to us by our consciousness. Our 
unconsciousness is our nirvdna or final extinction, while our consciousness is 
the cause of our woe. 


26. It is by their own attention that men soon come to the knowledge of the 
knowables; but it is the unknowing or unconsciousness of these that is our 
nirvdna, while our consciousness is the cause of our woe. (Want of self- 
consciousness, is want of pain. And perfect apathy is the perfection of 
solipsism). 


27. Destroy O Rama, whatever is desirable to your mind, and is the object of 
your affection; then knowing them as reduced to nothing, forsake your desires 
as seedless sprouts (which can never grow), and live content without the 
feelings of joy and grief. 


CHAPTER CXIII. 


Description of Ignorance and Delusion (Avidyd). 


Argument. Extirpation of Evil Desires and duality by the true knowledge of 
unity called the Vidya. 


Vasishtha continued: — The false desires which continually rise in the breast, 
are as the appearances of false moons in the sky, and should be shunned by 
the wise. 


2. They rise in the minds of the unwise amidst their ignorance; but everything 
which is known only by its name and not in actuality, cannot have its 
residence in the minds of wise people. (Nominalism as opposed to Realistic 
Platonism). 


3. Be wise, O Rama, and do not think like the ignorant, but consider well all 
that I tell you, — there is no second moon in the sky, but it appears so only by 
deception of our optical visions. 


4. There exists nothing real or unreal anywhere, except the only true essence 
of God, as there is no substantiality in the continuity of the waves, besides the 
body of waters. 


5. There is no reality in anything, whether existent or non-existent, all which 
are mere creations of your shadowy ideality; do not therefore, impute any 
shape or figure to the eternal, boundless, and pure spirit of God. 


6. You are no maker nor master of anything, then why deem any act or thing 
as your own, (mamatd, — meity?) You know not what these existences are, 
and by whom and wherefore they are made. 


7. Neither think yourself as actor, because no actor can attempt to do 
anything. Discharge whatever is your duty, and remain at your ease with 
having done your part. 


8. Though you are the actor of an action, yet think not yourself as such, 


minding your inability to do or undo anything; for how can you boast yourself 
as the actor, when you know your inability for action. 


9. If truth is delectable and untruth is odious, then remain firm to what is 
good, and be employed in your duties (in the path of truth and goodness). 


10. But as the whole world is a gallery, a magic, and an unreality, then say 
what reliance is there in it, and what signifies pleasurableness or 
unpleasurableness to anybody. 


11. Know Rama, this ovum of the world to be a delusion, and being inexistent 
in itself, appears as a real existence to others. 


12. Know this busy sphere of the world, which is so full with its inessence, to 
be an ideal phantasm presented for the delusion of our minds. 


13. It is like the beautiful bamboo plant, all hollow within, and without pith 
and marrow in the inside, and like the curling waves of the sea, both of which 
are born to perish without being uprooted from the bottom. (It is impossible to 
root out the bamboo as well as the rising wave of the water). 


14. This world is as volatile as the air and water flying in the air, and hardly to 
be tangible or held fast in the hand, and as precipitous as the water-fall in its 
course, (hurling down and sweeping away everything before it). 


15. It appears as a flowery garden, but never comes to any good use at all; so 
the billowy sea in the mirage, presents the form of water, without allaying our 
thirst. 


16. Sometimes it seems to be straight, and at others a curve; now it is long and 
now short, and now it is moving and quiet again, and everything in it, though 
originally for our good, conspires to our evil only. 


17. Though hollow in the inside, the world appears to be full with its apparent 
contents; and though all the worlds are continually in motion, yet they seem to 
be standing still. 


18. Whether they be dull matter or intelligences, their existence depends upon 
their motion, and these without stopping anywhere for a moment, present the 
sight of their being quite at rest. 


19. Though they are as bright as light to sight, they are as opaque as the dark 
coal in their bowels; and though they are moved by a superior power, they 
appear to be moving of themselves. 


20. They fade away before the brighter light of the sun, but brighten in the 
darkness of the night; their light is like that of the mirage, by reflection of 


sunbeams. 


21. Human avarice is as a sable serpent, crooked and venomous, thin and soft 
in its form, but rough and dangerous in its nature, and ever unsteady as a 
woman. 


22. Our love of the world, ceases soon without the objects of our affection, as 
the lamp is extinguished without its oil, and as the vermilion mark, which is 
soon effaced. (Here is a pun upon the word sneha, meaning a fluid substance 
as well as affection; and that the world is a dreary waste, without the objects 
dear to us). 


23. Our false hopes are as transient, as the evanescent flash of lightnings; they 
glare and flare for a moment, but they disappear in the air as these transitory 
flashes of light. 


24. The objects of our desire are often had without our seeking; but they are as 
frail as the fire of heaven; they appear to vanish like the twinkling lightnings, 
and being held carefully in the hand, they burn it like the electric fire. (This 
passage shows the science of electricity and the catching of electric fire, to 
have been known to the ancients). 


25. Many things come to us unasked, and though appearing delightsome at 
first, they prove troublesome to us at last. Hopes delayed, are as flowers 
growing out of season, which, neither bear their fruits, nor answer our 
purposes. (Unseasonal flowers are held as ominous and useless). 


26. Every accident tends to our misery, as unpleasant dreams infest our sleep 
and disturb our rest. 


27. It is our delusion, (avidyd), that presents these many and big worlds before 
us, as our dreams produce, sustain and destroy all the appearances of vision in 
one minute. 


28. It was delusion which made one minute, appear as many years to king 
Lavana; and the space of one night, seem as the long period of a dozen of 
years to Haris Chandra. 


29. Such also is the case with separated lovers among rich people, that a 
single night seems as a live long year to them, in the absence of their beloved. 


30. It is this delusive avidyd, that shortens the flight of time to the rich and 
happy, and prolongs its course, with the poor and miserable, all of whom are 
subject to the power of delusion vipary’dsa. 


31. The power of this delusion is essentially spread over all the works of 
creation, as the light of a lamp, is spread over things in its effulgence and not 


in substance. 


32. As a female form represented in a picture is no woman, and has not the 
power of doing anything, so this avidyd which presents us the shapes of our 
desired objects in the picture of the mind, can produce nothing in reality. 


33. The delusion consists in the building of aerial castles in the mind, without 
their substance; and though these appear in hundreds and thousands of shapes, 
they have no substantiality in them. 


34. It deludes the ignorant, as a mirage misleads the deer in a desert; but it 
cannot deceive the knowing man by its false appearances. 


35. These appearances, like the foaming waters, are as continuous as they are 
evanescent, they are as fleeting as the driving frost, which cannot be held in 
the hand. 


36. This delusion holds the world in its grasp, and flies aloft with it in the air; 
it blinds us by the flying dust, which is raised by its furious blasts. (This is 
delusion of ambitions). 


37. Covered with dust and with heat and sweat of its body, it grasps the earth 
and flies all about the world. The deluded man ever toils and moils, and runs 
everywhere after his greed. 


38. As the drops of rain water, falling from the clouds, form the great rivers 
and seas, and as the scattered straws being tied together, make the strong rope 
for the bondage of beasts, so the combination of all the delusive objects in the 
world, makes the great delusion of Maya and Moha. (‘Gutta cum gutta facit 
lacum’. Drop by drop, makes a lake. Or by drops the lake is drained. And 
many a little, makes a mickle). 


39. The poets describe the fluctuations of the world as a series of waves and 
the world itself, as a bed of lotuses: pleasant to sight, but floating on the 
unstable element. But I compare it with the porous stalk of the lotus, which is 
full of perforations and foramens inside; and as a pool of mud and mire, with 
the filth of our sins. (The world is full of hidden traps and trapdoors and is a 
pit of sinfulness). 


40. Men think much of their improvement, and of many other things on earth, 
but there is no improving in this decaying world, which is as a tempting cake 
with a coating of sweets, but full of deadly gall within. 


41. It is as an extinguishing lamp, whose flame is lost and fled we know not 
where. It is visible as a mist, but try to lay hold on it, and it proves to be 
nothing. 


42. This earth is a handful of ashes, which being flung aloft flies in particles of 
dust; and the upper sky which appears to be blue, has no blueness in it. 


43. There is the same delusion here on earth, as in the appearance of a couple 
of moons in the sky; and in the vision of things in a dream, as also in the 
motion of immovable things on the land, to the passenger in a boat. (Things 
taken to be true, prove to be false). 


44. Men being long deluded by this error, which has fastly laid hold of their 
minds, imagine a long duration of the world, as they do of the scenes in their 
dreams. 


45. The mind being thus deluded by this error, sees the wonderful productions 
of the world, to rise and fall within itself like the waves of the sea. 


46. Things which are real and good, appear as otherwise in our error; while 
those that are unreal and noxious, appear as real and good to our deluded 
understandings. 


47. Our strong avarice riding on the vehicle of the desired object, chases the 
fleeting mind as bird-catchers do the flying birds in nets. 


48. Delusion, like a mother and wife, often offers us fresh delights, with her 
tender looks and breasts distilling sweet milk. 


49. But these delights serve only to poison us, while they seem to cool the 
worlds with their distillation; just as the crescent orb of the moon, injures us 
with too much of her moistening influence, while it appears to refresh us with 
her full bright beams. 


50. Blind delusion turns the meek, mild, and mute men, to giddy and 
vociferous fools; as the silent Vetdlas become in their revelrous dancings, 
amidst the silent woods at night. 


51. It is under the influence of delusion, that we see the shapes of snakes and 
serpents, in our brick-built and stone made houses at night falls, (Ze., 
apprehensions of these in darkness). 


52. It makes a single thing appear as double, as in the sight of two moons in 
the sky; and brings near to us whatever is at a distance, as in our dreams; and 
even causes us to dream ourselves as dead in sleep. 


53. It causes the long to appear as short, as our nightly sleep shortens the 
duration of time; and makes a moment appear as a year, as in the case of 
separated lovers. 


54. Look at the power of this unsubstantial ignorance, a negative thing, and 


still there is nothing which it cannot alter to something else. 


55. Therefore, be diligent to stop the course of this delusion, by your right 
knowledge, as they dry up a channel by stopping the current of the stream. 


56. Rama said: — It is wonderful that a false conception, which has no real 
existence, and is so delicate as almost a nothing (but a name) should thus 
blind the understanding. 


57. It is strange that something without form or figure, without sense or 
understanding, and which is unreal and vanishing, should so blindfold the 
world. 


58. It is strange that a thing sparkling in darkness, and vanishing in day-light, 
and mope-eyed as the moping owl, should thus keep the world in darkness. 


59. It is strange that something prone to the doing of evil, (deception), and 
unable to come to light and flying from sight, and having no bodily form 
whatever, should thus darken the world. 


60. It is a wonder that one acting so miserly, and consorting with the mean 
and vile, and ever hiding herself in darkness, should thus domineer over the 
world. 


61. It is wonderful that fallacy which is attended with incessant woe and peril, 
and which is devoid of sense and knowledge, should keep the world in 
darkness. 


62. It is to be wondered that error arising from anger and avarice, creeping 
crookedly in darkness, and liable to instant death (by its detection), should yet 
keep the world in blindness. 


63. It is surprising that error which is a blind, dull, and stupid thing itself, and 
which is falsely talkative at all times, should yet mislead others in the world. 


64. It is astonishing, that falsehood should betray a man, after attaching so 
close to him as his consort, and showing all her endearments to him, but flying 
at the approach of his reason. 


65. It is strange that man should be blinded by the womanish attire of error, 
which beguiles the man but dares not to look at him face to face. 


66. It is strange that man is blinded by his faithless consort of error, which has 
no sense nor intelligence, and which dies away without being killed. 


67. Tell me Sir, how this error is to be dispelled, which has its seat in the 
desires, and is deeply rooted in the recesses of the heart and mind, and lead us 
to the channels of endless misery, by subjecting us to repeated births and 


deaths, and to the pains and pleasures of life. 


CHAPTER CXIV. 


Description of Error. 


Argument. Spiritual knowledge, the only means of dispelling worldly errors, 
temporal desires and cares. 


Rama repeated: — Tell me Sir, how this stony blindness of man, is to be 
removed, which is caused by the train of ignorance or delusion called avidyd. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — As the particles of snow, melt away at the sight of the 
sun, so is this ignorance dispelled in a moment, by a glance of the holy spirit. 


3. Till then doth ignorance continue to hurl down the soul and spirit, as from a 
precipice to the depths of the world, and expose them to woes, as thick as 
thorny brambles. 


4. As long as the desire of seeing the spirit, does not rise of itself in the human 
soul, so long there is no end of this ignorance, (avidyd), and insensibility, 
(Moha). 


5. The sight of the supreme Spirit, destroys the knowledge of our self- 
existence, which is caused by our ignorance, as the light of the sun, destroys 
the shadows of things. 


6. The sight of the all-pervading God, dispels our ignorance in the same 
manner, as the light of the twelve zodiacal suns (all shining at once), puts the 
shadows of night to flight from all sides of the horizon. 


7. Our desires are the offspring of our ignorance, and the annihilation of these 
constitutes what we call our liberation, because the man that is devoid of 
desires, is reckoned the perfect and consummate Siddha. 


8. As the night-shade of desires, is dissipated from the region of the mind; the 
darkness of ignorance is put to flight, by the rise of the intellectual sun, 
(Vivekodaya). 


9. As the dark night flies away before the advance of solar light, so does 
ignorance disappear, before the advancement of true knowledge, — Viveka. 


10. The stiffness of our desires, tends to bind the mind fast in its worldly 
chains, as the advance of night serves to increase the fear of goblins in 
children. 


11. Rama asked: — The knowledge of the phenomenals as true, makes what 
we call avidyd or ignorance, and it is said to be dispersed by spiritual 
knowledge. Now tell me Sir, what is the nature of the Spirit. 


12. Vasishtha replied: — That which is not the subject of thought, which is 
all-pervasive, and the thought of which is beyond expression and 
comprehension is the universal spirit, (which we call our Lord and God). 


13. That which reaches, to the highest empyrean of God, and stretches over 
the lowest plots of grass on earth, is the all-pervading spirit at all times, and 
unknown to the ignorant soul. 


14. All this is verily Brahma, eternal and imperishable intelligence. To him no 
imagination of the mind can reach at any time. 


15. That which is never born or dead, and which is ever-existent in all worlds, 
and in which the conditions of being and change are altogether wanting. 


16. Which is one and one alone, all and all pervading, and imperishable Unity, 
which is incomprehensible in thought, and is only of the form of Intellect, is 
the universal Spirit. 


17. It is accompanied with the ever-existent, all-extending, pure, and 
undisturbed Intellect, and is that calm, quiet, even, and unchanging state of the 
soul, which is called the Divine Spirit. 


18. There resides also the impure mind, which is in its nature beyond all 
physical objects, and runs after its own desire; it is conceivable by the 
Intellect as sullied by its own activity. 


19. This ubiquious, all-potent, great, and godlike mind, separates itself in its 
imagination from the Supreme spirit, and rises from it as a wave on the 
surface of the sea. (So the Sruti: — Etasmat Jayate pranahmanah, etc. The 
life and mind have their rise from Him). 


20. There is no fluctuation, (Sansriti), nor projection, (Vikshepa), in the all- 
extending tranquil soul of God; but these take place in the mind owing to its 
desires, which cause its production of all things in the world. (Hence the 
world and all things in it, are creations of the divine and active mind, and not 
of the inactive Supreme Soul). 


21. Therefore, the world being the production of desire or will, has its 
extinction with the privation of desires; for that which comes the growth of a 
thing, causes its extinction also, as the wind which kindles the fire, 
extinguishes it likewise. (Here is a coincidence with the Homcepathic maxim 
Similes per similibus). 


22. The exertion of human efforts, gives rise to the expectation of fruition, but 
want of desire, causes the cessation of exertions; and consequently puts a stop 
to the desire of employment, together with our ignorance causing the desire. 


23. The thought that, ‘I am distinct from Brahma,’ binds the mind to the 
world; but the belief that, ‘Brahma is all,’ releases the mind from its bondage. 


24. Every thought about one’s self, fastens his bondage in this world; but 
release from selfish thoughts, leads him to his liberation. Cease from thy 
selfish cares, and thou shalt cease to toil and moil for naught. 


25. There is no lake of lotuses in the sky, nor is there a lotus growing in the 
gold mine, whose fragrance fills the air, and attracts the blue bees to suck its 
honey. 


26. The goddess of ignorance, — Avidyd, with her uplifted arms resembling 
the long stalks of lotus plants, laughs in exultation over her conquests, with 
the glaring light of shining moonbeams. 


27. Such is the net of our wishes spread before us by our minds, which 
represent unrealities as real, and take a delight to dwell upon them, like 
children in their toys. 


28. So also is the snare spread out by our own ignorance, all over this world, 
that it ensnares the busy people to their misery in all places, as it binds fast the 
ignorant men and boys in its chains. 


29. Men are busied in worldly affairs with such thoughts, as these that, ‘I am 
poor and bound in this earth for my life; but I have my hands and feet 
wherewith I must work for myself’. 


30. But they are freed from all affairs of this life, who know themselves as 
spiritual beings, and their spiritual part is neither subject to bondage nor 
labour. (They know themselves to be bodiless, in their embodied forms). 


31. The thought that, ‘I am neither flesh nor bones, but something else than 
my body,’ releases one from his bondage; and one having such assurance in 
him, is said to have weakened his avidyd or ignorance. 


32. Ignorance, (avidyd), is painted in the imagination of earthly men, to be as 
dark as the darkness which surrounds the highest pinnacle of Meru, blazing 


with the blue light of sapphire, or at the primeval darkness impenetrable by 
the solar light. (Hence ignorance and darkness are used as synonymous 
terms). 


33. It is also represented by earth-born mortals, as the blackness which 
naturally covers the face of heaven by its own nature like the blue vault of the 
sky. (Thus Avidya is represented as the black and the blue goddess Kali). 


34. Thus ignorance is pictured with a visible form, in the imagination of the 
unenlightened; but the enlightened never attribute sensible qualities to 
inanimate and imaginary objects. 


35. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, what is the cause of the blueness of the sky, if 
it is not the reflexion of the blue gems on the Meru’s peak, nor is it a 
collection of darkness by itself. 


36. Vasishtha replied: — Rama! the sky being but empty vacuum, cannot 
have the quality of blueness which is commonly attributed to it; nor is it the 
bluish lustre of the blue gems which are supposed to abound on the top of 
Meru. 


37. There is neither the possibility of a body of darkness to abide in the sky, 
when the mundane egg is full of light (which has displaced the primeval 
darkness); and when the nature of light is the brightness which stretches over 
the extramundane regions. (This is the zodiacal light reaching to 
extramundane worlds). 


38. O fortunate Rama! the firmament, (svinya), which is a vast vacuum, is 
open to a sister of ignorance, (avidyd), with regard to its inward hollowness. 
(The sky and ignorance are twin sisters, both equally blank and hollow within, 
and of unlimited extent, enveloping the worlds within their unconscious 
wombs). 


39. As one after losing his eyesight, beholds but darkness only all about him; 
so the want of the objects of sight in the womb of vacuity, gives the sky the 
appearance of a darksome scene. 


40. By understanding this, as you come to the knowledge, that the apparent 
blackness of the sky, is no black colour of its own; so you come to learn the 
seeming darkness of ignorance to be no darkness in reality, (but a figurative 
expression derived from its similitude to the other). 


41. Want of desire or its indifference, is the destroyer of ignorance; and it is as 
easy to effect it, as to annihilate the lotus-lake in the sky, (an Utopia or a 
castle built in the air, being but an airy nothing). 


42. It is better, O good Rama! to distrust the delusions of this world, and 
disbelieve the blueness of the sky, than to labour under the error of their 
reality. 


43. The thought that, ‘I am dead,’ makes one as sorrowful, as when he dreams 
of his death in sleep; so also the thought that, ‘I am living,’ makes one as 
cheerful, as when he wakes from the deadly dream of his death-like sleep. 


44. Foolish imaginations make the mind as stolid as that of a fool; but 
reasonable reflexions lead it to wisdom and clearsightedness. 


45. A moment’s reflexion of the reality of the world and of his own essence, 
casts a man into the gloom of everlasting ignorance, while his forgetfulness of 
these, removes all mortal thoughts from his mind. 


46. Ignorance is the producer of passions and tempter to all transient objects; 
it is busy in destroying the knowledge of the soul, and is destroyed by 
knowledge of the soul only. (Ignorance leads to materialism, but it is lost 
under spiritual knowledge). 


47. Whatever is sought by the mind, is instantly supplied by the organs of 
action, which serve as ministers subservient to the orders of their king. (The 
body serves the mind). 


48. Hence who so does not attend to the dictates of his mind, in the pursuit of 
sensible objects, entertains the tranquility of his inmost soul, by his diligent 
application to spirituality. 


49. What did not exist at first, has no existence even now, (i.e., material 
objects); and these that appear as existent, are no other than the quiescent and 
immaculate essence, — Brahma himself. (The eternal is ever existent, and the 
instantaneous are but the phases and fluctuations of the everlasting). 


50. Let no other thought of any person or thing, or of any place or object 
employ your mind at any time, except that of the immutable, everlasting, and 
unlimited spirit of Brahma. (For what faith or reliance is there in things that 
are false and fleeting). 


51. Rely in the superior powers of your understanding, and exert your sovran 
intellect (to know the truth); and root out at once all worldly desire by 
enjoyment of the pleasures of your mind. 


52. The great ignorance that rises in the mind and raises the desires of thy 
heart, has spread the net of thy false hopes for thy ruin, causing thy death and 
decrepitude under them. 


53. Thy wishes burst out in expressions as these that, “these are my sons and 


these my treasures; I am such a one, and these things are mine.” All this is the 
effect of a magic spell of ignorance, that binds thee fast in it. 


54. Thy body is a void, wherein thy desires have produced all thy selfish 
thoughts, as the empty winds raise the gliding waves on the surface of the sea 
(resembling the fleeting moments in the infinity of the Deity). 


55. Learn ye that are seekers of truth, that the words: I, mine, and this and 
that, are all meaningless in their true sense, and that there is nothing that may 
be called real at any time, except the knowledge of the true self and essence of 
Brahma. 


56. The heavens above and the earth below, with all the ranges of hills and 
mountains on earth, and all the lines of its rivers and lakes, are but the 
dissolving views of our sight, and are seen in the same or different lights as 
they are represented by our ignorance. (This is a tenet of the drishtisrishti 
system of philosophy, which maintains Visual creations or existence of 
phenomenals, to be dependent upon sight or visual organs and are deceptio 
visus or fallacies of vision only). 


57. The phenomenals rise to view from our ignorance, and disappear before 
the light of knowledge (as the dreams and spectres of the dark, are put to flight 
before the rising sun-light). They appear in various forms in the substratum of 
the soul, as the fallacy of a snake appearing in the substance of a rope. 


58. Know Rama, that the ignorant only are liable to the error, of taking the 
earth and sun and the stars, for realities; but not so the learned, to whom the 
Great Brahma is present in all his majesty and full glory, in all places and 
things. 


59. While the ignorant labour under the doubt of the two ideas, of a rope and a 
snake in the rope, the learned are firm in their belief, and sight of one true God 
in all things. 


60. Do not, therefore, think as the ignorant do, but consider all things well like 
the wise and the learned. Forsake your earthly wishes, and do not grovel like 
the vulgar by believing the unself as the self. (The second clause has the 
double sense of mistaking an alien as your own, and of taking an unreality for 
the true God). 


61. Of what good is this dull and dumb body to you, Rama? (in your future 
state), that you are so overcome by your alternate joy and grief at its pleasure 
and pain? 


62. As the wood of a tree and its gum resin, and its fruit and seed, are not one 
and the same thing, though they are so closely akin to one another, so is this 


body and the embodied being, quite separate from one another, though they 
are so closely united with each other. 


63. As the burning of a pair of bellows, does not blow out the fire, nor stop the 
air blown by another pair, so the vital air is not destroyed by destruction of the 
body, but finds its way into another form and frame elsewhere. (This is the 
doctrine of the transmigration of the soul and life in other bodies). 


64. The thought that, ‘I am happy or miserable,’ is as false as the conception 
of water in the mirage: — and knowing it as such, give up your 
misconceptions of pleasure and pain, and place your reliance in the sole truth. 


65. O how wonderful is it, that men have so utterly forgotten the true Brahma, 
and have placed their reliance in false ignorance, (avidyd), the sole cause of 
errors. 


66. Do not, O Rama! give way to ignorance in your mind, which being 
overspread by its darkness, will render it difficult for you to pass over the 
errors of the world. 


67. Know ignorance to be a false fiend and deluder of the strongest minds; it 
is the baneful cause of endless woes, and producer of the poisonous fruits of 
illusion. 


68. It imagines hell fire, in the cooling beams of the watery orb of the moon, 
and conceives the torments of the infernal fires, proceeding from the 
refreshing beams of that celestial light. (This passage alludes to the poetical 
description of moon light as a flame of fire, in respect to a lover, who is 
impatient at the separation of his beloved, and is burning under the 
inextinguishable flame of ardent desire). 


69. It views a dry desert in the wide waters, beating with billows and 
undulating with the fragrance of the aqueous Kalpa flowers, and imagines a 
dry mirage in the empty clouds of autumn. (This alludes also to the wild 
imageries of poets, proceeding from their false imagination and ignorance). 


70. Ignorance builds the imaginary castles in empty air, and causes the error 
of rising and falling towers in the clouds; it is the delusion of our fancy, that 
makes us feel the emotions of pleasure and pain in our dreams. 


71. If the mind is not filled and led away by worldly desires, there is no fear 
then of our falling into the dangers, which the day-dreams of our earthly 
affairs incessantly present before us. 


72. The more does our false knowledge, (error), lay hold of our minds, the 
more we feel the torments of hell and its punishments in us, as one dreams of 


nightmares in his sleep. 


73. The mind being pierced by error as by the thorny stalk of a lotus, sees the 
whole world revolving before it like the sea rolling with its waves. 


74. Ignorance taking possession of the mind, converts the enthroned princes to 
peasants, and reduces them to a condition worse than that of beastly 
huntsmen. (All tyrants are the creatures of ignorance). 


75. Therefore, Rama! give up the earthly desires, that serve at best to bind 
down the (celestial) soul to this mortal earth and its mortifying cares, and 
remain as the pure and white crystal, with reflecting the hues of all things 
around in your stainless mind. 


76. Employ thy mind to thy duties, without being tarnished by thy attachment 
to any; but remain as the unsullied crystal, receiving the reflections of outward 
objects, without being stained by any. 


77. Knowing everything with avidity in thy watchful mind, and performing all 
thy duties with due submission, and keeping from the common track with thy 
exalted mind, thou wilt raise thyself above comparison with any other person. 


CHAPTER CXV. 


Causes of Happiness and Misery. 


Argument. The Nature and Powers of the Mind elucidated in the moral of 
Prince Lavana’s story. 


Valmiki relates: — Being thus admonished by the high-minded Vasishtha, the 
lotus eyes of Rama became unfolded as new-blown flowers. 


2. He with his expanded heart and blooming face, shone forth with a pure 
grace, like the fresh lotus reviving at the end of night, under the vivifying 
beams of the rising sun. 


3. His smiling countenance shone forth as the shining moon, with his inward 
enlightenment and wonder; and then with the nectarious beams of his bright 
and white pearly teeth, he spoke out these words. 


4. Rama said: — O wonder! that the want of ignorance should subdue all 
things, as if it were to bind the huge hills with the thin threads of lotus stalks. 
(Wondrous achievements of science). 


5. O! that this straw of the earth, which shows itself to be so compact a body 
in the world, is no more than the production of our ignorance, which shows 
the unreal as a reality. 


6. Tell me further for my enlightenment regarding the true nature of this 
magical earth, which rolls as a ceaseless stream, running amidst the ethereal 
worlds. 


7. There is another great doubt that infests my breast, and it is with regard to 
the state which attended on the fortunate Lavana at last. 


8. Tell me, moreover, regarding the embodied soul and the animated body, 
whether they are in concord or discord with one another, and which of them is 
the active agent and recipient of the rewards of acts in this earth. 


9. Tell me also who was that sorcerer and where he fled, after putting the good 
prince Lavana to all his tribulation, and then restoring him to his former 
exalted position. 


10. Vasishtha said: — The body is as a frame of wood work, and contains 
nothing (spiritual) in it; it receives the reflexion of an intelligence in it as ina 
dream, and this is called the mind. 


11. This mind becomes the living principal, (life), and is endued with the 
power of thinking also. It is as unstable as a boat on the current of world of 
affairs, and plays the part of a fickle monkey, amidst the busy castle of the 
world. 


12. The active principle in the body, is known under the several appellations 
of the mind, life, and egoism, (or consciousness); and having a body for its 
abode, is employed in a variety of actions. 


13. This principle is subject to endless pains and pleasures in its 
unenlightened or unawakened state, and the body bears no relation with them. 
(The mind is the perceptive and sensitive principle and not the body). 


14. The unenlightened understanding again has received many fictitious 
names, according to the various faculties which it exhibits in its acts. 


15. As long as the unawakened mind is in its sleeping state, it perceives the 
busy bustle of the world as it were in his dream, and which is unknown to the 
waking or enlightened mind. 


16. As long as the living being is not awakened from its dormancy, so long it 
has to labour under the inseparable mist of worldly errors. 


17. But the darkness over-hanging on the minds of the enlightened, is as soon 
put to flight as the shade of night overspreading the bed of lotuses, is 
dispersed at sun rise. 


18. That which is called the heart, the mind, the living soul, ignorance, and 
desire by the learned, and what is also styled the principle of action, is the 
same embodied being that is subject both to the feelings of pleasure and pain. 


19. The body is dull matter and is insensible of pain and pleasure; it is the 
embodied being, which is said to be subject to these by men of right reason, 
and this by reason of its impervious ignorance and irrationality, is the cause of 
its Own misery. 


20. The living soul is the subject of its good and bad actions; but it becomes 
confined in its body by reason of its irrationality, and remains pent up there 
like the silkworm in its cocoon. 


21. The mind being fast bound to its ignorance, exerts its faculties in various 
ways, and turns round like a wheel in its various pursuits and employments. 


22. It is the mind dwelling in the body, that makes it to rise and set, to eat and 
drink, to walk and go, and to hurt and kill, all which are acts of the mind, and 
not of the body. 


23. As the master of the house does his many acts in it, and not the house 
itself, so the mind acts its several parts in the body, and not the body by itself. 


24. The mind is the active and passive agent of all the actions and passions, 
and of the pains and pleasures of the body, and it is the mind only that makes 
the man. 


25. Hear me now tell you the useful moral of the story of Lavana, and how he 
was transformed to a Chandala, by derangement of his mind. 


26. The mind has to feel the effects of its actions whether good or evil, and in 
order that you may understand it well, hear attentively what I will now relate 
unto you. 


27. Lavana, who was born of the line of king Harischandra, thought within 
himself one day, as he was sitting apart from all others of his court. 


28. My grand-father was a great king and performed the Rdjasuya sacrifice in 
act; and I, being born of his line, must perform the same in my mind, (i.e., 
mentally). 


29. Having determined so, and getting the things ready for the sacrifice, he 
entered the sacrificial hall for his initiation in the sacred rites. 


30. He called the sacrificial priests, and honoured the holy saints; he invited 
the gods to it, and kindled the sacrificial fire. 


31. Having performed the sacrifice to his heart’s content, and honoured the 
gods, sages, and Brahmans, he went to a forest to reside there for a year. 


32. Having then made presents of all his wealth to Brahmans and other men, 
he awoke from his slumber in the same forest by the evening of that day. 


33. Thus the king Lavana attained the merit of the sacrifice, in his internal 
satisfaction of having attained the meritoriousness of the sacrifice. 


34. Hence learn to know the mind to be the recipient of pleasure and pain; 
therefore, employ your attention, Rama! to the purification of your mind. 


35. Every man becomes perfect in his mind in its full time and proper place; 
but he is utterly lost who believes himself to be composed of his body only. 


36. The mind being roused to transcendental reason, all miseries are removed 
from the rational understanding, just as the beams of the rising sun falling 
upon the lotus-bud, dispel the darkness that had closely contracted its folded 
petals. 


CHAPTER CXVI. 


Birth and Incarnation of Adepts in Yoga. 


Argument. Production of the Body from the Mind. 


Rama asked: — What evidence is there Sir, in proof of Lavana’s obtaining the 
reward of his mental sacrifice of Rdjasiya, in his transformation to the state of 
the Chandala, as it was wrought upon him by the enchantment of the 
magician? 


2. Vasishtha answered: — I was myself present in the court-house of king 
Lavana, at the time when the magician made his appearance there, and I saw 
all that took place there with my own eyes. 


3. After the magician had gone and done his work, I with the other courtiers, 
was respectfully requested by the king Lavana, to explain to him the cause (of 
the dream and its circumstances). 


4. After I had pondered the matter and clearly seen its cause, I expounded the 
meaning of the magician’s spell, in the way as I shall now relate to you, my 
Rama! 


5. I remembered that all the performers of Rdjasiya sacrifice, were subjected 
to various painful difficulties and dangers, under which they had to suffer for a 
full dozen of years. 


6. It was then that Indra, the lord of heaven had compassion for Lavana, and 
sent his heavenly messenger in the form of the magician to avert his calamity. 


7. He taxed the Rdjasiiya sacrificer with the inflictment of the very many 
hardships in his dream, and departed in his aerial journey to the abode of the 
gods and Siddhas. 


8. (Prose) Thus Rama! it is quite evident and there is no doubt in it. The mind 
is the active and passive agent of all kinds of actions and their sequences. 


(a). Therefore, rub out the dirt of your heart, and polish the gem of your mind; 
and having melted it down like the particle of an icicle, by the fire of your 
reason, attain to your chief good summum bonum at last. 


(b). Know the mind as self-same with ignorance, (avidyd), which presents 
these multitudes of beings before you, and produces the endless varieties of 
things by its magical power. 


(c). There is no difference in the meanings of the words ignorance, mind, 
understanding, and living soul, as in the word tree and all its synonyms. 


(d). Knowing this truth, keep a steady mind freed from all its desires; and as 
the orb of the clear sun of your intellect has its rise, so the darkness of your 
nolens and volens flies away from you. 


(e). Know also this truth, that there is nothing in the world which is not to be 
seen by you, and which cannot be made your own, or alienated from you. 
Nothing is there that does not die or what is not yours or others. All things 
become all at all times. (This dogma is based on a dictum of the Vedanta 
given in the Madhu Brahmana. That nothing is confined in any place or 
person at all times, but passes from one to another in its turn and time). 


9. The multitudes of existent bodies and their known properties, meet together 
in the substantiality (of the self-same Brahma), as the various kinds of unburnt 
clay vessels, are melted down in the same watery substance. 


10. Rama said: — You said Sir, that it is by weakening the desires of our 
mind, that we can put an end to our pleasures and pains; but tell me now, how 
is it possible to stop the course of our naturally fickle minds. 


11. Vasishtha replied: — Hear, O thou bright moon of Raghu’s race! the 
proper course that I will tell thee for quieting the restless mind; by knowing 
this thou shalt obtain the peace of thy mind, and be freed from the actions of 
thy organs of sense. 


12. Ihave told you before of the triple nature of the production of beings here 
below, which I believe, you well remember. 


13. Of these the first is that power, (Brahma), who assumed to himself the 
shape of the Divine Will, (Sankalpa), and saw in his presence whatever he 
wished to produce, and which brought the mundane system into existence. 


14. He thought of many changes in his mind, as those of birth and death, of 
pleasure and pain, of the course of nature and effect of ignorance and the like, 
and then having ordained them as he willed, he disappeared of himself as 
snow before the solar light. 


15. Thus this god, the personification of Will, rises and sets repeatedly, as he 
is prompted from time to time by his inward wish. (So does every living being 
come out of the mould of its internal desire. Or that: — it is the wish, that 
frames and fashions everybody, or the will that moulds the mind). 


16. So there are millions of Brahmas born in this mundane egg, and many that 
have gone by and are yet to come, whose number is innumerable (and who are 
incarnations of their desires only). 


17. So are all living beings in the same predicament with Brahma, proceeding 
continually from the entity of God. Now I will tell you the manner in which 
they live, and are liberated from the bond of life. 


18. The mental power of Brahma issuing from him, rests on the wide expanse 
of vacuum which is spread before it, then being joined with the essence of 
ether, becomes solidified in the shape of desire. 


19. Then finding the miniature of matter spread out before it, it becomes the 
quintessence of the quintuple elements. Having assumed afterwards the 
inward senses, it becomes a suitable elementary body composed of the finest 
particles of the five elements. It enters into grains and vegetables, which re- 
enter into the bowels of animals in the form of food. 


20. The essence of this food in the form of semen, gives birth to living beings 
to infinity. 


21. The male child betakes himself in his boy-hood, to his tutor for the 
acquisition of knowledge. 


22. The boy next assumes his wondrous form of youth, which next arrives to 
the state of manhood. 


23. The man afterwards learns to choose something for himself, and reject 
others by the clear-sightedness of his internal faculties. 


24. The man that is possessed of such right discrimination of good and evil, 
and of right and wrong, and who is confident of the purity of his own nature, 
and of his belonging to the best caste (of a Brahman), attains by degrees the 
supernatural powers for his own good, as also for the enlightenment of his 
mind, by means of his knowledge of the seven essential grounds of Yoga 
meditation. 


CHAPTER CXVILI. 


Different States of Knowledge and Ignorance. 


Argument. The septuple grounds of true and false Knowledge and their mixed 
modes. And firstly, of self-abstraction or abstract knowledge of one or 
swartpa; and then of the different grounds of Ignorance. 


Note: The Text uses the terms jndna and ajndna, which literally signify 
knowledge and ignorance, and mean to say that, we know the subjective 
ourselves only (as-ego-sum) and are ignorant of the true nature of the 
objective, as whether they are or not and what they are. Though it would be 
more appropriate to use the words nischaya and anischaya or certainty and 
uncertainty, because we are certain of our own existence, and are quite 
uncertain of everything besides, which we perceive in our triple states of 
waking, dreaming and sound sleep, which incessantly produce and present 
before us a vast variety of objects, all of which lead us to error by their false 
appearances. 


Rama said: — Please Sir, tell me in brief, what are the grounds of Yoga 
meditation, which produce the seven kinds of consummation, which are aimed 
at by the Yogi adepts. You Sir, who are best acquainted with all recondite 
truths, must know it better than all others. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — They consist of the seven states of ignorance, 
(ajndna-bhimi), and as many of knowledge also; and these again diverge into 
many others, by their mutual intermixture. (Participating the natures of one 
another, and forming the mixed modes of states of truth and error). 


3. All these states, (both of right and wrong cognitions), being deep rooted in 
the nature of man, (mahd-satta), either by his habit or of training, made 
produce their respective fruits or results (tending to his elevation or 
degradation in this world and the next). 


Note. Habit or natural disposition, (pravritti), is the cause of leading to 


ignorance and its resulting error; but good training, — sddhana, and better 
endeavours, — prayatna, are the causes of right knowledge and elevation. 


4. Attend now to the nature of the sevenfold states or grounds of ignorance, 
and you will come to know thereby, the nature of the septuple grounds of 
knowledge also. 


5. Know this as the shortest lesson, that I will give thee of the definitions of 
true knowledge and ignorance; that, it is the remaining in one’s own true 
nature, (swartpa or suiform state), that constitutes his highest knowledge and 
liberation; and his divergence from it to the knowledge of his ego, (egoism, — 
ahanta), is the cause of his ignorance, and leads him to the error and bondage 
of this world. 


6. Of these, they that do not deviate from their consciousness, — samvitti, of 
themselves, — swarupa, as composed of the pure ens or essence only, 
(suddha-san-matra), are not liable to ignorance, because of their want of 
passions and affections, and of the feelings of envy and enmity in them. (The 
highest intelligence of one’s self, is the consciousness of his self-existence, or 
that, “I am that I am,” as a spiritual being, because the spirit or soul is the true 


self). 


7. But falling off from the consciousness of self-entity, — swarupa, and 
diving into the intellect, — Chit, in search of the thoughts of cognizable 
objects, (chetydrthas), is the greatest ignorance and error of mankind. (No 
error is greater than to fall off from the subjective and run after the objective). 


8. The truce that takes place in the mind, in the interim of a past and future 
thought of one object to another, (arthadar thantara); know that respite of the 
mind in thinking, to be the resting of the soul, in the consciousness of its self- 
entity, swarupa. 


9. That state of the soul which is at calm after the setting of the thoughts and 
desires of the mind, and which is as cold and quiet as the bosom of a stone, 
and yet without the torpitude of slumber or dull drowsiness, is called the 
supineness of the soul in its recognition of itself. 


10. That state of the soul, which is devoid of its sense of egoism and destitute 
of its knowledge of dualism, and its distinction from the state of the one 
universal soul, and shines forth with its unsleeping intelligence, is said to be at 
rest in itself or swartipa. 


11. But this state of the pure and self-intelligent soul, is obscured by the 
various states of ignorance, whose grounds you will now hear me relate unto 
you. These are the three states of wakefulness or jdgrat, known as the 


embryonic waking, (or vijajdgrat), the ordinary waking, and the intense 
waking called the mahajagrat. (i.e., the hypnotism or hybernation of the soul, 
being reckoned its intelligent state, its waking is deemed as the ground of its 
ignorance, and the more is it awake to the concerns of life, the more it is said 
to be liable to error). 


12. Again the different states of its dreaming, (swapnam or somnum), are also 
said to be the grounds of its ignorance and these are the waking dream, the 
sleeping dream, the sleepy waking, and sound sleep or sushupti. These are the 
seven grounds of ignorance. (Meaning hereby, all the three states of waking, 
dreaming, and sound sleep, (jagrat, swapna and sushupta), to be the grounds 
fertile with our ignorance and error). 


13. These are the seven-fold grounds, productive of sheer ignorance, and 
which when joined with one another, become many more and mixed ones, 
known under different denominations as you will hear by and by. 


14. At first there was the intelligent Intellect, (Chaitanya Chit), which gave 
rise to the nameless and pure intelligence Suddha-Chit, which became the 
source of the would-be mind and living soul. 


15. This intellect remained as the ever waking embryonic seed of all, 
wherefore it is called the waking seed, (Vijajdgrat); and as it is the first 
condition of cognition, it is said to be the primal waking state. 


16. Now know the waking state to be next to the primal waking intelligence of 
God, and it consists of the belief of the individual personality, of the ego and 
meity, — aham and mama; i.e., this am I, and these are mine by chance, — 
prag-abhava. (The first is the knowledge of the impersonal soul, and the 
second the knowledge of personal or individual souls). 


17. The glaring or great waking, — mahajdgrat, consists in the firm belief that 
I am such a one, and this thing is mine, by virtue of my merits in this or by- 
gone times or Karman. (This positive knowledge of one’s self and his 
properties, is the greatest error of the waking man). 


18. The cognition of the reality of anything either by bias, — rudhddhydsa or 
mistake, — arudha, is called the waking dream; as the sight of two moons in 
the halo, of silver in shells, and water in the mirage; as also the imaginary 
castle building of day dreamers. 


19. Dreaming in sleep is of many kinds, as known to one on his waking, who 
doubts their truth owing to their short-lived duration (as it was in the 
dreaming of Lavana). 


20. The reliance which is placed in things seen in a dream, after one wakes 


from his sleep, is called his waking dream, and lasting in its remembrance 
only in his mind. (Such is the reliance in divine inspirations and prophetic 
dreams which come to be fulfilled). 


21. A thing long unseen and appearing dimly with a stalwart figure in the 
dream, if taken for a real thing of the waking state, is called also a waking 
dream. (As that of Brutus on his seeing the stalwart figure of Cesar). 


22. A dream dreamt either in the whole body or dead body of the dreamer, 
appears as a phantom of the waking state: (as a living old man remembers his 
past youthful person, and a departed soul viewing the body it has left behind). 


23. Besides these six states, there is a torpid, — jada state of the living soul, 
which is called his sushupta, — hypnotism or sound sleep, and is capable of 
feeling its future pleasures and pains. (The soul retains even in this torpid 
state, the self-consciousness of its merit and demerit, (as impressions, — 
sanskdras in itself, and the sense of the consequent bliss or misery, which is to 
attend upon it)). 


24. In this last state of the soul or mind, all outward objects from a straw up to 
a mountain, appear as mere atoms of dust in its presence, as the mind views 
the miniature of the world in profound meditation. 


25. [have thus told you Rama, the features of true knowledge and error in 
brief, but each of these states branches out into a hundred forms, with various 
traits of their own. 


26. A long continued waking dream is accounted as the waking state, — 
jdgrat, and it becomes diversified according to the diversity of its objects. 
(i.e., Waking is but a continued dreaming). 


27. The waking state contains under it the conditions of the wakeful soul of 
God; also there are many things under these conditions which mislead men 
from one error to another, as a storm casts the boats into whirlpools and 
eddies. 


28. Some of the lengthened dreams in sleep, appear as the waking sight of day 
light; while others though seen in the broad day-light of the waking state, are 
no better than night-dreams seen in the day time, and are thence called our 
day dreams. 


29. Ihave thus far related to you the seven grades of the grounds of ignorance, 
which with all their varieties, are to be carefully avoided by the right use of 
our reason, and by the sight of the Supreme soul in our-selves. 


CHAPTER CXVIII. 


Directions to the Stages of Knowledge. 


Argument. Definitions of the seven Grounds of Knowledge, together with that 
of Adepts — artdhasin in Yoga, and also of Liberation. 


Vasishtha continued: — O sinless Rama, attend now to the sevenfold stages 
of cognoscence, by the knowledge of which you will no more plunge into the 
mire of ignorance. 


2. Disputants are apt to hold out many more stages of Yoga meditation; but in 
my opinion, these (septuple stages) are sufficient for the attainment of the 
chief good on ultimate liberation. (The disputants are the Patanjala Yoga 
philosophers, who maintain various modes of discipline, for attaining to 
particular perfections of consummation, — Siddhi; but the main object of this 
Sdstra is the summum bonum (parama-purushartha) which is obtainable by 
means of the seven stages, — Bhiimikas which are expounded herein below). 


3. Knowledge is understanding, which consists in knowing these seven stages 
only; but liberation, — mukti, which is the object of knowledge, (jndna), 
transcends the acquaintance of these septuple stages. 


4. Knowledge of truth is liberation, (moksha), and all these three are used as 
synonymous terms; because the living being that has known the truth, is freed 
from transmigration as by his liberation also. (The three words, mukti, moksha 
and jndna imply the same thing). 


5. The grounds of knowledge comprise the desire of becoming good, — 
subhechhd, and this good will is the first step. Then comes discretion or 
reasoning, (vichdrand), the second, followed by purity of mind, (tanu- 
manasa), which is the third grade to the gaining of knowledge. 


6. The fourth is self-reliance as the true refuge, — Sattd-patti, then asansakti 
or worldly apathy as the fifth. The sixth is paddrthabhadva or the power of 


abstraction, and the seventh or the last stage of knowledge is turya-gati or 
generalization of all in one. 


7. Liberation is placed at the end of these, and is attained without difficulty 
after them. Attend now to the definitions of these steps as I shall explain them 
unto you. 


8. First of all is the desire of goodness, springing from dispassionateness to 
worldly matters, and consisting in the thought, “why do I sit idle, I must know 
the Sdstras in the company of good men.” 


9. The second is discretion, which arises from association with wise and good 
men, study of the Sdstras, habitual aversion to worldliness, and consists in an 
inclination to good conduct, and the doing of all sorts of good acts. 


10. The third is the subduing of the mind, and restraining it from sensual 
enjoyments; and these are produced by the two former qualities of good will 
and discretion. 


11. The fourth is self-reliance, and dependence upon the Divine spirit as the 
true refuge of this soul. This is attainable by means of the three qualities 
described above. 


12. The fifth is worldly apathy, as it is shown by one’s detachment from all 
earthly concerns and society of men, by means of the former quadruple 
internal delight, (which comes from above). 


13. By practice of the said fivefold virtues, as also by the feeling of self- 
satisfaction and inward delight, (spiritual joy), man is freed from his thoughts 
and cares, about all internal and external objects. 


14. Then comes the powers of cogitation into the abstract meanings of things, 
as the sixth step to the attainment of true knowledge. It is fostered either by 
one’s own exertion, or guidance of others in search of truth. 


15. Continued habitude of these six qualifications and incognition of 
differences in religion, and the reducing of them all to the knowledge of one 
true God of nature, is called generalization. (Because all things in general, 
proceed from the one and are finally reduced in to the same). 


16. This universal generalization appertains to the nature of the living 
liberation of the man, who beholds all things in one and in the same light. 
Above this is the state of that glorious light, which is arrived by the 
disembodied soul. 


17. Those fortunate men, O Rama, who have arrived to the seventh stage of 
their knowledge, are those great minds that delight in the light of their souls, 


and have reached to their highest state of humanity. 


18. The living liberated are not plunged in the waters of pleasure and sorrow, 
but remain sedate and unmoved in both states; they are at liberty either to do 
or slight to discharge the duties of their conditions and positions in society. 


19. These men being roused from their deep meditation by intruders, betake 
themselves to their secular duties, like men awakened from their slumber (at 
their own option). 


20. Being ravished by the inward delight of their souls, they feel no pleasure 
in the delights of the world, just as men immerged in sound sleep, can feel no 
delight at the dalliance of beauties about them. 


21. These seven stages of knowledge are known only to the wise and thinking 
men, and not to beasts and brutes and immoveable things all around us. They 
are unknown to the barbarians and those that are barbarous in their minds and 
dispositions. 


22. But any one that has attained to these states of knowledge, whether it be a 
beast or barbarian, an embodied being or disembodied spirit, has undoubtedly 
obtained its liberation. 


23. Knowledge severs the bonds of ignorance, and by loosening them, 
produces the liberation of our souls; it is the sole cause of removing the 
fallacy of the appearance of water in the mirage, and the like errors. 


24. Those who being freed from ignorance, have not arrived at their ultimate 
perfection of disembodied liberation, have yet secured the salvation of their 
souls, by being placed in these stages of knowledge in their embodied state 
during their life time. 


25. Some have passed all these stages, and others over two or three of them; 
some have passed the six grades, while a few have attained to their seventh 
state all at once, (as the sages Sanaka, Narada, and other holy saints have done 
from their very birth). 


26. Some have gone over three stages, and others have attained the last; some 
have passed four stages, and some no more than one or two of them. 


27. There are some that have advanced only a quarter or half or three fourths 
of a stage. Some have passed over four quarters and a half, and some six and a 
half. 


28. Common people walking upon this earth, know nothing regarding these 
passengers in the paths of knowledge; but remain as blind as their eyes were 
dazzled by some planetary light or eclipsed by its shadow. 


29. Those wise men are compared to victorious kings, who stand victorious on 
these seven grounds of knowledge. The celestial elephants are nothing before 
them; and mighty warriors must bend their heads before them. 


30. Those great minds that are victors on these grounds of knowledge, are 
worthy of veneration, as they are conquerors of their enemies of their hearts 
and senses; and they are entitled to a station above that of an emperor and an 
autocrat, samrat and virat, both in this world and in the next in their embodied 
and disembodied liberations, — sadeha and videha muktis. 


Notes: — These terms called the grades of knowledge may be better 
understood in their appropriate English expressions, as: — 


1. Desire of improvement. 
. Habit of reasoning. 
. Fixity of attention. 


. Self-dependence — Intuition 


. Abstraction or abstract knowledge. 


2 

3 

4 

5. Freedom from bias or one-sidedness. 

6 

7. Generalization of all in the universal unity. 
8 


. Liberation is anaesthesia or cessation of action, sensation and thoughts. 


CHAPTER CXIX. 


Illustration of the Gold-ring. 


Argument. Ascertaining the True Unity by rejecting the illusory forms and on 
the said Grounds of Knowledge. 


Vasishtha said: — The human soul reflecting on its egoism, forgets its essence 
of the Supreme soul, as the gold-ring thinking on its formal rotundity, loses its 
thought of the substantial gold whereof it is made. 


2. Rama said: — Please tell me Sir, how the gold can have its consciousness 
of its form of the ring, as the soul is conscious of its transformation to egoism. 


3. Vasishtha said: — The questions of sensible men, relate only to the 
substances of things, and not to the production and dissolution of the existent 
formal parts of things, and neither to those of the non-existent; so you should 
ask of the substances of the soul and gold, and not of the ego and the ring, 
which are unsubstantial nullities in nature. (So men appraise the value of the 
gold of which the ring is made, and not by the form of the ring). 


4. When the jeweller sells his gold-ring for the price of gold, he undoubtedly 
delivers the gold which is the substance of the ring and not the ring without its 
substance. (So the shapes of things are nothing at all, but the essential 
substance, — Brahma underlying all things, is all in all). 


5. Rama asked: — If such is the case that you take the gold for the ring, then 
what becomes of the ring as we commonly take it to be? Explain this to me, 
that I may thereby know the substance of Brahma (underlying all 
appearances). 


6. Vasishtha said: — All form, O Rama, is formless and accidental quality, 
and no essential property of things. So if you would ascertain the nature of a 
nullity, then tell me the shape and qualities of a barren woman’s son (which 
are null and nothing). 


7. Do not fall into the error of taking the circularity of the ring, as an essential 
property of it; the form of a thing is only apparent and not prominent to the 
sight. (In European philosophy, form is defined as the essence of a thing, for 
without it nothing is conceivable. But matter being the recipient of form, it 
does form any part of its essence. Vasishtha speaking of matter as void of 
form, means the materia prima of Aristotle, or the elementary sorts of it). 


8. The water in the mirage, the two moons in the sky, the egoism of men and 
the forms of things, though appearing as real ones to sight and thought, cannot 
be proved as separate existences apart from their subjects. (All these, 
therefore, are fallacies vanishing before vichdrana or reasoning, the second 
ground of true knowledge). 


9. Again the likeness of silver that appears in pearl-shells, cannot be realized 
in the substance of the pearl-mother, or even a particle of it at any time or any 
place. (The Sanskrit alliterations of kanam, kshanam, kvanu, cannot be 
preserved in translation). 


10. It is the incircumspect view of a thing that makes a nullity appear as a 
reality, as the appearance of silver in the shell and the water in the mirage, (all 
which are but deceptions of sight and other senses, and are therefore never 
trustworthy). 


11. The nullity of a nil appears as an ens to sight, as also the fallacy of a thing 
as something where there is nothing of the kind, (as of silver in the pearl- 
mother and water in the mirage). 


12. Sometimes an unreal shadow acts the part of a real substance, as the false 
apprehension of a ghost kills a lad with the fear of being killed by it. (Fright 
of goblins and bogies of mormos and ogres, have killed many men in the 
dark). 


13. There remains nothing in the gold-jewel except gold, after its form of 
jewelry is destroyed; therefore, the forms of the ring and bracelet are no more, 
than drops of oil or water on a heap of sand. The forms are absorbed in the 
substance, as the fluids in dust or sand. 


14. There is nothing real or unreal on earth, except the false creations of our 
brain (as appearances in our dreams); and these whether known as real or 
unreal, are equally productive of their consequences, as the sights and fears of 
spectres in children. (We are equally encouraged by actual rewards and 
flattering hopes, as we are depressed at real degradation and its threatening 
fear). 


15. A thing whether it is so or not, proves yet as such as it is believed to be, by 


different kinds and minds of men, as poison becomes as effective as elixir to 
the sick, and ambrosia proves as heinous as hemlock with the intemperate. (So 
is false faith thought to be as efficacious by the vulgar as the true belief of the 
wise). 


16. Belief in the only essence of the soul, constitutes true knowledge, and not 
in its likeness of the ego and mind, as it is generally believed in this world. 
Therefore, abandon the thought of your false and unfounded egoism or 
individual existence. (This is said to be self-reliance or dependance on the 
universal soul of God). 


17. As there is no rotundity of the ring inherent in gold, so there is no 
individuality of egoism in the all-pervading universal soul. 


18. There is nothing everlasting beside Brahma, and no personality of Him as 
a Brahma, Vishnu or any other. There is no substantive existence as the world, 
but off spring of Brahma called the patriarchs. (All these are said to be 
negative terms in many passages of the Srutis as the following: — 


There is no substantiality except that of Brahma. There is no personality, 
(ddesa), of him. He is Brahma the supreme soul and no other. He is neither 
the outward nor inward nor he is nothing.) 


19. There are no other worlds beside Brahma, nor is the heaven without Him. 
The hills, the demons, the mind, and body all rest in that spirit which is no one 
of these. 


20. He is no elementary principle, nor is he any cause as the material or 
efficient. He is none of the three times of past, present, and future but all; nor 
is he anything in being or not-being (in esse or posse or in nubibus). 


21. He is beyond your egoism or tuism, ipseism and suism, and all your 
entities and non-entities. There is no attribution nor particularity in Him, who 
is above all your ideas, and is none of the ideal personifications of your 
notions, (i.e., He is none of the mythic persons of abstract ideas as Love and 
the like). 


22. He is the plenum of the world, supporting and moving all, being unmoved 
and unsupported by any. He is everlasting and undecaying bliss; having no 
name or symbol or cause of his own. (He is the being that pervades through 
and presides over all, — sanmdtram). 


23. He is no sat or est or a being that is born and existent, nor an asat, — 
nonest, (i.e., extinct); he is neither the beginning, middle or end of anything, 
but is all in all. He is unthinkable in the mind, and unutterable by speech. He 
is vacuum about the vacuity, and a bliss above all felicity. 


24. Rama said: — I understand now Brahma to be self-same in all things, yet I 
want to know what is this creation, that we see all about us. (i.e., Are they the 
same with Brahma or distinct from him?) 


25. Vasishtha replied: — The supreme spirit being perfectly tranquil, and all 
things being situated in Him, it is wrong to speak of this creation or that, when 
there is no such thing as a creation at any time. 


26. All things exist in the all containing spirit of God, as the whole body of 
water is contained in the universal ocean; but there is fluctuation in the waters 
owing to their fluidity, whereas there is no motion in the quiet and motionless 
spirit of God. 


27. The light of the luminaries shines of itself, but not so the Divine light; it is 
the nature of all lights to shine of themselves, but the light of Brahma is not 
visible to sight. 


28. As the waves of the ocean rise and fall in the body of its waters, so do 
these phenomena appear as the noumena in the mind of God (as his ever- 
varying thoughts). 


29. To men of little understandings, these thoughts of the Divine mind appear 
as realities; and they think this sort of ideal creation, will be lasting for ages. 


30. Creation is ascertained to be a cognition, (a thought) of the Divine Mind; 
it is not a thing different from the mind of God, as the visible sky is no other 
than a part of Infinity. 


31. The production and extinction of the world, are mere thoughts of the 
Divine mind, as the formation and dissolution of ornaments take place in the 
self-same substance of gold. 


32. The mind that has obtained its calm composure, views the creation as full 
with the presence of God, but those that are led by their own convictions, take 
the inexistent for reality, as children believe the ghosts as real existences. 


33. The consciousness of ego (or the subjective self-existence), is the cause of 
the error of the objective knowledge of creation; but the tranquil 
unconsciousness of ourselves, brings us to the knowledge of the supreme, 
who is above the objective and inert creation. 


34. These different created things appear in a different light to the sapient, 
who views them all in the unity of God, as the toy puppets of a militia, are 
well known to the intelligent to be made and composed of mud and clay. 


35. This plenitude of the world is without its beginning and end, and appears 
as a faultless or perfect peace of workmanship. It is full with the fullness of 


the supreme Being, and remains full in the fullness of God. 


36. This plenum which appears as the created world, is essentially the Great 
Brahma, and situated in his greatness; just as the sky is situated in the sky, 
tranquility in tranquility, and felicity in felicity. (These are absolute and 
identic terms, as the whole is the whole, etc.). 


37. Look at the reflexion of a longsome landscape in a mirror, and the picture 
of a far stretching city in the miniature; and you will find the distances of the 
objects lost in their closeness. So the distances of worlds are lost in their 
propinquity to one another in the spirit of God. 


38. The world is thought as a nonentity by some, and as an entity by others; 
by their taking it in the different lights of its being a thing beside God, and its 
being but a reflection of Brahma. (In the former case it is a nonentity as there 
can be nothing without God; in the latter sense it is real entity being identic 
with God). 


39. After all, it can have no real entity, being like the picture of a city and not 
as the city itself. It is as false as the appearance of limpid water in the desert 
mirage, and that of the double moon in the sky. 


40. As it is the practice of magicians, to show magic cities in the air, by 
sprinkling handfuls of dust before our eyes; so doth our erroneous 
consciousness represent the unreal world, as a reality unto us. 


41. Unless our inborn ignorance, (error), like an arbour of noxious plants, is 
burnt down to the very root by the flame of right reasoning, it will not cease to 
spread out its branches, and grow the rankest weeds of our imaginary 
pleasures and sorrows. 


CHAPTER CXX. 


Lamentation of the Chandala Woman. 


Argument. Lavana goes to the Vindhyan region, and sees his consort and 
relatives of the dreaming state. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now Rama, attend to the wonderful power of the said 
Avidyd or error, in displaying the changeful phenomenals, like the changing 
forms of ornaments in the substance of the self-same gold. 


2. The king Lavana, having at the end of his dream, perceived the falsehood 
of his vision, resolved on the following day to visit that great forest himself. 


3. He said to himself: — Ah! when shall I revisit the Vindhyan region, which 
is inscribed in my mind; and where I remember to have undergone a great 
many hardships in my forester’s life. 


4. So saying, he took to his southward journey, accompanied by his ministers 
and attendants, as if he was going to make a conquest of that quarter, where 
he arrived at the foot of the mount in a few days. 


5. There he wandered about the southern, and eastern and western shores of 
the sea, (i.e., all round the Eastern and Western Ghats). He was as delighted 
with his curvilinear course, as the luminary of the day, in his diurnal journey 
from east to west. 


6. He saw there in a certain region, a deep and doleful forest stretching wide 
along his path, and likening the dark and dismal realms of death, (Yama or 
Pluto). 


7. Roving in this region he beheld everything, he had seen before in his 
dream; he then inquired into the former circumstances, and wondered to learn 
their conformity with the occurrences of his vision. 


8. He recognised there the Chandala hunters of his dream, and being curious 
to know the rest of the events, he continued in his peregrination about the 


forest. 


9. He then beheld a hamlet at the skirt of the wilderness, foggy with smoke, 
and appearing as the spot where he bore the name of Pushta Pukkasa or 
fostered Chandala. 


10. He beheld there the same huts and hovels, and the various kinds of human 
habitations, fields and plains, with the same men and women that dwelt their 
before. 


11. He beheld the same landscapes and leafless branches of trees, shorn of 
their foliage by the all devouring famine; he saw the same hunters pursuing 
their chase, and the same helpless orphans lying thereabouts. 


12. He saw the old lady, (his mother-in-law), wailing at the misfortunes of 
other matrons, who were lamenting like herself with their eyes suffused in 
tears, at the untimely deaths and innumerable miseries of their fellow 
brethren. 


13. The old matrons with their eyes flowing with brilliant drops of tears, and 
with their bodies and bosoms emaciated under the pressure of their afflictions, 
were mourning with loud acclamations of woe in that dreary district, stricken 
by drought and dearth. 


14. They cried, O ye sons and daughters, that lie dead with your emaciated 
bodies for want of food for these three days, say where fled your dear lives, 
stricken as they were by the steel of famine from the armour of your bodies. 


15. We remember your sweet smiles, showing your coral teeth resembling the 
red gunjaphalas to our lords, as they descended from the towering tdla, (palm 
trees), with their red-ripe fruits held by their teeth, and growing on the cloud- 
capt mountains. 


16. When shall we see again the fierce leap of our boys, springing on the 
wolves crouching amidst the groves of Kadamba and Jamb and Lavanga and 
Gunja trees. 


17. We do not see those graces even in the face of Kama the god of love, that 
we were wont to observe in the blue and black countenances of our children, 
resembling the dark hue of Tamdla leaves, when feasting on their dainty food 
of fish and flesh. 


Lamentation of the mother-in-law. 


18. My nigrescent daughter, says one, has been snatched away from me with 
my dear husband like the dark Yamuna by the fierce Yama. O they have been 


carried away from me like the Tamdla branch with its clustering flowers, by a 
tremendous gale from this sylvan scene. 


19. O my daughter, with thy necklace of the strings of red gunja seeds, 
gracing the protuberant breast of thy youthful person, and with thy swarthy 
complexion, seeming as the sea of ink was gently shaken by the breeze. Ah! 
whither hast thou fled with thy raiment of woven withered leaves, and thy 
teeth as black as the jet-jambu fruits (when fully ripe). 


20. O young prince! that wast as fair as the full moon, and that didst forsake 
the fairies of thy harem, and didst take so much delight in my daughter, where 
hast thou fled from us? Ah my daughter! she too is dead in thy absence, and 
fled from my presence. 


21. Being cast on the waves of this earthly ocean, and joined to the daughter 
of a Chandala, thou wast, O prince! subjected to mean and vile employments, 
that disgraced thy princely character. (This is a taunt to all human beings that 
disgrace their heavenly nature, and grovel as beasts while living on earth). 


22. Ah! that daughter of mine with her tremulous eyes, like those of the 
timorous fawn, and, Oh! that husband valiant as the royal tiger, you are both 
gone together, as the high hopes and great efforts of men are fled with the loss 
of their wealth. 


23. Now grown husbandless, and having of late lost my daughter also, and 
being thrown in a distant and barren land, I am become the most miserable 
and wretched of beings. Born of a low caste, I am cast out of all prospect in 
life, and have become a personification of terror to myself, and a sight of 
horror to others. 


24. O! that the Lord has made me a widowed woman, and subjected me to the 
insult of the vulgar, and the hauteur of the affluent. Prostrated by hunger and 
mourning at the loss of a husband and child, I rove incessantly from door to 
door to beg alms for my supportance, (as it is the case of most female 
beggars). 


25. It is better that one who is unfortunate and friendless, or subject to passion 
and diseases, should rather die sooner than live in misery. The dead and 
inanimate beings are far better than the living miserable. 


26. Those that are friendless, and have to toil and moil in unfriendly places, 
are like the grass of the earth, trampled under the feet, and overwhelmed 
under a flood of calamities. 


27. The king seeing his aged mother-in-law mourning in this manner, offered 
her some consolation through the medium of her female companions, and then 


asked that lady to tell him, “who she was, what she did there, who was her 
daughter and who is his son.” 


28. She answered him with tears in her eyes: — This village is called 
Pukkasa-Ghosha, here I had a Pukkasa for my husband, who had a daughter 
as gentle as the moon. 


29. She happened to have here a husband as beautiful as the moon, who was a 
king and chanced to pass by this way. By this accident they were matched 
together, in the manner that an ass finds by chance a pot of honey lying on her 
way in the forest. 


30. She lived long with him in connubial bliss, and produced to him both sons 
and daughters, who grew up in the covert of this forest, as the gourd plant 
grows on a tree serving as its support. 


CHAPTER CXXI. 


Proof of the Futility of Mind. 


Argument. Lavana’s return to his Palace and the interpretation of his dream 
by Vasishtha. 


The Chandala continued: — O lord of men! After lapse of sometime, there 
occurred a dearth in this place owing to the drought of rain, which broke 
down all men under its diresome pressure. 


2. Pressed by extreme scarcity, all our village people were scattered far 
abroad, and they perished in famine and never returned. 


3. Thence forward O lord! we are exposed to utmost misery, and sit lamenting 
here in our helpless poverty. Behold us lord, all bathed in tears falling 
profusely from our undrying eyelids. 


4. The King was lost in wonder, at hearing these words from the mouth of the 
elderly lady; and looking at the face of his follower, the faithful minister 
remained in dumb amazement as the figure in a picture. 


5. He reflected repeatedly on this strange occurrence, and its curious 
concurrence with his adventures in the dream. He made repeated queries 
relating to other circumstances, and the more he heard and learned of them, 
the more he found their coincidence with the occurrences of his vision. 


6. He sympathised with their woes, and saw them in the same state, as he had 
seen them before in his dream. And then he gave suitable gifts and presents to 
relieve their wants and woes. 


7. He tarried there a long while, and pondered on the decrees of destiny, when 
the wheel of fortune brought him back to his house, wherein he entered amidst 
the loud cheers and low salutations of the citizens. 


8. In the morning the King appeared in his court hall, and sitting there amidst 
his courtiers, asked me saying: — “How is it, O sage, that my dream has come 


to be verified in my presence to each item and to my great surprise?” 


9. “They answered me exactly and to the very point all what I asked of them, 
and have removed my doubt of their truth from the mind, as the winds 
disperse the clouds of heaven.” 


10. Know thus, O Rama! it is the illusion of Avidya, that is the cause of a great 
many errors, by making the untruth appear as truth, and representing the sober 
reality as unreality. 


11. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how the dream came to be verified; it is a 
mysterious account that cannot find a place in my heart. 


12. Vasishtha replied: — All this is possible, O Rama! to the illusion of 
ignorance, (Avidya); which shows the fallacy of a picture, (pata), in a pot, 
(ghata), and represents the actual occurrences of life as dreams, and dreams as 
realities. 


13. Distance appears to be nigh, as a distant mountain seen in the mirror; and 
a long time seems a short interval, as a night of undisturbed repose. 


14. What is untrue seems to be a truth as in dreaming one’s own death in 
sleep; and that which is impossible appears possible, as in one’s aerial journey 
in a dream. 


15. The stable seems unsteady, as in the erroneous notion of the motion of 
fixed objects to one passing in a vehicle; and the unmoving seem to be 
moving to one, as under the influence of his inebriation. 


16. The mind infatuated by one’s hobby, sees exposed to its view, all what it 
thinks upon within itself. It sees things in the same light, as they are painted in 
his fancy, whether they be in existence or not, or real or unreal. 


17. No sooner does the mind contract its ignorance, by its false notions of 
egoism and tuism, than it is subjected to endless errors, which have no 
beginning, middle, or end and are of incessant occurrence in their course. 


18. It is the notion that gives a shape to all things; it makes a Kalpa age appear 
as a moment, and also prolongs a moment of time to a whole Kalpa. 


19. A man deprived of understanding, believes himself as he is said, to have 
become a sheep; so a fighting ram thinks himself to be a lion in his ideal 
bravery. (The word sheep is a term of derision, as the lion is that of applause). 


20. Ignorance causes the blunder of taking things for what they are not, and 
falling into the errors of egoism and tuism: — so all errors in the mind 
produce errors in actions also. 


21. It is by mere accident, that men come in possession of the objects of their 
desire; and it is custom that determines the mode of mutual dealings. (The 
gain is accidental and the dealing is conventional). 


22. Lavana’s remembrance of the dream of his having lived in the habitation 
of the Pukkasa, was the internal cause, that represented to him the external 
picture of that abode, as it was a reality. (The mind shows what we think 
upon, whether they are real or unreal ones). 


23. As the human mind is liable to forget many things which are actually done 
by some, so it is susceptible to remember those acts as true which were never 
done, but had been merely thought upon in the mind. (The forgetfulness of 
actualities as well as the thoughts of inactualities, belong both to the province 
of the mind. Here Lavana did not remember what he had not done, but 
recollected the thoughts that passed in his mind). 


24. In this manner is the thought of my having eaten something while I am 
really fasting; and that of my having sojourned in a distant country in a dream, 
appears true to me while I think of them. 


25. It was thence that the king came to find the same conduct in the habitation 
of the Chandalas at the side of Vindhya, as he had been impressed with its 
notion in his dream as said before. 


26. Again, the false dream that Lavana had dreamt of the Vindhyan people, 
the same took possession of their minds also. (The same thought striking in 
the minds of different persons at the same time (as we see in men of the same 
mind)). 


27. The notion of Lavana as settled in the minds of the Vindhyans, as the 
thoughts of these people rose in the mind of the king. (If it is possible for us to 
transfer our thoughts to one another, how much easier must it be for the 
superior instrumentality of dreams and revelations to do the same also. This is 
the Yoga, whereby one man reads the mind of another). Again, the same error 
taking possession of many minds all at once, proves the futility of common 
sense and universal belief being taken for certainty, hence the common belief 
of the reality of things, is the effect of universal delusion and error. 


28. As the same sentiments and figures of speech, occur in different poets of 
distant ages and countries, so it is not striking that the same thoughts and 
ideas should rise simultaneously in the minds of different men also. (We have 
a striking instance of the coincidence of the same thought in the titles of 
Venisanhara and Rape of the Lock, in the minds of Vhattanarayn and Pope). 


29. In common experience, we find the notions and ideas to stand for the 


things themselves, otherwise nothing is known to exist at all without our 
notion or idea of it in the mind. (All that we know of, are our ideas and 
nothing besides. — Locke and Berkeley). 


30. One idea embraces many others also under it, as those of the waves and 
current, are contained under that of water. And so one thought is associated by 
others relating its past, present, and future conditions of being, as the thought 
of a seed accompanies the thoughts of its past and future states and its fruits 
and flowers of the tree. (So the word man, comprises almost every idea 
relating to humanity). 


31. Nothing has its entity or non-entity, nor can anything be said to exist or 
not to be, unless we have a positive idea of the existent, and a negative notion 
of the in-existent. 


32. All that we see in our error, is as inexistent as oiliness in sands; and so the 
bracelet is nothing in reality, but a formal appearance of the substance of gold. 


33. A fallacy can have no connection with the reality, as the fallacy of the 
world with the reality of God, and so the fallacy of the ring with the substance 
of gold and of the serpent with the rope. The connection or mutual relation of 
things of the same kind, is quite evident in our minds. 


34. The relation of gum resin and the tree, is one of dissimilar union, and 
affords no distinct ideas of them except that of the tree which contains the 
other. (So the idea of the false world, is lost in that of its main substratum of 
the Divine Spirit). 


35. As all things are full of the Spirit, so we have distinct ideas of them in our 
minds, which are also spiritual substances, and are not as dull material stones 
which have no feelings. 


Note: All things existent in the Divine mind in their eternally ideal state, 
present the same ideas to our minds also, which are of the similar nature and 
substance with the Divine. 


36. Because all things in the world are intellectually true and real, we have 
therefore their ideas impressed in our minds also. 


37. There cannot be a relation or connection of two dissimilar things, which 
may be lasting, but are never united together. For without such mutual relation 
of things, no idea of both can be formed together. 


38. Similar things being joined with similar form together their wholes of the 
same kind, presenting one form and differing in nothing. 


39. The intellect being joined with an abstract idea, produces an invisible, 


inward, and uniform thought; so dull matter joined to another dull object, 
forms a denser material object to view. But the intellectual and material can 
never unite together owing to their different natures. 


40. The intellectual and material parts of a person, can never be drawn 
together in any picture, because the intellectual part having the intellect, has 
the power of knowledge, which is wanting in the material picture. 


41. Intellectual beings do not take into account the difference of material 
things as wood and stone, which combine together for some useful purpose 
(as the building of a house and the like). 


42. The relation between the tongue and taste is also homogeneous, because 
rasa taste, and rasand the instrument of tasting, are both watery substances, 
and there is no heterogeneous relation between them. (And so of the other 
organs of sense and their respective objects). 


43. But there is no relation between intellect and matter, as there is between 

the stone and the wood; the intellect cannot combine with wood and stone to 
form anything. (The mind and matter have no relation with one another, nor 

can they unite together in any way). 


44. Spiritually considered, all things are alike, because they are full with the 
same spirit; otherwise, the error of distinction between the viewer and the 
view, creates endless differences as betwixt wood and stones and other things. 


45. The relation of combination though unseen in spirits, yet it is easily 
conceived that spirits can assume any form, ad libitum and ad infinitum, (but 
they must be spiritual and never material. So also a material thing can be 
converted to another material object, but never to a spiritual form). 


46. Know ye seekers of truth, all things to be identic with the entity of God. 
Renounce your knowledge of nonentities and the various kinds of errors and 
fallacies and know the One as All to pan. (The omnipotent spirit of God, is 
joined with all material things, in its spiritual form only, and it is knowable to 
the mind and spirit of man, and never by their material organs of sense). 


47. The Intellect being full with its knowledge, there is nothing wanting to us; 
it presents us everything in its circumference, as the imagination having its 
wide range, shews us the sights of its air-built castles and everything beside. 
(The difference consists in the intellect’s shewing us the natures of things in 
their true light, and the imagination’s portraying them in false shapes and 
colours to our minds). 


48. To Him there is no limit of time or place, but his presence extends over all 
his creation. It is ignorance that separates the creator from creation, and raises 


the errors of egoism and tuism, (i.e., of the subjective and objective. The union 
of these into One is the ground-work of pantheism). 


49. Leaving the knowledge of the substantive gold, man contracts the error of 
taking it for the formal ornament. The mistake of the jewel for gold, is as 
taking one thing for another, and the production for the producer. 


50. The error of the phenomenon vanishes upon loss of the eyesight, and the 
difference of the jewel (or visible shape), is lost in the substance of gold. 


51. The knowledge of unity removes that of a distinct creation, as the 
knowledge of the clay takes off the sense of puppet soldiers made of it. (So 
the detection of AEsop’s ass in the lion’s skin, and that of the daw with the 
peacock’s feathers, removed the false appearance of their exteriors). 


52. The same Brahma causes the error of the reality of the exterior worlds, as 
the underlying sea causes the error of the waves on its surface. The same 
wood is mistaken for the carved figure, and the common clay is taken for the 
pot which is made of it. (The truth is that, which underlies the appearance). 


53. Between the sight and its object, there lieth the eye of the beholder, which 
is beyond the sight of its viewer, and is neither the view nor the viewer. (Such 
is the supreme Being hidden alike from the view and the viewer). 


54. The mind traversing from one place to another, leaves the body in the 
interim, which is neither moving nor quite unmoved, since its mental part only 
is in its moving state. (So should you remain sedate with your body, but be 
ever active in your mind). 


55. Remain always in that quiet state, which is neither one of waking, 
dreaming, nor of sleeping; and which is neither the state of sensibility or 
insensibility, but one of everlasting tranquility and rest. 


56. Drive your dullness, and remain always in the company of your sound 
intellect as a solid rock; and whether in joy or grief, commit your soul to your 
Maker. 


57. There is nothing which one has to lose or earn in this world; therefore, 
remain in uniform joy and bliss, whether you think yourself to be blest or 
unblest in life. (“Naked came I, and naked must I return; blessed be the name 
of the Lord’’). 


58. The soul residing in thy body, neither loves nor hates aught at any time; 
therefore, rest in quiet, and fear naught for what betides thy body, and engage 
not thy mind to the actions of thy body. 


59. Remain free from anxiety about the present, as you are unconcerned about 


the future. Never be impelled by the impulses of your mind, but remain 
steadfast in your trust in the true God. 


60. Be unconcerned with all, and remain as an absent man. Let thy heart 
remain callous to everything like a block of stone or toy of wood; and look 
upon your mind as an inanimate thing, by the spiritual light of your soul. 


61. As there is no water in the stone nor fire in water, so the spiritual man has 
no mental action, nor the Divine spirit hath any. (There is no mutability of 
mental actions in the immutable mind of God). 


62. If that which is unseen, should ever come to do anything or any action, 
that action is not attributed to the unseen agent, but to something else in the 
mind. (But the mind being ignored, its actions are ignored also). 


63. The unself possessed (unspiritual) man, that follows the dictates of his 
fickle and willful mind, resembles a man of the border land, following the 
customs of the out-cast Mlechchdas or barbarians. 


64. Having disregarded the dictates of your vile mind, you may remain at ease 
and as fearless, as an insensible statue made of clay. 


65. He who understands that there is no such thing as the mind, or that he had 
one before, but it is dead in him today, becomes as immovable as a marble 
statue with this assurance in himself. 


66. There being no appearance of the mind in any wise, and you having no 
such thing in you in reality except your soul, say, why do you in vain infer its 
existence for your own error and harm? 


67. Those who vainly subject themselves to the false apparition of the mind, 
are mostly men of unsound understandings, and bring fulminations on 
themselves from the full-moon of the pure soul. 


68. Remain firm as thou art with thyself (soul), by casting afar thy fancied and 
fanciful mind from thee; and be freed from the thoughts of the world, by 
being settled in the thought of the Supreme Soul. 


69. They who follow a nullity as the unreal mind, are like those fools who 
shoot at the inane air, and are cast into the shade. 


70. He that has purged off his mind, is indeed a man of great understanding, 
he has gone across the error of the existence of the world, and become 
purified in his soul. We have considered long, and never found anything as the 
impure mind in the pure soul. 


CHAPTER CXXII. 


Ascertainment of the Self or Soul. 


Argument. Description of the grounds of knowledge, vanity of fears and 
sorrows, and the natures of the intellect and soul. 


Vasishtha said, (Prose). — After the birth of a man and a slight development 
of his understanding, he should associate the company of good and wise men. 


2. There is no other way except by the light of Sdstras and association with 
the good and wise, to ford over the river of ignorance, which runs in its 
incessant course flowing in a thousand streams. 


3. It is by means of reasoning that man is enabled to discern what is good for 
him, and what he must avoid to do. 


4. He then arrives to that ground of reason which is known as good will, or a 
desire to do what is good and keep from what is bad and evil. 


5. Then he is led by his reason to the power of reasoning, and discerning the 
truth from untruth, and the right from wrong. 


6. As he improves in knowledge, he gets rid of his improper desires, and 
purifies his mind from all worldly cares. 


7. Then he is said to have gained that stage of knowledge, which is called the 
purity of his soul and mind and of his heart and conduct. 


8. When the Yogi or adept attains to his full knowledge, he is said to have 
arrived at his state of goodness, — satva. 


9. By this means and the curtailing of his desires, he arrives to the state called 
unattachment or indifference to all worldly matters, (andsakta), and is no 
more subjected to the consequence of his actions. 


10. From the curtailment of desires, the Yogi learns to abstract his mind from 
the unrealities of the world. 


11. And whether sitting inactive in his posture of Samddhi meditation, or 
doing anything for himself or others, he must fix his mind to whatever is 
productive of real good to the world. His soul being cool by the tenuity of his 
desires, is habituated to do its duties, without the knowledge of what it is 
doing. (He neither fondly pursues anything nor thinks with ardour of any. His 
want of desire makes him indifferent to all, and like a man waking from his 
sleep, he takes himself to the discharge of his duties). 


12. Verily, he who has subdued his mind, has reached to the contemplative 
stage of Yoga meditation. 


13. Thus, one having his mind dead in himself, learns by practice of years, to 
perform his duties, by refraining from his thoughts of external objects. Such a 
one is said to have attained the turya or fourth stage of his spiritual elevation, 
and to have become liberated in his life-time. 


14. He is not glad to get anything, nor sorry to miss it. He lives without fear of 
accidents, and is content with whatever he gets. 


15. Thou hast, O Rama! known whatever is to be known by man, and thou 
hast certainly extirpated thy desire in all thy actions through life. 


16. Thy thoughts are all spiritual, and transcend the actions of the corporeal 
body, though thou art in thy embodied state. Do not give up thy self to joy or 
grief, but know thyself to be free from decay and defect. 


17. Spiritually thou art a pure and bright substance, which is ubiquious and 
ever in its ascendancy. It is devoid of pleasure and pain, and of death and 
disease. 


18. Why dost thou lament at the grief or loss of a friend, when thou art so 
friendless in thyself. Being thrown alone in this world, whom dost thou claim 
as a friend of thy soul? 


19. We see only the particles of matter of which this body is composed; it 
exists and passes away in its time from its place, but there is no rising or 
falling of the soul. 


20. Being imperishable in thyself, why dost thou fear to fall into naught? And 
why think of the destruction of thy soul, which is never subject to death? 


21. When a jar is broken in twain from its upper part, its vacuity is not lost, 
but mixes with the air; so the body being destroyed, the indestructible soul is 
not lost with it, (but unites with its original source). 


22. As the sunlight causing the appearance of a river in the mirage, is not lost 
at the disappearance of the phenomenal river; so the immortal soul does not 


perish upon dissolution of the frail body. 


23. There is a certain illusion, which raises the false appetites within us; 
otherwise, the unity of the soul requires the help of no duality or secondary 
substance, in order to be united with the sole unity. 


24. There is no sensible object, whether visible, tangible, audible, or of taste 
or smelling (which relate to the particular senses and brain), that can affect the 
unconnected soul. 


25. All things and their powers, are contained in the all-powerful and all- 
comprehensive soul; these powers are displayed throughout the world, but the 
soul is as void as the empty air. 


26. It is the mental deception, O Raghava, that presents before it the 
phenomena of the triple world, representing diverse forms according to the 
triplicate nature of man, (the satva, rajas and tamas). 


27. There are threefold methods of dispelling this delusion of the mind, 
namely, by the tranquility of the mind, by destroying its desires, and by 
abandonment of acts (which lead only to errors in our repeated regenerations). 


28. The world is a crushing mill, with its lower and upper stones of the earth 
and heaven; our desires are the cords that incessantly drag us under it; 
therefore, Rama, break off these ropes (and you will escape the danger of 
being crushed by it). 


29. Our unacquaintance with spiritual knowledge, is the cause of all our 
errors; but our acquaintance of it, leads us to endless joy and ultimately to 
Brahma himself. 


30. The living being having proceeded from Brahma, and travelled over the 
earth at pleasure, turns at last to Brahma by means of his knowledge of Him. 


31. Rama! all things have sprung from one Being, who is perfect felicity 
itself, inconceivable and undecaying in its nature; and all these are as the rays 
of that light, or as the light of that everlasting fire. 


32. These are as lines on the leaves of trees, and as the curls and waves on the 
surface of waters. They are as ornaments made of that gold, and as the heat 
and cold of that fire and water. 


33. Thus the triple world subsists in the thought of the Divine mind. It has 
thus sprung from the mind of God, and rests in its self-same state with the all- 
comprehending mind. 


34. This Mind is called Brahma, who is the soul of all existence. He being 


known the world is known also, (i.e., the world is known through him); and as 
he is the knower of all, he gives us the knowledge of all things. (Thus the 
Sruti: — There is no knowing of anything but by the knowledge that He 
imparts to us). 


35. This all-pervasive Being is explained to us by the learned, by the coined 
epithets of the soul, intellect and Brahma, used both in the Sdstras as in the 
popular language. 


36. The pure notion that we have of an everlasting Being, apart from all 
sensible ideas and impressions, is called the Intellect and soul. 


37. This Intellect or Intelligent soul, is much more transparent than the 
ethereal sky; and it is the plenum, that contains the plenitude of the world, as a 
disjoined and distinct reflexion of itself. 


38. The knowledge of the separate existence of the unreal reflexion of the 
world, apart from that real reflector, is the cause of all our ignorance and 
error; but the view of their subsistence in the mirror of the supreme soul, 
blends them all to myself also, (who are the same soul). 


39. Now Rama, that hast a bodiless soul of the form of pure intellect, thou 
canst have no cause to fall into the error, of being sorry for or afraid of the 
vanities of the world. 


40. How can the unembodied soul be affected by the passions and feelings of 
the body? It is the ignorant and unintelligent only, that are subject to vain 
suspicions about unrealities. 


41. The indestructible intellect of the unintelligent even, is not destroyed by 
the destruction of their bodies, how then should the intelligent be afraid of 
their dissolution? 


42. The intellect is irresistible in its course, and roves about the solar path, 
(ecliptic); it is the intellectual part that makes the man, and not the outward 
body. (Puri sete purushah; it is the inner soul that is called man). 


43. The soul called the purusha or inner person, whether it abideth in the body 
or not, and whether it is intelligent or otherwise, (rational or irrational), never 
dies upon the death of the body. 


44. Whatever miseries you meet with, Rama! in this transient world, all 
appertain to the body, and not to the intangible soul or intellect. 


45. The intellectual soul being removed from the region of the mind, (which is 
but an inward sense, and of the nature of vacuity, and not the grains of the 
brain composing the mind), is not to be approached by the pleasures and pains 


affecting the body and mind. 


46. The soul that has curbed its earthly desires, flies to its seat in the spirit of 
Brahma, after the dissolution of its prison house of the body, in the same 
manner as the bee lying hid under the coverlet of the lotus petals in the 
darkness of the night, takes to its heavenward flight by the dawning light of 
the day. 


47. If life is known to be frail, and the living state to be a transient scene, then 
say, O Rama! what it is that is lost by loss of this prison-house of the body, 
and what is it that you mourn for? 


48. Think, therefore, O Rama! on the nature of truth, and mind not about the 
errors of ignorance. Be freed from your earthly desires, and know the sinless 
soul to be void of all desires. 


49. The intellectual soul being tranquil and transparent, and a mere witness of 
our doings, without any doing or desire of its own, receives the reflexion of 
the undesirous God, as a mirror reflects the images of things. 


50. The soul being, as said before, a translucent particle, reflects the images of 
all worlds in itself, as a polished gem reflects the rays of light in its bosom. 


51. The relation of the indifferent soul with the world, is like that of the mirror 
and its reflexions; the difference and identity of the soul and the world, are of 
the same kind. 


52. As the activities of living beings, have a free play with the rising sun, so 
the duties of the world, are fully discharged by the rising of the intellect. 


53. No sooner you get rid of your error of the substantiality of the world, than 
you shall come to the consciousness of its being a vacuum, resting in the spirit 
of God, (which is the receptacle of infinite space, and whatever there appears 
in it). 

54. As it is the nature of a lighted lamp to spread its lustre all around, so it is 
the nature of mental philosophy, to enlighten us with the real state of the soul. 


55. The essence of the supreme soul gave rise to the mind, (will), at first, 
which spread out the universe with its network of endless varieties. It was as 
the sky issuing out of the infinite vacuity, and assuming the shape of the blue 
atmosphere which is also a nullity. 


56. Privation of desires melts down the mind, and dissolves the mist of 
ignorance from the face of the intellect. Then appears the bright light of the 
one infinite and increate God, like the clear firmament of autumn after the 
dispersion of clouds. 


57. The mind sprouts out at first from the supreme soul with all its activities, 
and takes upon it the nature of the lotus-born Brahma by its desire of creation. 
It stretches out a variety of worlds by its creative will, which are also as the 
fancied apparitions, appearing before the imaginations of deluded boys. 


58. Non-entity appears as an entity before us, it dies away at death, and 
reappears with our new birth. The mind itself takes its rise from the divine 
intellect, and displays itself in the substance of the Divine Soul, as the waves 
play about on the surface of the waters of the deep. 


BOOK IV. 
STHITI PRAKARANA 
ON ONTOLOGY OR EXISTENCE. 


CHAPTER I. 
JANYA-JANI-NIRUPANA. 


On Genesis and Epigenesis. 


Argument. The variety of creation is described as the working of the mind, 
and the existence of one Brahma only, is established in refutation of the 
Atomic and Materialistic doctrines of Nyaya and Sankhya philosophy. 


Vasishtha said: — Attend now Rama, to the subject of Existence, which 
follows that of Production: a knowledge of this, is productive of nirvana or 
utter annihilation of the self or soul. 


2. Know then the phenomenal world which is existent before you, and your 
knowledge of egoism or self-existence, to be but erroneous conceptions of the 
formless inexistence or inanity. 


3. You see the tints of various hues painting the vacuous sky, without any 
paint, (colouring substance), or their cause (the painter). This is but a 
conception of the mind without its visual perception, and like the vision in a 
dream of one, who is not in a state of sound sleep. (The world is a dream). 


4. It is like an aerial city built and present in your mind; or like the 
warming of shivering apes beside the red clay, thinking it as red hot fire; and 
as one’s pursuing an unreality or (grasping a shadow). 


5. It is but a different aspect of the self same Brahma, like that of a 
whirlpool in water, and as the unsubstantial sunlight, appearing as a real 
substance in the sky. 


6. It is like the baseless fabric of gold of the celestials on high; and like the 
air-built castle of Gandharvas in the midway sky. (The gods and Gandharvas 
are believed to dwell in their golden abodes in heaven). 


7. It is as the false sea in the mirage, appearing true at the time; and like the 


Elysian and Utopian cities of imagination in empty air, and taken for truth. 


8. It is like the romantic realms with their picturesque scenes in the fancies 
of poets, which are nowhere in nature but it seems to be solid and thick 
within, without any pith or solidity in it, as a thing in an empty dream. 


9. It is as the ethereal sphere, full of light all around, but all hollow within; 
and like the blue autumnal sky, with its light and flimsy clouds without any 
rain-water in them. 


10. It is as the unsubstantial vacuum, with the cerulean blue of solid 
sapphire; and like the domes and dames appearing in dreams, fleeting as air 
and untangible to touch. 


11. It is as a flower garden in a picture, painted with blooming blossoms, 
and appearing as fragrant without any fragrance in them. It is lightsome to 
sight, without the inherent heat of light, and resembles the orb of the sun or a 
flaming fire represented in a picture. 


12. It is as an ideal domain, — the coinage of the brain, and an unreal 
reality or a seeming something; and likens a lotus-bed in painting, without its 
essence or fragrance. 


13. It is as the variegated sky, painted with hues which it does not possess; 
and is as unsolid as empty air, and as many-hued as the rain-bow without any 
hue of its own. 


14. All its various colourings of materiality, fade away under the right 
discrimination of reason; and it is found in the end to be as unsolid a 
substance as the stem of a plantain tree; (all coated without, and nothing solid 
in the inside). 


15. It is like the rotation of black spots, before the eyes of a purblind man; 
and as the shape of a shadowy inexistence, presented as something existent 
before the naked eye. 


16. Like the bubble of water, it seems as something substantial to sight; but 
in reality all hollow within; and though appearing as juicy, it is without any 
moisture at all. 


17. The bubbling worlds are as wide spread as the morning dews or frost; 
but take them up, and you will find them as nothing, it is thought as gross 
matter by some, and as vacuum by others. It is believed as a fluctuation of 
thought or false vision by some, and as a mere compound of atoms by many. 


(It is the dull matter of Sankhyas; mere vacuity of Vedantists; fluctuation of 
error, — avidyd spanda of the Sankaras; empty air of Méadhyamikas; 
fortuitous union of atoms of Acharyas; different atomisms of Sautrantas, and 
Vaibhashikas; and so likewise of Kanada, Gotama and Arhatas; and so many 
more according to the theories of others. — Gloss.) 


18. Iam partly of a material frame, on my body and mind, but spiritually I 
am an empty immaterial substance; and though felt by the touch of the hand, I 
am yet as intangible as a nocturnal fiend: — (an empty shadow only). 


19. Rama said: — It is said Sir, that at the end of a great Kalpa age, the 
visible world remains in its seed, after which it develops again in its present 
form, which I require to be fully explained to me. 


20. Are they ignorant or knowing men, who think in these various ways? 
Please Sir, tell me the truth for removal of my doubts, and relate to me the 
process of the development. 


21. Vasishtha replied: — Those who say that the mundane world existed in 
the form of a seed at the final sleep (of Brahm4), are altogether ignorant of the 
truth, and talk as children and boys: (from what they think themselves, or hear 
from others). 


22. Hear me tell you, how unaccordant it is to right reason and how far 
removed from truth. It is a false supposition, and leading both the preacher 
and hearer of such a doctrine to great error and egregious mistake. 


23. Those who attempt to show the existence of the world, in the form of a 
germ in the mundane seed, maintain a very silly position, as I shall now 
explain unto you. 


24. A seed is in itself a visible thing, and is more an object of sense than 
that of the mind; as the seeds of paddy and barley, are seen to sprout forth in 
their germs and leaves. 


25. The mind which is beyond the six organs of sense, is a very minute 
particle; and it cannot possibly be born of itself, nor become the seed of the 
universe. 


26. The Supreme Spirit also, being more rarefied than the subtle ether, and 
undefinable by words, cannot be of the form of a seed. 


27. That which is as minute as a nil and a zero, is equivalent to nothing; 
and could never be the mundane seed, without which there could be no germ 


nor sprout. 


28. That which is more rare and transparent than the vacuous and clear 
firmament, cannot possibly contain the world with all its mountains and seas, 
and the heavens with all their hosts, in its transcendent substratum. 


29. There is nothing, that is in any way situated as a substance, in the 
substantiality of that Being; or if there is anything there, why is it not visible 
to us? 


30. There is nothing that comes of itself, and nothing material that comes 
but of the immaterial spirit; for who can believe a hill to proceed from the 
hollowness of an earthen pot? 


31. How can a thing remain with another, which is opposed to it in its 
nature? How can there be any shadow where there is light, and how does 
darkness reside in the disc of the sun, or even coldness in fire? 


32. How can an atom contain a hill, or anything subsist in nothing? The 
union of a similar with its dissimilar, is as impossible as that of shadow with 
the light of the sun. 


33. It is reasonable to suppose that the material seeds of the fig and paddy, 
should bring forth their shoots in time; but it is unreasonable to believe the big 
material world to be contained in an immaterial atom. 


34. We see the same organs of sense and their sensations, in all men in 
every country; but there is not the same uniformity in the understandings of 
men in every place, nor can there be any reason assigned to this difference. 


35. Those who assign a certain cause to some effect or event, betray their 
ignorance of the true cause; for what is it that produces the effect, except the 
very thing by some of its accessory powers. (Every production is but a 
transformation of itself, by some of its inherent powers and properties). 


36. Throw off at a distance, the doctrine of cause and effect invented by the 
ignorant; and know that to be true, which is without beginning and end, and 
the same appearing as the world. (An increate everlasting prototype in the 
mind of God). 


CHAPTER II. 
THE RECEPTACLE OF THE MUNDANE EGG. 


Argument. — Refutation of the doctrine of the separate Existence of the 
world, and establishment of the tenet of the, “One God as All in All.” 


Vasishtha said: — Now Rama! that best knowest the knowable, I will tell thee 
in disparagement of thy belief in the separate existence of the world, that there 
is one pure and vacuous principle of the Intellect only, above all the false 
fabrications of men. 


2. If it is granted, that there was the germ of the world in the beginning, still 
it is a question, what were the accompanying causes of its development. 


3. Without co-operation of the necessary causes, there can be no vegetation 
of the seed, as no barren woman is ever known or seen to bring forth an 
offspring, notwithstanding the seed is contained in the womb. 


4. If it was possible for the seed to grow without the aid of its 
accompanying causes, then it is useless to believe in the primary cause, when 
it is possessed of such power in its own nature. 


5. It is Brahma himself who abides in his self, in the form of creation at the 
beginning of the world. This creation is as formless as the creator himself, and 
there is no relation of cause and effect between them. 


6. To say the earth and other elements, to be the accompanying causes of 
production, is also wrong, since it is impossible for these elements to exist 
prior to their creation. 


7. To say the world remained quiescent in its own nature, together with the 
accompanying causes, is the talk proceeding from the minds, (mouths), of 
boys and not of the wise. 


8. Therefore, Rama! there neither is or was or ever will be a separate world 


in existence. It is the one intelligence of the Divinity, that displays the 
creation in itself. 


9. So Rama! there being an absolute privation of this visible world, it is 
certain that Brahma himself is All, throughout the endless space. 


10. The knowledge of the visible world, is destroyed by the destruction of 
all its causalities; but the causes continuing in the mind, will cause the visibles 
to appear to the view even after their outward extinction, (like objects in the 
dream). 


11. The absolute privation of the phenomenal, is only effected by the 
privation of its causes, (i.e., the suppression of our acts and desires); but if 
they are not suppressed in the mind, how can you effect to suppress the sight? 


12. There is no other means of destroying our erroneous conception of the 
world, except by a total extirpation of the visibles from our view. 


13. It is certain that the appearance of the visible world, is no more than our 
inward conception of it, in the vacuity of the intellect; and the knowledge of I, 
thou, and he, are false impressions on our minds like figures in paintings. 


14. As these mountains and hills, these lands and seas and these revolutions 
of days and nights, and months and years and the knowledge that this is a 
Kalpa age, and this is a minute and moment, and this is life and this is death, 
are all mere conceptions of the mind. 


15. So is the knowledge of the duration and termination of a Kalpa and 
Mahdkalpa, (millenniums etc.) and that of the creation and its beginning and 
end, are mere misconceptions of our minds. 


16. It is the mind that conceives millions of Kalpas and billions of worlds, 
most of which are gone by and many as yet to come. (Or else there is but an 
everlasting eternity, which is self-same with the infinity of the Deity). 


17. So the fourteen regions of the planetary spheres, and all the divisions of 
time and place, are contained in the infinite space of the Supreme Intellect. 


18. The universe continues and displays itself as serenely in the Divine 
mind, as it did from before and throughout all eternity; and it shines with 
particles of the light of that Intellect, as the firmament is as full with the 
radiance of solar light. 


19. The ineffable light, which is thrown into the mind by the Divine 
Intellect, shows itself as the creation, which in reality, is a baseless fabric by 


itself. 


20. It does not come to existence nor dissolves into nothing, nor appears or 
sets at any time; but resembles a crystal glass with certain marks in it, which 
can never be effaced. 


21. The creations display of themselves in the clear Intellect of God, as the 
variegated skies, form portions of the indivisible space of endless vacuum. 


22. These are but properties of the Divine Intellect, as fluidity is that of 
water, motion of the wind, the eddies of the sea, and the qualities of all things. 
(Creation is coeternal with the Eternal Mind). 


23. This creation is but a compact body of Divine wisdom, and is contained 
in the Divinity as its component part. Its rising and setting and continuance, 
are exhibited alike in the tranquil soul. 


24. The world is inane owing to its want of the accompaniment of 
secondary, (i.e., material and instrumental) causes and is self-born; and to call 
it as born or produced, is to breathe the breath (of life) like a madman, (i.e., it 
is foolish to say so). 


25. Rama! purify your mind from the dross of false representations, and 
rise from the bed of your doubts and desires; drive away your protracted sleep 
of ignorance, (avidyd), and be freed from the fears of death and disease with 
every one of your friends in this Court. 


CHAPTER III. 
ETERNITY OF THE WORLD. 


Rama said: — But it is related, that Brahma, — the lord of creatures, springs 
up by his reminiscence at the end of a Kalpa, and stretches out the world from 
his remembrance of it, in the beginning of creation. 


2. Vasishtha answered: — So it is said, O support of Raghu’s race! that the 
lord of creatures rises at first by his predestination, after the universal 
dissolution, and at the commencement of a new creation. 


3. It is by his will, that the world is stretched out from his recollection, and 
is manifested like an ideal city, in the presence of Brahma, — the creative 
power. 


4. The supreme being can have no remembrance of the past at the 
beginning of a new creation, owing to his want of a prior birth or death. 
Therefore, this aerial arbour of reminiscence has no relation to Brahma. (Who 
being an ever living being, his cognizance of all things is also everlasting). 


5. Rama asked: — Does not the reminiscence of the past, continue in 
Brahma at his recreation of the world, and so the former remembrance of men 
upon their being reborn on earth? Or are all past remembrances effaced from 
the minds of men by the delirium of death in their past life? 


6. Vasishtha replied: — All intelligent beings, including Brahma and all 
others of the past age, that obtain their nirvdna or extinction, are of course 
absorbed in One Brahma, (and have lost their remembrance of everything 
concerning their past lives). 


7. Now tell me, my good Rama, where do these past remembrances and 
remembrancers abide any more, when they are wholly lost, at the final 
liberation (or extinction) of the rememberers? 


8. It is certain that all beings are liberated, and become extinct in Brahma at 
the great dissolution; hence there cannot be remembrance of anything in the 


absence of the persons that remember the same. 


9. The remembrance that lives impressed of itself in the empty space of 
individual Intellects, is verily the reservoir of the perceptible and 
imperceptible worlds. This reminiscence is eternally present before the sight 
of God, as a reflexion of his own Intellect. 


10. It shines with the lustre of his self-consciousness, from time without 
beginning and end, and is identic with this world, which is therefore called to 
be self-born, (because it is immanent in the mind of God). 


11. The spiritual body which is the attribute of God from time without 
beginning (that God is a spirit), is the same with Virata or manifestation of 
himself, and exhibits the form of the world or the microcosm, (i.e., God, — 
spirit, — Virdj or cosmos). 


12. But the world is said to be composed of atoms, which compose the land 
and woods, the clouds and the firmament. But there are no atoms to form time 
and space, actions and motions and revolutions of days and nights. (All which 
are shaped by the spirit and not by atoms). 


13. Again, the atoms (of matter) which fill the world, have other incipient 
atoms (of spirit), which are inherent in them, and cause them to take and 
appear in the forms of mountains and the like. 


14. But these forms seeming to be conglomerations of atomic particles, and 
showing themselves to our vision as lightsome objects, are in reality no 
substantial things. 


15. Thus, there is no end of the real and unreal sights of things; the one 
presenting itself to the view of the learned, and the other to that of the 
unlearned. (i.e., All things are viewed in their spiritual light by the learned, 
and in their material aspect by the ignorant). 


16. The cosmos appears as the immutable Brahma only to the intelligent, 
and as the mutable visible world to the unintelligent. 


17. As these bright worlds appear to roll about as eggs in their spheres, so 
there are multitudes of other orbs, shining in every atom in the universe. 


18. As we see curved pillars, consisting of figures under figures, and those 
again under others, so is the grand pillar of the universe, composed of systems 
under systems to no end. 


19. As the sands on a rock, are separably attached to it, and are countless in 


their number, so the orbs in the three worlds, are as particles of dust in the 
mountainous body of Brahma. 


20. It may be possible to count the particles of ray scattered in the sun- 
beams; but it is impossible to number the atoms of light, which are emanating 
from the great sun of Brahma. 


21. As the sun scatters the particles of his light, on the sparkling waters and 
sands of the sea; so does the Intellect of God, disperse the atoms of its light all 
over the vacuity of the universe. 


22. As the notion of vacuity fills the mind, with the idea of the visible 
firmament, so the thought of creation, as self-same with Brahma, gives us the 
notion of his intellectual sphere. 


23. To understand the creation as something different from Brahma, leads 
man apart from Him; but to take it as synonymous with Brahma, leads him to 
his felicity. 


24. The enlightened soul, freed from its knowledge of the mundane seed, 
and knowing Brahma alone as the plenum filling the vacuum of intellect; 
knows the knowable, (God), in his inward understanding, as the same with 
what has proceeded from him. 


CHAPTER IV. 
TREATING OF THE GERM OF EXISTENCE. 


Argument. Sensations and Perceptions, as the Roots of the knowledge of 
Existence: suppression of these annuls all existence, and removes the visibles 
from view. 


Vasishtha said: — It is the overthrow of the battery of the senses, that supplies 
us with a bridge over the ocean of the world; there is no other act, whereby we 
may cross over it (to the other shore of truth). 


2. Acquaintance with the Sdstras, association with the good and wise, and 
practice of the virtues, are the means whereby the rational and self-controlled 
man, may come to know the absolute negation of the visibles. 


3. [have thus told you, O handsome Rama! of the causes of the appearance 
and disappearance of the creation, resembling the heaving and resting of the 
waves of the sea of the world. 


4. There is no need of a long discourse to tell you that, the mind is the germ 
of the arbour of acts, and this germ being nipped in the beginning, prevents 
the growth of the tree, and frustrates the doing of acts, which are the fruits 
thereof. 


5. The mind is all, (i.e., the agent of all actions); therefore, it is that by the 
healing of your heart and mind, you can cure all the troubles and diseases, you 
may incur in the world. 


6. The minds of men are ever troubled, with their thoughts of the world and 
bodily actions; but these being deadened and defunct, we see neither the body 
nor the outer world. 


7. The negation of the outer world, and the suppression of the inner 
thoughts, serve to curb the demon of the mind, by practice of self-abnegation 
for a long period of time. 


8. It is possible to heal the inward disease of the internal mind, by 
administration of this best and only medicine of negation of the external 
world. (Ignoring the outer world, is the only way to restore the peace of the 
mind). 


9. It is because of its thoughts, that the mind is subjected to the errors of its 
birth and death; and to those of its being bound to or liberated from, the bonds 
of the body and this world. 


10. The mind being deluded by its thoughts, sees the worlds shining before 
it; as a man sees in his delusion, the imaginary city of the Gandharvas, drawn 
before him in empty air. 


11. All these visible worlds consist in the mind, wherein they seem to exist 
as the fragrance of the air, consists in the cluster of flowers containing the 
essence. 


12. The little particle of the mind contains the world, as a small grain of 
sesamum contains the oil, and as an attribute is contained in its subject, and a 
property abiding in the substance. 


13. The world abides in the mind in the same manner, as the sun-beams 
abide in the sun, and as brightness consists in the light, and as the heat is 
contained in fire. 


14. The mind is the reservoir of the worlds, as the snow is the receptacle of 
coldness. It is the substratum of all existence, as the sky is that of emptiness, 
and as velocity is inherent in the wind. 


15. Therefore, the mind is the same with the world, and the world is identic 
with the mind; owing to their intimate and inseparable connection with one 
another. The world however is lost by the loss of the mind; but the mind is not 
lost by destruction of the world. (Because the thoughts thereof are imprinted 
in the mind). 


CHAPTER V. 
STORY OF BHARGAVA. 


Argument. Meditation of Bhrigu, Ramblings of Sukra. His sight of and 
amour for an aerial nymph. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, that knowest all truths, and art best acquainted 
with all that is past and is to come, how the form of the world is so vividly 
existed in the mind. 


2. Please Sir, explain to me by some illustration, how this world, appears as 
a visible object to the inner mind. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — The world is situated as truly in the minds of men, 
as it appeared in its firm and compact state to the bodiless son of Indu, (I have 
related long before). 


4. It is situated in the same manner in the minds of men, as the thought of 
king Lavana’s transformation of himself to a Chandala, under the influence of 
sorcery. 


5. It is in the same manner, as Bhargava believed himself to be possessed 
of all worldly gratifications. Because true bliss has much more relation to the 
mind, than to earthly possessions. 


6. Rama said: — How is it Sir, that the son of Bhrigu came to the 
enjoyment of earthly pleasures, when he had been longing for the fruition of 
heavenly felicity. 


7. Vasishtha replied: — Attend now Rama, to my narration of the history of 
Bhrigu and Kala, whereby you will know how he came to the possession of 
earthly enjoyments. 


8. There is a table-land of the Mandara mountain, which is beset by rows of 
tamdla trees, with beautiful arbours of flowers under them. 


9. Here the sage Bhrigu conducted his arduous devotion in olden times and 
it was in this place, that his high-minded and valiant son Sukra, also came to 
perform his devotion. 


10. Sukra was as handsome as the moon, and radiant with his brilliant 
beams (like the sun). He took his seat in that happy grove of Bhrigu, for the 
purpose of his devotion. 


11. Having long sat in that grove under the umbrage of a rock, Sukra 
removed himself to the flowery beds and fair plains below. 


12. He roved freely about the bowers of Mandara in his youthful sport, and 
became revered among the wise and ignorant men of the place. 


13. He roved there at random like Trisanku, between the earth and sky, 
sometimes playing about as a boy, and at others sitting in fixed meditation as 
his father. 


14. He remained without any anxiety in his solitude, as a king who has 
subdued his enemy, until he happened to behold an Apsara fairy, traversing in 
her aerial journey. 


15. He beheld her with the eyes of Hari, fixed upon his Lakshmi, as she 
skims over the watery plain, decked with her wreaths of Mandara flowers, 
and her tresses waving loosely with the playful air. 


16. Her trinkets jingling with her movements, and the fragrance of her 
person perfuming the winds of the air, her fairy form was as beautiful as a 
creeping plant, and her eyeballs rolling as in the state of intoxication. 


17. The moon-beams of her body, shed their ambrosial dews over the 
landscape, which bewitched the hard-heart of the young devotee, as he beheld 
the fairy form before him. 


18. She also with her body shining as the fair full-moon, and shaking as the 
wave of the sea, became enamoured of Sukra as she looked at his face. 


19. Sukra then checked the impulse of his mind, which the god of love had 
raised after her; but losing all his power over himself, he became absorbed in 
the thought of his beloved object. 


CHAPTER VI. 
ELYSIUM OF BHARGAVA. 


Argument. Sukra’s imaginary journey to heaven, and his reception by 
Indra. 


Vasishtha said: — Henceforth Sukra continued to think of the nymph with his 
closed eye-lids, and indulge himself in his reverie of an imaginary kingdom. 


2. He thought that the nymph was passing in the air, to the paradise of 
Indra, — the god with thousand eyes; and that he followed her closely, to the 
happy regions of the celestial gods. 


3. He thought, he saw before him the gods, decorated with their chaplets of 
beautiful mandara blossoms on their heads, and with garlands of flowers 
pendant on their persons resplendent as liquid gold. 


4. He seemed to see the heavenly damsels with their eyes as blue-lotuses, 
regaling the eyes of their spectators; and others with their eyes as beautiful as 
those of antelopes, sporting with their sweet smiles all about (the garden of 
paradise). 


5. He saw also the Marutas or gods of winds, bearing the fragrance of 
flowers, and breathing their sweet scent on one another; and resembling the 
omnipresent Viswartipa by their ubiquitous journey. 


6. He heard the sweet hum of bees, giddy with the perfumed ichor, exuding 
from the proboscis of Indra’s elephant; and listened to the sweet strains, sung 
by the chorus of the heavenly choir. 


7. There were the swans and storks, gabbling in the lakes, with lotuses of 
golden hue in them; and there were the celestial gods reposing in the arbours, 
beside the holy stream of the heavenly Ganga, (Mandakini). 


8. These were the gods Yama and Indra, and the sun and moon, and the 


deities of fire and the winds; and there were the regents of the worlds, whose 
shining bodies shaded the lustre of vivid fire. 


9. On one side was the warlike elephant of Indra, — (Airdvata), with the 
scratches of the demoniac weapons on his face, (proboscis), and tusks gory 
with the blood of the defeated hosts of demons. 


10. Those who were translated from earth to heaven in the form of 
luminous stars, were roving in their aerial vehicles, blazing with aureate 
beams of the shining sun. 


11. The gods were washed by the showers, falling from the peaks of Meru 
below, and the waves of the Ganges, rolled on with scattered mandara flowers 
floating on them. 


12. The alleys of Indra’s groves, were tinged with saffron, by heaps of the 
dust of mandara flowers; and were trodden by groups of Apsara lasses, 
sporting wantonly upon them. 


13. There were the gentle breezes blowing among the pdrijdta plants, 
brightening as moon-beams in the sacred bowers; and wafting the fragrant 
honey, from the cups of Kunda and mandara blossoms. 


14. The pleasure garden of Indra, was crowded by heavenly damsels, who 
were besmeared with the frosty farina of késara flowers, mantling them like 
the creepers of the grove in their yellow robes. 


15. Here were the heavenly nymphs dancing in their gaiety, at the tune of 
the songs of their lovers; and there were heavenly musicians, Narada and 
Tamburu, joining their vocal music in unison with the melody of the wired 
instruments of the lute and lyre, (Vallakikdkali). 


16. Holy men and the pious and virtuous, were seen to soar high in their 
heavenly cars, and sitting there with their decorations of various kinds. 


17. The amorous damsels of the gods, were clinging round their god Indra, 
as the tender creepers of the garden, twine about the trees beside them. 


18. There were the fruit trees of gulunchas, studded with clusters of their 
ripening fruits; and resembling the gemming sapphires and rubies, and set as 
rows of ivory teeth. 


19. After all these sights, Sukra thought of making his obeisance to Indra, 
who was seated on his seat like another Brahma, — the creator of the three 
worlds. 


20. Having thought so, Sukra bowed down to Indra in his own mind, as he 
was the second Bhrigu in heaven, — (i.e., He bowed to him with a veneration 
equal to that he paid to his father). 


21. Indra received him with respect, and having lifted him up with his 
hand, made him sit by himself. 


22. Indra addressed him saying: — I am honoured, Sukra! by thy call, and 
this heaven of mine is graced by thy presence, may thou live long to enjoy the 
pleasure of this place. 


23. Indra then sat in his seat with a graceful countenance, which shone with 
the lustre of the unspotted full-moon. 


24. Sukra being thus seated by the side of Indra, was saluted by all the 
assembled gods of heaven; and he continued to enjoy every felicity there, by 
being received with paternal affection by the lord of gods and men. 


CHAPTER VII. 
RE-UNION OF THE LOVERS. 


Argument. Sukra sees his beloved in heaven, and is joined to her at that 
place. 


Vasishtha said: — Thus Sukra being got among the gods in the celestial city, 
forgot his former nature, without his passing through the pangs of death. 


2. Having halted awhile by the side of Sachi’s consort, (Indra), he rose up 
to roam about the paradise, by being charmed with all its various beauties. 


3. He looked with rapture on the beauty of his own person, and longed to 
see the lovely beauties of heavenly beings, as the swan is eager to meet the 
lotuses of the lake. 


4. He saw his beloved one among them in the garden of Indra’s Eden, 
(udydna), with her eyes like those of a young fawn; and with a stature as 
delicate as that of a tender creeper of the Amra, (amarynthus). 


5. She also beheld the son of Bhrigu, and lost her government on herself, 
and was thus observed by him also in all her indications of amorous feelings. 


6. His whole frame was dissolved in affection for her, like the moonstone 
melting under the moonbeams; so was hers likewise in tenderness for him. 


7. He like the moonstone was soothed by her cooling beauty, beaming as 
moonlight in the sky, and she also being beheld by him, was entirely subdued 
by her love to him. 


8. At night they bewailed as Chakravdkas, (ruddy geese), at their 
separation from one another, and were filled with delight on their mutual sight 
at the break of the day, (which unites the Chakravdka pair together). 


9. They were both as beautiful to behold, as the sun and the opening 
blossom of the lotus at morn; and their presence added a charm to the garden 


of paradise, which promised to confer their desired bliss. 


10. She committed her subdued-self to the mercy of the god of love, who in 
his turn darted his arrows relentless on her tender heart. 


11. She was covered all over her person with the shafts of cupid, as when 
the lotus blossom is hid under a swarm of fleeting bees, and became as 
disordered as the leaves of the lotus, are disturbed under a shower of rain 
drops. 


12. She fluttered at the gentle breath of the playful winds, like the tender 
filaments of flowers; and moved as graceful as the swan, with her eyes as 
bluish as those of the leaflets of blue-lotuses. 


13. She was deranged in her person by the god of love, as the lotus-bed is 
put into disorder by the mighty elephant; and was beheld in that plight by her 
lover, (Sukra), in the flight of his fancy. 


14. At last the shade of night overspread the landscape of the heavenly 
paradise, as if the god of destruction, (Rudra) was advancing to bury the 
world under universal gloom. 


15. A deep darkness overspread the face of the earth, and covered it in 
thick gloom, like the regions of the polar mountains, where the hot-blazing- 
sun is obscured by the dark shade of perpetual night, as if hiding his face in 
shame under the dark veil of Cimmerian gloom. 


16. The loving pair met together in the midst of the grove, when the 
assembled crowds of the place, retired to their respective habitations in 
different directions. 


17. Then the love-smitten-dame approached her lover with her sidelong 
glances, as a bird of air alights from her aerial flight in the evening, to meet 
with her mate on the earth below. 


18. She advanced towards the son of Bhrigu, as a peahen comes out to meet 
the rising cloud; and thought she beheld there a white washed edifice, with a 
couch placed in the midst. 


19. Bhargava entered the white hall, as when Vishnu enters into the hoary 
sea, accompanied by his beloved Lakshmi; who held him by the hand with her 
down-cast countenance. 


20. She graced his person, as the lotus-stalk graces the bosom of the 
elephant; and then spoke to him sweetly with her words mixed with tender 


affection. 


21. She told him in a sweet and delightsome speech fraught with 
expressions of endearment: — Behold, O my moon-faced lover! I see the 
curve of thy bow as a bow bent for my destruction. 


22. Cupid is thence darting his arrows to destroy this lovelorn maid; 
therefore, protect me from him, that am so helpless and have come under thy 
protection from his rage. 


23. Know my good friend, that it is the duty of good people, to relieve the 
wretched from their distress; and those that do not look upon them with a 
compassionate eye, are reckoned as the basest of men. 


24. Love is never vilified by those, who are acquainted with erotics; 
because the true love of faithful lovers, have endured to the last without any 
fear of separation. 


25. Know my dear, that the delightful draught of love, defies the dewy 
beams distilled by the moon; and the sovereignty of the three worlds, is never 
so pleasing to the soul, as the love of the beloved. 


26. I derive the same bliss from the touch of thy feet, as it attends on 
mutual lovers on their first attachment to one another. 


27. I live by the nectarious draught of thy touch, as the kumuda blooms by 
night, imbibing the ambrosial beams of the moon. 


28. As the fluttering Chakora, is delighted with drinking the moonbeams, 
so is this suppliant at thy feet, blessed by the touch of the leaf-like palm of thy 
hand. 


29. Embrace me now to thy bosom, which is filled with ambrosial bliss. 
Saying so, the damsel fell upon his bosom with her body soft as a flower, and 
her eyes turning as a leaflet at the gentle breeze. 


30. The loving pair fell into their trance of love in that happy grove, as a 
couple of playful bees creeps into the lotus cup, under the fair filaments of the 
flower, shaking by the gentle breeze. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
TRANSMIGRATIONS OF SUKRA. 


Argument. Sukra fancies his fall from heaven, and passing through 
many imaginary births. 


Vasishtha related: — Thus the son of Bhrigu, believed himself to be in the 
enjoyment of heavenly pleasures, in his ideal reveries. 


2. He thought of enjoying the company of his beloved, bedecked with 
garlands of mandara flowers, and inebriated with the drink of ambrosial 
draughts, like the full-moon accompanied by the evening star. 


3. He roved about the ideal lake of heaven, (Mdnas Sarovara), filled with 
golden lotuses, and frequented by the giddy swans and gabbling geese or 
hansas of heaven; and roamed beside the bank of the celestial river, 
(Mandadkini), in company with the choristers, (chaéranas, and Kinnaras of 
paradise). 


4. He drank the sweet nectarious juice beaming as moonbeams in company 
with the gods; and reposed under the arbours of the groves, formed by the 
shaking branches of pdrijdta plants. 


5. He amused himself with his favourite Vidydadharis, in swinging himself 
in the hanging cradles, formed by the shady creepers of the arbour, and 
screening him from the vernal sunbeams. 


6. The parterres of Nandana gardens were trodden down under the feet of 
the fellow followers of Siva, as when the ocean was churned by the Mandara 
mountain. 


7. The tender weeds and willows growing as golden shrubberies, and 
tangled bushes in the beach of the river, were trampled under the legs of 
heated elephants, as when they infest the lotus lakes on Meru. (i.e., Lotuses 
growing in the lakes of mountainous regions). 


8. Associated by his sweet-heart, he passed the moonlight nights in the 
forest groves of Kailasa, attending to the songs and music of heavenly 
choristers. 


9. Roaming on the table-lands of Gandhamadana mountain, he decorated 
his beloved with lotus-garlands from her head to foot. 


10. He roved with her to the polar mountain which is full of wonders, as 
having darkness on one side and lighted on the other. Here they sported 
together with their tender smiles and fond caresses and embrace. 


11. He thought he remained in a celestial abode beside the marshy lands of 
Mandara, for a period of full sixty years; and passed his time in the company 
of the fauna of the place. 


12. He believed he passed half a yuga with his helpmate, on the border of 
the milky ocean, and associated with the maritime people and islanders of that 
ocean. 


13. He next thought to live in a garden at the city of the Gandharvas, where 
he believed to have lived for an immeasurable period like the genius of Time 
himself, who is the producer of an infinity of worlds. 


14. He was again translated to the celestial seat of Indra, where he believed 
to have resided for many cycles of the quadruple yuga ages with his mistress. 


15. It was at the end of the merit of their acts that they were doomed to 
return on earth, shorn of their heavenly beauty and the fine features of their 
persons. 


16. Being deprived of his heavenly seat and vehicle, and bereft of his 
godlike form and features, Sukra was overcome by deep sorrow, like a hero 
falling in the field of warfare. 


17. His great grief at his fall from heaven to earth, broke his frame as it 
were into a hundred fragments; like a waterfall falling on the stony ground, 
and breaking into a hundred rills below. 


18. They with their emaciated bodies and sorrowful minds, wandered about 
in the air, like birds without their nest. 


19. Afterwards, their disembodied minds entered into the network of lunar 
beams, and then in the form of molten frost or rain water, they grew the 
vegetables on earth. 


20. Some of these vegetables were concocted, and then eaten by a Brahman 
in the land of Dasarna or confluence of the ten streams. The substance of 
Sukra was changed to the semen of the Brahman, and then conceived as a son 
by his wife. 


21. The boy was trained up in the society of the munis to the practice of 
rigorous austerities, and he dwelt in the forests of Meru for a whole 
manwantara, observant of his holy rites. 


22. There he gave birth to a male child of human figure in a doe, (to which 
his mistress was transformed in her next birth), and became exceedingly fond 
of the boy, to the neglect of his sacred duties. 


23. He constantly prayed for the long life, wealth and learning of his 
darling, and thus forsook the constancy of his faith and reliance in Providence. 
(Longevity, prosperity, and capacity for learning, are the triple blessings of 
civil life, instead of austerity, purity, and self-resignation of painful 
asceticism). 


24. Thus his falling off from the thought of heaven, to those of the earthly 
aggrandizement of his son, made his shortened life an easy prey to death, as 
the inhaling of air by the serpent. (It is said that the serpent lives upon air, 
which it takes in freely in want of any other food). 


25. His worldly thoughts having vitiated his understanding, caused him to 
be reborn as the son of the Madra king, and succeed to him in the kingdom of 
the Madras, (Madura-Madras). 


26. Having long reigned in his kingdom of Madras by extirpation of all his 
enemies, he was overtaken at last by old age, as the lotus-flower is stunted by 
the frost. 


27. The king of Madras, was released of his kingly person by his desire of 
asceticism; whereby he became the son of an anchorite in the next-birth, in 
order to perform his austerities. 


28. He retired to the bank of the meandering river of the Ganges, and there 
betook himself to his devotion, being devoid of all his worldly anxieties and 
cares. 


29. Thus the son of Bhrigu, having passed in various forms in his 
successive births, according to the desires of his heart, remained at last as a 
fixed arbour on the bank of a running stream. 


CHAPTER IX. 
DESCRIPTION OF SUKRA’S BODY. 


Argument. The departed spirit of Sukra, remembers the state of its 
former body. 


Vasishtha related: — As Sukra was indulging his reveries in this manner, he 
passed insensibly under the flight of a series of years, which glided upon him 
in the presence of his father. 


2. At last his arboraceous body withered away with age, under the 
inclement sun and winds and rain; and it fell down on the ground as a tree torn 
from its roots. 


3. In all his former births, his mind thirsted after fresh pleasures and 
enjoyments, as a stag hunts after fresh verdure from forest to forest. 


4. He underwent repeated births and deaths, in his wanderings in the world 
in search of its enjoyments, and seemed as something whirled about in a 
turning mill or wheel, till at last he found his rest in the cooling beach of the 
rivulet. 


5. Now the disembodied spirit of Sukra, remained to reflect on his past 
transmigrations, in all the real and ideal forms of his imagination. 


6. It thought of its former body on the Mandara mountain, and how it was 
reduced to a skeleton of mere bones and skin by the heat of the sun and his 
austerities, (i.e., of the five fires pancha-tapas of his penance). 


7. It remembered how the wind instrument of its lungs, breathed out the 
joyous music of its exemption from the pain of action, (to which all other men 
were subjected). (It refers to the breathing of so-ham hamsah in Yoga, which 
is the sweet music of salvation). 


8. Seeing how the mind is plunged in the pit of worldly cares, the body 


seems to laugh at it, by showing the white teeth of the mouth in derision. 


9. The cavity of the mouth, the sockets of the eyes, the nostrils and ear- 
holes in the open face, are all expressive of the hollowness of human and 
heavenly bodies, (i.e., they are all hollow within, though they seem to be solid 
without). 


10. The body sheds the tears of its eyes in sorrow for its past pains and 
austerities, as the sky rains after its excessive heat to cool the earth. 


11. The body was refreshed by the breeze and moon-beams, as the 
woodlands are renovated by cooling showers in the rainy season. 


12. It remembered how its body was washed on the banks of mountain rills, 
by the water-falls from above, and how it was daubed by the flying dust and 
the dirt of sin. 


13. It was as naked as a withered tree, and rustling to the air with the 
breeze; yet it withstood the keen blasts of winter as unshaken devotion in 
person. 


14. The faded face, the withered lungs and arteries, and the skinny belly, 
resembled those of the goddess of famine, that cried aloud in the forest, in the 
howlings of the wild beasts. 


15. Yet the holy person of the hermit was unhurt by envious animals, 
owing to its freedom from passions and feelings, and its fervent devotion; and 
was not devoured by rapacious beasts and birds. 


16. The body of Bhrigu’s son was thus weakened by his abstinence and 
self-denial, and his mind was employed in holy devotion, as his body lay 
prostrate on the bed of stones. 


CHAPTER X. 
BHRIGU’S CONFERENCE WITH KALA OR 
DEATH. 


Argument. Bhrigu’s grief at seeing the death-like body of his son. 


Vasishtha continued: — After the lapse of a thousand years, the great Bhrigu 
rose from his holy trance, (anaesthesia); and was disengaged in his mind from 
its meditation of God, as in a state of suspension or syncope of his holy 
meditations. 


2. He did not find his son lowly bending down his head before him, the son 
who was the leader of the army of virtues, and who was the personified figure 
of all merits. 


3. He only beheld his body, lying as a skeleton before him, as it was 
wretchedness or poverty personified in that shape. 


4. The skin of his body was dried by the sun, and his nostrils snoring as a 
hooping bird; and the inner entrails of his belly, were sounding as dry leather- 
pipes with the croaking of frogs. 


5. The sockets of his eyes, were filled with new-born worms grown in 
them; and the bones of his ribs had become as bars of a cage, with the thin 
skin over them resembling the spider’s web. 


6. The dry and white skeleton of the body, resembled the desire of fruition, 
which bends it to the earth, to undergo all the favourable and unfavourable 
accidents of life. 


7. The crown of the head had become as white and smooth (by its baldness 
or grey hairs), as the phallus of Siva anointed with camphor, at the Jndu- 
varcha ceremony in honor of the moon. 


8. The withered head erected on the bony neckbone, likened the soul 


supported by the body: — (either to lead or be led by it). 


9. The nose was shriveled to a dry stalk, for want of its flesh; and the nose- 
bone stood as a post, dividing the two halves of the face. 


10. The face standing erect on the protruded shoulders on both sides, was 
looking forward in the womb of the vacuous sky, whither the vital breath had 
fled from the body. 


11. The two legs, thighs, knees, and the two arms (forming the eight angas 
or members of the body), had been doubled in their length (for their long 
ethereal course); and lay slackened with fatigue of the long journey. 


12. The leanness of the belly like a lath, showed by its shriveled flesh and 
skin, the empty inside of the ignorant: (i.e., they may be puffed up with pride 
on the outside, but are all hollow in the inside). 


13. Bhrigu seeing the withered skeleton of his son, lying as the worn-out 
post (to which the elephant was tied by its feet), made his reflections as said 
before, and rose from his seat. 


14. He then began to dubitate in his mind, at the sight of the dead body, as 
to whether it could be the lifeless carcass of his son or any other. 


15. Thinking it no other than the dead body of his son, he became sore 
angry upon the god of death (that had untimely taken him away). 


16. He was prepared to pronounce his imprecation against the god of fate, 
in vengeance of his snatching his son so prematurely from him. 


17. At this, Yama, — the regent of death, and devourer of living beings, 
assumed his figurative form of a material body, and appeared in an instant 
before the enraged father. 


18. He appeared in armour with six arms and as many faces, accompanied 
by the army of his adherents, and holding the noose and sword and other 
weapons in his hands. (The commentary ascribes a dozen of arms to Yama, by 
the number of the twelve months of the year, and having half of the number 
on either side, according to the six signs of the zodiac in either hemisphere. 
The six faces are representative of the six seasons of Hindu astronomy instead 
of four of other nations). 


19. The rays of light radiating from his body, gave it the appearance of a 
hill, filled with heaps of the crimson kinsuka flowers, growing in mountain 
forests. 


20. The rays of the living fire flashing from his trident gave it the glare of 
golden ringlets, fastened to the ears of all the sides of the sky. 


21. The breath of his host, hurled down the ridges of mountains, which 
hung about them, like swinging cradles on earth. 


22. His sable sword flashing with sombre light, darkened the disk of the 
sun, as it were by the smoke of the final conflagration of the earth. 


23. Having appeared before the great sage, who was enraged as the raging 
sea, he soothed him to calmness as after a storm, by the gentle breath of his 
speech. 


24. “The sages,” said he, “are acquainted with the laws of nature, and know 
the past and future as present before them. They are never moved even with a 
motive to anything, and are far from being moved without a cause. 


25. “You sages are observers of the multifarious rules of religions 
austerities, and we are observant of the endless and immutable laws of 
destiny; we honour you therefore, for your holiness, and not from any other 
desire (of being blessed by you or exempted from your curse).” 


26. Do not belie your righteousness by your rage, nor think to do us any 
harm, who are spared unhurt by the flames of final dissolution, and cannot be 
consumed by your curses. 


27. We have destroyed the spheres of the universe and devoured legions of 
Rudras, millions of Brahmas and myriads of Vishnus, (in the repeated 
revolutions of creation); what is it therefore, that we cannot do? 


28. We are appointed as devourers of all beings; and you are destined to be 
devoured by us. This is ordained by destiny herself, and not by any act of our 
own will. 


29. It is the nature of flame to ascend upwards, and that of fluids to flow 
downward; it is destined for the food to be fed upon by its eaters, and that 
creation must come under its destruction by us. 


30. Know this form of mine to be that of the Supreme Being, whose 
universal spirit acts in various forms, all over the universe. 


31. To the unstained (clear) sight, there is no other agent or object here, 
except the supreme; but the stained sight (of the clear eyed), views many 
agents and objects (beside the one in all). 


32. Agency and objectivity are terms, coined only by the short sighted; but 
they disappear before the enlarged view of the wise. 


33. As flowers grow upon trees, so are animals born on earth; their growth 
and birth, as also their fall and death, are of their own spontaneity, and 
miscalled as their causality. 


34. As the motion of the moon is caused by no casual cause, though they 
falsely attribute a causality to it, such is the course of death in the world of its 
own spontaneous nature. 


35. The mind is falsely said to be the agent of all its enjoyments in life, 
though it is no agent of itself. It is a misbelief like the false conception of a 
serpent in the rope, where there is no serpent at all. 


36. Therefore, O sage! allow not yourself to be so angry for your sorrow; 
but consider in its true light, the course of events that befall on humankind. 


37. We were not actuated by desire of fame, nor influenced by pride or 
passion to any act; but are ourselves subject to the destiny, which 
predominates over all our actions. 


38. Knowing that the course of our conduct, is subject to the destiny 
appointed by the Divine will, the wise never allow themselves to be subjected 
under the darkness of pride or passion, at our doings. 


39. That our duties only should be done at all times, is the rule laid down 
by the wise creator; and you cannot attempt to remove it by your subjection to 
ignorance and idleness. 


40. Where is that enlightened sight, that gravity and that patience of yours, 
that you grovel in this manner in the dark like the blind, and slide from the 
broad and beaten path laid open for everybody? (This path is submission to 
what is destined by the Divine will, according to the common prayer: — “Let 
not mine, but thy will be done’). 


41. Why don’t you consider your case as the sequence of your own acts, 
and why then do you, who are a wise man, falsely accuse me like the 
ignorant; (as the cause of what is ordained by the Supreme cause of all!) 


42. You know that all living beings have two bodies here, of which one is 
known as the intellectual or spiritual body or mind. 


43. The other is the inert or corporeal frame, which is fragile and 
perishable. But the minute thing of the mind which lasts until its liberation, is 


what leads all to their good or evil desires. 


44. As the skilful charioteer guides his chariot with care, so is this body 
conducted by the intelligent mind, with equal attention and fondness. 


45. But the ignorant mind which is prone to evil, destroys the goodly body; 
as little children break their dolls of clay in sport. 


46. The mind is hence called the purusha or regent of the body, and the 
working of the mind is taken for the act of the man. It is bound to the earth by 
its desires, and freed by its freedom from earthly attractions and expectations. 


47. That is called the mind which thinks in itself, “this is my body which is 
so situated here, and these are the members of my body and this my head.” 


48. The mind is called life, for its having the living principle in it; and the 
same is one and identic with the understanding. It becomes egoism by its 
consciousness, and so the same mind passes under various designations, 
according to its different functions. 


49. It has the name of the heart from the affections of the body, and so it 
takes many other names at will, (according to its divers operations). But the 
earthly bodies are all perishable. 


50. When the mind receives the light of truth, it is called the enlightened 
intellect, which being freed from its thoughts relating to the body, is set to its 
supreme felicity. 


51. Thus the mind of your son, wandered from your presence, as you sat 
absorbed in meditation, to regions far and wide in the ways of its various 
desires. (i.e., His body was before thee, but his mind was led afar by its 
inward desires). 


52. He having left this body of his behind him, in the mountain cave of 
Mandara, fled to the celestial region, as a bird flies from his nest to the open 
air. 


53. This mind got into the city of the tutelar gods, and remained in a part of 
the garden of Eden (Nandana), in the happy groves of Mandara, and under the 
bower of pdrijdta flowers. 


54. There he thought he passed a revolution of eight cycles of the four 
Yugas, in company with Viswdchi a beauteous Apsara damsel, unto whom he 
clung as the hexaped bee clings to the blooming lotus. 


55. But as his strong desire led him to the happy regions of his imagination, 
so he had his fall from them at the end of his desert, like the nightly dew 
falling from heaven. 


56. He faded away in his body and all his limbs, like a flower attached to 
the ear or head ornament; and fell down together with his beloved one, like 
the ripened fruits of trees. 


57. Being bereft of his aerial and celestial body, he passed through the 
atmospheric air, and was born again on earth in a human figure. 


58. He had become a Brahman in the land of Dasarna, and then a king of 
the city of Kosala. He became a hunter in a great forest, and then a swan on 
the bank of Ganges. 


59. He became a king of the solar race, and then a rdja of the Pundras, and 
afterwards a missionary among the Sauras and Sdlwas. He next became a 
Vidyadhara, and lastly the son of a sage or muni. 


60. He had become a ruler in Madras, and then the son of a devotee, 
bearing the name of Vasudeva, and living on the bank of Samanga. 


61. Your son has also passed many other births, which he was led to by his 
desire; and he had likewise to undergo some itara-janma heterogeneous births 
in lower animals. 


62. He had repeatedly been a Kirata, — huntsman in the Vindhyéa hills and 
at Kaikatav. He was a chieftain in Sauvira, and had become an ass at Trigarta. 


63. He grew as a bamboo tree in the land of Keralas, and as a deer in the 
skirts of China. He became a serpent on a palm tree, and a cock on the tamdla 
tree. 


64. This son of yours had been skilled in incantations, — mantras, and 
propagated them in the land of Vidyadharas. (So called from their skill in 
enchantments). 


65. Then he became a Vidyadhara, (Jadugar) or magician himself; and 
plied his jugglery of abstracting ornaments from the persons of females. 


66. He became a favourite of females, as the sun is dear to lotus-flowers; 
and being as handsome as Kdma, (Cupid), in his person, he become a 
favourite amongst Vidyddhara damsels in the land of Gandharvas. 


67. At the end of the Kalpa age (of universal destruction), he beheld the 


twelve suns of the zodiac shining at once before him, and he was reduced to 
ashes by their warmth, as a grasshopper is burnt up by its falling on fire. 


68. Finding no other world nor body where he could enter (upon the 
extinction of the universe), his spirit roved about in the empty air, as a bird 
soars on high without its nest. 


69. After the lapse of a long time, as Brahma awoke again from his long 
night of repose, and commenced anew his creation of the world in all its 
various forms: — 


70. The roving spirit of your son was led by its desire, as if it was propelled 
by a gust of wind, to become a Brahman again, and to be reborn as such on 
this earth. 


71. He was born as the boy of a Brahman, under the name of Vasudeva, 
and was taught in all the Srutis, among the intelligent and learned men of the 
place. 


72. It is in this Kalpa age that he has become a Vidydadhara again, and 
betaken himself to the performance of his devotion on the bank of Samanga, 
where he is sitting still in his Yoga meditation. 


73. Thus, his desire for the varieties of worldly appearances, has led him to 
various births, amidst the woods and forests in the womb of this earth, 
covered with jungles of the thorny khadira, karanja and other bushes and 
brambles. 


CHAPTER XI. 
CAUSE OF THE PRODUCTION OF THE 
WORLD. 


Argument. Yama’s narration of Sukra’s meditation, and his 
inclination to worldliness. 


Yama continued: — Your son is still engaged in his rigorous austerities on the 
bank of the rivulet, rolling with its loud waves on the beach, and the winds 
blowing and howling from all sides. 


2. He has been sitting still in his firm devotion, with matted braids of hair 
on his head; and beads of rudrdksha seeds in his hand; and controuling the 
members of his body from their going astray. 


3. If you wish, O venerable sage! to know the reveries in his mind, you 
shall have to open your intellectual eye, in order to pry into the thoughts of 
others. 


4. Vasishtha said: — Saying so, Yama the lord of world, who sees all at 
one view, made the Muni to dive into the thoughts of his son with his 
intellectual eye. 


5. The sage immediately saw by his percipience, all the excogitations of his 
son’s mind, as if they were reflected in the mirror of his own mind. 


6. Having seen the mind of his son in his own mind, the muni returned from 
the bank of Samanga to his own body on mount Mandara, where it was left in 
its sitting posture, in the presence of Yama (during the wandering of his 
mind). 


7. Surprised at what he saw, the sage looked upon Yama with a smile; and 
dispassionate as he was, he spoke to the god in the following soft and 
dispassionate words. 


8. O god, that art the lord of the past and future! we are but ignorant 
striplings before thee, whose brilliant insight views at once, the three times 
presented before it. 


9. The knowledge of the existence of the world, whether it is a real entity or 
not, is the source of all errors of the wisest of men, by its varying forms and 
fluctuations. 


10. It is thou, O potent god! that knowest what is inside this world; while to 
us it presents its outward figure, in the shape of a magic scene only. 


11. I knew very well, that my son is not subject to death; and therefore, I 
was struck with wonder, to behold him lying as a dead body. 


12. Thinking the imperishable soul of my son, to be snatched by death, I 
was led to the vile desire, of cursing thee on his untimely demise. 


13. For though we know the course of things in the world, yet we are 
subjected to the impulses of joy and grief, owing to the casualties of 
prosperity and adversity. 


14. Moreover, to be angry with wrong doers, and to be pleased with those 
that act rightly, have become the general rule in the course of the world. 


15. So long do we labour under the sense of what is our duty, and what we 
must refrain from, as we are subject to the error of the reality of the world; but 
deliverance from this error, removes all such responsibilities from us. 


16. When we fret at death, without understanding its intention, (that it is 
intended only for our good), we are of course blamable for it. 


17. Iam now made to be acquainted by thee, regarding the thoughts of my 
son; and am enabled also to see the whole scene on the bank of Samanga (by 
thy favour). 


18. Of the two bodies of men, the mind alone is ubiquitous, and leader of 
the outer body of animated beings. The mind, therefore, is the true body, 
which reflects and makes us conscious of the existence of ourselves, as also of 
the exterior world. 


19. Yama replied: — You have rightly said, O Brahman! that the mind is 
the true body of man. It is the mind that moulds the body according to its will, 
as the potter makes the pot ad libitum, (ex suo moto). 


20. It frames a form and gives a feature to the person, that it had not before, 


and destroys one in existence in a moment. It is the imagination that gives an 
image to airy nothing, as children see ghosts before them in the dark. (The 
mind changes the features of the face and body, and views things according to 
its own fancy). 


21. Its power to create apparent realities out of absolute unreality, is well 
known to everybody, in his dream and delirium, in his misconceptions and 
fallacies and all kinds of error, as the sight of magic cities and talismans. 


22. It is from reliance in visual sight, that men consider it as the principal 
body, and conceive the mind as a secondary or supplementary part. 


23. It was the (Divine) mind, that formed the world from its thought; 
wherefore the phenomenal is neither a substance by itself (as it subsists in the 
mind), nor is it nothing (being in existence in us). — Gloss. It is therefore 
undefinable, — anirvachaniya. 


24. The mind is part of the body, and spreads itself in its thoughts and 
desires into many forms, as the branch of a tree shoots forth in its blossoms 
and leaves. And as we see two moons by optical deception, so does one mind 
appear as many in many individuals (and as different in different persons). 


25. It is from the variety of its desires, that the mind perceives and 
produces varieties of things, as pots and pictures and the like, — ghatapatddi. 
(Hence the mind is the maker of all things). 


26. The same mind thinks itself as many by the diversity of its thoughts; 
such as: — “I am weak, I am poor, I am ignorant and the like;” (all which 
serve to liken the mind to the object constantly thought upon). 


27. The thought, that I am none of the fancied forms which I feign to 
myself, but of that form from whence I am, causes the mind to be one with the 
everlasting Brahma, by divesting it of the thoughts of all other things. 


28. All things springing from Brahma, sink at last in him; as the huge 
waves of the wide and billowy ocean, rise but to subside in its calm and 
undisturbed waters below. 


29. They sink in the Supreme Spirit, resembling one vast body of pure and 
transparent, cold and sweet water; and like a vast mine of brilliant gems of 
unfailing effulgence. 


30. One thinking himself as a little billow, diminishes his soul to littleness. 
(He who bemeans himself, becomes mean). 


31. But one believing himself as a large wave, enlarges his spirit to 
greatness. (Nobleness of mind, ennobles a man). 


32. He who thinks himself as a little being, and fallen from above to suffer 
in the nether world, is born upon earth in the form he took for his pattern. 


33. But he who thinks himself to be born to greatness, and rises betimes by 
his energy, becomes as big as a hill, and shines with the lustre of rich gems 
growing upon it. 


34. He rests in peace, who thinks himself to be situated in the cooling orb 
of the moon; otherwise, the body is consumed with cares, as a tree on the 
bank is burnt down by a conflagration. 


35. Others like forest trees are fixed and silent, and shudder for fear of 
being burnt down by the wild fire of the world, though they are situated at 
ease, as beside the running streams of limpid water, and as high as on 
mountain tops of inaccessible height. 


36. Those who think themselves to be surrounded by worldly affairs, are as 
wide-stretching trees, awaiting their fall by impending blasts of wind. 


37. Those who wail aloud for being broken to pieces under the pressure of 
their misery, are like the noisy waves of the sea, breaking against the shore 
and shedding their tears in the form of the watery spray. 


38. But the waves are not of one kind, nor are they altogether entities or 
nullities in nature; they are neither small or large nor high or low, nor do these 
qualities abide in them. 


39. The waves do not abide in the sea, nor are they without the sea or the 
sea without them: they are of the nature of desires in the soul, rising and 
setting at their own accord. 


40. The dead are undying, (because they die to be born again), and the 
living are not living, (because they live but to die at last). Thus is the law of 
their mutual succession which nothing can forefend or alter. 


41. As water is universally the same and transparent in its nature, so is the 
all pervading spirit of God, pure and holy in every place. 


42. It is this one and self-same spirit which is the body of God, that is 
called the transparent Brahma. It is omnipotent and everlasting, and 
constitutes the whole world appearing as distinct from it. 


43. The many wonderful powers that it contains, are all active in their 
various ways. The several powers productive of several ends, are all contained 
in that same body. All the natural and material forces, have the Divine spirit 
for their focus. 


44. Brahma was produced in Brahma as the billow is produced in the water, 
and the male and female are produced from the neuter Brahma, changed to 
and forming both of them. 


45. That which is called the world, is only an attribute of Brahma; and there 
is not the slightest difference between Brahma and the world. (The one being 
a facsimile of the original Mind). 


46. Verily this plenitude is Brahma, and the world is no other than Brahma 
himself. Think intently upon this truth and shun all other false beliefs (of the 
creator and created, and the like). 


47. There is one eternal law, that presides over all things, and this one law 
branches forth into many, bringing forth a hundred varieties of effects. The 
world is a congeries of laws, which are but manifestations of the Almighty 


power and omniscience. (Therefore, says the psalmist: — “Blessed is he, who 
meditates on his laws day and night.” — O bhi Turat Jehovah hefzo yomam 
olaila). 


48. Both the inert and active (matter and life), proceed from the same; and 
the mind proceeds from the intellect, — chit of God. The various desires are 
evolved by the power of the mind, from their exact prototypes in the Supreme 
soul. 


49. It is Brahma therefore, O sinless Rama! that manifests itself in the 
visible world; and is full with various forms, as the sea with all its billows and 
surges. 


50. It assumes to itself all varieties of forms by its volition of evolution or 
the will of becoming many; and it is the spirit that displays itself in itself and 
by itself (of its own causality), as the sea water displays its waves in its own 
water and by itself. 


51. As the various waves are no other than the sea water, so all these 
phenomena are not different from the essence of the lord of the world. 


52. As the same seed develops itself in the various forms of its branches 
and buds, its twigs and leaves, and its fruits and flowers; so the same almighty 
seed evolves itself in the multifarious varieties of creation. 


53. As the strong sunlight displays itself in variegated colours in different 
bodies, so does Omnipotence, display itself in various vivid colours, all of 
which are unreal shades. (Urdu: O leken chamakta hai har rang men. — It is 
His light, that shines in all colours). 


54. As the colourless cloud receives in its bosom, the variety of transient 
hues displayed in the rainbow; so the inscrutable spirit of the Almighty, 
reflects and refracts the various colours displayed in creation. (Shines in the 
stars, glows in the sun, efc. — Pope). 


55. From the active agent, proceed the inert matter and inactivity without a 
secondary cause; as the active spider produces the passive thread, and the 
living man brings upon him, his dull torpor in sleep. (So the active spirit of 
God, brings forth inertia and inactive matter, out of itself into being. The laws 
of statics as well as dynamics both subsist in the energy of the spirit). 


56. Again the Lord makes the mind to produce matter for its own bondage 
only, as he makes the silkworm weave its own sheathing for its confinements 
alone. (So the mind maketh its material equipage, for its own imprisonment in 
the world). 


57. The mind forgets its spiritual nature of its own will, and makes for itself 
a strong prison house (of its earthly possessions), as the silkworm weaves its 
own coating. 


58. But when the mind inclines to think of its spiritual nature by its own 
free will, it gets its release from the prison-house of the body and bondage in 
the world; as a bird or beast is released from its cage, and the big elephant let 
loose from his fetters and the tying post. 


59. The mind gradually moulds itself into the form, which it constantly 
thinks upon in itself; and it derives from within itself, the power to be what it 
wishes to become. (Constant thought brings about its end. Yddrisi bhavand 
yasya, etc.). 


60. The long sought power when acquired, becomes as familiar to the soul, 
as the dark clouds are attendant upon the sky in the rainy-season. 


61. The newly obtained power is assimilated with its recipient, as the virtue 
of every season is manifested in its effect upon the trees, (i.e., in the season 
fruits and flowers). 


62. There is no bondage nor liberation of human soul, nor of the Divine 
Spirit. We cannot account for the use of these words among mankind. (These 


terms apply to the mind which is bound and freed, and not to the soul which is 
ever free). 


63. There is no liberation nor bondage of the soul, which is the same with 
the Divine. It is this delusive world which shows the immortal soul under the 
veil of mortality, or as eclipsed by and under the shadow of temporary affairs. 


64. It is the unsteady mind, which has enwrapped the steady soul, under the 
sheath of error; as the coverlet of the silkworm, covers the dormant worm. 


65. All other bondages which bind the embodied soul to earth, are the 
works of the mind, which is the root of all worldly ties and affections. 


66. All human affections and attachments to the visible world, are born in 
and remain in the mind; although they are as distinct from it, as the waves of 
the sea or as the beams of the moon; are produced from and contained in their 
receptacles. 


67. It is the Supreme spirit, which is stretched out as one universal ocean, 
agitated into myriads of its waves and billows. The Intellect itself is spread 
out as the water of the universal ocean, containing everything that is aqueous 
and terrene in its infinite bosom. 


68. All those that appear as Brahma, Vishnu and Rudras, as also they that 
have become as gods, and those that are called men and male creatures: — 


68. — (1). Are all as the waves of the sea, raised spontaneously by the 
underlying spirit; and so are Yama, Indra, the sun, fire, Cuvera and the other 
deities. 


68. — (2). So too are the Gandharvas and Kinnaras, the Vidyadharas and 
the other gods and demi-gods, that rise and fall or remain for a while like the 
breakers of the sea. 


68. — (3). They rise and fall as waves on every side, though some continue 
for a longer duration, as the lotus-born Brahma and others. 


68. — (4). Some are born to die in a moment, as the petty gods and men; 
and others are dead no sooner they are born as the ephemerids and some 
worms. 


69. Worms and insects, gnats and flies and serpents and huge snakes, rise in 
the great ocean of the Divine Spirit, like drops of water scattered about by 
waves of the sea. 


70. There are other moving animals as men and deer, vultures and jackals, 
which are produced on land and mountains, in woods and forests and in 
marshy grounds. 


71. Some are long lived and others living for a short duration; some living 
with higher aims and ambitions, and others with no other care than that of 
their contemptible bodies, or self-preservation only. 


72. Some think of their stability in this world of dreams, and others are 
betrayed by their false hope of the stability of worldly affairs, which are quite 
unstable. (So in Persian, Daregd jehan rad baquina didam). 


73. Some that are subjected to penury and poverty, have little to effect in 
their lives; and always torment themselves with the thoughts, that they are 
poor and miserable, weak and ignorant. 


74. Some are born as trees, and others have become as gods and demi-gods; 
and while some are furnished with moving bodies, others are dissolved as 
water in the sea. 


75. Some are no less durable than many kalpas, (as the land and sea and 
mountains, efc.); and others return to the Supreme Spirit, by the moonlike 
purity of their souls. All things have risen from the oceanlike Spirit of 
Brahma, like its moving undulations. It is the intellectual consciousness of 
everybody that is termed his mind. 


CHAPTER XII. 
DETAILED ACCOUNT OF THE GENESIS OF 
THE WORLD. 


Argument. Confutation of the instance of the sea and its 
fluctuation, with regard to the immutable spirit of God; and resolution 
of the phenomenal world, to our erroneous conception, and visual 
deception. 


Yama said: — The consciousness of gods, demi-gods and men as distinct 
beings, is quite wrong, since they are no way distinct from the infinite ocean 
of Divine Spirit, of which they are all as undulations. 


2. It is owing to our erroneous conceptions that we make these distinctions 
in ourselves and the Supreme Soul. The thought of our being separate and 
apart from the Supreme spirit, is the cause of our degradation from our 
pristine holiness and the image of God, in which man was made at first and 
was infused with his holy spirit. 


3. Remaining within the depth of the Divine Spirit, and yet thinking 
ourselves to live without it, is the cause of keeping us in darkness on the 
surface of the earth. 


4. Our consciousness of ourselves as Brahma, being vitiated by the various 
thoughts in our minds, becomes the root of our activities; while the pure 
consciousness of ego sum, — Iam, is free from all actions and energies. 


5. It is the inward desire of the heart and mind, that becomes the seed of 
earthly actions; which sprouts forth in thorny plants like the Karanja, a 
handful of which fills the ground with rankest weeds. 


6. Those living bodies, that lie scattered as pebbles on earth, are seen to roll 
about or lie down with their temporary joy and grief in continued succession, 
owing to their ignorance of themselves. 


7. From the highest empyrean of Brahma, down to the lowest deep, there is 
an incessant undulation of the Divine spirit, like the oscillation of the wind, 
which keeps all beings in their successive wailing and rejoicing, and in their 
incessant births and deaths. 


8. There are some of pure and enlightened souls, as the gods Hari, Hara, 
and others; and some of somewhat darkened understandings, as men and the 
inferior demi-gods. 


9. Some are placed in greater darkness, as the worms and insects; and 
others are situated in utter darkness, as the trees and vegetables. 


10. Some grow afar from the great ocean of the Divine Spirit; as the grass 
and weeds of the earth, which are ever degraded, owing to their being the 
emblems of sin; and others are barred from elevation as dull stones and 
heinous snakes. 


11. Some have come to being only with their bodies, (without any share of 
understanding); and they know not that death has been undermining the fabric 
of their bodies, as a mouse burrows a house. 


12. Some have gone through the ocean of Divine knowledge, and have 
become as divinities, in their living bodies as Brahma, Hari, and Hara. (The 
gods, like angels, are embodied beings in which form, they are worshipped by 
their votaries. It is wrong therefore for the Kesavite Brahmos, to call the 
formless Brahma as Hari, who had a visible body according to our text). 


13. Some having a little understanding, have gone down the depth of holy 
knowledge, without ever reaching the bottom, or finding its either shore. 


14. Some beings that have undergone many births, and have yet to pass 
through many more, have ever remained abortive and benighted without the 
light of truth. 


15. Some are tossed up and down, like fruits flung from the hand; those 
flying upward have gone higher still, and those going down have fallen still 
lower and lower. (None can know the highest pitch or lowest depth of 
existence?). 


16. It is forgetfulness of Supreme felicity, that causes one to rove in various 
births of weal or woe; but the knowledge of the Supreme, causes the cessation 
of transmigration; as the remembrance of Garuda, destroys the power of the 
most destructive poison. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
CONSOLATION OF BHRIGU. 


Argument. Bhrigu being acquainted with the powers of the mind 
and Death, rose to repair to the spot where the body of Sukra was 


lying. 


Yama said: — Among these various species of living creatures, which 
resemble the waves of the ocean, and are as numerous as the plants and 
creepers of spring: — 


2. There are some persons among the Yakshas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras, 
who have overcome the errors of their minds, and have well considered 
everything before and after them; that have become perfect in their lives, and 
passing as the living liberated persons in this world. 


3. Others there are among the moving and unmoving, that are as 
unconscious of themselves as wood and stone; and many that are worn out 
with error, and are incapable of judging for themselves. (Worn out with error, 
means hardened in their ignorance). 


4. But those that are awakened to sense, have the rich mine of the Sdstras, 
framed by the enlightened, for the guidance of their souls. (Hence it is for the 
sensible only to benefit themselves by learning). 


5. Those who are awakened to sense, and whose sins are washed off, have 
their understandings purified by the light of the Sdstras. (Lit., by investigation 
into the Sdstras). 


6. The study of good works, destroys the errors of the mind; as the course 
of the sun in the sky, destroys the darkness of the night. 


7. Those who have not succeeded to dispel the errors of their minds, have 
darkened their understandings by a mist of ignorance, like the frosty sky of 
winter, and they find the phantoms of their error, dancing as demons before 


their eyes. 


8. All living bodies are subject to pain and pleasure; but it is the mind 
which constitutes the body, and not the flesh, (which is insensible of either). 


9. The body that is seen to be composed of flesh and bones and the five 
elemental parts, is a creation of the imagination of the mind, and has no 
substantiality in it. 


10. What your son had thought of in his mental body, (mdnas-sarira), the 
same he found in the same body; and was not accountable to anybody for 
aught or whatever passed in his mind. (We are responsible for every act of the 
body; but not so for the thoughts or reveries of the mind). 


11. Whatever acts a man wills to do in his own mind, the same comes to 
take place in a short time; and there is no other (foreign) agency of anybody 
else required to bring them about. 


12. Whatever the mind doth in a moment and of its own accord, and 
actuated by its own will or desire, there is nobody in the world, who has the 
power to do or undo the same at any time. (The mind is master of the act, and 
not the body, nor anybody besides. Or, whatever the mind sets about to do, it 
does it sooner than by the help of another). 


13. The suffering of hell torments and enjoyment of heavenly bliss, and the 
thoughts of birth and death, are all fabrications of the mind, which labours 
under these thoughts. (It is the mind that makes a heaven of hell and a hell of 
heaven). 


14. What need I to tell more in the manner of verbose writers (on this 
subject), than go together at once, to the place where your son is situated. 


15. He, (Sukra), having tasted the pleasure and pain of all these states at a 
moment’s thought of his mind, is now seated as a devotee on the bank of 
Samanga, under the spreading beams of the moon. (The Gloss speaks here of 
Sukra’s passing into many births, before his betaking himself to devotion). 


16. His vital breath having fled from his heart, became as the moonbeam 
sparkling in a dew drop, which entered the uterus in the form of semen virilis. 


17. Saying so, the lord of death smiled to think of the course of nature, and 
taking hold of Bhrigu’s hand in his own, they both departed as the sun and 
moon together. 


18. O wonderful is the law of nature! said Bhrigu slowly to himself, and 


then rose higher and higher, as the sun ascends above his rising mountain. 


19. With their luminous bodies, they arrived at the spot of Samanga, and 
shone on high above the tamdla trees below. Their simultaneous rising in the 
clear firmament, made them appear as the sun rising with the full-moon over 
the cloudy horizon. 


20. Valmiki said: — As the muni, (Vasishtha), was telling these things, the 
sun went down his setting mountain, and the day departed to its evening 
service. The court broke with mutual salutations, to perform their evening 
rites and observances, after which they joined the assembly at the dawn of the 
next day. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
SUKRA’S REMINISCENCE OF HIS 
METEMPSYCHOSIS. 


Argument. Bhrigu and Yama’s Expostulation with Sukra, and 
desiring him to return to his former state. 


Vasishtha said: — Now, as Yama and Bhrigu departed from the cavern of the 
Mandara mountain, and proceeded towards the bank of Samanga river: — 


2. They beheld upon their descending from the mountain, a great light 
below, proceeding from the bodies of the celestials, sleeping in the arbours of 
aureate creepers. 


3. The birds were sporting in their sprays, formed by the cradling creepers 
under the canopy of heaven; and the lovely antelopes looking face to face, 
with their eyes resembling the blue-lotuses. 


4. They beheld the Siddhas, sitting on their stony seats upon the elevated 
rocks, with their bodies full of vigour, and their eyes looking on the spheres 
with defiance. 


5. They saw the lords of the elephantine tribe, with their big trunks as large 
as the palm trees, and plunging in the lakes covered with flowers, falling 
incessantly from the beachening boughs, and branches of flowering trees. 


6. They saw the mountain bulls, (Bos guavus), dozing in their giddiness, 
and sitting as ebriety in person; while their bodies were reddened by the red 
dust of flowers, and their tails flushed with the crimson farina blown by the 
breeze. 


7. There were the brisk and beautiful chowri deer serving as flappers of the 
mountain king, and dousing in the pools filled with falling flowers. 


8. They saw the Kinnara lads sitting on the tops of straight and stately date 


trees, and sporting with pelting the date fruits upon one another, which stuck 
to the reeds below as their fruits. 


9. They beheld big monkeys, jumping about with their hideous reddish 
cheeks, and hiding themselves in the coverts of wide-spreading creepers. 


10. They saw the Siddhas, to be hit by the celestial damsels with blossoms 
of mandara flowers, and clad with vests of the tawny clouds by which they 
were shrouded. 


11. The uninhabited skirts of the mountain, were as the solitary walks of 
Buddhist vagrants; and the rivulets at its foot, were gliding with their currents 
covered under the kunda and mandara flowers, as if they were running to 
meet the sea, mantled in their yellow vests of the spring season. 


(It is well known that the vernal vesture of damsels, is of the yellow colour 
of the farina of flowers, and the rivulets are poetically figured as females 
hastening towards their lord the sea, (saritdm-pathih)). 


12. The trees decorated with wreaths of flowers, and shaken by the breeze, 
seemed as bacchanals giddy with the honey of the flowers, and rolling their 
dizzy eyes formed of the fluttering bees. 


13. They walked about here and there, and looked at and admired the 
grandeur of the mountain, till at last they alighted on the nether earth, 
decorated with its cities and human habitations. 


14. They arrived in a moment at the bank of Samanga, flowing with the 
loosened flowers of all kinds, as if it were a bed of flowers by itself. 


15. Bhrigu beheld his son on one of its banks, with his body changed to 
another form, and his features quite altered from his former state. 


16. His limbs were stiff, and his sense at a stand-still, as he sat with his 
mind fixed on steady meditation. He seemed to be long at rest, in order to get 
his rest from the turmoils of the world. 


17. He thought upon the course of the currents of the world, which are 
continually gliding with successive joy and sorrow to man, who gets rid of 
them after his long trial. 


18. He became motionless as a wheel, after its long-winded motion; and 
found his rest after his prolonged whirling, in the whirlpool of the ocean of 
the world. 


19. He sat retired as a lover, solely reclined on the thought of his beloved 
object in his retirement; and his mind was at rest, after its long wanderings. 


20. He sat in a state of uniform meditation, without a shadow of biplicity in 
it; and was smiling with a cold apathy at all the pursuits of mankind. 


21. Liberated from all concerns, and released from the enjoyments of life, 
and disenthralled from the snare of desires and fancies, he rested in the 
supreme bliss of the soul. 


22. His soul was at rest, in the everlasting rest of God; as the pure crystal 
catches the colour of the gem, which is contiguous to it. 


23. Bhrigu beheld his son in the calmly composed and awakened state of 
his mind, and freed alike both from his thoughts of what was desirable, as also 
from his hatred against what was disgusting. (God is said to be eternally at 
rest the six days creation, but an act of his Mind, Will, Word, Fiat, Logos or 
Brahma). 


24. Yama seeing the son of Bhrigu, said to the father in a voice, hoarse as 
the sounding sea. ‘Lo there thy son.’ 


25. “Awake,” said he to Bhargava, which startled him from his meditation, 
as the roaring of a cloud, rouses the slumbering peacock from his summer 
sleep. 


26. Upon opening and lifting up his eyes, he beheld the god standing with 
his father on one side, who being pleased at his sight, glowed in their 
countenances like the disks of the sun and moon. 


27. He rose from his seat of Kadamba leaves, and made his obeisance to 
them, who appeared to have come to him like the gods Hari and Hara in the 
disguise of a couple of Brahmans. 


28. After their mutual salutations, they were seated on a slab of stone, and 
appeared as the venerable gods Vishnu and Siva, were seated on the pinnacle 
of Meru. 


29. The Brahman boy, having ended the muttering of his mantras on the 
bank of Samanga, accosted them with a voice distilling as the sweet nectarine 
juice of ambrosia amrita or water of life, (aqua-vitae or abi haiydt). 


30. “I am emancipated, my lords, at your sight this day (from all earthly 
cares), as you have blessed me by your sights, resembling those of the sun and 
moon, appearing together to view.” (Lit. as the orbs of the cooling and 


dazzling beams. (himdnsu and ushndnsu)). 


31. The darkness, which reigned in my mind, and which no light of the 
Sdstras or spiritual or temporal knowledge, nor even my austerities could 
remove, is dispelled today by the light of your presence. 


32. A kind look of the great, gives as much joy to the mind, as draughts of 
pure ambrosia, serve to satisfy the heart. 


33. Tell me who are you, whose feet have sanctified this place, as the 
glorious orbs of the day and night, enlighten the firmament. 


34. Being addressed in this manner, Bhrigu desired him to remember his 
prior births, which he could well do, by his enlightened understanding. 


35. Bhrigu made him acquainted with the state of his former birth, and he 
remembered it instantly by the clairvoyance of his inward sight. 


36. He was struck with wonder at the remembrance of his former state, and 
smiled with a joyous face and gladsome heart, to ponder on what he had been, 
and then uttered as follows. 


37. Blessed is the law of the Supreme Being, which is without its beginning 
or end, and is known as destiny here below; and by whose power the world is 
revolving as a curricle. 


38. I see my countless and unknown births, and the innumerable accidents 
to which they were subject, for the period of a whole Kalpa or duration of the 
world from first to last. (The Soul being immortal, has to pass into infinite 
births under various shapes and forms of bodies. If it were to lie dormant in 
the grave forever what is the good of its being made or created to be 
immortal?) 


39. I have undergone great hardships, and known prosperity also with the 
toil of earning; have had my wanderings also in different lives, and remember 
to have roamed for a long time, over the mountainous regions of Meru. 


40. I drank the water reddened with the pollen of mandara flowers, and 
roved along the bank of the heavenly stream of Mandakini filled with lotuses. 


41. I wandered about the Mandara groves, filled with flowering creepers 
like gold, and under the shade of the Kalpa arbors of Meru, and in the flowery 
plains above and about it. 


42. There is naught of good or evil, which I have not tasted or felt or done 


myself; nor is there anything, which I have not seen and felt and known in my 
past lives. 


43. I have now known the knowable (that is to be known), and seen the 
imperishable one in whom I have my repose. I have now rested after my toils 
were over, and have passed beyond the domain of error and darkness. 


44. Now rise, O father! and let us go to see that body, lying on the Mandara 
mount, and which is now dried as a withered plant. 


45. I have no desire to remain in this place, nor go anywhere of my own 
will; it is only to see the works of fate, that we wander all about. 


46. I will follow you, with my firm belief in the one adored Deity of the 
learned. Let that be the desirable object of my mind, and I will act exactly in 
conformity with my belief. 


CHAPTER XV. 
LAMENTATION AND EXPOSTULATION OF 
SUKRA. 


Argument. Sukra laments on seeing his former body, and his 
consolation at its ultimate anaesthesia. 


Vasishtha said: — Thus contemplating on the course of nature, these 
philomaths moved with their spiritual bodies, from the bank of Samanga 
(towards the Mandara mountain). 


2. They ascended to the sky, and passed through the pores of the clouds to 
the region of the Siddhas, whence they descended to the lower world, and 
arrived at the valley of Mandara. 


3. There Sukra saw on a cliff of that mountain, the dried body of his former 
birth, lying covered under the dark and dewy leaves of trees. 


4. He said, here is that shriveled body, O father! which thou hadst 
nourished with many a dainty food before. 


5. There is that body of mine, which was so fondly anointed with camphor, 
agallochum and sandal paste, by my wet-nurse before. 


6. This is that body of mine, which was used to repose on the cooling beds, 
made with heaps of mandara flowers, in the airy spots of Meru. 


7. This is that body of mine, which was so fondly caressed by heavenly 
dames of yore, and which is now lying, to be bitten by creeping insects and 
worms, on the bare ground below. 


8. This is that body of mine, which was wont of yore, to ramble in the 
parterres of sandalwood; now lying a dried skeleton on the naked spot. 


9. This is that body of mine, now lying impassive of the feelings of delight 


in the company of heavenly nymphs, and withering away unconscious of the 
actions and passions of its mind. 


10. Ah, my pitiable body! how dost thou rest here in peace, forgetful of thy 
former delights in the different stages of life; and insensible of the thoughts of 
thy past enjoyments and amusements of yore. 


11. O my body! that hast become a dead corpse and dried by sun-beams; 
thou art now become so hideous in thy frame of the skeleton, as to frighten me 
at this change of thy form. 


12. I take fright to look upon this body, in which I had taken so much 
pleasure before, and which is now reduced to a skeleton. 


13. I see the ants now creeping over that breast of mine, which was 
formerly adorned with necklaces studded with starry gems. 


14. Look at the remains of my body, whose appearance of molten gold, 
attracted the hearts of beauteous dames, bearing now a load of dry bones only. 


15. Behold the stags of the forest flying with fear, at the sight of the wide 
open jaws, and withered skin of my carcass; which with its horrid mouth, 
frightens the timid fawns in the woods. 


16. I see the cavity of the belly of the withered corpse, is filled with sun 
shine, as the mind of man is enlightened by knowledge. 


17. This dried body of mine, lying flat on the mountain stone, resembles the 
mind of the wise, abased at the sense of its own unworthiness. 


18. It seems to be emaciating itself like an ascetic, in his supine hypnotism 
on the mountain, dead to the perceptions of colour and sound, and of touch 
and taste, and freed from all its desires and passions. 


19. It is freed from the demon of the mind, (mental activity), and is resting 
in its felicity without any apprehension of the vicissitudes of fate and fortune, 
or fear of fall. 


20. The felicity which attends on the body, upon the calmness of the demon 
of the mind, is not to be had, from possession of the vast dominion of the 
world. 


21. See how happily this body is sleeping in this forest, by being freed from 
all its doubts and desires in the world; and by its being liberated from the 
network of its fancies. 


22. The body is disturbed and troubled like a tall tree, by the restlessness of 
the apish mind; and it is hurled down by its excitation like a tree uprooted 
from its bottom. 


23. This body being set free from the impulses of the mischievous mind, is 
sleeping in its highest and perfect felicity, and is quite released from the 
jarring broils of the world, clashing like the mingled roarings of lions and 
elephants in their mutual conflict. 


24. Every desire is a fever in the bosom, and the group of our errors is as 
the mist of autumn; and there is no release of mankind from these, save by the 
impassionateness of their minds. 


25. They have gone over the bounds of worldly enjoyments, who have had 
the high-mindedness, to lay hold on the tranquility of their minds. 


26. It is by my good fortune, that I came to find this body of mine, resting 
in these woods without its troublesome mind, and freed from all its 
tribulations and feverish anxieties. 


27. Rama said: — Venerable Sir, that art versed in all knowledge, you have 
already related of Sukra’s passing through many births in different shapes; 
and feeling all their casualties of good and evil. 


28. How was it then that he regretted so much for his body begotten by 
Bhrigu; in disregard of all his other bodies; and the pains and pleasures which 
attended upon them? 


29. Vasishtha answered: — Rama! the other bodies of Sukra were merely 
the creations of his imagination; but that of Bhargava or as the son of Bhrigu, 
was the actual one, as produced by the merit of his pristine acts. (Here the 
gloss is too verbose on the theory of metempsychosis; but the literal meaning 
of the couplet is what is given above). 


30. This was the first body with which he was born by the will of his 
Maker, being first formed in the form of subtle air, and then changed into the 
shape of wind. 


31. This wind entered into the heart of Bhrigu in a flux of the vital and 
circulating breaths, and being joined in time with the semen, formed the germ 
of Sukra’s body. (So called from the seed, — sukra). 


32. The person of Sukra, received the Brahmanical sacraments, and became 
an associate of the father; till at last it was reduced to the form of a skeleton in 


course of a long time. 


33. Because this was the first body which Sukra had obtained from Brahma 
the creator, it was on this account that he lamented so much for it. (Sukra the 
son of Bhrigu, was the grandson of Manu, — the first human being, after 
creation of the world called kalpdrambha). 


34. Though impassionate and devoid of desire as Sukra was, yet he 
sorrowed for his body, according to the nature of all being born of flesh, 
(dehaja). (All flesh is subject to sorrow). 


35. This is the way of all flesh, whether it be the body of a wise or unwise 
man (to mourn for its loss). This is usual custom of the world, whether the 
person was mighty or not. 


36. They who are acquainted with the course of nature, as also those that 
are ignorant of it as brutes and beasts; are all subject to the course of the 
world, as if they are bound in the net of fate and liable to grief and sorrow. (It 
is not the greatness of a great mind, to be insensible of the tender feelings of 
his nature, but to keep his joys and sorrows under proper bounds). 


37. The wise as well as the unwise, are on an equal footing with respect to 
their nature and custom. It is only the difference in desire that distinguishes 
the one from the other, as it is the privation of or bondage to desires, that is 
the cause of their liberation or enthrallment in this world. It is also the great 
aim that distinguishes the great, from the mean-mindedness of the base. 


38. As long as there is the body, so long is there the feeling of pleasure in 
pleasure and that of pain in pain. But the mind which is unattached to and 
unaffected by them, feigns to itself the show of wisdom. (Unfeelingness is a 
mere show and not reality). 


39. Even great souls are seen to feel happy in pleasure and become 
sorrowful in matters of pain; and show themselves as the wise in their 
outward circumstances. 


40. The shadow of the sun, is seen to shake in the water, but not so the 
fixed sun himself; so the wise are moved in worldly matters, though they are 
firm in their faith in God. 


41. As the unmoved and fixed sun, seems to move in his shadow on the 
wave, so the wise man who has got rid of his worldly concerns, still behaves 
himself like the unwise in it. 


42. He is free who has the freedom of his mind, although his body is 
enthralled in bondage; but he labours in bondage whose mind is bethralled by 
error, though he is free in his body. (True liberty consists in moral and not in 
bodily freedom). 


43. The causes of happiness and misery as also those of liberty and 
bondage, are the feelings of the mind; as the sun-beams and flame of fire, are 
the causes of light. 


44. Therefore, conform thyself with the custom of the society in thy 
outward conduct; but remain indifferent to all worldly concerns in thy inward 
mind. 


45. Remain true to thyself, by giving up thy concerns in the world; but 
continue to discharge all thy duties in this world by the acts of thy body. 
(Keep your soul to yourself, but devote your body to the service of the world). 


46. Take care of the inward sorrows and bodily diseases, and the dangerous 
whirlpools and pitfalls in the course of thy life; and do not fall into the 
blackhole of selfishness, (meitatem), which gives the soul its greatest anguish. 


47. Mind, O lotus-eyed Rama, that you mix with nothing, nor let anything 
to mix with you; but be of a purely enlightened nature, and rest content in thy 
inward soul. 


48. Think in thyself the pure and holy spirit of Brahma, the universal soul 
and maker of all, the tranquil and increate All, and be happy for ever. 


49. If you can rescue yourself from the great gloom of egotism, and arrive 
at the state of pure indifference to all objects; you will certainly become great 
in your mind and soul, and be the object of universal veneration. 


CHAPTER XVI. 
RESUSCITATION OF SUKRA. 


Argument. Sukra’s Revival at the word of Yama, and his becoming 
the preceptor of Daityas. 


Vasishtha continued: — Then the god Yama, interrupted the long lamentation 
of Sukra, and addressed him in words, sounding as deep as the roaring of a 
cloud. 


2. Yama said: — Now, O Sukra! cast off thy body of the Samanga devotee, 
and enter this dead body in the manner of a prince entering his palace. 


3. Thou shalt perform austere devotion with this thy first born body, and 
obtain by virtue of that, the preceptorship of the Daitya tribe. 


4. Then at the end of the great Kalpa, thou shalt have to shuffle off thy 
mortal coil forever, as one casts off a faded flower. 


5. Having attained the state of living liberation, by merit of thy prior acts; 
thou shalt continue in the preceptorship of the leader of the great Asuras 
forever. 


6. Fare you well, we shall now depart to our desired habitation; know for 
certain that there is nothing desirable to the mind, which it cannot accomplish 
(by perseverance). 


7. Saying so, the god vanished from before the weeping father and son, and 
moved amidst the burning sky, like the dispenser of light, (sun). 


8. After the god had gone to the place of his destination, and gained his 
destined state among the gods, the Bhrigus remained to ruminate on the 
inexplicable and unalterable course of destiny (or divine ordinance). 


9. Sukra entered into his withered corpse, as the season of spring enters into 
a faded plant, in order to adorn it again with its vernal bloom, and its re- 


springing blossoms. 


10. His Brahmanical body fell down immediately on the ground, staggering 
as when a tree is felled or falls down with its uprooted trunk; and it became 
disfigured in a moment in its face and limbs. 


11. The old sage Bhrigu finding the revivification of the dead body of his 
son, sanctified it with propitiatory mantras and sprinkling of water, from his 
sacerdotal water pot, (kamandalu). 


12. The veins and arteries and all the cells and cavities of the dead body, 
were again supplied with their circulating blood; as the dry beds of rivers, are 
filled again with floods of water in the rainy weather. 


13. The body being filled with blood, gave the limbs to bloom; like the 
growth of lotuses in rainy lakes, and the bursting of new shoots and buds in 
vernal plants. 


14. Sukra then rose up from the ground, breathing the breath of life, like the 
cloud ascending to the sky by force of the winds. 


15. He bowed down to his father, standing in his holy figure before him; as 
the rising cloud clings to, and kisses the foot of the lofty mountain. 


16. The father then embraced the revived body of his son, and shed a flood 
of his affectionate tears upon him; as the high risen cloud washes the 
mountain top with showers. 


17. Bhrigu looked with affection on the new risen old body of his son; and 
smiled to see the resuscitation of the body that was begotten by him. 


18. He was pleased to know him as the son born of himself; and to find his 
features engrafted in him. 


19. Thus the son and sire graced each other by their company, as the sun 
and lotus-lake rejoice to see one another, after the shade of night. 


20. They rejoiced at their reunion, like the loving pair of swans at the end 
of the night of their separation; and as the joyous couple of peacocks, at the 
approach of the rainy clouds. 


21. The worthy sire and son, sat awhile on the spot, to halt after all their 
toils and troubles were at an end, and then they rose up to discharge the duties 
that were then at hand. 


22. They then set fire to the body of the Samangaé Brahman, and reduced it 
to ashes; for who is there among the earth-born mortals, that ought to set at 
naught aught of the customary usages of his country? 


23. Afterwards, the two devotees, Bhrigu and Bhargava, continued to dwell 
in that forest, like the two luminaries, — the sun and moon, in the region of 
the sky. 


24. They both continued as the living liberated guides of men, by their 
knowledge of all that was to be known; and preserving the equanimity of their 
minds, and the steadiness of their dispositions, amidst all the vicissitudes of 
time and place, (and the changes of their fortune and circumstances). 


25. In course of time, Sukra obtained the preceptorship of the demons, and 
Bhrigu remained in his patriarchal rank and authority among the sons of men, 
(mdnavas). 


26. Thus the son of Bhrigu, who was born as Sukra at first, was gradually 
led away from his holy state by his thought of the heavenly nymph, and 
subjected to various states of life to which he was prone (by the bent of his 
mind and inward proclivities). 


CHAPTER XVII. 
ATTAINMENT OF THE IDEAL REALM. 


Argument. Mutual sympathy of pure hearted souls, the reciprocities of their 
affections, and their union with one another. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, why the ideal reflexion of others, is not attended 
with equal result, with that of the son of Bhrigu, (though one is given to the 
like reveries as the other). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The reason is, that the body of Sukra issued at first 
from the will of Brahma, and was born of the pure family of Bhrigu, without 
being vitiated by any other birth (either prior to it or of a lower kind). 


3. The purity of mind which follows upon subsidence of desires, is called 
its coolness, and the same is known as the unsullied state of the soul. 
(Nirmaldtmda). 


4. Whatever the man of a pure and contrite spirit, thinks in his mind, the 
same comes to take place immediately; as the turning of the sea water turns 
into the eddy. (Turning over in the mind, turns out into being). 


5. As the errors of various wanderings, occurred to the mind of Sukra; so it 
is with everybody (from his observation of the world), as it is instanced in the 
case of Bhrigu’s son. 


6. As the serum contained in the seed, develops itself in the shoots and 
leaves, so the mind evolves in all the forms which are contained therein. 


7. Whatever forms of things are seen to exist in this world, are all false 
appearances; and so are their disappearances also, (mere creations of the 
mind). 


8. Nothing appears or disappears to anyone in this world, but error and 
aerial phantasms; that show themselves to those that are bewitched by this 


magic scene of the world. 


9. As it is our notion of this part of the world, which presents its form to 
our view, so the appearance of thousands of such worlds in the mind, is mere 
ideal; and as false as the show of a magic-lantern. 


10. As the sights in our dream, and the images of our imagination, are 
never apart from our minds; and as they cannot show themselves to the view 
of others; such is our erroneous conception of the world (confined within 
ourselves). 


11. So are all places and things but imaginary ideas, and show themselves 
as real objects, to the purblind sight of the ignorant only. 


12. So also are the ghosts and goblins, demons and devils, but imaginary 
figures of the mind; born in the shallow brain of men, to terrify them with 
their hideous shapes. 


13. Thus have we all become, like the dreaming son of Bhrigu, to 
understand the false creations of our imagination, as sober realities. 


14. So the creation of the world, and all created things, are situated, 
(pictured), in the mind of Brahma; and make their repeated appearance, as the 
phantoms of a phantasmagoria before him. 


15. All things appearing unto us, are as false as these phantoms; and they 
proceed from the mind of Brahma, as the varieties of trees and shrubs, are 
produced from the same sap of the vernal season. (The one is the source of 
many). 


16. Considering in a philosophical light, (tatwadarsana), it will be found, 
that it is the will or desire of everybody, which is productive of the objects of 
his desire. (Lit. which evolves itself in its productions. And as it is with the 
will of the creator, so is it with that of every one). 


17. Everybody beholds everything in the world, according to the nature of 
the thoughts in his mind, and then perishes with his wrong view of it. 


18. It is in its ideality, that anything appears as existent, which in reality is 
inexistent, though it is apparent to sight. The existence of the world, is as that 
of a lengthened dream; and the visible world is a wide spread snare of the 
mind, like fetters at the feet of an elephant. 


(The world is existent in the ideal, but inexistent in its apparent real and 
visual form. It is a network of the mind, like a longspun dream, and binds it as 


fast as fetters at the feet of an elephant). 


19. The reality of the world depends upon the reality of mind, which causes 
the world to appear as real. The loss of the one, destroys them both; because 
neither of them can subsist without the other. 


20. The pure mind has the true notions of things, as the gem polished from 
its dross, receives the right reflection of everything, (or) reflects the true image 
of everything. 


21. The mind is purified by its habit of fixed attention to one particular 
object; and it is the mind undisturbed by desires, that receives the true light 
and reflexion of things. 


22. As the gilding of gold or any brilliant colour, cannot stand on base 
metal or on a piece of dirty cloth, so it is impossible for the vitiated mind, to 
apply itself intensely to any one particular object. 


23. Rama asked: — Will you tell me Sir, in what manner the mind of 
Sukra, received the reflexion of the shadowy world, and its temporaneous 
movement in itself, and how these fluctuations rose and remained in his mind? 


24. Vasishtha said: — In the same manner as Sukra was impressed with the 
thoughts of the world, from the lectures of his father, so did they remain in his 
mind, as the future peacock resides in the egg. 


25. It is also naturally situated in the embryo of the mind, of every species 
of living being, and is gradually evolved from it, in the manner of the shoots 
and sprouts, and leaves and flowers of trees, growing out of the seed. 


26. Everybody sees in his mind, what its heart desires to possess, as it is in 
the case of our prolonged dreams. 


27. Know it thus, O Rama! that a partial view of the world, rises in the 
mind of everybody; in the same manner, as it appears in the mind in a dream 
at night. 


28. Rama said: — But tell me Sir, whether the thought and the things 
thought of, simultaneously meet themselves in the mind of the thinker; or it is 
the mind only that thinks of the object which is never met with by it. 


29. Vasishtha replied: — But the sullied mind cannot easily unite with the 
object of its thought, as a dirty and cold piece of iron, cannot join with a pure 
red-hot one, unless it is heated and purified from its dross. 


30. The pure mind and its pure thoughts, are readily united with one 
another, as the pure waters mix together into one body of the same kind, 
which the muddied water cannot do. 


31. Want of desire constitutes the purity of the mind, which is readily 
united with immaterial things of the same nature like itself. The purity of the 
mind conduces to its enlightenment, and these being united in one, leads it to 
the Supreme. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
THE INCARNATION OF THE LIVING SPIRIT 


Argument. The Impure state of the soul; and its Purity leading to the 
knowledge of the only One. 


Vasishtha continued: — The living souls, (Jivdtman), residing in the seeds of 
material bodies, (bhita-vija), in all parts of the world, differ from one another; 
and there according to the difference in their knowledge of themselves, 
(tanmdtra), or self-identity with the Unity. 


2. As long as there is no volition nor nolition, connected with the identity 
of the living soul; so long it reposes in a state of rest, not unlike that of sound 
sleep, (susupti). 


3. But living souls addicted to their wishes, view their identity with the 
same; and find themselves born in their desired shapes here below. 


4. The tanmdtras of the living soul and its proclivities, run in one channel 
to the reservoir of life, and are thickened into one living being by their mutual 
coalition. 


5. Some of them are situated apart from one another, and are dissolved also 
separately; and some are joined together, and are born as two gunja fruits 
growing together. 


6. The world consisting of thousands of orbs like gunja fruits, contains the 
assemblage of atoms on atoms; and these unconnected with one another, form 
the great garden of God. 


7. These being joined also with one another, became dense and thick; and 
remain in the same place, where it has grown. 


8. The different states of the mind, ensuing upon the absence of its present 
objects under its province, brings on a change in its constitution, which is 


called its regeneration (in a new life). 


(Thus the change of the mind under the change of circumstances, is 
reckoned its transformation to a different being). 


9. Thus every regeneration of the mind in a new life, is accompanied with 
its concomitant desires, and their results. The new life is attended with its 
proper body, unless the mind has lost its reminiscence. 


10. As the pure Spirit taking the form of the vital breath, performs the 
functions of the body, so the mind being reborn in a new body, is employed in 
all the functions of the same body. 


11. The souls of all living beings are subject to the three states of waking, 
dreaming, and sound sleep, which are caused by the mind and not by the 
body. 


12. Thus the soul passing under the triple condition in its living state, does 
not give rise to the body, as the sea-water gives rise to the waves. (The body is 
caused by the mind, and not by the soul which has no connection with it). 


13. The living soul having attained its intellectual state, and the rest of the 
conditions of sound sleep, (susupti), is awakened to the knowledge of itself, 
and is released from its rebirth; while the ignorant soul is subjected to be born 
again. 


14. And though the knowing and unknowing souls attain the state of 
susupti, and resemble each other in kind; yet the unknowing susupta soul, 
which is not awakened to the knowledge of its spirituality, is doomed to be 
reborn in the mortal world. 


15. The ubiquity of the intellect, makes it pass into the mind in its next 
birth; and exhibit itself in different forms in all its succeeding and subordinate 
regenerations (stages of life). 


16. Among these repeated births, the subordinate regenerations resemble 
the many folded coatings of a plantain tree; and the spirit of Brahma is 
contiguous to, and pervades the whole, like the lofty leaves of the same tree. 


17. The influence of the Divine spirit, is as cool as the cooling shade of a 
plantain arbour. It is of its own nature; and is as unchangeable as the pith of 
the plantain tree, notwithstanding the changes in all its outer coats and 
coverings. 


18. There is no difference or diversity in the nature of Brahma the creator, 


in his repeated and manifold creations of worlds; for he being the seed of the 
world, shoots forth by his moisture into the form of the expanded tree of the 
world, and becomes the same seed again. 


19. So Brahma taking the form of the mind, becomes the same Brahma by 
reminiscence of his mind, as the sap of the soil makes the seed to bring forth 
the fruit, which reproduces the like seed. 


20. So the productive seed proceeding from Brahma, displays itself in the 
form of the world. But as nobody can say what is the cause of the sap in the 
seed, so no one can tell why the spirit of God, teems with productive seed (of 
Brahma) in it. 


21. So no one should inquire into the cause of Brahma; because his nature 
being inscrutable and undefinable, it is improper to say him this or the other. 


22. He must not attribute causality to what is not the cause, nor impute the 
causation of material bodies to the immaterial spirit of God, that is the prime 
and supreme cause of all (as the Prototype). We must reason rightly regarding 
what is certain truth, and not argue falsely about what transcends our 
knowledge. 


23. The seed casts off its seedy form, and assumes the shape of the fruit; 
but Brahma, (the seed of all), contains the fruit (of the universe) in his bosom, 
without laying aside the seed. 


24. The seed of the fruit bears a material form, but Brahma, — the 
universal seed, has no form at all; therefore, it is improper to compare the 
visible seed, with the invisible Brahma, who is beyond all comparison. 


25. Brahma evolves himself in his creation and does not produce the world 
like the fruit from the seed; therefore, know the world as the vacuous heart of 
Brahma, and is neither born nor unborn of itself. 


26. The viewer viewing the view, is unable to see himself, (his inward 
soul), because his consciousness being engrossed by external objects, is 
disabled from looking into itself. 


27. Of what avail is sagacity to one, whose mind labours under the error of 
water in a mirage; and what power has the mirage over a mind, which is 
possessed of its sagacity? 


28. As the looker on the clear sky does not see every part of it, and as the 
eye that looks on all others does not see itself; so we see everything about us 


besides ourselves. 


29. As the looker on the clear sky, does not see what is above the skies; so 
we see ourselves and others as material beings; but cannot see the inward part 
of the immaterial soul, as the wise men do. 


30. Brahma, who is as clear as the firmament, cannot be perceived by all 
our endeavours; because the sight of the sky as a visible thing, cannot give us 
an insight into the invisible Brahma; (which fills all space with his presence). 


31. Such a sight cannot present itself to us, unless we can see the true form 
of God; but it is far from being visible to the beholder, as the sight of subtlest 
things. 


32. We see the outward sight because we cannot see the beholder of the 
sight, (i.e., God himself who beholds his works). The beholder, (God), is only 
the existent being, and the visibles are all nothing. 


33. But the all seeing God, being permeated in the visibles, there can be no 
beholding of him as a personal God, nor of them as distinct things. Because 
whatever the Almighty King proposes to do, he instantly forms their notions, 
and becomes the same himself. 


34. As the sweet saccharine juice of the sugarcane, thickens itself into the 
form of the sugar candy, so the will of God, becomes compact in the solid 
body of the universe. 


35. As the moisture of the ground and of the vernal season, becomes 
incorporated in vegetable life, bringing forth the fruits and flowers; so the 
energy of the Divine Intellect, turns itself into the living spirit; which shortly 
appears in a corporeal form (of the body and its limbs). 


36. As everything is beheld in our sight, without being separated from its 
idea in the mind; so the inward notion, shows itself in the shape of the visible 
object, like the vision in a dream, which is but a representation of the thoughts 
entertained in our minds. (ie., The thought is the archetype of the 
appearance). 


37. The ideas of self and others, are as granules in the mind, and are like 
the grains of salt, which are produced in the briny grounds from moisture of 
the earth, (i.e., saline particles, produced of terrene and marine serosity). So 
the multitudes of thoughts in the mind, are exactly as the globules of salt or 
sand on the seashore: (almost infinite in their number). 


38. As the serum of the earth appears in various shapes (of minerals and 
vegetables); so the sap of the intellect, produces the infinity of ideas and 
thoughts, growing as trees in the wilderness of the mind. 


39. These trees again shoot forth in branches and leaves, of which there is 
no end; and so is every other world like a forest, supplying its sap to 
innumerable plants, like the thoughts in the mind. 


40. The intellect perceives in itself the existence of everything, as distinctly 
as the inherent power of the living soul exhibits itself in creation. (The power 
of the soul is its reminiscence (sanskdra) of the past, which reproduces and 
presents the former impressions in its subsequent states of birth). 


41. Every one’s intellect, perceives the existence of the world, in the same 
manner as his living soul, happens to meet with everything, as present before 
it, by virtue of its former acts, and their reminiscence stampt in it. 


Note: (It was Plato’s doctrine of the souls’ reminiscence of a former 
apprehension of truth awakened by the traces of ideas which sensation 
discovered in things). 


42. There are some living souls, which meet and join with others and 
propagate their species; and then cease to exist after having lived a long time 
together. 


43. You must observe with your keen-sightedness and well discerning 
mind, in order to look into the different states and thoughts of others. (Read 
the minds in their outward look and indications). 


44. There are thousands of worlds like atoms of earth, contained in the 
mind; as in the ample space of the sky and in the particles of water; and these 
reside in those atoms like oil in the mustard seeds. 


45. When the mind becomes perfect, it comes to be the living being; and 
the intellect being purified, becomes all pervasive. Hence is the union of the 
intellect with the living spirit. 


46. The self-entity of the lotus-born Brahma and all other living beings, is 
only their self-deception; and the sense of the existence of the world, is as a 
protracted dream rising and setting in the mind. 


47. Some beings pass into successive states of existence, as a man passes 
from one dream to another; and they think themselves to be firmly established 
in them, as one supposes to be settled in some house, appearing to him in his 


dream. 


48. Whatever the intellect dwells upon at any time or place, it immediately 
sees the same appearing therein before it; as anything which is seen in dream, 
appears to be true to the dreamer all that time. 


49. The atom of the intellect, contains the particles of all our notions; as the 
seed-vessel contains the farinaceous atoms of the future fruits and flowers, 
and branches and leaves (of very large trees). 


50. I consider the atoms of the intellect and the mind, contained within the 
particles, of the material body, to be both vacuous, and joined in one without 
causing a duality in their nature. 


51. So the intellect conceives within itself and of its own particles, many 
other atomic germs, under the influence of particular times and places and 
actions and circumstances, which cannot be extraneous from itself. (i.e., All 
notions are the making of the mind, and not impressions from without). 


52. It is this particle of the intellect which displays the creation, like the 
vision of a dream before it; and it is this conception, that led the gods Brahma 
and others to the idea of their visible bodies, as it makes the little insects to 
think of their own bodies. (ie., The minds of all display the outer world 
subjectively to all beings). 


53. All that is displayed in this (outer) world, is in reality nothing at all; and 
yet do these living beings, though possessing the particles of intellect in them, 
erroneously conceive the duality of an extraneous existence. 


54. Some intellects (of particular persons), display themselves in their 
bodies, and derive the pleasure of their consciousness, through the medium of 
their eyes and external organs. (i.e., Some men believe their bodily senses as 
the intellect, and no mind besides). 


55. Others look on outward objects as receptacles of the intellect, from the 
belief that the all pervasive, inseparable and imperishable intellect, (soul), 
must abide in all and every one of them. (It is the intellect which contains the 
material world, and not this the other, as many think omnipresence to mean). 


56. Some men view the whole gross world within the body, instead of the 
all pervading intellect of Brahma; as Viswartipa, and these being hardened by 
long habit of thinking so, are plunged in the gulph of error. (These are the 
materialists and the Tantrika microcosmists). 


57. These rove from one error to another, as a man sees one dream after 
another; and roll about in the pit of their delusion, as a stone when hurled 
from a hill downward. 


58. Some persons rely on the union of the body and soul, and others relying 
in the soul alone, are placed beyond the reach of error; while there are many, 
who rely on their consciousness alone, and shine thereby as rational beings. 
(The Cartesians and conscientionalists). 


59. They that perceive in themselves the errors of other people, are to be 
considered as under the influence of false dreams in their sleep, (but mind not 
themselves, that labour under the error as the dreamer). 


60. God being the all pervading spirit of nature, is verily seen in the spirit 
of everybody; and as he is ubiquitous, his omnipresence is present in 
everything in all places. (This doctrine is the source of pantheism, and gives 
rise to universal idolatry, which adores the presiding spirit of the idol, and not 
the idol itself). 


61. God that shines is the living soul of everybody, resides also in the soul 
of that soul, as also in all the living souls and mind which are contained within 
the body of another. (Such as in living beings born inside the body of 
another). 


62. One living being in born in another, and that again within another, like 
the coatings of plantain trees, which grow one under the other over the inmost 
pith. (So God is the inmost marrow of all external lives and souls, which are 
as crusts of the same). 


63. By reverting the cognition of visibles, to the recognition of their 
essence, (tanmdtra), in the invisible plenum, we get rid of our error of the 
reality of the formal world, as we do of the ornament in the material gold. 
(i.e., The substances of gold is the material cause of the formal and 
changeable jewels). — Gloss. The knowledge of the consequent, (pardk), and 
antecedent, (pratyak), must blend in that of the sameness, (samdni), of both, 
(yugupat), the internal, (antar), and external, (bdhya), (existences). 


64. He who does not inquire into the question, “who he is,” and, “what is 
the world,” beside himself, is not liberated in his inward soul, and suffers 
under the continuous fever of an erroneous life. 


65. He is successful in his inquiry, who by his good understanding, comes 
to know how to curb his worldly avarice day by day. 


66. As proper regimen is the best medicine to secure the health of the body; 
so is the habit of keeping the organs of sense under control, the only means of 
edifying the understanding. 


67. He who is discoursive in his words, and not discerning in his mind, is 
like a blazing fire in a picture, (which lightens nobody). No one can be wise 
until he gets rid of his false wit. 


68. As the perception of air, comes by the feeling and not by words of the 
mouth; so wisdom proceeds from the curtailing of desires, (and not by lengthy 
or loud vociferation). 


69. As the ambrosia in the painting is no ambrosial food, nor the fire in a 
picture is burning flame; so a beauty in a drawing is no beauteous maid, and 
wisdom in words is want of wisdom only. 


70. Wisdom serves at first to weaken our passions and enmity, and then 
uproot them at once, and at last it lessens our desires and endeavours, and 
gives an appearance of holiness to its possessor. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
INVESTIGATION INTO THE NATURE OF THE 
LIVING SOUL. 


Argument. The quadruple conditions of the soul in its waking, dreaming, 
sound sleep and its anaesthesia. 


Vasishtha continued: — Brahma is the seed of life, and remains as empty air 
everywhere. Hence there are many kinds of living beings, situated in the 
world within the womb of universal Life. (God is the light and life of all we 
see). 


2. All living beings composed of the dense intellect and soul, contain other 
living animals under one another, like the manifold crusts of the plantain tree, 
and the insects contained in the womb of earth. (So also, the parasite plants 
and worms growing upon the bodies of trees and animals). 


3. The worms and insects, that grow out of the dirt and scum of earth and 
water in the hot season, and appear filthy to our sight, are nevertheless full of 
the particles of intellect, becoming to them as living beings. (Even the dirty 
worms, are full with the holy spirit of god). 


4. According as living beings strive for their progress, so they prosper in 
their lives, agreeably to the various scope of their thoughts and actions. 


5. The worshippers of gods, get to the region of gods, and those of Yakshas 
meet at the place of Yakshas, and the adorers of Brahma ascend to 
Brahmaloka. Resort, therefore, to what is best and the greatest refuge. 


6. So the son of Bhrigu, obtained his liberation at last by the purity of his 
conscience; though he was enslaved of his own nature to the visibles, at his 
first sight of them (as of the Apsara and others). 


7. The child that is born on earth with the purity of its soul at first, becomes 


afterwards of the same nature, as the education he gets herein, and not 
otherwise. 


8. Rama said: — Please Sir, tell me the difference of the states of waking 
and dreaming, and what are the states of waking watchfulness, waking dream 
and waking delusion. 


9. Vasishtha answered: — The waking state is that wherein we have a sure 
reliance; and that is called dreaming, in which we place no certain reliance 
and are believed to be untrue. 


10. That which is seen for a moment (as true), and as it were in the waking 
state, is called a dream; but if the object is seen at a distance of time and 
place, it is said to be waking dream or dreaming wakefulness. 


11. The state of waking dream is again of longer or shorter duration, in 
both of which the visions appear the same at all places and times. 


12. Dreaming also appears as waking, as long as it lasts; but waking seems 
as dreaming, when the objects of its vision are not lasting. 


13. A dream which is understood as an occurrence of the waking state, is 
believed as waking, (as the prolonged dream of Harish Chandra); but the 
inward consciousness of dreaming makes it a dream. 


14. As long as one knows anything to be lasting before him, so long he 
believes himself to be waking, but no sooner is it lost to him, than he thinks 
himself to have been dreaming of it. 


15. Hear now how it is. There is the principle of life in the body, which 
causes it to live; this vital element is an electric force, which is termed the life. 


16. When the body has its activity with the powers of the mind, speech, and 
the other members of action, it is to be understood, that its vital element is put 
to motion by the vital breath which it breathes. 


17. This breath circulating throughout the whole body, gives it the powers 
of sensibility and consciousness, which have their seats in the heart and mind, 
wherein the erroneous conception of the world is hidden. 


18. The mind circulates about the outer world, through the passages of 
sight and other organs; and sees within itself the forms of many mutable 
shapes and figures. 


19. As long as these forms, remain permanent in the mind, it is called the 


waking state. So far have I told you about the cause of waking; now hear me 
expound to you the laws of sleep and dreaming. 


20. When the body is weary with action of its limbs, mind or speech, the 
living element then becomes still, and remains in its composure, with the calm 
and quiet soul residing within the body. 


21. The internal actions of the body and mind being quieted, and the 
motion of the heart being at rest, the living principle becomes as still, as the 
flame of a lamp unshaken by the wind. 


22. The vital power ceases to exert itself in the members of the body, and to 
keep the consciousness awake. The senses of sight and others do not act upon 
their organs, nor receive the sensations from without. 


23. Life lies latent in the inner heart, as the liquid oil resides in the 
sesamum seed; it lies as dormant in the interior part, as frigidity within the 
frost, and fluidity in the clarified butter. 


24. The particle of intellect taking the form of life, after being purified from 
its earthly impurity, mixes with the internal soul, and attains the state of sound 
sleep, as if lulled to insensibility by the cooling breeze. 


25. One feeling the impassibility of his mind, and dealing unconcernedly 
with every one, and reaching to the fourth stage of consciousness, beyond the 
three states of waking, dreaming and sleeping, is said to be turiya or deadened 
in life. 


26. When the vital principle comes again to action, after the enjoyment of 
its sound sleep, either in this or the other world, (i.e., when it is restored to or 
reborn in life); it takes the name of the living element or the mind or self- 
consciousness (in the living body). 


27. This principle of life and thought, sees the multitudinous worlds 
situated with all their vicissitudes within itself, as the large tree and all its 
parts and productions, are observed to be contained within the seed. (This is 
the picture of life in its dreaming state). 


28. When the element of life is put to slight motion, by the breeze of the 
vital breath, it becomes conscious of its self-existence as, “I am’; but the 
motion being accelerated, it finds itself to be flying in the air. 


29. When it is immerged in the water, (phlegm), of the body, it gets the 
feeling of humidity in itself, as a flower perceives its own fragrance. 


30. When it is assailed by the internal bile, it has then the feeling of its 
inward heat, and sees all outward objects with its splenetic humour. 


31. When it is full of blood, it perceives a fiery redness in itself, like that of 
a rubicund rock, or as the crimson red of the setting sun in the sky. 


32. Whatever one desires to have, he sees the same in himself in his sleep; 
and this is by the force of his inward wind acting upon his mind, as upon his 
outward organs. 


33. When the organs are not besieged by external objects, which disturb the 
inward senses of the mind, it indulges itself in the reflexion of many things, 
which is called its dreaming state. 


34. But when the organs are besieged by outward objects, and the mind is 
moved by flatulence, (4 vdyu), to their sight and perception, it is called the 
state of waking. 


35. Now, O great-minded Rama! you have learnt the inward process of 
your mind; but there is no reality in them nor in this existent world, which is 
subject to the evils of death, desire, and destruction. 


CHAPTER XX. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MIND. 


Argument. The delusion of the world and reliance in the true Spirit, which 
is the same with the heart, soul and mind. 


Vasishtha said: — Now Rama! I have told you all this, in order to explain the 
nature of the mind to you, and for no other reason. 


2. Whatever the mind often thinks upon with a strong conviction of its 
reality, it immediately assumes that form, as the iron-ball becomes ignited by 
its contact with fire. 


3. Therefore, the convictions of being or not being, and of receiving or 
rejecting of a thing, depend upon the imagination of the mind; they are neither 
true nor untrue, but are mere fluctuations of the mind. 


4. The mind is the cause of error, and it is the mind which is the framer of 
the world. The mind also stretches itself in the form of the universe, 
(Viswartipa), in its gross state. (The first is the human mind, second the mind 
of Brahma, and the third is the mind of Virdj). 


5. The mind is styled the purusha or regent of the body, which being 
brought under subjection, and directed in the right course, is productive of all 
prosperity (or supernatural powers). 


6. If the body were the purusha, how could the high-minded Sukra, pass 
into various forms in his very many transmigrations (as mentioned before)? 


7. Therefore the mind, (chitta), is the purusha or regent of the body, which 
is rendered sensible, (chetya), by it. Whatever form the mind assumes to itself, 
it undoubtedly becomes the same. 


8. So inquire into what is great, devoid of attributes and error, and which is 
easily attainable by everybody. Be diligent in your inquiry, and you will 


surely succeed to obtain the same. 


9. Hence whatever is seated in the mind, the same comes to pass on the 
body; but what is done by the body never affects the mind. Therefore, O 
fortunate Rama! apply your mind to truth, and shun whatever is untrue. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MIND. 


Argument. Inquiry into the cause of the fulness of the mind. 


Rama said: — Venerable Sir! that art acquainted with the mysteries of all 
things, I have a great doubt swelling in my breast like a huge surge of the sea. 


2. How is it Sir, that any foulness could attach to the mind, when it is 
situated in the eternal purity of the infinite Spirit, which is unbounded by time 
and space. 


3. Again, as there is nothing, nor was there ever, nor anything ever to be at 
any time, or place, beside the entity of the Holy one, how and whence could 
this foulness come in Him? 


4. Vasishtha answered: — Well said Rama! I see your understanding 
approaching to the way of your liberation, and exhaling the sweetness of the 
blossoms of the garden of paradise, (Nandana). 


5. I see your understanding is capable of judging both a priori and a 
posteriori, and is likely to attain that acme which was gained by the gods, 
Sankara and others. 


6. It is not now the proper time and place for you to propose this question, 
it should be adduced when I would come to the conclusion of the subject. 


7. This question should be asked by you when I come to the conclusion, 
and it will be demonstrated to you as clearly as the situation of a place in a 
map or globe, placed in the palm of your hand, (hastdmalaka). 


8. This question of yours will be most suitable at the end, as the sounds of 
the peacock and swan, are best suited to the rainy season and autumn. 


9. The blueness of the sky, is pleasant to look upon at the end of the rainy 
weather; but it is odd to speak of it during the rains. (So the question must 


have its proper place and occasion). 


10. It is best to investigate into the mind by the nature of its acts and 
operations, which tend to be the causes of the repeated births of mankind. 


11. It is by its nature, that the mind has its power of thinking, and leading 
all the organs and members to their several actions, as it is ascertained by the 
seekers of salvation. 


12. Men learned in the Sdstras and eloquent in speech, have given various 
appellations to the mind, in different systems of philosophy, according to its 
various perceptive faculties and different functions and operations in the body. 
(Gloss. — It is called the mind, (mana), from its power of minding, (manana); 
it is termed internal sight, (pasyanti), from its seeing inwardly; it is the ear, 
(srotra), from its hearing, — sravana from within, and so on). 


13. Whatever nature the mind assumes by the fickleness of its thoughts, it 
receives the same name and nature for itself, as the same fleeting air receives 
from its exhaling of different odours. 


14. So the mind delights itself with the thoughts of its desired objects, and 
assimilating itself into their natures. 


15. It receives the same form in which it delights, and which it assumes to 
itself in its imagination. 


16. The body being subject to the mind, is moulded in the same form of the 
mind; just as the wind is perfumed by the odour of the flowerbed, through 
which it passes (and the fragrance it carries). 


17. The inward senses being excited, actuate the outward organs of sense in 
their own ways, as the exciting motion of the winds, drives the dust of the 
earth before their course. 


18. The mind exerts its powers in the action of the external organs in the 
performance of their several functions; just as the flying winds drive the dust 
in different directions. 


19. Such are the acts of the mind which is said to be the root of action, and 
these combine together as inseparably as the flower and its fragrance. 


20. Whatever nature the mind adopts to itself by its wonted habit, the same 
shoots forth in the form of its two kinds of motion, (the will and action). 


21. And according as the mind does its action, and brings about the result 


by its assiduity, in like manner does it enjoy the fruition thereof, and enslaves 
itself to the enjoyment. 


22. It understands that as its right course, which agrees well with its 
temperament, and knows for certain that there is no other way to its real good 
(beside its wonted course). 


23. Minds of different casts follow different pursuits, according to their 
particular proclivities; and employ themselves in the acquisition of wealth and 
virtues, desired objects and liberation according to their best choice. 


24. The mind is ascertained by the Kapila (Sankhya) philosophers, as a 
pure substance, like the immaterial intellect (under the title of pradhdna); and 
this view of it is adopted in their system or Sdstra (in opposition to the 
doctrine of Vedanta). 


25. These men relying on the error of their own hypothesis, inculcate their 
supposed view of the mind to others, as the only light to guide them in the 
way of their salvation. 


26. But the professors of Vedanta doctrines, acknowledge the mind as 
Brahma himself; and preach peace and self-control, as the only means of the 
attainment of liberation. 


27. But that there is no other way to the salvation of the supposed mind 
(than by these means), is an ipse dixit of the Vedanta, and an assumed dogma, 
(kalpitaniyama), as those of other schools. 


28. The Vijnanavadi philosophers also, have ascertained and upheld peace 
and self-government as the leaders to liberation, but this too is an effusion of 
their erroneous understandings. 


29. Thus all sects give out their own views, in the false rules they have 
adopted for the salvation of their supposed minds; and assert that there is no 
other way to it, beside what is laid down by them. 


30. So the Arhatas, (Buddhists), and the other sectarians, have proposed a 
variety of fictitious methods for the liberation of the mind, of their arbitrary 
will in their respective Sdstras. 


31. The arbitrary rules of the learned, and those unsupported by the Srutis, 
are as numerous and varying from one another, as the bubbles of clear water, 
(but are never lasting like the dicta of the holy writ). 


32. Know mighty Rama, the mind to be the source of all these rules and 


methods, as the sea is the source of every kind of gem (lying hid in its 
bosom). 


33. There is no innate sweetness in the sugarcane nor bitterness in the 
nimba, both of which are sucked by insects; nor is there any heat or cold 
inherent in the sun or moon, (as both of them are peopled by gods and spirits). 
It is the intrinsic habit of the mind that makes the difference. 


34. Those that want to enjoy the unadulterated happiness of their souls, 
should habituate their minds to assimilate themselves to that happy state, and 
they are sure to have the same. 


35. The mind having fled from the sphere of the phenomenal world, 
becomes exempt from all its pleasure and pain, like the fledged bird flying in 
the air by casting its shell and leaving its cage below. 


36. O sinless Rama! Cherish no fondness for the phenomenal world, which 
is an unreal illusion, full of fear and unholiness, and is stretched out to ensnare 
the mind. 


37. The wise have styled our consciousness of the world as a magic scene, 
(mdyd), an appearance of ignorance, — avidyd, a mere thought, (bhdvand), 
and the cause and effect of our acts. 


38. Know that it is the delusive mind, which stretches the visible world 
before thee, rub it off, therefore, as dirty mud from the mind. 


39. This visible appearance which naturally appears before thee in the form 
of the world, is called the production of ignorance by the wise. 


40. Men being deluded by it, are at a loss to know their real good, as the 
blinded eye is incapable to perceive the brightness of the day. 


41. It is the contemplation of objects, (sankalpa), that presents the 
phenomena to our view, like arbors in the empty sky; and it is their 
incogitancy, (asankalpana), which effaces their images from the inward and 
outward sights. 


42. It is the abstract meditation of the thoughtful Yogi, that weakens the 
outward impressions, and by dissociating the soul from all external things, 
keeps it steady and sedate in itself. 


43. The mind being inclined to the right view of things, by its abstraction 
from the unreal sights, produces the clearness of the understanding, and an 
insouciant tranquility of the soul. 


44. The mind that is regardless of realities as well as of unrealities, (that is 
of its inward and outward reflections), and is insensible of pleasure and pain, 
feels in itself the delight of its singleness or unity. 


45. Application of the mind to unworthy thoughts, and to the internal or 
external sights of things, debars the soul from tasting the sweets of its soleity, 
(apart from other considerations). 


46. The mind that is subject to its endless desires, is like the clear 
firmament obscured by the clouds; and ranges in the maze of doubt between 
truth and untruth, as of supposing the rope for the serpent. 


47. Man obstructs to himself the sight of the clear firmament of his 
intellect, by the mist of his doubts; but he thinks it as unobstructed by his 
error, and indulges the fancies of his imagination which tends the more to his 
error. 


48. He takes the true, incorruptible, and supreme Brahma in a different light 
(of base and corruptible things), as one mistakes one thing for another in the 
dark or in his error. 


49. Having got rid of his false imagination, man comes to the knowledge of 
true God and his happiness, as one freed from his false apprehension of a tiger 
in a copse, is set at rest with himself. 


50. The bugbear of one’s (soul’s) imprisonment in the vacuity, (cavity), of 
the body, is dispersed by his insight into it, as the fear of a lion lurking in the 
jungle, is removed upon finding no such thing therein. 


51. So on looking deeply, you will find no bondage in the world; the 
notions that this is the world and this is myself, are only errors of the mind. 


52. It is flight of fancy, that fills the mind with chimeras of good and evil; 
just as the shade of evening, presents spectres of vetdla ghosts to little 
children. 


53. Our fancies alight on us at one time, and depart at another, and assume 
different forms at will; just as our consorts act the part of wives in our youth, 
and of nurses in our old age. 


54. She acts the part of a house wife in her management of household 
affairs, and taken as a mistress, she embraces us in her bosom, (or She hangs 
on us by the neck). 


55. And like an actress, the mind forgets to display its parts, when it plays 


another, so everybody is betaken by the thoughts he has in his head, in neglect 
of others which are absent. 


56. The ignorant do not perceive the self-same unity, in all things he 
beholds in the world; but they view everything in the light, as they have its 
idea imprinted in their minds. 


57. They meet also with the results of the forms, which they have in view 
for the time; though they are not in reality what they seem to be, nor are they 
entirely false, (being the idealities of their mind). 


58. Man views everything in the same manner as he thinks it in himself; as 
his fancy of an elephant in the sky, makes him view the elephants in clouds. 


59. He believes these elephants pursuing their mates, in his thought; so it is 
the thought, that gives the outward forms of things. 


60. Rama! repel your drowsiness, and behold the supreme soul in thy soul; 
and be as a bright gem by repelling the shadows of all external things. 


61. It is impossible, O Rama, that one so enlightened as thyself, will 
receive the reflexion of the world, as dull matter like others, (rather than a 
reflexion of the Spirit). 


62. Being certain of its immateriality, never taint thy mind with its outward 
colouring, or the knowledge of its reality; but know it as no way distinct from 
the Supreme Spirit. 


63. Mind in thyself the Being that is without beginning or end, and 
meditate on the Spirit in Spirit. Do not let the reflexions of thy mind, imbue 
their tinge in the pure crystal of thy soul. 


64. Be on thy guard, as never to allow the reflexions of your mind, to taint 
the clear crystal of thy soul; but remain unmindful of the visibles, and 
regardless of all worldly desires, (which are causes of misery and repeated 
births and deaths). 


CHAPTER XXII. 
RESTING IN SUPREME FELICITY. 


Argument. Remission of the sins of the enlightened, and their sight of the 
pure Spirit. 


Vasishtha continued: — Men of sound judgment, are freed from mental 
perturbation, and are perfected in their mastery over themselves, by 
restraining the flight of the mind, and fastening it to its inward cogitation. 
(Gloss. — The Yogi given to meditation is master of his soul and mind). 


2. They swerve from the sight of the visibles as unworthy of their notice, 
and seek after the knowledge of their chief good; they behold the all-seeing 
God in their mental and external sights, and have no perception of the 
unintelligent perceptibles. (i.e., They perceive the noumenon only in the 
phenomenon). 


3. They are dormant amidst the thick gloom of error, overspreading the 
mazy paths of life, and are awake under the transcendent light (of divine 
knowledge), requiring the vigilance of the living. 


4. They are utterly indifferent to the sweet pleasures of this life, as also to 
the cheerless prospects of future enjoyments (in the next world). (The Yogi is 
equally averse to the present and prospective pleasures of both worlds). 


5. They are mixed, (like salt), with the water of spiritual (divine) unity, and 
in the boundless ocean of omnipresence; and they melt away as the ice in a 
river, by their rigorous austerities, resembling the vigorous heat of the sun. 


6. All their restless desires and passions are set to rest, at the disappearance 
of their ignorance; as the turbulent waves of rivers subside of themselves, in 
the absence of stormy clouds. 


7. The net of desires, which ensnares men as birds in their traps, is cut 
asunder by a spirit of dispassionateness; as the meshes of a net, are torn into 


twain, by the teeth of a mouse. 


8. As the seeds of kata fruits, serve to purify the foul water; so doth 
philosophy tend to expurgate human nature, from all its errors. 


9. The mind that is freed from passions, from worldly connections and 
contentions, and from dependance on any one (person or thing), is liberated 
also from the bonds of ignorance and error, as a bird is set free from its 
imprisoning cage. (True freedom is the freedom from all cares, concerns, and 
connections, which are but bondages of the soul). 


10. When the disturbances of doubts are settled, and the wandering of 
curiosity is over, it is then that the full moon of internal fulness, sheds its 
lustre over the mind. 


11. As the mind has its true magnanimity, after its setting from the height 
of its dignity and high-mindedness, so it begins to have its equanimity in a 
state, resembling the calmness of the sea after the storm. 


12. As long as the shadow of solicitude, hangs over the mind, it is darkened 
and stupified and broken in the heart, until the sun of inappetency rises to 
dispel its gloom. 


13. It is by the sunshine of the intellect, that the lotus-bed of intelligence, 
shines in its pure lustre; and unfolds the foliage of its virtues before the 
dawning light above it. 


14. Intelligence is charmer of hearts and delighter of all in the world; it is 
fostered by the quality of goodness, (sattwaguna), as the moon becomes full 
by her increasing digits. 


15. What more shall I say on this subject, than that he who knows the 
knowable (God), has his mind expanded as the sphere of heaven, which has 
no beginning nor end. 


16. The mind which is enlightened by reasoning, is as exalted in its nature, 
as to take pity even on the great gods Hari, Hara, Brahma, and Indra, (on 
account of their incessant avocations in the management of the world). 


17. They are far from tasting the happiness of the egoistic Yogis, who are 
continually seeking to quench their thirst (after pleasure), from the waters 
appearing in the mirage, as the parching deer, (running to them by mistake). 


18. It is the heart’s desire of all beings, that subjects them to repeated births 
and deaths, which cause the ignorant only and not the wise, to appear and 


disappear like waves of the sea. 


19. The world presents no other show in its course, except that of the 
appearance and disappearance of bodies, which are now seen to move about at 
the sport of time, and now fall as a prey to it forever. 


20. But the spiritual body, (the spirit or one knowing the spirit), is neither 
born nor dies in this world; nor is it affected by the decoration or perdition of 
the material body; but remains unchanged as the vacuity of a pot, both when it 
is in existence or broken to pieces. (The vacuous soul is aloof from the body). 


21. As the understanding rises with its cooling moon-beams within us, it 
dispels the mist of erroneous desires rising before us like the mirage of the 
dreary desert. 


22. So long does the pageant of the world, present its dusky appearance to 
our view, as we do not deign to consider the questions, “what am I, and what 
are all these about me?” (That is, “whether I or these or all other things are 
true or false?’’) 


23. He sees rightly, who sees his body as an apparition of his error, and the 
abode of all evils; and that it does not serve for the spiritual meditation of his 
soul and his maker. 


24. He sees rightly, who sees that his body is the source of all the pain and 
pleasure, which betides one at different times and places, and that it does not 
answer his purpose of spiritual edification. 


25. He sees rightly, who sees the Ego to pervade the infinite space and 
time, and as the source of all accidents and events, which incessantly take 
place in them. (The Ego is ubiquitous). 


26. He knows rightly, who knows the Ego to be as minute as a millionth or 
billionth part of the point of a hair, and pervading all over the infinity of space 
and eternity of time. 


27. He perceives rightly, who perceives the universal soul to be permeated 
in all the various objects of his sight; and knows them as sparks of the 
Intellectual Light. 


28. He perceives rightly, who perceives within himself the omnipotence of 
the infinite Spirit, to be present in all the states and conditions of beings, and 
the self-same Intellect to abide in and preside over all. 


29. He understands rightly, who understands by his wisdom, that he is not 


his body, which is subject to diseases and dangers, to fears and anxieties, and 
to the pain and pangs of old age and death. 


30. He understands rightly, who understands his soul to stretch above and 
below and all about him; whose magnitude has no bounds nor an equal to it. 


31. He knows, full well who kens his soul as a string, (Sutrdtmd), to which 
all things are strung as gems in a jewel; and that it is not the mind or heart, 
which is seated in the brain or bosom. 


32. He kens rightly, who weens neither himself nor anything else as 
existent, except the imperishable-Brahma; and who knows himself as living 
between the reality and unreality, (Z.e., betwixt the present and absent, and 
between the visible and invisible. — Gloss). 


33. He is right, who beholds what they call the three worlds, to be but parts 
of his self, and have been rolling about him as the waves of the sea. 


34. He is wise, who looks with pity upon the frail world, and 
compassionates the earth as his younger sister. 


35. That great soul looks brightly upon the earth, who has withdrawn his 
mind from it, by retrenching his reliance on his egoism or tuism, (i.e., both on 
his subjectivity and objectivity). 


36. He sees the truth, who finds his body and the whole world, filled by the 
colossus figure of the Intellect, without the opposition of any sensible object. 


37. He that looks on the states of misery and happiness, which attend on 
worldly life, to be but the fluctuating conditions of the ego, has no cause to 
repine or rejoice at them. 


38. He is the right-sighted man, who sees himself situated amidst the world, 
which is filled with the divine spirit, (and the endless joy emanating from it); 
he has nothing to desire or dislike in this (or in his future) state of existence. 


39. He is the right (discerning) man, who has weakened his estimation and 
dislike of what is desirable and disgusting to him in the world, which is full of 
the essence of that being, whose nature is beyond comprehension and 
conception. (The world being full with the presence of God, we have nothing 
to like or dislike, or to take or shun in it). 


40. That great-souled man is a great god, whose soul, like the all-pervading 
sky, extends over all, and penetrates through every state of existence, without 
receiving the tincture of any. (Who is informed with all and untinged by any). 


41. I bow down to that great soul, which has passed beyond the states of 
light, darkness, and fancy, (i.e., the state of waking or life, sleep or death, and 
dreaming or transmigration, and which is situated in a state of brightness and 
tranquility in supreme felicity or heavenly bliss). 


42. I bow down to that Siva, of transcendental understanding; whose 
faculties are wholly engrossed in the meditation of that eternal Being, who 
presides over the creation, destruction, and preservation of the universe, and 
who is manifest in all the various wondrous and beauteous grandeurs of 
nature. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
MEDITATION OF THE WONDERS IN THE 
REALM OF THE BODY. 


Argument. The dominion of the enlightened man over the realm of his 
Body, and the pleasure of the government of the mind. 


Vasishtha continued: — The man that is liberated in this life, and is settled in 
the Supreme state of felicity, is not tarnished by his reigning over the realm of 
his body, and turning about like a wheel. 


2. The body of the wise man is as a princedom to him, and calculated for 
his benefit and no disadvantage. It is comparable with the bower of a holy 
hermit, for the consummation of his fruition and liberation. 


3. Rama said: — How do you call, O great sage! the body to be the 
dominion of a man, and how the Yogi can enjoy his princely felicity in it? 


4. Vasishtha replied: — Beautiful is this city of the body, and fraught with 
every good to mankind, and being enlightened by the light of the mind, it is 
productive of endless blessings in both worlds. 


5. The eyes are the windows of this city, letting out the light for the sight of 
distant worlds, the two arms are as the two valves of this city-gate, with the 
hands like latches reaching to the knees. 


6. The hairs on the body are as the moss and grass on the walls, and the 
porous skin resembles the netted covering of the palace; the thighs and legs 
are as the columns of the edifice, and the feet with the ankles and toes, are as 
pedestals of the pillars. 


7. The lines marked under the soles of the feet, are as inscriptions marked 
on the foundation stone, and upon those at the base of the pedestals of the 
pillars; and the outer skin which covers the flesh, marrow, veins and arteries, 


and the joints of the body, is as the beautiful plaster of the building, hiding the 
mortar and bricks inside. 


8. The middle part of the body above the two thick thighs, contains the 
aqueducts, beset by the hairy bushes about them, and likening to rivers 
running amidst a city, between rows of trees on both sides of the banks. 


9. The face is as the royal garden beautified by the eye-brows, forehead, 
and the lips; the glancing of the eyes, are as the blooming lotuses; and the 
cheeks are as flat planes in it. 


10. The broad bosom is as a lake with the nipples like buds of lotuses; the 
streaks of hairs on the breast, are as its herbage, and the shoulders are as the 
projecting rocks, (ghats), upon it. 


11. The belly is the store-house, which is eager to receive the delicious 
articles of food; and the long lungs of the throat, are blown loudly by the 
internal winds. 


12. The bosom is considered as the depository of jewels (from their being 
worn upon it); and the nine orifices of the body, serve as so many windows for 
the breathing of the citizens. 


13. There is the open mouth like the open door-way, with its tooth-bones 
slightly seen as its gratings; and the tongue moving in the door way like a 
naked sword, is as the projecting tongue of the goddess Kali, when she 
devours her food. (The voracity of the goddess is well known whence she is 
called Kali, the consort of the all devouring Kala, — death). 


14. The ear-holes are covered by hairs like long grass, and the broad back 
resembles a large plain, beset by rows of trees on its borders. 


15. The two private passages serve as sewers and drains of the city, to let 
out its dirt, and the heart is the garden-ground, where the passions parade 
about as ladies. (Or, the region of the mind is the garden-ground for the 
rambling thoughts as ladies). 


16. Here the understanding is fast bound in chains as a prisoner, and the 
organs of sense are let loose as monkeys to play about. The face is as a flower 
garden, the smiles whereof are its blooming blossoms. 


17. The life of the man, knowing the proper use of his body and mind, is 
prosperous in everything; it is attended by happiness and advantages, and no 
disadvantage whatever. 


18. This body is also the source of infinite troubles to the ignorant; but it is 
the fountain of infinite happiness to the wise man. 


19. Its loss is no loss to the wise; but its continuance is the cause of 
continued happiness to the wise man. 


20. The body serves as a chariot to the wise, who can traverse everywhere 
by riding in it; and can produce and procure everything conducive to his 
welfare and liberation. 


21. The possession of the body, is of no disadvantage to the wise man; who 
can obtain by it, all the objects of his hearing and seeing, of his touch and 
smelling, and his friends and prosperity. 


22. It is true that the body is subject to a great amount of pain and pleasure; 
but the wise man can well bear with them, (knowing them to be concomitant 
to human life). 


23. Hence the wise man reigns over the dominion of his body, without any 
pain or trouble, in the same manner as one remains the lord of his house, 
without any anxiety or disturbance. 


24. He is not addicted to licentiousness like a high mettled steed; nor parts 
with the auspicious daughter of his prudence, from his avarice after some 
poisonous plant. 


25. The ignorant can see the cities of others, but not observe the gaps and 
breaks of their own. It is better to root out the fears of our worldly enemies, 
(passions), from the heart, than live under their subjection. 


26. Beware of diving in the perilous river, which flows fast by the dreary 
forest of this world, with the current of desire, whirl-pools of avarice, and the 
sharks of temporal enjoyment. 


27. Men often bathe their outer bodies in holy streams, without looking to 
the purification of their inward souls; and they shave their persons at the 
confluence of rivers with the sea, in hopes of obtaining their object. (Bathing 
in the sauger, (Sagora sangama stdna), is said to confer every object of 
desire). 


28. All sensual people are averse to the unseen happiness of the next world; 
and dwell on the pleasure of their own imagination in the inward recesses of 
their minds. 


29. This city of the body is pleasant to one, acquainted with his spiritual 


nature, because he deems it as the paradise of Indra, which is filled with 
pleasurable fruits, as well as of those of immortality (or future life and bliss). 


30. All things depend on the existence of the city of the body, yet nothing is 
lost by its loss since the mind is the seat of everything. These bodily cities 
which fill the earth, cannot be unpleasant to anybody. 


31. The wise man loses nothing by loss of the citadel of his body; as the 
vacuity in a vessel is never lost, by the breaking of the vessel. (So the death of 
the body, does not destroy the vacuous soul). 


32. As the air contained in a pot, is not felt by the touch like the pot itself, 
so is the living soul, which resides in the city of the body. 


33. The ubiquitous soul being situated in this body, enjoys all worldly 
enjoyments, until at last it comes to partake of the felicity of liberation, which 
is the main object it has in view. 


34. The soul doing all actions, is yet no doer of them; but remains as 
witness of whatever is done by the body; and sometimes presides over the 
actions actually done by it. 


35. The sportive mind rides on the swifting car of the body, as one mounts 
on a locomotive carriage for the place of its destination, and passes in its 
unimpeded course to distant journeys. (So the body leads one to his journey 
from this world to the next). 


36. Seated there, it sports with its favourite and lovely objects of desire, 
which are seated in the heart as its mistresses. (The embodied mind enjoys the 
pleasurable desires, rising before it from the recess of the heart). 


37. These two lovers reside side by side in the same body, as the moon and 
the star visékha, remain gladly in the same lunar mansion. 


38. The sage, like the sun, looks down from above the atmosphere of the 
earth, on the hosts of mortals that have been hewn down by misery, like heaps 
of brambles and branches scattered in the woods. 


39. The sage has the full satisfaction of his desires, and full possession of 
his best riches, and shines as the full-moon without the fear of waning. 


40. The worldly enjoyments of the wise, do not tend to vitiate their nature; 
as the poisonous draught of Siva, was not capable of doing him any injury. 
(The baneful effects of worldliness, do not affect the wise). 


41. The food which is habitual to one, (as the poison of Siva), is as 
gratifying to him; as a thief by long acquaintance forgets his thievishness, and 
becomes friendly to his neighbours. 


42. The wise man looks upon the separation of his friends and possessions, 
in the light of the departures, (exits), of the visitant men and women and 
actors and actresses, at the end of a play from the theatre. 


43. As passengers chance to meet unexpectedly, at the exhibition of a play 
on their way, so the wise people look unconcernedly, at their meeting with 
and separation from the occurrences of life. 


44. As our eye-sight falls indifferently on all objects about us, so doth the 
wise man look unconcernedly upon all things and transactions of life. 


45. The wise man is self-sufficient in all conditions of life; he neither 
rejects the earthly blessings that are presented to him; nor longs or strives hard 
for what is denied to him. 


46. The regret of longing after what one does not possess, as also the fear 
of losing what he is in possession of, does not vacillate the mind of the wise; 
as the plumes of the dancing peacock do not oscillate the unshaking mountain. 


47. The wise man reigns as a monarch, free from all fears and doubts, and 
devoid of all cares and curiosity; and with a mind freed from false fancies (of 
subtle and gross bodies). 


48. The soul which is immeasurable in itself, is situated in the Supreme 
Soul, as the boundless Milky ocean, is contained in the body of the one 
universal ocean. 


49. Those that are sober in their minds, and tranquil in their spirits, laugh to 
scorn the vile beasts of sensuality as madmen; as also those that have been 
bemeaned by the meanness of their sensual appetites to the state of mean 
reptiles. 


50. The sensualist, eager for the gratification of his senses, are as much 
ridiculed by the wise, as a man who takes to him a woman deserted by 
another, is derided by his tribe. 


51. The unwise man becomes wise by relinquishing all the pleasures of his 
body, and subduing the emotions of his mind by his reason; as the rider 
subdues the ungovernable elephant by the goad, (ankusa), in his hand. 


52. He whose mind is bent to the enjoyment of carnal pleasures, should first 


of all check the inclination, as they draw out the poisonous plants from the 
ground. 


53. The well governed mind, being once let loose, recurs like a spoiled boy 
to its former habits; as the tree withered in summer heat, grows luxuriant at a 
slight rain-fall. 


54. That which is full out of its time, does not become fuller in its season; 
as the river which is ever full, receives no addition in the rains over its 
fulness. (The full never becomes fuller). 


55. The mind that is naturally greedy, wishes for more with all its fulness; 
as the sea with the sufficiency of its water to overflood the earth, receives the 
rain waters and the outpourings of innumerable rivers in its insatiate womb. 
(The greedy mind like the insatiate sea, is never full). 


56. The mind that is restrained in its desires, is gladdened at its little gains; 
and these being increased are reckoned as blessings by the stinted mind. 


57. A captive prince when enfranchised, is content with his morsel of 
bread, who ere before had been discontented with a realm in his free and 
uncaptured state. 


58. With the writhing of your hands and gnashing of your teeth, and 
twisting of your limbs and body, you must chastise your reprobate members 
and mind. (So is Plato said to have chastised his angry self). 


59. The brave and wise man, who intends to overcome his enemies, must 
first of all strive to subdue the internal enemies of his own heart and mind, and 
the members of his body. (Subdue yourself, ere you subdue others). 


60. Those men are reckoned the most prosperous, and best disposed in their 
minds in this earth, who have the manliness to govern their minds, instead of 
being governed by them. 


61. I revere those pure and holy men, who have quelled the huge and 
crooked serpent of their minds, lying coiling in the cave of their hearts; and 
who rest in the inward tranquility and serenity of their souls. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
THE NON-ENTITY OF THE MIND. 


Argument. The means of repressing the force of the senses, and of curbing 
the sensual desires of men. 


Vasishtha continued: — The vast domain of death, in region of hell, is full of 
the furious elephants of our sins; and the ungovernable enemies of the senses 
with the arrows of desires. (i.e., Hell is the abode of sinners, sensualists, and 
the greedy). 


2. Our senses are our invincible enemies, being the sources of all misdeeds 
and wicked actions. They are the ungrateful miscreants against the body, in 
which they have found their refuge. 


3. The roving senses like flying birds, have found their nest in the body; 
whence with their outstretched wings of right and wrong, they pounce on their 
prey like vultures. 


4. He who can entrap these greedy birds of the senses, under the snare of 
his right reason, is never ensnared in his person in the trap of sin, but breaks 
its bonds as the elephant does his fetters. 


5. He who indulges himself in sensual pleasures which are pleasant at first, 
will have to be cloyed in them in process of time. (Pleasure is followed by 
pain. Or, Rills of pleasure not sincere.) 


6. He who is fraught with the treasure of knowledge in his frail body, is not 
to be overcome by his inward enemies of sensual appetites. 


7. The kings of earth are not so happy in their earthly citadels, as the lords 
of the cities of their own bodies, and the masters of their own minds. (Mastery 
over one’s self, is better than over a realm). 


8. He who has brought the senses under his slavery, and reduced the enemy 


of his mind to subjection, has the blossoms of his understanding ever 
blooming within him as in the vernal meadow. 


9. He who has weakened the pride of his mind, and subdued the enemies of 
his senses, has his desires all shrunken as the lotuses in the cold weather. 


10. So long do the demons of our desires, infest the region of our hearts, as 
we are unable to bring the mind under the subjection of our knowledge of the 
True one. 


11. He is the faithful servant, who acts according to the will of his master, 
and he is the true minister who does good services to his prince. He is the best 
general who has command over the force of his own body, and that is the best 
understanding which is guided by reason. 


12. The wife is loved for her endearments, and the father is revered for his 
protection of the child. A friend is valued by his confidence, and the mind for 
its wisdom. 


13. The mind is called our father, for its enlightening our understanding 
with the light of the Sdstras derived by itself, and for its leading us to 
perfection by losing itself in the Supreme spirit. (The mind like the father, is 
the instructor and bequeather of its all to man, ere it is extinct in the universal 
soul). 


14. The mind that has well observed and considered all things, that is 
enlightened and firm in its belief, and is employed in laudable pursuits, is 
verily a valuable gem within the body. 


15. The mind as a counsellor of our good, teaches us how to fell down the 
tree of our transmigration, and produce the arbour of our future bliss. 


16. Such is the gem of the mind, O Rama! unless it is soiled by the dirt and 
filth of sin and vice, when it requires to be washed and cleansed with the 
water of reason, in order to throw its light on thee. 


17. Be not dormant to cultivate reason as long as you abide in the darksome 
abode of this world; nor thrust yourself to every accident, which awaits upon 
the ignorant and unreasonable men. 


18. Do not overlook the mist of error which overspreads this world of 
illusion, abounding with multitudes of mishaps and mischiefs. (Harm watch, 
harm catch. Hold arms, against harms). 


19. Try to cross over the wide ocean of the world, by riding on the strong 


barque of your reason, espying the right course by your discretion, against the 
currents of your sensual desires. 


20. Know your body to be a frail flower, and all its pleasure and pain to be 
unreal; so never take them for realities, as in the instance of the snare, snake, 
and the matting; but remain above sorrowing for anything as in the instance of 
Bhima and Bhasa, (which will be shortly related to you). 


21. Give up, O high minded Rama! your misjudgments of the reality of 
yourself, and of this and that thing; but direct your understanding to the 
knowledge of the Reality which is beyond all these; and by forsaking your 
belief and reliance in the mind, continue in your course of eating and drinking 
as before. 


CHAPTER XXvV. 
NARRATIVE OF DAMA, VYALA AND KATA. 


Argument. The demon Sambara defeated by the deities, and his production 
of other demons by magic and sorcery. 


Vasishtha said: — O intelligent Rama! that dost shine as the delight of 
mankind in this world, and endeavourest after the attainment of thy chief 
good, by the accomplishment of thy best objects. 


2. Do not let the instance of the demons, Dama and VydAla, or the snare and 
snake, apply to thy case; but try to extricate thyself from vain sorrowing (at 
the miseries of the world), by the lesson of fortitude as given in the story of 
Bhima and Bhasa. 


3. Rama asked: — What is that parable of the snare and snake, which thou 
sayest must not apply to my case? Please relate it in full, to remove the 
sorrows of my mind and of all mankind. 


4. And how is that fortitude which thou pointest out for my imitation, from 
the instance of Bhima and Bhasa, in order to get rid from all earthly sorrow? 


5. Kindly relate the whole, and enlighten me with thy purifying words, as 
the roaring of the rainy clouds, serves to alleviate the summer heat of 
peacocks. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me Rama! relate to you both these anecdotes, 
that you may derive the benefit of aping according the same. 


7. There lived one Sambara, — the chief of demons, and a profound 
sorcerer in a subterraneous cell, filled with enchanting wonders like a sea of 
gems. 


8. He constructed a magic city in the sky, with gardens and temples of gods 
in it; and artificial suns and moons emblazoning its vault. 


9. It was beset with rich stones, resembling the gems of the Sumeru 
mountain; and the palace of the demon was full with opulence and treasures 
of every kind. 


10. The beauties in his seraglio, vied with the celestial dames in their 
charming strains; and the arbors of his pleasure garden, were shaded by an 
awning of bright moon-beams on high. 


11. The blue lotuses blooming in his bed room, put to blush the blue-eyed 
maids of his court; and the gemming swans in the lakes, cackled about the 
beds of golden lotuses in them. 


12. The high branches of aureate plants, bore the blossoms of artificial 
lotuses on them; and the rows of Karanga arbours dropped down showers of 
mandara flowers on the ground. 


13. His garden-house consisted both of cold and hot baths, and 
refrigeratories and fire-places for the hot and cold seasons; and the tarku (?) 
weapons of the demons, had baffled the arms of Indra himself. 


14. The flower-gardens on all sides, had surpassed the mandara groves of 
paradise; and the magical skill of the demon, had set rows of sandal trees, 
with their encircling snakes all around. 


15. The inner compound which was strewn over with gold dust, vanquished 
the glory of heaven; and the court-yard of the palace, was filled with heaps of 
flowers up to the knee. 


16. The earthen figure of Siva which was exposed for show, had surpassed 
the image of Hari holding his discus and the mace; and the gems sparkling as 
fire-flies in the inside apartment, resembled the twinkling stars in the arena of 
heaven. 


17. The dark night of the subterrene dwelling, was lightened by a hundred 
moon-lights like the starry heaven, and he chaunted his martial songs before 
his idol deity. 


18. His magical elephant, drove away the Airavata of Indra; and his inward 
apartment was hoarded with the precious treasures of the three worlds. 


19. All wealth and prosperity and grandeur and dignity, paid their homage 
to him; and the whole host of demons, honoured him as their commander. 


20. The umbrage of his arms, gave shelter to the whole body of demons; 
and he was the receptacle of all sagacity, and reservoir of every kind of 


treasure. 


21. This destroyer of the Devas, (gods), had a gigantic and _ terrific 
appearance; and commanded a large army of Asura-demons to defeat the 
Sura-deities. 


22. The gods also sought every opportunity of harassing the demoniac 
force, whenever this exorcist demigod, went to sleep or somewhere out of his 
city. 


23. This enraged Sambara to a degree, that he broke the trees in his rage, 
and employed his generals for protection of his legions. 


24. The Devas finding their fit opportunities, killed the demons one by one; 
as the aerial hawks pounce upon and kill the feeble and timid sparrows. 


25. The king of the demons then appointed other generals over his army, 
and they were as swift-footed and hoarse sounding as the waves of the sea. 


26. The Devas destroyed these also in a short time; when the leader of the 
demon band pursued his enemies to their station above the heavens. 


27. The gods fled from their heavenly abode for fear of them, as the 
timorous deer fly from before the sight of Siva’s and Gauri’s bull into the 
thick thickets. 


28. The gods were weakened with weeping, and the faces of Apsaras were 
suffused in tears. The demon saw the heavenly abode abandoned by the 
celestials, as it was the desolation of the world. 


29. He wandered about in his rage, and plundered and took away all the 
valuables of the place. He burnt down the cities of the regents of heaven, and 
then returned to his own abode. 


30. The enmity between the deities and demons, was so inveterate on both 
sides, that it forced the Devas to quit their heavenly abodes, and hide 
themselves in distant parts of the world. 


31. But the enraged gods, succeeded at last by their perseverance, to defeat 
and slay all the generals and combatants, that were set against them by 
Sambara. 


32. The discomfited demon, then gave vent to his fury, and began to 
breathe out living fire from his nostrils like a burning mountain. 


33. He after much search in the three worlds, found out the hiding place of 
the gods, as a wicked man succeeds in his purpose by his best endeavours. 


34. Then he produced by his sorcery three very strong and fearful Asuras 
for the protection of his army, with their hideous appearances as that of death. 


35. These horrible leaders of his army, being produced in his magic, flew 
upward with their enormous bodies, resembling the flying mountains of old. 


36. They had the names of Dama, — the snare, Vydla, — the snake, and 
Kata, — the mat given them for their entrapping, enfolding and enwrapping 
the enemy, according to the demon’s wish. 


37. They were preadamite beings and devoid of changing desires; and the 
want of their prior acts (like those of the human kind), made them move about 
as free as spiritual beings in one uniform tenor of their course. 


38. These were not born as men from the seeds of their previous acts, with 
solid and substantial bodies; but mere artificial forces and airy forms, as 
facsimiles of the images in the demon’s mind. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
BATTLE OF THE DEITIES AND DEMONS. 


Argument. The war of the gods with the Demons, rising from the Rasatala 
or Infernal regions. 


Vasishtha continued: — So saying, the chief of the demons despatched his 
generals Dama, VyAala, and Kata, to lead his armies for the destruction of the 
Deities upon earth. 


2. The demoniac army rose out of the foaming sea and infernal caverns, in 
full armour and begirt with fiendish arms; and then bursting forth with 
hideous noise, soared aloft with their huge bodies, like mountains flying on 
high. 


3. Their monstrous and mountainous bodies, hid the disk of the sun in the 
sky; and their stretching arms smote him of his rays. They increased also in 
their number and size under the leadership of Dama, Vyala, and Kata. 


(This is the war of the Gods and Titans, wherein Sambara is the Satan, and 
his generals are the devils, Damon, Baal or Bel, and etc.)? 


4. Then the dreadful hosts of the celestials also, issued out from the forests 
and caverns of the heavenly mountain, — Meru, like torrents of the great 
deluge. 


5. The forces under the flags of the deities and demons, fought together 
with such obstinacy, that it seemed to be an untimely and deadly struggle 
between the gods and Titans as of the prior world. 


6. The heads of the decapitated warriors, decorated with shining earrings, 
fell down on the ground like the orbs of the sun and moon; which being shorn 
of their beams as at the end of the world, were rolling in the great abyss of 
chaos. 


7. Huge hills were hurled by the heroes, with the hoarse noise of roaring 
lions; and were blown up and down, by the blast of an all destroying tornado. 


8. The broken weapons of the warriors, fell on mountain tops, and ground 
them to granules; that fell down as hailstones upon the lions, that had been 
resting by their sides below. 


9. The sparks of fire that flew about by the commingled clashing of the 
weapons, were as the scattered stars of the sky, flying at random on the last 
day of dissolution. 


10. The ghosts of Vetdlas as big as the tdlas or palmtrees, were beating the 
tdla or time of their giddy dance, with the tdli or clapping of their palms, over 
the heaps of carnage, floating on floods of blood flowing as a sanguinary sea, 
on the surface of earth. 


11. Showers of shedding blood, had put down the flying dust of the 
battlefield; and numbers of the crowned heads separated from their bodies, 
glistened amidst the clouds, like so many stars sparkling in the sky. 


12. All sides were filled by the demons, who blazed like burning suns with 
their luminous bodies, and held the tall Kalpa branches in their hands for 
striking the enemy therewith, and with which they broke down the tops and 
peaks of mountains. 


13. They ran about with their brandished swords in hand, and broke down 
the buildings by the rapidity of their motion, like the blast of a gale; and the 
rocks which they hurled at the foe, were reduced to dust, like the ashes of a 
burning mountain. 


14. The gods also pursued them as sacrificial horses, and drove the 
weaponless Asuras, like clouds before the storm. 


15. They fell upon and laid hold of them like cats pouncing upon rats, and 
seizing them for their prey; while the Asuras also were seizing the Devas as 
bears lay hold on men, mounting on high trees for fear of them. 


16. Thus the gods and demi-gods dashed over one another, as the forest 
trees in a storm, striking each other with their branching arms, and strewing 
the flowers of mutual bloodshed. 


17. Their broken weapons lay scattered on all sides, like heaps of flowers 
lying on the sides of a hill after a strong gale is over. 


18. There was a close fight of both armies, with a confused noise filling the 


vault of the sky; which like the hollow of the Udumbara tree, resounded to the 
commingled hum of the gnats rumbling within it. 


19. The elephants that were the regents of the different quarters of the skies, 
sent their loud roars, answering the tremendous peal of the world-destroying 
cloud. 


20. The thickened air grew as hard as the solid earth with the gathering 
clouds, and the thickened clouds that became as dense as to be grasped in the 
fist, were heavy and slow in their motion. 


21. The broken weapons which were repelled by the war-chariots and hit 
against the hills, emitted a rattling noise from their inward hollowness, like 
the cacophony of a chorus. 


22. The mountain forests were set on fire by the fiery weapons, and the 
burning rocks melted down their lava with as dreadful a noise, as that of the 
volcanic mount of Meru with its melting gold, and blazing with the effulgence 
of the twelve suns of the zodiac. 


23. The clamour of the battle, was as that of the beating waves of the 
boisterous ocean, filling the vast deep of the earth, and resounding hoarsely by 
their concussion. 


24. The huge rocks which were hurled by the demons, flew as birds in the 
air with their flapping wings sounding as thunder claps; while the hoarse noise 
of the rocky caverns, sounded as the deep sounding main. 


25. The clamour of the warfare resembled the rumbling of the ocean, at its 
churning by the Mandara mountain, and the clashing arms sounded as the 
clappings of the hands of the gods, in their revelry for the ambrosial draughts. 


26. In this warfare of the two armies, the haughty demons gained the day; 
and laid waste the cities and villages of the gods, together with whole tracts of 
their hills and forests. 


27. The mountainous bodies of the demons also, were pierced by the great 
weapons of the gods; and the vault of heaven was filled with the flying 
weapons, flung by the hands of both parties. 


28. The bursting rockets broke the peaks and pinnacles of the rocks by 
hundreds; and the flying arrows pierced the faces of both parties of the gods 
and demi-gods. 


29. The whirling disks lopped off the heads of the warriors like blades of 


grass, and the clamour of the armies rolled with an uproar in the midway sky. 


30. Struck by the flying weapons, the heavenly charioteers fell upon the 
ground; and their celestial cities were deluged by the hydraulic engines of the 
demons. 


31. Flights of swords, spears and lances were flying in the air, like rivers 
running down the sides of mountains; and the vault of heaven was filled by 
wat-whoops and shouts of the combatants. 


32. The habitation of the regnant divinities, were falling under the blows of 
demons from behind; and their female apartments reechoed to the 
lamentations and jingling trinkets of the goddesses. 


33. The stream of the flying weapons of the demons, washed the bodies of 
fighting men with blood, and made them fly off from the battle-field with 
hideous cries. 


34. Death was now lurking behind, and now hovering over the heads of the 
gods and leaders of armies; like a black-bee now skulking in, and then flitting 
over the lotuses; while the armies on both sides, were discomfited by the 
blows of the gods and demi-gods on the battle field. 


35. The demons flew in the air like winged mountains, moving around the 
sky; and making a whizzing rustle that was dreadful to hear. 


36. The mountainous bodies of the demons, being pierced by the weapons 
of the gods, were gushing out with streams of blood; which converted the 
earth below to a crimson sea, and tinged the air with purple clouds over the 
mountain heights. 


37. Many countries and cities, villages and forests, vales and dales were 
laid waste; and innumerable demons and elephants, horses and human beings 
were put to death. 


38. Also numbers of elephants were pierced, with long and pointed shafts 
of steel and iron; and huge Airavatas were bruised in their bodies, by the 
blows of steeled fists. 


39. Flights of arrows falling in showers like the diluvian rains, crushed the 
tops of mountains; and the friction of thunderbolts, broke down the bodies of 
the mountainous giants. 


40. The furious flames of heavenly fire, burned the bodies of the infernal 
hosts; who in their turn, quenched the flame with water-spouts drawn out of 


the subterranean deep. 


41. The enraged demons flung up and hurled the huge hills to oppose the 
falling fires of the gods; which like a wild conflagration, melted down the 
hardstones to liquid water. 


42. The demons spread a dark night in the sky, by the shadow of their arms; 
which the gods destroyed by the artificial flame of lightnings, blazing as so 
many suns in heaven. 


43. The fire of the lightnings, dried up the waters of the raining clouds; and 
the clashing of arms, emitted a shower of fire on all sides. 


44. The shower of thunder-arms, broke down the battery of mountain 
ramparts; and the Morphean weapon of slumber dispelled by that of its 
counteraction. 


45. Some bore the sawing weapon, while others held the Brahmastra, — 
the invincible weapon of warfare, that dispelled the darkness of the field by its 
flashing. 


46. The air was filled with shells and shots, emitted by the fire-arms; and 
the machine of hurling stones, crushed the missile weapons of fire, 
(agneyastra). 


47. The war chariots with their up-lifted flags and moon-like disks, moved 
as clouds about the horizon, while their wheel rolled with loud roaring under 
the vault of heaven. 


48. The incessant thunders of heaven were killing the demons in numbers, 
who were again restored to life by the great art of Sukra, that gave 
immortality to demoniac spirits. 


49. The gods that were now victorious and now flying away with loss, were 
now looking to their good stars, and now to the inauspicious ones in vain. 


50. They looked upon heaven for signs of good and evil with their uplifted 
heads and eyes, but the world appeared to them as a sea of blood from the 
heaven above to the earth below. 


51. The world seemed to them as a forest of full-blown rubicund (Kinsuka) 
flowers, by the rage of their obstinate enmity, and appeared as a sea of blood 
filled with mountains of dead bodies in it. 


52. The dead bodies hanging pendant on the branches of trees, appeared as 


their fruits moving to and fro by the breath of winds. 


53. The vault of the sky was filled with forests of long and large arrows, 
and with mountains of headless trunks with their hundred arms (as those of 
Briareus). 


54. These as they leaped and jumped in the air, plucked the clouds and stars 
and the heavenly cars of the celestials with their numerous arms; and hurled 
their mountain like missile arms and clubs and arrows to the heavens. 


55. The sky was filled with the broken fragments of the edifices, falling 
from the seven spheres of heaven, and their incessant fall raised a noise like 
the roaring of the diluvian clouds. 


56. These sounds were resounded by the elephants of the deep, (pdtdla); 
while the bird of heaven, — Garuda, was snatching the gigantic demons as his 


prey. 


57. The dread of the demons drove the celestial deities, the Siddhas and 
Saddays and the gods of the winds, together with the Kinnaras, Gandharvas 
and Charanas, from all their different quarters to one indistinct side. (There 
was no distinction of the sides in the chaotic state). 


58. Then there blew a tremendous tornado like the all-destroying Boreas of 
universal desolation; laying waste the trees of the garden of paradise, and 
threatening to destroy the gods; while the thunders of heaven were splitting 
and breaking down the mountains flung to the face of the sky. 


CHAPTER XXVII 
ADMONITION OF BRAHMA. 


Argument. The defeated Devas have recourse to Brahma in their danger, 
who tells them the way of their averting it. 


Vasishtha related: — As the war of the gods and Titans, was raging violently 
on both sides, and their bodies were pierced by the weapons of one another: 


2. Streams of blood, gushed out of their wounds like water-falls in the basin 
of Ganges; and the gods caught into the snares of the demi-gods, groaned and 
roared aloud like lions. 


3. Vyala, (Baal), with his stretching arms, was crushing the bodies of the 
gods; and Kata was harassing them in their unequal challenge with them. 


4. The Daityas waged their battle with the rage of the mid-day sun, and put 
to flight the Airavata elephant of Indra, — the leader of the gods. 


5. The Devas dropped down with their bodies gored with wounds, and 
spouting with blood; and their armies fled on all sides, like the currents of a 
river overflowing and breaking down its bank. 


6. Dama, Vyala, and Kata pursued the flying and run away gods, in the 
same manner as a raging fire runs after the wood for its fuel. 


7. The Asuras sought and searched long after the gods in vain, for they had 
disappeared like the deer and lions, among the thickets after breaking loose of 
their snares. 


8. Failing to find out the gods, the generals Dama, Vyala, and Kata, 
repaired with cheerful hearts to their chief in his abode in the infernal region. 


9. The defeated gods after halting awhile, had then their recourse to the 
almighty Brahma, in order to consult him on the means of gaining their 


victory over the demons. 


10. Brahma then appeared to the blood besmeared Devas with his purple 
countenance, as the bright and cooling moonbeams appear in the evening on 
the surface of the sea, tinged with the crimson hues of the setting sun. 


11. They bowed down before him, and complained of the danger that was 
brought upon them by Sambara, through his generals Dama, Vydla, and Kata, 
whose doings they fully related to him. 


12. The judging-Brahma having heard and considered all this, delivered the 
following encouraging words to the host of gods before him. 


13. Brahma said: — “You shall have to wait a hundred thousand years 
more, for the destruction of Sambara under the arms of Hari in an open 
engagement.” 


Note: Hari in the form of Krishna, destroyed the demons chief Sambara or 
Kaliya under his feet; as the son of God in the form of Christ, defeated Satan 
and bruised his head under his feet. 


14. You have been put to flight today by the demoniac Dama, Vydala, and 
Kata, who have been fighting with their magical art (and deceitful weapons). 


15. They are elated with pride at their great skill in warfare, but it will soon 
vanish like the shadow of a man in a mirror. 


16. These demons who are led by their ambition to annoy you, will soon be 
reduced under your might, like birds caught in a snare. 


17. The gods being devoid of ambition, are freed from the vicissitudes of 
pain and pleasure; and have become invincible by destroying the enemy by 
their patience. 


18. Those that are caught and bound fast in the net of their ambition, and 
led away by the thread of their expectation, are surely defeated in their aims, 
and are caught as birds by a string. 


19. The learned that are devoid of desire, and are unattached to anything in 
their minds, are truly great and invincible, as nothing can elate or depress 
them at any time. 


20. A man however great and experienced he may be, is easily overcome 
by a boy, when he is enticed to pursue after everything by his avarice. 


21. The knowledge that, this is I and these are mine, (and apart from all 
others), is the bane of human life; and one with such knowledge of his self 
and egoism, becomes the receptacle of evils like the sea of briny waters. 


22. He who confines his mind within a narrow limit, for want of his great 
and extended views, is called a dastardly and narrow-minded man 
notwithstanding with all his learning and wisdom. (Why then do you 
compress the unlimited soul, within the limited nut-shell of your body?). 


23. He that puts a limit to his soul or dtmd, which is unbounded and 
infinite, both surely reduce his magnanimity or garimd to the minuteness or 
anima by his own making. 


24. If there be anything in the world beside the oneself, that may be thine or 
worth thy desiring, thou mayst long to have it; but all things being but parts of 
the universe, there is nothing particular for anyone to have or seek. 


25. Reliance on earthly things is the source of unhappiness, while our 
disinterestedness with all things, is the fountain of everlasting felicity. 


26. As long as the Asuras are independent of worldly things, they must 
remain invincible; but being dependent on them, they will perish as a swarm 
of gnats in the flame of wild fire. 


27. It is the inward desire of man that makes him miserable in himself, and 
became subdued by others; otherwise, the worm-like man is as firm as a rock. 
(Cringing avarice makes one a slave to others, but its want makes a lion of a 
weak man). 


28. Where there is any desire in the heart, it is thickened and hardened in 
time; as everything in nature increases in its bulk in time; but not so the things 
that are not in existence, as the want of desires, (i.e., all what exists, has its 
increase likewise, but a nullity can have no increase). 


29. Do you, O Indra! try to foster both the egoistic selfishness, as well as 
the ambition of Dama and others for their universal dominion, if you want to 
cause their destruction. 


30. Know, it is avarice which is the cause of the poverty, and all dangers to 
mankind; just as the Karanja tree is the source of its bitter and pernicious 
fruits. 


31. All those men who rove about under the bondage of avarice, have bid 
farewell to their happiness, by subjecting themselves to misery. 


32. One may be very learned and well-informed in everything, he may be a 
noble and great man also, but he is sure to be tied down by his avarice, as a 
lion is fettered by his chain. 


33. Avarice is known as the snare of the mind, which is situated like a bird 
in its nest of the heart, as it is within the hollow of the tree of the body. 


34. The miserable man becomes an easy prey to the clutches of death by his 
avarice, as a bird is caught in the birdlime by a boy; and lies panting on the 
ground owing to its greediness. 


35. You gods, need not bear the burden of your weapons any more, nor toil 
and moil in the field of war any longer; but try your best to inflame the 
pernicious avarice of your enemies to the utmost. 


36. Know, O chief of the gods, that no arm nor weapon, nor any polity or 
policy, is able to defeat the enemy, until they are defeated of themselves by 
their want of patience, through excess of their avarice. 


37. These, Dama, Vyala, and Kata, that have become elated with their 
success in warfare, must now cherish their ambition and foster their avarice to 
their ruin. 


38. No sooner these ignorant creatures of Sambara, shall have gained their 
high desires, than they are sure to be foiled by you in their vain attempts. (The 
great height must have its fall). 


39. Now ye gods! excite your enemies to the war by your policy, of 
creating in them an ambition and intense desire for conquest, and by this you 
will gain your object. 


40. They being subjected by their desire, will be easily subdued by you; for 
nobody that is led blindfold by his desires in this world, is ever master of 
himself. 


41. The path of this world, is either even or rugged, according to the good 
or restless desires of our hearts. The heart is like the sea in its calm after 
storm, when its waves are still as our subsided desires, or as boisterous as the 
stormy sea with our increasing rapacity. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
THE RENEWED BATTLE OF THE GODS AND 
DEMONS. 


Argument. The rising Desires of the Demons, causing them to resume the 
Battle. 


Vasishtha continued: — Saying so, the god Brahma vanished from the sight 
of the gods, as the wave of the sea retires and mixes with its waters, after 
having dashed and crashed against the shore. 


2. The gods, having heard the words of Brahma, returned to their respective 
abodes; as the breeze bearing the fragrance of the lotus, wafts it to the forests 
on all sides. 


3. They halted in their delightsome houses for some days, as the bees rest 
themselves in the cells of flowers after their wanderings. 


4. Having refreshed and invigorated themselves in the course of time, they 
gave the alarm of their rising, with the beating of their drums, sounding as the 
peal of the last day. 


5. Immediately the demons rose from the infernal regions, and met the gods 
in the midway air, and commenced their dreadful onset upon them. 


6. Then there was a clashing of the armours, and clattering of swords and 
arrows, the flashing of lances and spears, and the crackling of mallets and 
various other weapons, as battle axes and discuses, thunderbolts, and hurling 
of rockstones and huge trees and the like. 


7. There was also many magical instruments, which ran on all sides like the 
torrents of rivers; while rocks and hills, high mountains and huge trees, were 
flung and hurled from both sides, filling the earth with confused noise and 
rumbling. 


8. The encampment of the gods, was beset by a magical flood of the 
demons, resembling the stream of the Ganges; while showers of firearms and 
missiles of all sorts, were hurled upon their heads from above. 


9. Many big bodies of the gods and demons, rose and fought and fell by 
turns, as the elemental bodies of earth and the other elements, rise to and 
disappear from view by the act of Maya or illusion. (The enormous bodies of 
the warriors, fought with one another in the same manner, as the jarring 
elements clash against each other). 


10. Big bombs broke the heads of mountains, and the earth became a vast 
sheet of blood like a sanguine sea. The heaps of dead bodies on both sides, 
rose as forests to the face of heaven. 


11. Living lions with iron bodies, and rows of saw-like teeth and nails 
white as Kdsa flowers, were let loose by the magic art to roam rampant in the 
airy field, devouring the stones, flung by the gods and demons, and bursting 
out into shells and shots and many other weapons. 


12. The serpentine weapons flew with their mountainous shapes in the 
ocean of the sky; having their eyes flashing with their venomous heat, and 
burning with the fire of the twelve suns on the last day of desolation. 


13. The hydraulic engine sent forth floods of weapons, whirling as 
whirlpools, and sounding loud as the rattling thunder; and sweeping the hills 
and rocks in their current. 


14. The stone missiles which were thrown by the Garuda engine, to the 
aerial battle-field of the gods, emitted at intervals water and fire, and 
sometimes shone as the sun, and at others became altogether dark. 


15. The Garuda weapons flew and roared in the sky, and the fire-arms 
spread a conflict of burning hills above; the burning towers of the gods fell 
upon the earth, and the world became as unendurable as in its conflagration on 
the last day. 


16. The demons jumped up to the sky from the surface of the earth, as birds 
fly to heaven from mountain tops. The gods fell violently on the earth, as the 
fragment of a rock falls precipitately on the ground. 


17. The long weapons sticking to the bodies of the deities and demons, 
were as bushes with their burning pain; thus their big statures appeared as 
rocks decorated with arbors growing upon them. 


18. The gods and demons, roving with their mountainous bodies, all 
streaming in blood, appeared as the evening clouds of heaven, pouring the 
purple floods of celestial Ganga, (Mandakinf). 


19. Showers of weapons were falling as water-falls or showers of rain, and 
the tide of thunders flowed as fast as the fall of meteoric fire in promiscuous 
confusion. 


20. Those skilled in the arts, were pouring floods of purple fluids, mixed 
with the red clay of mountains, from the pipes of elephants’ trunks; as they 
sputter the festive water of Phagua, mixed with the red powder, (phdga), 
through the syringe, (phichkdri). (The pouring, of holy (hori) water is a 
sacrament of Krishnites, as well as of Christians; but this baptismal function 
of Krishna among his comrades, is now become a mockery and foolery even 
among the coreligionist-vaishnavites. The text expresses it as, — 
punyavarsana or purifying sprinkling). 


21. The Devas and Asuras, though worried by one another, did not yet give 
up their hope of victory, but hurled the weapons from their hands for mutual 
annoyance; and riding on the broad backs of big elephants, they wandered in 
the air, spreading their effulgence all around. 


22. They then wandered in the sky like flights of inauspicious locusts, with 
their bodies pierced in the heads, hands, arms, and breasts, and filled the vault 
of the world like the flying clouds, obscuring the sun and the sides of heaven, 
and the surface and heights of the earth. 


23. The earth was battered and rent to pieces by the fragments of broken 
weapons, falling from the waists of the combatants, who assailed one another 
with their loud shouts. 


24. The sky re-echoed to the thunder-claps of the mutual strokes of the 
weapons, the clattering of the stones and trees, and the blows of the warriors 
on one another, as it was the bustle of the day of universal destruction. 


25. The disordered world seemed to approach its untimely end, by the 
blowing of the furious winds mixed with fire and water (as in the chaotic 
state); and the many suns of the deities and demons, shining above and below, 
(as it is predicted of the dreaded last day). 


26. All the quarters of heaven, seemed to be crying aloud, with the sounds 
of the hurling weapons, rolling as mountain peaks, roaring as lions, and borne 
by the blowing winds on all sides. 


27. The sky appeared as an ocean of illusion, burning with the bodies of the 
warriors like flaming trees, and rolling in surges of the dead bodies of the 
gods and demons, floating on it like mountains; while the skirts of the earth, 
seemed as forest, made by the clubs and lances and spears, and many other 
weapons incessantly falling upon them. 


28. The horizon was surrounded by the big and impenetrable line of 
demoniac bodies, resembling the chain of Sumeru mountains girding the 
earth; while the earth itself resembled the ocean filled with the mountainous 
bodies of fallen warriors, and towers of the celestial cities blown down by the 
winds. 


29. The sky was filled with violent sounds, and the earth and its mountains, 
were washed by torrents of blood; the blood-sucking goblins danced on all 
sides, and filled the cavity of the world with confusion. 


30. The dreadful warfare of the gods and Titans, resembled the tumults 
which rage through the endless space of the world, and that rise and fall with 
the vicissitudes of pleasure and pain, which it is incessantly subject to. (i.e., 
The world is a field of continued warfare of good and evil, like the battle-field 
of the gods and demons). 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
DEFEAT OF THE DEMONS. 


Argument. The Demons elated with the pride of their bodily strength, are at 
last foiled and put to flight by the gods. 


Vasishtha continued: — In this manner, the energetic and murderous Asuras, 
repeated their attacks and waged many wars with the gods. 


2. They carried on their warfare sometimes by fraud and often by their 
aggressiveness; and frequently after a truce or open war was made with the 
gods. They sometimes took themselves to flight, and having recruited their 
strength, they met again in the open field; and at others they lay in ambush, 
and concealed themselves in their subterranean caves. 


3. Thus they waged their battle for five and thirty years against the 
celestials, by repeatedly flying and withdrawing themselves from the field, 
and then reappearing in it with their arms. 


4. They fought again for five years, eight months and ten days, darting their 
fire arms, trees and stones and thunders upon the gods. 


5. Being used to warfare for so long a period, they at last grew proud of 
their superior strength and repeated successes, and entertained the desire of 
their final victory. 


6. Their constant practice in arms made them sure of their success, as the 
nearness of objects casts their reflection in the mirror. (Constant application 
makes one hopeful of success). 


7. But as distant objects are never reflected in the glass, so the desire for 
anything, is never successful without intense application to it. 


8. So when the desires of the demons Dama and others, became identified 
with their selves, their souls were degraded from their greatness, and confined 


to the belief of the desired objects. 


9. All worldly desires lead to erroneous expectations, and those that are 
entangled in the snares of their expectations, are thereby reduced to the 
meanness of their spirits. 


10. Falling into the errors of egotism and selfishness, they were led to the 
blunder of meitatem or thinking these things as mine; just as a man mistakes a 
rope for a snake. 


11. Being reduced to the depravity of selfishness, they began to think their 
personalities to consist in their bodies, and to reflect how their bodies from the 
head to foot could be safe and secure from harm. 


12. They lost their patience by continually thinking on the stability of their 
bodies, and their properties and pleasures of life. (Z.e., The eager desire of 
worldly gain and good, grows into impatience at last). 


13. Desire of their enjoyments, diminished their strength and valour; and 
their former acts of gallantry now became a dead letter to them. 


14. They thought only how to become lords of the earth, and thus became 
lazy and enervated, as lotus-flowers without water. (As the thought of 
grandeur enervated the Romans to impotence). 


15. Their pride and egoism led their inclination to the pleasures of good 
eating and drinking, and to the possession of every worldly good. (Luxury is 
the bane of valour). 


16. They began to hesitate in joining the warfare, and became as timid as 
the timorous deer, to encounter the furious elephants in their ravages of the 
forest. 


17. They moved slowly in despair of their victory, and for fear of losing 
their lives, in their encounter with the furious elephants (of the gods) in the 
field. 


18. These cowards wishing to preserve their bodies from the hands of 
death, became as powerless as to rest satisfied with having the feet of their 
enemies set up on their heads. (i.e., They fell at the feet of their foes to spare 
their lives; (as they say; that cowards die many times before their death)). 


19. Thus these enervated demons, were as disabled to kill the enemy 
standing before them, as the fire is unable to consume the sacred ghee 
offering, when it is not kindled by its fuel. 


20. They became as gnats before the aggressive gods, and stood with their 
bruised bodies like beaten soldiers. 


21. What needs saying more, than that the demons being overpowered by 
the gods, fled away from the field of battle for fear of their lives. 


22. When the demons Dama, Vydla, Kata and others, who were renounced 
before the gods in their prowess, fled cowardly in different ways: — 


23. The force of the Daityas, fell before the deities, and fled from the air on 
all sides, like the falling stars of heaven, at the end of a Kalpa age or last day 
(of judgment). 


24. They fell upon the summits of mountains, and in the arbours of the 
Sumeru range; some were enwrapt in the folds of the clouds above, and others 
fell on the banks of distant seas below. 


25. Many fell in the cavities of the eddies of seas, and in the abyss of the 
ocean, and in the running streams; some fell into far distant forests, and others 
dropped down amidst the burning woods of wild fire. 


26. Some being pierced by the arrows of the celestials, fell in distant 
countries, villages, and cities on earth; and others were hurled in thick jungles 
of wild beasts, and in sandy deserts and in wild conflagrations. (i.e., The 
demons were hurled down by the gods from high heaven to the earth below). 


27. Many fell in the polar regions, some alighting on the mountain tops, 
and others sinking in the lakes below; while several of them were tossed over 
the countries of Andhra, Dravida, Kashmir, and Persia. 


28. Some sank in billowy seas and in the watery maze of Ganges, and 
others fell on distant islands, in different parts of the Jambudwipa, and in the 
nets of fisher-men. 


29. Thus the enemies of the gods, lay everywhere with their mountainous 
bodies, all full of scars from head to foot; and maimed in their hands and 
arms. 


30. Some were hanging on the branches of trees, by their outstretched 
entrails, gushing out with blood; others with their cropt off crowns and heads, 
were lying on the ground with open and fiery eyes. 


31. Many were lying with their broken armours and weapons, slashed by 
the superior power of the adversary, and with their robes and attires all 
dismantled and torn by their fall. 


32. Their helmets which were terrific by their blaze, were hanging down 
their necks; and the braids of their hairs woven with stones, hung loosely 
about their bodies. 


33. Their heads which were covered with hard brazen and pointed coronets, 
were broken by slabs of stone, which were pelted upon them from the hands 
of the gods. 


34. In this manner the demons were destroyed on all sides, together with all 
weapons at the end of the battle; which devoured them, as the sea water 
dissolves the dust. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
ACCOUNT OF THE SUBSEQUENT LIVES OF 
THE DEMONS. 


Argument. Account of the torments of the Demons in the regions of Pluto, 
and their succeeding births. 


Vasishtha continued: — Upon destruction of the demons, the gods were 
exceedingly joyous; but Dama and the other leaders of the Daityas, became 
immerged in sorrow and grief. 


2. Upon this Sambara was full of wrath, and his anger was kindled like the 
all destroying fire against his generals, whom he called aloud by their names 
and said, where are they? 


3. But they fled from their abodes for fear of his ire, and hid themselves in 
the seventh sphere of the infernal regions. 


4. There dwelt the horrid myrmidons of death, formidable as their lord 
Pluto, (Yama), himself; and who were glad with their charge of guarding the 
abyss of hell. 


5. Dauntless warders of the hell-gate received them into their favour, and 
having given them shelter in the hell-pit, gave them their three maiden 
daughters in marriage. 


6. They there passed in their company, a period of ten thousand years, and 
gave a free vent to their evil desires up to the end of their lives. (The evil 
thoughts being the progeny of hell). 


7. Their time passed away in such thoughts as these, that, “this is my 
consort and this my daughter, and I am their lord:” and they were bound 
together in the ties of mutual affections as strong as the chain of death. 


8. It happened on one occasion that Yama, — the god of retributive justice, 


gave his call to that spot, in order to survey the state of affairs in the doleful 
pits of hell. 


9. The three Asuras, being unaware of his rank and dignity, (by seeing him 
unattended with his ensigns), failed to make their obeisance to the lord of hell, 
by taking him to their peril as one of his servants. 


10. Then a nod of his eyebrows, assigned to them a place in the burning 
furnace of hell; where they were immediately cast by the stern porters of hell 
gate. 


11. There they lay burning with their wives and children, until they were 
consumed to death, like a straw-hut and withered trees. 


12. The evil desires and wicked propensities, which they contracted in the 
company of the hellish train, caused their transmigration to the forms of 
Kiratas, for carrying on their slaughters and atrocities like the myrmidons of 
Yama. 


13. Getting rid of that birth, they were next born as ravens, and then as 
vultures and falcons of mountain caves (preying on the harmless birds below). 


14. They were then transformed to the forms of hogs in the land of 
Trigarta, and then as mountain rams in Magadha, and afterwards of heinous 
reptiles in caves and holes. 


15. Thus after passing successively into a variety of other forms, they are 
now lying as fishes in the wood-land lakes of Cashmir. 


16. Being burnt in hell fire at first, they have now their respite in the watery 
lake, and drink its filthy water, whereby they neither die nor live to their 
hearts content. 


17. Having thus passed over and over into various births, and being 
transformed again and again to be reborn on earth, they are rolling like waves 
of the sea to all eternity. 


18. Thus like their endless desires, they have been eternally rolling like 
weeds in the ocean of the earth; and there is no end of their pains until the end 
of their desires. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 
INVESTIGATION OF REALITY AND 
UNREALITY 


Argument. Egoism the cause of Poverty and Calamity, illustrated in the 
instance of Dama and others. 


Vasishtha continued: — It was for your enlightenment, O high minded Rama! 
that I have related to you the instance of Dama and Vydla, that you may 
derive instruction thereby, and not let it go for nothing as a mere idle story. 


2. Following after untruth by slighting the truth, is attended with the danger 
of incurring endless miseries, which the careless pursuer after it, is little aware 
of. 


3. Mind! how great was the leadership of Sambara’s army, (once held by 
Dama and his colleagues), and whereby they defeated the hosts of the 
immortal deities, and reflect on the change of their state to contemptible fishes 
in a dry and dirty quagmire. 


4. Mind their former fortitude, which put to flight the legions of the 
immortals; and think on their base servility as hunters, under the chief of 
Kiratas afterwards. 


5. See their unselfishness of mind and great patience at first, and then see 
their vain desires and assumption of the vanity of egotism at last. 


6. Selfish egotism is the root of the wide extended branches of misery in the 
forest of the world, which produces and bears the poisonous blossoms of 
desire. 


7. Therefore, O Rama! be diligent to wipe off from thy heart the sense of 
thy egoism, and try to be happy by thinking always of the nullity of thyself. 


8. The error of egoism, like a dark cloud, hidst the bright disk of the moon 


of truth under its gloom, and causes its cooling beams to disappear from sight. 


9. The three Daityas, Dama, Vyala, and Kata, being under the demoniac 
influence of Egoism, believed their non-entity as positive entity by the excess 
of their illusion. 


10. They are now living as fishes in the muddy pool of a lake, among the 
forest lands of Kashmira, where they are content at present with feeding with 
zest upon the moss and weeds growing in it. (The watery land of Kashmir is 
well-known to abound in fishes feeding on aquatic herbs and moss). 


11. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how they came to existence when they were 
non-existent before; for neither can a nil be an ens, nor an entity become a 
non-entity at any time. 


12. Vasishtha replied: — So it is, O strong armed Rama! that nothing can 
ever be something, or anything can ever be nothing. But it is possible for a 
little thing to be great, as for a great one to be reduced to minuteness. (As it is 
the case in the evolution and involutions of beings). 


13. Say what non-entity has come to being, or what entity has been lasting 
forever. All these I will explain to you by their best proofs and examples. 


14. Rama answered: — Why Sir, all that is existent is ever present before 
us as our own bodies, and all things beside ourselves; but you are speaking of 
Dama and the demons, as mere nullities and yet to be in existence. 


15. Yes Rama, it was in the same way, that the non-existent and unreal 
Dama and others seemed to be in existence by mere illusion, as the mirage 
appears to us to be full of water by our optical delusion (or deception of 
vision). 


16. It is in like manner that ourselves, these gods and demi-gods, and all 
things besides, are unrealities in fact, and yet we seem to turn about and speak 
and act as real persons. 


17. My existence is as unreal as thine, and yet it appears as real as we 
dream our death in sleep. (So we dream of our existence while we are awake). 


18. As the sight of a dead friend in a dream is not a reality, so the notion of 
the reality of the world, ceases upon the conviction of its unreality, as that of 
the demise of the person seen in a dream. 


19. But such assertions of our nihility are not acceptable to them, who are 
deluded to the belief of the reality of sensible objects. It is the habit of 


thinking its reality, that will not listen to its contradiction. 


20. This mistaken impression of the reality of the world, is never to be 
effaced without the knowledge of its unreality, derived from the Sdstras, and 
the assuetude of thinking it so. 


21. He who preaches the unreality of the world and the reality of Brahma, 
is derided by the ignorant as a mad man; (for his negation of the seeming 
reality, and assertion of the unseen God). 


22. The learned and the ignorant cannot agree on this subject, as the 
drunken and sober men cannot meet together. It is one who has the distinct 
knowledge of light and darkness, that knows the difference between the shade 
and sunlight. 


23. It is as impossible to turn the ignorant to truth, from their belief in the 
reality of unrealities, as to make a dead body to stand on its legs by any effort. 


24. It is in vain to preach the doctrine of “to pan,” that “Brahma is all” to 
the vulgar, who for want of their knowledge of abstract meditation, are 
devoted to their sensible notions. 


25. There prohibition is an admonition, giving to the ignorant, (who are 
incapable of persuasions); as for the learned who know themselves to be 
Brahma, it is useless to lecture them on this subject (which they are already 
acquainted with). 


26. The intelligent man, who believes that the supremely quiescent spirit of 
Brahma, pervades the whole universe, is not to be led away by any from his 
firm belief. 


27. So nothing can shake the faith of that man, who knows himself as no 
other, beside the Supreme Being who is all in all; and thinks himself to be 
dependent on the substantiality of God, as the formal ring depends on its 
substance of gold. 


28. The ignorant have no notion of the spirit, beside that of matter, which 
they believe as the cause and effect, (Kdrya Kdrana), of its own production; 
but the learned man sees the substantive spirit, in all forms of creation, as he 
views the substance of gold in all the ornaments made of that metal. 


29. The ignorant man is composed of his egoism only, and the sage is 
fraught with his spirituality alone; and neither of them is ever thwarted from 
his own belief. 


30. What is one’s nature or habit (of thinking), can hardly be altered at any 
time; for it would be foolish in one, who has been habituated to think himself 
as a man, to take himself for a pot or otherwise. 


31. Hence though ourselves and others, and that Dama and the demons are 
nothing in reality; yet who can believe that we or these or those and not what 
ourselves to be. 


32. There is but One Being that is really existent, who is truth and 
consciousness himself, and of the nature of the vacuum and_ pure 
understanding. He is immaculate, all pervading, quiescent and without his rise 
or fall. 


33. Being perfect quietude and void, he seems as nothing existent; and all 
these creations subsist in that vacuity as particles of its own splendour. 


34. As the stars are seen to shine resplendent in the darkness of night, and 
the worms and waves are seen to float on the surface of the waters, so do all 
these phenomena appear to occur in his reality. 


35. Whatever that being purposes himself to be, he conceives himself to be 
immediately the same; it is that vacuous Intellect only which is the true 
reality, and all others are also real, as viewed in it and rising and setting in it 
out of its own will (volition or bidding). 


36. Therefore, there is nothing real or unreal in the three worlds, but all of 
or the same form as it is viewed by the Intellect, and rising before it of its own 
spontaneity. (The three worlds are composed of this earth and the worlds 
above and beneath it, called as swarga, martya and pdtdla). 


37. We have also sprung from that Will Divine as Dama and others; hence 
there is neither any reality or unreality in any of us, except at the time (when 
we exist or cease to do so). 


38. This infinite and formless void of the Intellect, is ubiquitous and all 
pervading; and in whatever form this intellect manifests itself in any place, it 
appears there just in the same figure and manner. 


39. As the divine consciousness expanded itself with the images of Dama 
and others, it immediately assumed those shapes by its notions of the same. 
(But here it was the consciousness of Sambara or Satan, which manifested 
itself in those shapes, and implies everything to be but a manifestation of our 
notion of it). 


40. So it is with every one of us, that all things are produced to our view, 
according to their notions which are presented to our consciousness. (This is 
the tenet of conceptualism or idealism, which bears resemblance to the 
doctrine of Realism. See Cousin’s treatise, “De Intellectibus’’). 


41. What we call the world, is the representation of things to us as in our 
dream; it is a hollow body as a bubble rising in the empty ocean of the 
Intellect, and appearing as the water in the mirage. 


42. The waking state of the vacuous intellect, is styled the phenomenal 
world, and its state of sleep and rest, is what we call liberation, emancipation 
or salvation from pain, (dtyantika dukkha nivritti moksha). 


43. But the Intellect which never sleeps, nor has to be awakened at any 
time, (but is ever wakeful), is the vacuity of the Divine Mind, in which the 
world is ever present in its visible form (and to which nothing is invisible). 


44. There the work of creation is united with the rest of nirvdna, and the 
cessation from the act of creation, is joined with uninterrupted quiescence; 
and no difference of alternate work and rest whatever subsists in God any 
time. (There is no such thing as, “God rested from his works’’). 


45. The Divine Intellect views its own form in the world, and the world in 
itself in its true sense; as the blinded eye sees the internal light in its orbit. (?) 


46. The Divine Intellect like the blinded eye, sees nothing from without, 
but views every form within itself; because there is no visible nor phenomenal 
world, beside what is situated within the vacuous sphere of the intellect. 


47. There are all these things everywhere, as we have ideas of them in our 
minds; but there is never anything anywhere, of which we have no previous 
idea in the mind. It is the one quiet spirit of God, which lies extended in all 
these forms coming to our knowledge. Therefore, knowing him as all in all, 
give up all your fears and sorrows and duality, rest in peace in his unity. 


48. The great intellect of God, is as solid and clear as a block of crystal, 
which is both dense and transparent in the inside. They appear to be all hollow 
within, but replete with the images of all things from without. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
ON GOOD CONDUCT. 


Argument. Passing from the meaner to higher births, is the way to the 
attainment of Liberation, and supreme felicity. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how Dama, Vydala, and Kata obtained their 
liberation at last like all other virtuous souls, and got released from the 
torments of hell, like children getting rid of the fear of Yakshas and Pisdchas. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear, O thou support of Raghu’s race! what Yama 
said in respect of Dama, Vydla and their companions, when they besought for 
their liberation through his attendants in hell. 


3. That Dama and others would obtain their liberation, upon their release 
from their demoniac bodies by death; and upon hearing the account of their 
lives and actions. 


4. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how, when and from what source, Dama and 
others, came to learn the accounts of their lives, and in what manner they 
obtained their release from hell. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — These demons being transformed to fishes in a 
pool, by the bank of the great lotus lake in Kashmere, underwent many 
miserable births, in their finny forms in the same bog. 


6. Being then crushed to death in that marshy ground under the feet of 
buffaloes, they were transformed afterwards to the shapes of cranes, 
frequenting that lake of lotuses. 


7. There they fed upon the moss and mushrooms and tender petals of 
lotuses, and had to live upon the leaves of aquatic plants and creepers, that 
floated on the surface of the waves. 


8. They swung in cradles of flowers, and rested on beds of blue lotuses; and 


dived in vortices of the waters, or flew under the cooling showers of rainy 
clouds. 


9. These charming cranes and herons, were at last becleansed of their 
brutish foulness, by their vegetable food of sweet fruits and flowers, and by 
their pure beverage of the crystal lake, the food of holy saints. 


10. Having by these means obtained a clear understanding, they were 
prepared for their release from the brutish state, as men when enabled to 
distinguish and get hold of the qualities of satva and rajas, (i.e., of goodness 
and virtue), from that of tamas or wrong and evil, are entitled to their 
liberation. 


11. Now there is a city by name of Adhisthana, in the happy valley of 
Kashmere, which is beset by mountains and trees on all sides, and very 
romantic in its appearance. 


12. There is a hill in the midst of that city known as Pradyumna Sekhara, 
which bears resemblance to a pistil, rising from the pericarp within the cell of 
a lotus-flower. 


13. On the top of that hill, there is an edifice towering above all other 
buildings, and piercing the sky with its high turrets, which appears like 
pinnacles above its summit. 


14. On the north-east corner of that edifice, there is a hollow at the top of 
its towering head, which is overgrown with moss, and is continually 
resounding to the blowing winds. 


15. There the demon Vyd4la built his nest in the form of a sparrow, and 
chirped his meaningless notes, as one repeats the Vedic hymns without 
knowing their meanings. (This chanting is elsewhere compared with the 
croaking of frogs). 


16. There was at that time a prince in the same city, by name of Yasaskara 
or the renowned, who reigned there like Indra over the gods in heaven. 


17. Then the demon Dama became a gnat and dwelt in that dwelling, and 
continued to buzz his low tune in the crevice of a lofty column of that 
building. 


18. It then came to pass, that the citizens of Adhisthana, prepared a play- 
ground by name of Ratnavati-vehara in that city. 


19. There the minister of the king known as Narasinha by name, took his 


residence. He understood the fates of human kind, as the astronomer knows 
the stars of heaven on a small celestial globe, which he holds in his hand. 


20. It happened at that time, that the deceitful demon Kata, is as reborn as a 
parrot, and became the favourite of the minister, by being kept in a silver cage 
in his house. 


21. It then turned out that the minister recited this poetical narrative of the 
Titan war to the inmates of the house. 


22. And the parrot Kata, happening to hear it, remembered his past life, 
whereby he was absolved of his sins, and attained his final liberation. 


23. The sparrow dwelling on the top of the Pradyumna hill, also chanced to 
hear the narration of his life in that place, and obtained his emancipation 
thereby. 


24. Dama, who in the form of a gnat, resided in the palace, happened also 
to hear the minister’s recital of his tale, and obtained thereby his peace and 
release. 


25. In this manner, O Rdma! the sparrow on the Pradyumna mount, the 
gnat in the palace, and the parrot on the play-ground, had all their liberation. 


26. Thus I have related to you the whole of the story of the demon Dama 
and others, which will fully convince you of the vanity of the world. 


27. It is the ignorant only that are tempted to vanity by their error, as they 
are led to the delusion of water in a mirage; and so the great also are liable 
like these demons, to fall low from their high stations by their error. 


28. Think of one of these, that reduced the high Meru and Mandara 
mountains with a nod of his eyebrows, was constrained to remain as a 
contemptible gnat in the chink of a pillar in the palace. (So the huge Satan 
entered the body of the small and hateful serpent, and the gigantic devils in 
the hateful bodies of the herd of swine). 


29. Look at another who threatened to destroy the sun and moon with a 
slap, living at last as a poor sparrow in a hole of the peak of the Pradyumna 
mountain. 


30. Look at the third who balanced the mount Meru like a flower bouquet 
in his hand, lying imprisoned as a parrot in the cage at the house of Nrisingha. 


31. When the sphere of the pure intellect, is tinged with the hue of egotism, 


it is debased to another form without changing its nature (by another birth). 


32. It is because of the wrong desire of a man that he takes the untruth for 
truth, as if by the excessive thirst of a person, that he mistakes the mirage for 
water, and thereby loses both his way and his life. 


33. Those men only can ford across the ocean of the world, who by the 
natural bent of their good understanding, are inclined to the study of the 
Sdstras, and look forward to their liberation, by rejecting whatever is vicious 
and untrue. 


34. Those who are prone to false reasoning and heresy, by rejecting the 
revelations, are subject to various changes and miseries, and fall like the 
running water into the pit, by loss of their best interests in life. 


35. But those who walk by the dictates of conscience, and follow the path 
pointed by the Agama, (Veda), are saved from destruction, and attain their 
best state (of perfection and bliss). 


36. O high-minded Rama! he whose mind always longs after having this 
thing and that, loses the best gain of his manliness, (parama purushdrtha), by 
his avarice, and leaves not even ashes or traces behind. 


37. The high-minded man regards the world as a straw, and shuns all its 
concerns as a snake casts off its slough. 


38. He whose mind is illumined by the wondrous light of truth, is always 
taken under the protection of the gods, as the mundane egg is protected by 
Brahma, (or rather under the wings of Brahma’s swan, hatching over its egg). 


39. Nobody should walk in paths which are long and wearisome, crooked 
and winding, and encompassed by dangers and difficulties; because Rahu, — 
the ascending node, lost its life by its curvilinear course, to drink the nectarine 
beams of the moon. 


40. He who abides by the dictates of the true Sdstras, and associates with 
the best of men, are never subject to the darkness of error. 


41. Those who are renowned for their virtues, have the power to bring their 
destiny under their command, convert all their evils to good, and render their 
prosperity perpetual. 


42. Those who are unsatisfied with their qualifications, (but wish to qualify 
themselves the more), and those who thirst after knowledge and are seekers of 
truth, are truly called as human beings, all others are but brutes. 


43. Those, the lakes of whose hearts are brightened by the moonbeams of 
fame, (i.e., whose heart are desirous of fame), have the form of Hari seated in 
their hearts, as in the sea of milk. 


44. The repeated desire of enjoying what has been enjoyed, and of seeing 
what has often been seen, is not the way to get rid of the world; but is the 
cause of repeated birth, for the same enjoyments. 


45. Continue to abide by the established rule of conduct, act according to 
the Sdstras and good usages, and break off the bonds of worldly enjoyments, 
which are all but vanities. 


46. Let the world resound with the renown of your virtues reaching to the 
skies; because thy renown will immortalize thy name, and not the enjoyments 
thou hast enjoyed. 


47. Those whose good deeds shine as moonbeams, and are sung by the 
maidens of heaven, are said to be truly living, while all others unknown to 
fame are really dead. 


48. They that aspire to their utmost perfection by their unfailing exertions, 
and act according to the precepts of the Sdstras, are surely successful in their 
attempt. 


49. Abiding patiently by the Sdstra, without hastening for success, and 
perfecting one’s self by long practice, produce the ripe fruits of 
consummation. 


50. Now Rama, renounce all your sorrow and fear, your anxieties, pride 
and hastiness; conduct yourself by the ordinances of law and Sdstras, and 
immortalize your name. 


51. Take care, that your sensuous soul does not perish as a prey in the snare 
of your sensual appetites, nor as a blind old man by falling in the hidden pits 
of this world. 


52. Do not allow yourself henceforward to be degraded below the vulgar; 
but consider well the Sdstras as the best weapons, for defeating the dangers 
and difficulties of the world. 


53. Why do you endanger your life in the muddy pit of this world, like an 
elephant falling in a pitfall under the keen arrows of the enemy? Avoid only to 
taste of its enjoyments, and you are free from all danger. 


54. Of what avail is wealth without knowledge; therefore, devote yourself 


to learning, and consider well your riches to be but trash and bubbles. 


55. The knowledge of heretical Sdstras, has made beasts of men, by 
making them only miserable and unhappy by their unprofitable arguments. 


56. Now wake and shake off the dullness of your long, deep, and death-like 
sleep, like the torpor of the old tortoise lying in the bog. 


57. Rise and accept an antidote to ward off your old age and death; and it is 
knowledge of this prescription, that all wealth and property are for our evils, 
and all pleasures and enjoyments, tend only to sicken and enervate our frames. 


58. Know your difficulty to be your prosperity, and your disrespect to be 
your great gain. Conduct yourself according to the purport of the Sdstras, as 
they are supported by good usage. 


59. Acts done according to the Sdstras and good usage also, are productive 
of the best fruits of immortality. 


60. He who acts well according to good usage, and considers everything by 
good reasons, and is indifferent to the pains and pleasures of the world; such a 
one flourishes like an arbor in the spring, with the fruits and flowers of long 
life and fame, virtues and good qualities and prosperity. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
CONSIDERATION OF EGOISM. 


Argument. Of good attempts, good company and good studies; also of 
liberation by Renunciation of Egoism and Worldly Bondage. 


Vasishtha continued: — Seeing the complete success of every undertaking, 
depending on your own exertion at all times and places, you should never be 
slack in your energy at all. 


2. See how Nandi gratified the wishes of all his friends and relations by his 
own exertions, and how he became victorious over death itself, by his 
adoration of Mahadeva by the side of a lake. 


3. See also, how the Ddnavas too got the better of the gods, who were 
fraught with every perfection, by their greater wealth and prowess, as the 
elephants destroy a lake of lotuses. 


4. See, how Marutta the King of demons, created another world like that of 
Brahma, by means of his sacrifice through the great sage Samvarta (the law 
giver). 


5. See, how Viswamitra, (the military chief), obtained the dignity of 
Brahmanhood by his great energy and continued exertions. He obtained by his 
austerities what is impossible to be gained by another. 


6. See, how the poor and unfortunate Upamanyu, obtained his nectarious 
food of the cake and curdled milk, by his worship of Siva, from the milky 
ocean in days of yore. 


7. See how the god Vishnu devoured, (destroyed), like a wild fire the 
demons of the triple world, likening the tender filaments of lotuses; and how 
the sage Sweta became victorious over death by means of his firm faith in 
Siva, (as it is described in the Linga Purana). 


8. Remember, how the chaste Savitri, brought back her spouse Satyavana 
from the realm of death, by her prevailing on stern Yama with the suavity of 
her discourse. 


9. There is no great exertion of any kind that goes unrewarded in this 
world; all impossibility is thought possible by ardent pursuit after it (or to the 
ardent pursuer, as it is said: — Fortune is found by the swiftest pursuer). 


10. So men having full knowledge of the spirit, and exerting their utmost 
devotion, are enabled to root out their destiny of transmigration, which is 
fraught with so much pain and pleasure, (both of which are equally hurtful to 
the soul). 


11. All visible things are full of danger to the sight of the intelligent. There 
is no pleasure to be had from anything, without its concomitant pain (either 
preceding or following it). 


12. Though it is difficult to know the Supreme Brahma, and facile to attain 
supreme felicity; yet should Brahma be sought at first, as the giver of all 
felicity. (Seek happiness through its giver, — the Great God). 


13. Forsake your pride, and rely on your unalterable peace of mind; 
consider well your worthiness in your understanding, and stick to your 
attendance on the wise and good. 


14. There is no other way for your salvation in this ocean of the world, save 
by your attendance on the wise. All your pilgrimage, austerity and learning of 
the Sdstras, are of no avail to your liberation. 


15. He is called the wise, whose greediness, anger, and erroneous 
conceptions, are on their wane day by day; and who walks in the path of 
rectitude, as it is inculcated in the Sdstra. 


16. The society of spiritual guides, serves to dispel the visibles from the 
sight of the devout, as the invisibles are hidden from sight, (i.e., as they are 
not in being). 


17. In the absence of all other objects, there remains the Supreme Spirit 
alone in view, and the human soul having nothing else to rest upon, rests at 
last in the Supreme Soul only. 


18. The visibles did not exist before, nor are they produced from naught; 
they are not in existence though seen in our presence, nor are they to exist in 
future. The supreme alone exist for ever without change or decay. 


19. I have already shown you by various instances the falsehood of the 
visibles (in the book of Genesis); I will now show you the falsity of existence, 
as it is known to the learned. 


20. Now that our passive consciousness of the three worlds, being the sober 
truth with the wise, there can be no room for the unrealities of matter and 
mdyd, — illusion, to enter into our belief. (We know nothing of the external 
world, except our inward consciousness of it. — Berkeley). 


21. Whatever wonders are displayed by the active intellect to the inactive 
soul, the same is thought to be the world. (There is no outward world, beside 
the working of the intellect). 


22. The notion of the sphere of the world, is derived from the rays of the 
central intellect, stretching to the circumference of the understanding, and 
there being no difference between the radiating point and the radiated circle, 
acknowledge the identity of the radiator, the radii and the periphery. (i.e., Of 
the intellect, its intelligence and the world). 


23. The twinklings of the intellectual eye in its acts of opening and 
shutting, cause the notions of the appearance and disappearance of the world 
in continued succession. 


24. One unacquainted with the true sense of Ego, is blind amidst the 
luminous sphere of the intellect, but he who knows its true meaning, finds 
himself amidst the sphere of spiritual light, (or rather loses himself in the 
divine light). 


25. He that understands the Divine Ego, does no more retain the notion of 
his own egoism; but mixes with the Supreme soul, as a drop of water is lost in 
the waters of the ocean. 


26. In reality there exists no I, or thou, nor the visible world nor anything 
else; but all these blend upon right reasoning in the One Ego, which remains 
and subsists after all other existences. 


27. Even clear understandings are sometimes clouded by false apparitions, 
as those of ogres, efc.; when there are no such things, just as children are 
seized with false fear of goblins. 


28. As long as the moonlight of the intellect, is obscured by the darkness of 
egoism, so long the lotus lake of spirituality, will not come to its bloom. 


29. The feeling of egoism being wiped off from the mind, the sense of self 


and selfish passions, will vanish of themselves from the heart; and there will 
be an utter end of the fears of death and hell, as also of the desires of heaven 
and liberation. 


30. So long as the egoistic feelings float about, like clouds over the sphere 
of the mind, there will be no end of desires, growing in the heart like weeds in 
the plains. 


31. As long as the cloud of egotism continue to overcast the mind and 
obscure its intelligence, the humidity of dullness will fill its sphere, and 
prevent the light of intellect to pierce through it. 


32. Egoistic pride is unmannerly in men, and is taken in the light of vanity, 
it is the cause of sorrow and not delight; and is as bug-bears to boys. 


33. The vain assumption of egoism, is productive of a great many errors, it 
leads to the ambition of gaining an infinity of worlds, as it was in the cases of 
the foolish demons. 


34. The conceit that I am such and such (a great man), is an error than 
which there is none other, nor is ever likely to be a greater error to lead us to 
utter darkness. 


35. Whatever joy or grief betides us at any time in this changeful world, is 
all the effect of the rotatory wheels of egoism, turning up and down at every 
moment. 


36. He who weeds and roots out the germs of egoism from his heart, he 
verily prevents the arbor of his worldliness, (Samsara Vriksha), from jutting 
out in a hundred branches. 


37. Egoism is the sprout of the trees of our lives, in their interminable 
revolutions through the world; and meity or the sense that, “this is mine,” is 
the cause that makes them expand in a thousand branches. (I am one, but 
claim many things as mine). 


38. Swift as the flight of birds, do our desires and desirable objects 
disappear from us; and upon mature consideration, they prove to be but 
bubbles, bursting on the evanescent waves of our lives. 


39. It is for want of the knowledge of the one Ego, that we think ourselves 
as I, thou, this, or the other; and it is by shutting out our view of the only soul, 
that we see the incessant revolutions of this world and that. 


40. As long as the darkness of egoism reigns over the wilderness of human 


life, so long doth the goblin of selfishness infest it with its wanton revelry. 


41. The vile man that is seized by the avaricious demon of selfishness, is at 
an utter loss of any moral precept, and any mantra of his religion to satisfy his 
wants. 


42. Rama said: — Tell me, O venerable Brahman, how we may be enabled 
to suppress our egoism or selfishness, for evading the dangers and difficulties 
in our course through the world. 


43. Vasishtha replied: — It is by seeking to settle mind in the resplendent 
soul, as it shines in the transparent mirror of the intellect, that it is possible for 
anybody to suppress the consciousness of his self or personal existence. (i.e., 
By losing one’s self in the self-existence of the Supreme Soul). 


44. A closer investigation into human life, proves it to be a maze full with 
the false shows of magic. It is not worth loving or hating, nor capable of 
causing our egoism or pride. 


45. He whose soul is free from egoism, and devoid of the impression of the 
phenomenals; whose course of life runs in an even tenor, is the man who can 
have no sense of egoism in him. (Whose life doth in one even tenor run, and 
end its days as it has begun. — Pope.) 


46. He who knowing his internal self to be beyond the external world, and 
neither desires nor dislikes anything in it, but preserves the serenity of his 
temper at all times, is not susceptible of egoism. 


47. Whoso thinks himself to be the inward noumena, and distinct from the 
outward phenomena, and keeps the calm equanimity of his mind, is not ruffled 
by the feeling of his egoism. 


48. Rama said: — Tell me, Sir, what is the form of egoism, and whether it 
consists in the body or mind or of both of these, and whether it is got rid of 
with the riddance of the body. 


49. Vasishtha replied: — There are three sorts of egoism, Rama! in this 
triple world, two of which are of superior nature, but the third is of a vile kind 
and is to be abandoned by all. 


50. The first is the supreme and undivided Ego, which is diffused 
throughout the world; it is the Supreme soul, (Paramdtma), beside which 
there is nothing in nature. 


51. The feeling of this kind of egoism, leads to the liberation of men, as in 


the state of the living-liberated; but the knowledge of the ego, as distinct and 
apart from all, and thought to be as minute as the hundredth part of a hair, is 
the next form of self-consciousness, which is good also. 


52. This second form of egoism, leads also to the liberation of human souls, 
even in the present state of their existence, known as the state of living- 
liberation, (Jivan-Mukta). 


53. The other kind of egoism, which is composed of the knowledge of the 
body, with all its members as parts of the Ego, is the last and worst kind of it, 
which takes the body for the soul or self. 


54. This third and last kind, forms the popular belief of mankind, who take 
their bodies as parts of themselves; it is the basest form of egoism, and must 
be forsaken in the same manner, as we shun our inveterate enemies. 


55. The man that is debased by this kind of egoism, can never come to his 
right sense; but becomes subject to all the evils of life, under the thrall of the 
powerful enemy. 


56. Possessed with this wrong notion of himself, every man is incessantly 
troubled in his mind by various desires, which expose him to all the evils of 
life. 


57. By means of the better egoisms, men transform themselves to gods; but 
the common form of it, debases a man to the state of a beast and its attendant 
evils. 


58. That I am not the body, is the certainty arrived at by the great and good, 
who believing themselves to be of the first two kinds, are superior to the 
vulgar. 


59. Belief in the first two kinds, raises men above the common level; but 
that in the lower kind, brings every misery on mankind. 


60. It was owing to their baser egoism, that the demons Dama, Vydla and 
others, were reduced to that deplorable state, as it is related in their tale. 


61. Rama said: — Tell me, Sir, the state of that man, who by discarding the 
third or popular kind of egoism from his mind, attains the well being of his 
soul in both the present and future worlds. 


62. Vasishtha replied: — Having cast off this noxious egoism, (which is to 
be got rid of by everybody), a man rests in the Supreme Spirit in the same 
manner, as the believers in the two other sorts of it. (i.e., Of the Supreme and 


superior sorts of spiritual egoisms, consisting in the belief of one’s self, as the 
impersonal or personal soul, — the undivided or individual spirit). 


63. The two former views of egoism, place the egotist in the all pervasive 
or all exclusive spirit (in the Ego of the Divine Unity). 


64. But all these egoisms which are in reality but different forms of 
dualism, being lost in the unity, all consciousness of distinct personality, is 
absorbed in the Supreme monism. 


65. The good understanding should always strive to its utmost, to get rid of 
its common and gross egotism, in order to feel in itself the ineffable felicity of 
the unity. 


66. Renunciation of the unholy belief of one’s self personality in his 
material body, is the greatest good that one can attain to for his highest state 
of felicity, parama padam. 


67. The man that forsakes the feeling of his egoism (or personality) from 
his mind, is not debased nor goes to perdition by either his indifference to or 
management of worldly affairs. (i.e., The doing or refraining from bodily or 
worldly actions, is equally indifferent to the philosophic mind). 


68. The man who has got rid of his egoism by the subsidence of his 
selfishness in himself, is indifferent to pain and pleasure, as the satiate are to 
the taste of sweet or sour. 


69. The man detesting the pleasures of life, has his full bliss presented 
before himself; as the mind cleared of its doubts and darkness, has nothing 
hidden from its sight. 


70. It is by investigation into the nature of egoism, and forsaking this gross 
selfishness, that a man crosses over the ocean of the world of his own accord. 


71. The man who having nothing of his own, and knowing himself as 
nothing, yet has all and thinks himself as all in all, and who though possessed 
of wealth and properties, has the magnanimity of his soul to disown them to 
himself; he is verily situated in the Supreme soul, and finds his rest in the state 
of Supreme bliss. (i.e., The world is the Lord’s, and human soul as a particle 
of the Divine, has its share in all and everything). 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
END OF THE STORY OF DAMA AND VYALA. 


Argument. The Gods annoyed by Bhima and others apply to Hari, who 
thereupon destroys them with Sambara also. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now, hear me relate to you, what Sambara did after 
the flight of Dama and his train; and how he remained in his rocky stronghold 
in the infernal region, (Pdtdla). 


2. After the complete overthrow of the whole army of Sambara, and their 
downfall from heaven like innumerable rain drops, falling from an over- 
spreading cloud, and afterwards dispersing itself and disappearing in autumn: 


3. Sambara remained motionless for many years in his strong citadel, at the 
loss of his forces defeated by the gods; and then thought within himself, about 
the best means of overcoming the celestials. 


4. He said, — “the demons Dama and others, that I produced by my black- 
art of exorcism, are all overthrown in battle, by their foolishness and vanity of 
pride and egotism. 


5. “I will now produce some other demons by the power of my charm, and 
endue them both with the power of reason and acquaintance with spiritual 
science, in order that they may know and judge for themselves. 


6. “These then being acquainted with the true nature of things, and devoid 
of false views, will not be subject to pride or vanity, but be able to vanquish 
the deities in combat.” 


7. Thinking so in himself, the arch-fiend produced a host of good demons 
by his skill in sorcery; and these creatures of his spell filled the space of the 
sky, as bubbles foam and float on the surface of the sea. 


8. They were all knowing and acquainted with the knowables; they were all 
dispassionate and sinless, and solely intent on their alloted duties, with 
composed minds and good dispositions. 


9. They were known under the different names of Bhima, Bhasa, and 
Dridha; and they looked upon all earthly things as straws, by the holiness of 
their hearts. 


10. These infernal spirits burst out of the ether and sprang up to the upper 
world, and then spread over the face of the sky as a flight of locusts. They 
cracked as guns, and roared and rolled about as the clouds of the rainy season. 


11. They fought with the gods for many cycles of years, and yet they were 
not elated with pride, owing to their being under the guidance of reason and 
judgement. 


12. For until they were to have the desire of having anything, and thinking 
it as, “this is my own,” so long were they insensible of their personal 
existence, such as, “this is I, and that one is another’; and consequently 
invincible by any. (Selfishness reduces one to slavery and subjections). 


13. They were fearless in fighting with the gods, from the knowledge of 
their being equally mortal as themselves; and from their want of the 
knowledge of any difference subsisting between one another. (i.e., They 
regarded themselves and their adversaries with an equal eye of indifference, as 
all were equally doomed to death, and therefore, never feared to die). 


14. They rushed out with a firm conviction that, the unsubstantial body is 
nothing, and the intellect is lodged in the pure soul; and that there is nothing 
which we call as I or another. 


15. Then these demons who were devoid of the sense of themselves and 
their fears were necessarily dauntless of the fear of their decease or death; and 
were employed in their present duties, without the thoughts of the past and 
future. 


16. Their minds were attached to nothing, they slew their enemies without 
thinking themselves as their slayers; they did their duties and thought 
themselves as no doers of them; and they were utterly free from all their 
desires. 


17. They waged the war under the sense of doing their duty to their master; 
while their own nature was entirely free from all passion and affection, and of 
even tenor at all times. 


18. The infernal force under the command of Bhima, Bhasa, and Dridha, 
bruised and burned and slew and devoured the celestial phalanx, as men 
knead and fry and boil the rice and afterward eat up as their food. 


19. The celestial army being harassed on all sides by Bhima, Bhasa, and 
Dridha, fled precipitately from the height of heaven, as the Ganges runs down 
from Himalayan height. 


20. The discomfited legion of the deities, then resorted to the god Hari, 
sleeping on the surface of the ocean of milk; as the bodies of the clouds of 
heaven, are driven by the winds to the tops of mountains (beyond the region 
of storm). 


21. The god lying folded in the coils of the serpent, as a consort in the arms 
of his mistress, gave the gods their hope of final success in future. (Hari or 
Krishna on the serpent, is typical of Christ’s bruising the head of the satanic 
serpent). 


22. The gods kept themselves hid in that ocean, until it pleased the lord 
Hari, to proceed out of it for the destruction of the demons. 


23. Then there was a dreadful war between Vishnu and Sambara, which 
broke and bore away the mountains as in an untimely great deluge of the 
earth. 


24. The mighty demon being at last overthrown by the might of Narayana, 
was sent to and settled in the city of Vishnu after his death. (Because those 
that are either saved or slain by Vishnu, are equally entitled to his paradise). 


25. The demons of Bhima, Bhasa, and Dridha, were also killed in their 
unequal struggle with Vishnu, and were extinguished like lamps by the wind. 


26. They became extinct like flames of fire, and it was not known whither 
their vital flame had fled. Because it is the desire of a person that leads him to 
another state, but these having no wish in them, had no other place to go. 


27. Hence the wishless soul is liberated, but not the wistful mind; therefore, 
use your reason, O Rama, to have a wishless mind and soul. 


28. A full investigation into truth, will put down your desires at once; and 
the extinction of desires, will restore your mind to rest like an extinguished 
candle. 


29. Consummate wisdom consists in the knowledge of there being nothing 
real in this world, and that our knowledge of reality is utterly false, and that 


nihility of thing, is the true reality. 


30. The whole world is full with the spirit of God, whatever otherwise one 
may think of it at any time; there can be no other thought of it except that it is 
a nihility, and this forms our perfect knowledge of it. 


31. The two significant words of the will and mind are mere insignificant 
fictions, as head and trunk of the ascending and descending nodes of a planet; 
which upon their right understanding, are lost in the Supreme Spirit. (i.e., It is 
only the divine will and spirit that is all in all). 


32. The mind being accompanied by its desires, is kept confined in this 
world, but when that is released from these, it is said to have its liberation. 


33. The mind has gained its existence in the belief of men, owing to the 
many ideas of pots and pictures, (ghata-patadi); and other things which are 
imprinted in it; but these thoughts being repressed, the mind also vanishes of 
itself like the phantoms of goblins (Yakshas — yakkas). 


34. The demons Dama, Vydala, and Kata, were destroyed by reliance on 
their minds, (i.e., by thinking their bodies as their souls); but Bhima, Bhasa, 
and Dridha were saved by their belief in the Supreme soul, as pervading all 
things. Therefore, O Rama! reject the examples of the former, imitate that of 
the latter. 


35. “Be not guided by the example of Dama, Vydla, and Kata,” is the 
lesson that was first delivered to me by Brahma, — the lotus-born and my 
progenitor himself. 


36. This lesson I repeat to you, O Rama, as my intelligent pupil, that you 
may never follow the example of the wicked demons Dama and others; but 
imitate the conduct of the good spirits, Bhima and others in your conduct. 


37. It is incessant pain and pleasure that forms the fearful feature of this 
world, and there is no other way of evading all its pangs and pains, save by 
your apathetic behaviour, which must be your crowning glory in this life. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
DESCRIPTION OF INSOUCIANCE. 


Argument. On the Abandonment of worldly desires, as conducive to the 
composure of the Mind, and society of the good, accompanied with rationality 
and spiritual knowledge, constituting the Samddhi of the soul. 


Vasishtha continued: — Blessed are the virtuous, who have cleansed their 
hearts from the dirt of ignorance; and victorious are those heroes, who have 
conquered their insatiable and ungovernable minds. 


2. It is self-control or the government of one’s own mind, that is the only 
means of wading through all the troubles and distresses, and amidst all the 
dangers and difficulties of this world. 


3. Hear the summary of all knowledge, and retain and cultivate it 
constantly in your mind; that the desire of enjoyment, (avarice), is our 
bondage in the world, and its abandonment is our release from it. 


4. What need is there of many precepts, learn this one truth as the sum 
substance of all, that all pleasures are poisonous and pernicious, and you must 
fly from them as from venomous snakes and a raging fire. 


5. Consider well and repeatedly in yourself, that all sensible objects are as 
hydras and dragons; and their enjoyment is gall and poison. Avoid them at a 
distance and pursue after your lasting good. 


6. The cupidinous mind is productive of pernicious evils, as the sterile 
ground is fertile only in thorns and brambles. (The vitiated mind brings forth 
but vice, as the vicious heart teems with guilt). 


7. The mind devoid of desire, lacks its expansion, as the heart wanting its 
passions and affections, is curbed and contracted in itself. 


8. The goodly disposed mind ever teems with virtues, that are opposed to 


wrong acts and vice, as the ground of a good quality, grows only the good and 
useful trees in spite of weeds and bushes. 


9. When the mind gains its serenity by culture of good qualities, the mist of 
its errors and ignorance gradually fade and fly away, like clouds before the 
rising sun. 


10. The good qualities coming to shine in the sphere of the mind, like stars 
in the moonlight sky, gives rise to the luminary of reason to shine over it, like 
the bright sun of the day. 


11. And as the practice of patience grows familiar in the mind, like the 
medicinal vansa-lochana within the bamboo; it gives rise to the quality of 
firmness in the man, as the moon brightens the vernal sky. 


12. The society of the good is an arbour, affording its cooling shade of 
peace, and yielding the fruit of salvation. Its effect in righteous men, is like 
that of the stately sarala-tree, distilling the juice of spiritual joy from the 
fruitage of samddhi, (sang-froid). 


13. Thus prepared, the mind becomes devoid of its desires and enmity, and 
is freed from all troubles and anxieties. It becomes obtuse to the feelings of 
grief and joy, and of pain and pleasure also, and all its restlessness dies in 
itself. 


14. Its doubts in the truths of the scriptures die away, as the ephemerides 
and all its curiosities for novelties, are put to a stop. Its veil of myths and 
fictions is unveiled, and its ointment of error is rubbed out of it. 


15. Its attempts and efforts, malice and disdain, distress and disease, are all 
removed from it; and the mist of its grief and sorrow, and the chain of 
affections, are all blown and torn away. 


16. It discards the progeny of its doubts, repudiates the consorts of its 
avarice, and breaks loose from the prison-house of its body. It then seeks the 
welfare of the soul, and attains its godly state of holiness. 


17. It abandons the causes of its stoutness, (i.e., its nourishments and 
enjoyments), and relinquishes its choice of this thing and that; and then 
remembering the dignity of the soul, it casts off the covering of its body as a 
straw. 


18. The elevation of the mind in worldly affairs, tends to its destruction, 
and its depression in these leads to its spiritual elevation. The wise always 


lower their minds, (pride); but fools are for elevating them (to their ruin). 


19. The mind makes the world its own, and ranges all about it; it raises the 
mountains and mounts over them; it is as the infinite vacuum, and 
comprehends all vacuity in itself; and it makes gods of friends and foes of 
others unto us. 


20. The understanding being soiled by doubts, and forgetting the true 
nature of the intellect, takes upon it the name of the mind, when it is full of all 
its worldly desires. 


21. And the intellect being perverted by its various desires, is called the 
living soul; the animal soul being distinct from the rational soul. 


22. The understanding which forgets its intellectuality, and falls into the 
error of its own personality, is what we call the internal principle of the mind 
which is all hollow within. 


23. The soul is not the man of the world, (i.e., no worldly being), nor is it 
the body or its blood. All material bodies are but gross and dull matter; but the 
soul in the body is empty air and intangible. 


24. The body being dissected into atoms, and analysed in all its particles, 
presents nothing but blood and entrails as the plantain tree, which when cut 
into pieces, presents naught but its folded rinds. 


25. Know the mind and living soul as making a man, and assuming his 
mortal form; the mind takes its form by itself according to his own option. 


26. Man stretches his own sphere of action by his own option only to entrap 
himself in it, as the silkworm weaves its cocoon for its own imprisonment. 


27. The soul lays down its error of being the body, when it has to forsake 
the same at some time or other, (i.e., sooner or later), and assume another 
form as the germ sprouts forth into leaves. (i.e., The body is not the soul, nor 
is the soul the same with the body, as the materialist would have it; because 
the soul has its transmigration, which the body has not). 


28. As is the desire or thought in the mind, so is it born in its next state of 
metempsychosis. Hence the new born babe is given to sleeping, because it 
thinks itself to be dead, and lying in the night-time of his death. It is also 
given to the dreaming of those things, which had been the objects of its desire 
or thought in its previous state or birth. (This establishes the doctrine of innate 
ideas in the dreaming state of new-born babies). 


29. So sour becomes sweet by mixture with sugar, and the bitter seed 
produces sweet fruits by being sown with honey. So on the contrary, sweet 
becomes bitter by intermixture of gall and wormwood. (This is a fact in 
horticulture. — Ardm Sdstra, and applies to the goodness and badness of the 
human mind, according to its good and bad associations). 


30. Aiming after goodness and greatness, makes a man good and great; as 
one wishing to be an Indra or a lord, dreams of his lordliness in his sleep. (The 
mind makes the man). 


31. Inclination to meanness bemeans a man, and a tendency to vileness 
vilifies his conduct in life; as one deluded by his fancy of devils, comes to see 
their apparitions in his nightly visions. 


32. But what is naturally foul or fair, can hardly turn otherwise at any time; 
as the limpid lake never becomes muddy, nor the dirty pool ever becomes 
glassy. (Nature of a thing is unchangeable). 


33. The perverted mind produces the fruits of its perversion in all its 
actions, while pure-mindedness is fraught with the effects of its purity 
everywhere. 


34. Good and great men never forsake their goodness and greatness, even 
in their fall and decline; so the glorious sun fills the vault of heaven with his 
glory, even when he is sinking below (the horizon). 


35. There is no restriction or freedom of the human soul, to or from any 
action or thing herein; it is a mere passive and neutral consciousness, of all 
that passes before it as a magic scene. 


36. The world is a magical city, and as a mirage appearing to sight; it is of 
the nature of the delusive panorama, showing many moons of the one, whose 
unity admits of no duality. So the one Brahma is represented as many by 
delusion. (The Hindus, contrary to Europeans, have many suns but one moon. 
Escas — Chandra). 


37. All this is verily the essence of Brahma, and this is the sober reality; the 
substantive world is an unsubstantiality, and peers out to view as a hollow 
phantom. (It is a phantasmagoria of phantasms). 


38. That I am not the infinite but an infinitesimal, is the misjudgment of the 
ignorant; but the certitude of my infinity and supremacy, is the means of my 
absorption in the Infinite and Supreme. 


39. The belief of one’s individuality in his undivided, all pervasive and 
transparent soul, as, “I am this,” is the cause of his bondage to his personality, 
and is a web spun by his erroneous dualism. (Knowledge of a separate 
existence apart from soliety, amounts to a dualistic creed). 


40. Want of the knowledge of one’s bondage or freedom, and of his unity 
or duality, and his belief in the totality of Brahma, is the supreme truth of true 
philosophy. 


41. Perfect transparency of the soul, amounting to its nihility, and its want 
of attachment to visible appearances, as also its unmindfulness of all that is, 
are the conditions for beholding Brahma in it. There is no other way to this. 


42. The purity of the mind produced by acts of holiness, is the condition for 
receiving the sight of Brahma; as it is the whiteness of the cloth that can 
receive any colour upon it. 


43. Think thy soul, O Rama! as same with the souls of all other persons, 
and abstain from all other thoughts, of what is desirable or undesirable, what 
invigorates or enfeebles the body, and what brings liberation after bondage, or 
Salvation after sinfulness. (Since none of these states appertains to the 
universal soul, which is quite free from them). 


44. The mirror of the mind being cleansed by the knowledge of the Sdstras, 
and dispassionateness of the understanding, it receives the reflexion of 
Brahma, as the clear crystal reflects the images of things. 


45. The sight which is conversant with visible objects and not with images 
and ideas in the mind, is called false vision of what is soon lost from view. 
(i.e., Mental sight is more lasting than that of the visual organs). 


46. When the mind is fixed upon God, by abstracting its sight from all 
mental and ocular visions, it has then the view of the Supreme before it. (This 
is called spiritual vision). 


47. The visible sights which are obvious to view, are all but unreal 
phantoms; it is the absorption of the mind in the Divine, that makes it 
identical with the same and no other. 


48. The visibles now present before us being absent from our view, either 
before or after our sight of them, must be considered as absent in the interim 
also. Therefore, one unacquainted with his mind, is as insensible as the man 
that knows not what he holds in his hand. 


49. One having no knowledge that, “the world is the same with the 
Supreme spirit,” is always subject to misery; but the negation of the visibles 
as distinct from God, gives us both the pleasure of our enjoyments here, and 
our liberation in future. 


50. It is ignorance to say the water is one thing and its wave is another; but 
it shows one’s intelligence, who says they are the one and the same thing. 


51. The vanities of the world, are fraught with sorrow, therefore, discard all 
its appendages from thee. The abandonment of superfluity, will conduce to 
thy attainment of wisdom at last. 


52. The mind being composed of vain desires, is an unreality in itself; say, 
therefore, O Rama! why should you sorrow for something which in reality is 
nothing. 


53. Do you, O Rama! look upon all things as traps set to ensnare the soul; 
and regard them with the eye of an unkind kinsman looking upon his relatives, 
with an eye of apathy and unconcern. 


54. As the unkind relative is unconcerned with the joys and griefs of his 
relations; so shouldst thou remain aloof from all things, by knowing the 
falsehood of their natures. 


55. Rely on that eternal Spirit, which is infinite knowledge and felicity, and 
which is between the viewer and the view, (i.e., betwixt the noumenon and the 
phenomenon). The mind being fixed to that truth, will adhere to it as clay, 
after the swiftness of its flight is at an end. 


56. The airy flight of the mind being restrained, the sluggish body must 
cease to run about; and the cloud of the dust of ignorance, will no more spread 
over the city of the world. 


57. When the rains of our desires are over, and the calmness of the mind is 
restored; when the shuddering coldness of dullness has fled, and when the 
mud of worldliness is dried up: — 


58. When the channel of our thirst is dried up, and the drinking pots are 
sucked up and emptied; when the forest of the heart is cleared, and its 
brambles are rooted out, and the frost of false knowledge has disappeared: — 


59. It is then that the mist of error vanishes from view, like the shadow of 
night on the approach of dawn; and the frigidity of dullness is put to flight, 
like the poison of a snake-bite by the potent charm of mantras. 


60. Then the rivulets of our desires, do not run down the rock of the body; 
nor do the peacocks of our fleeting wishes, fly and sport on its top. 


61. The sphere of our consciousness becomes as the clear sky; and the 
luminary of the living soul, shines as brightly over it as the midday sun. 


62. The cloud of error is dispelled and succeeded by the light of reason; and 
the longings of the soul, being purified of their dross, make it shine brilliantly 
amidst its sphere. 


63. Then raptures of serene delight, shoot forth in the soul like blooming 
blossoms in the open air; and a cool light is shed upon it, like the cooling 
beams of the autumnal moon. 


64. This ecstacy of the soul, unfolds all prosperity before it, and fructifies 
with abundance the well cultivated ground of the reasoning mind. (Truth is 
the fruit of holy joy in the reasonable mind). 


65. It sheds its clear lustre all over the world, and shows the depths of the 
hills and forests, and everything on earth in their clearest light. (Heavenly joy 
unfolds all things to light). 


66. It expands the mind and makes it translucent, and the heart as a clear 
lake, renders blooming with blossoms of the lotus of satva, and without the 
dust, — rajas of egoism. It is never infested by the swarming passions of 
pride or tamas. 


67. The mind then being purged of its selfishness, turns to universal 
benevolence and philanthropy; and being quite calm in itself without any 
desire of its own, it reigns as lord over the city of its body. 


68. The man whose investigation has made him acquainted with all things, 
whose soul is enlightened with truth; whose mind is melted down from his 
high-mindedness; who is calm and quiet in his understanding, and looks at the 
unpleasant course of the births and deaths of men with pity; he verily lives 
happily in the realm of his body, without his feverish anxieties about 
anything. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE INTELLECTUAL 
SPHERE. 


Argument. The Intellect as pervading all things, and making us acquainted 
with them. 


Rama said: — Tell me O Brahman! how the mundane system subsists in the 
extra mundane immaterial soul, for the sake of my advancement in 
knowledge. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The worlds having no separate existence, (before 
or after their formation), except in the Supreme mind, they are all situated in 
the Divine Intellect, like the unheaving and unseen would be waves of the sea. 


3. As the all-pervading sky is not to be seen owing to its extreme tenuity; 
so the undivided nature of the all-pervasive intellect, is not to be perceived on 
account of its rarity. 


4. As the gem has its brilliancy in it, whether it is moved or unmoved by 
any body, so the unreal world has its potential existence in the Divine Spirit, 
both in its states of action and inactivity. (Hence the eternity of the world in 
the Eternal Mind). 


5. As the clouds abiding in the sky, do not touch the sky or have a tangible 
feeling of its vacuity; so the worlds subsisting in the receptacle of the 
Intellectual soul, have no contact with the extraneous, (pard), intellect, which 
is unconnected with its contents. 


6. As the light residing in the waters of the sea or a pot of water, is not 
connected either with the water or pot, nor is it felt by us but by its reflexion; 
so the intangible soul abides unconnected in its receptacle of the body, and 
reflects itself to our knowledge only. 


7. The intellect is devoid of every desire and designation; it is the 
indestructible soul, and is named by our intelligence of it as (Chetya) 
intelligible; or from some one of our intelligible ideas as the living soul, etc. 


8. It is clearer than the translucent air, and finer than it by a hundred times; 
it is known as an undivided whole by the learned; who view it as identic with 
the whole undivided world, which it comprehends within itself. 


9. As the sea water shows itself in various forms in all its waves, so the 
intellect does not differ from it, in showing us its various representations of its 
own motion. 


10. The diversities of our subjective and objective knowledge of myself, 
and thyself, and these, (ego, tu etc.), are like the varieties of waves and 
billows in the ocean of the intellect, these are but erroneous notions, since 
they are representations of the same element, and the very same intellect. 


11. The various states of the intellect (Chit), intellection (Chintd), 
intelligence (Chittam), and intelligibles (Chetyas), all appertain to the main 
principle of the soul. They are differently conceived by the learned and 
ignorant, but the difference is a mere conceit, (Kalpana). 


12. The intellect presents its two different aspects to the wise and unwise 
people; to the ignorant, it shows its unreal nature in the realistic conception of 
the world, while to the learned it exhibits its luminous form in the identity of 
all things (with God). 


13. The intellect enlightens the luminous bodies of the sun and stars, by its 
internal (intellectual) light; it gives a relish to things by its internal taste; and it 
gives birth to all beings from its inborn ideas of them. 


14. It neither rises nor sets, nor gets up nor sits; it neither proceeds nor 
recedes to or fro, it is not here nor is it nowhere. (Omniscience is present 
everywhere and is ever the same). 


15. The pure and transpicuous intellect which is situated in the soul, 
displays in itself the phantasmagoria which is called the world. 


16. As a heap of fire emits its flame, and a luminous body blazes with its 
rays; and as the sea swells in surges and breaks in with its arms, so the 
intellect bursts out in its creations. (Omniscience is the cause and not 
percipience of the world, — God makes all things, and does not perceive them 
like us). 


17. Thus the intellect which is self-manifest and omnipresent of its own 
nature, develops and envelopes the world by its own manifestation and 
occultation, and by its acts of integration and segregation, (sdnhdra and 
nirhdra); or the acts of accretion and secretion. 


18. It is led by its own error and of its own accord, to forget and forsake its 
state of infinitude; and then by assuming its individual personality of egoism, 
(that I am), it is converted to an ignoramus. (So men of contracted views turn 
to be dunces). 


19. It falls from its knowledge of generals to that of particulars, by its act of 
specialization; and comes to the discrimination of the positive, and negative, 
and of inclusion and exclusion, (or admission or rejection). 


20. It strives and struggles within the confines of the sensuous body (owing 
to its degradation from spirituality); and it multiplies in these bodies like the 
weeds sprouting out of the bosom of the earth. (i.e., From its unity becomes a 
multiplicity in the many animal bodies). 


21. It is the intellect that stretches the spacious vacuum, to make room for 
the subsistence and growth of everything; and makes the all and ever moving 
air and the liquid water, for the vitality and nourishment of all. 


22. It makes the firm earth, (terrafirma), and the light-some fire and the 
fixed worlds all around; and employs time by its injunctions and prohibitions, 
(to do or undo anything). 


23. It gives fragrance to flowers, and grows by degrees their filaments and 
pistils; and it makes the moisture of the porous ground, to grow vegetables on 
earth. 


24. The rooted trees fructify with fruits, by their juicy saps from beneath; 
and they produce their fruitage, and display their foliage with lineaments in 
them, as their veins and arteries. 


25. It renovates the forest with its gifts of various hues, and dyes them with 
the variety of colours in the rainbow of Indra. 


26. It bids the folia, fruits and flowers to wait on the flowery season of 
spring; and then brings their fruitage to perfection, under the heat of the 
summer sun. 


27. It makes the dark blue clouds of heaven, to wait on the approach of the 
rainy weather; and causes the harvest of fields, to follow in the train of 


autumn. 


28. The cold season is decorated with its smiling frost, in its faces of the ten 
sides of the sky; and the dewy weather is made to waft its icicles of dew 
drops, on the pinions of the chilling winds of winter. 


29. It makes the ever moving time, to revolve in its rotation of years and 
cycles and Yuga, — ages; and causes the tide of creation to roll on in its 
waves of worlds, on its bosom of the ocean of eternity. 


30. Its decrees remain fixed with a wonderful stability, and the earth, (terra 
or dhara), continues firm (dhira or sthira), with its quality of containing all 
things. (In this sloka there is both a homonym and paronym of similar sound 
and sense in the word dhard derived from the root dhri: namely, dhird, dhard, 
= sthird, terra and dharana and dharini). 


31. It made the universe teem with fourteen kinds of beings in its as many 
worlds of the chaturdasa-bhuvanas; and these are as different in their modes 
of life as in their forms and figures. (The Atharvan or last Veda reckons tri- 
sapta or thrice seven worlds). 


32. These are repeatedly produced from and reduced to nothing, and move 
in their wonted courses for ever, as bubbles in the waterless ocean of eternity. 


33. Here the miserable multitudes, moving mad in vain struggles after their 
desired objects, and in their imbecility under the subjection of disease and 
death. They are incessantly coming to life and going away in their exits, 
remaining in their living states and acquiring their ends, and forever running 
to and fro, in their repeated births and deaths in this world. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 
UPASAMA. THE SAMENESS OR QUIETISM OF 
THE SOUL. 


Argument: — The sameness of the Spirit from its want of perturbation by 
worldly matters; and equanimity of the mind in all circumstances. 


Vasishtha added: — In this manner are these series of worlds, revolving in 
their invariable course, and repeatedly appearing and disappearing in the 
substantiality of Brahma. 


2. All this is derived from the one self-existence, and have become the 
reciprocal causes of one another, by their mutual transformations; and again, 
they are destroyed of themselves by their mutual destructiveness of one 
another. 


3. But as the motion of the waters on the surface, does not affect the waters 
in the depth of the sea; so the fluctuations of the changing scenes of nature, 
make no alteration in the ever tranquil spirit of Brahma. 


4. As the desert in summer heat, presents the waters of mirage to the clear 
sky, so the false world, shows its delusive appearances to the mind. 


5. As the calm soul seems to be giddy in the state of one’s drunkenness, so 
the essence of the intellect which is always the same, appears as otherwise in 
its ignorance. 


6. The world is neither a reality nor unreality; it is situated in the Intellect 
but appears to be placed without it. It is not separate from the soul, although it 
seems to be different from it, as the ornament appears to differ from its gold. 


7. Rama! that soul of yours whereby you have the perception of form and 
figures and of sound and smell, is the Supreme Brahma pervading all things. 


8. The pure soul being one in many, and inherent in all external objects, 


cannot be thought as distinct from those that appear otherwise than itself. 


9. Rama! it is the difference of human thoughts, that judges differently of 
the existence and non-existence of things, and of their good and bad natures 
also; it judges the existence of the world, either as situated in or without the 
Divine Spirit. 


10. Whereas it is impossible for anything to exist beside the Spirit of God, 
it was the Spirit that, “willed to become many.” And as there was nothing 
beside itself, which it could think of or find for itself, it was necessary that it 
became so of itself, and without the aid of any extraneous matter. (Prose). 


11. (Prose). Therefore, the will to do this or that, or try for one thing or 
other, does not relate to the soul but to the mind. Thus the optionless soul, 
having no will of its own, does nothing except cogitating on what is in itself. 
It is no active agent, owing to the union of all agency, instrumentality and 
objectivity in itself. It abides nowhere, being both the recipient and content, or 
the container and the contained of everything in itself. Neither is the will-less 
soul actionless likewise, when the acts of creation are palpable in itself, 
(karmaprasidhi). Nor is it possible that there is any other cause of them. 
(Nanyakartd dvitiryakam. — Sruti). 


12. Rama! you must know the nature of Brahma to be no other, (vetara-non 
alter) than this; and knowing him as no agent and without a second, be free 
from all anxiety. 


13. I will tell you further that: — Though you may continue to do a great 
many acts here, yet tell me in a word, what dost thou do that is worth doing. 
Rely on the want of your own agency, and be quiet as the sapient sage. 
Remain as calm and still, as the clear ocean when unshaken by the breeze. 


14. Again knowing well, that it is not possible for the swiftest runners to 
reach their goal of perfection, how far so ever they may go. You must desist 
in your mind from pursuing after worldly objects, and persist to meditate on 
the spirituality of your inward and intellectual soul. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
THE SAME QUIETNESS OR QUIETUDE OF 
THE SPIRIT. 


Argument. The unconnected Soul being connected with the Mind, is 
believed as the Active Spirit by the unwise. But the quiet spirit of the wise, 
which is unaffected by its actions, is ever free and emancipate from the acts. 


Vasishtha resumed: — (Prose). Such being the state of the wise, the actions 
they are seen to do, whether of goodness or otherwise or pleasurable or 
painful, in and whatsoever they are engaged, are nil and as nothing, and do 
not affect them as they do the other worldly mortals. (The unconcernedness of 
the wise, is opposed to the great concern of fools in their actions). 


2. For what is it that is called an action, but the exertion of mental and 
voluntary energies, with a fixed determination and desire of performing some 
physical acts, which they call the actions of a person. (But the apathetic minds 
of the wise, being insensible both of the purposes and their ends, there is no 
imputation of agency which can ever attach to them. — Gloss). 


3. The production of an act by appliance of the proper means, and the 
exertion and action of the body in conformity with one’s ability, and the 
completion of the effect compatible with one’s intention, together with the 
enjoyment of the result of such agency, are defined and determined as the 
action of the man. (It is the deliberate and voluntary doing of an act, and not 
the unintentional physical action, that constitutes human agency. — Gloss). 


4. (Verse). Moreover, whether a man is agent or no agent of an action, and 
whether he goes to heaven or dwells in hell, his mind is subject to the same 
feelings, as he has the desires in his heart. (The mind makes a heaven of hell, 
and a hell of heaven by its good or bad thoughts. — Milton). 


5. (Prose). Hence the agency of the ignorant, arises from their wishing to 
do a thing, whether they do it or not; but not so of the wise, who having no 


will, are not culpable even for their involuntary actions. Untutored minds are 
full with the weeds of vice, but well cultivated souls are quite devoid of them. 
— Gloss. (So: — “If good we plant not, vice will fill the place: And rankest 
weeds the richest soils deface’). 


6. He who has the knowledge of truth, (tatwajndna), becomes relaxed in his 
earthly desires; and though he acts his part well, he does not long eagerly for 
its result as others. He acts with his body but with a quiet unconcerned mind. 
When successful, he attributes the gain to the will of God; but the worldly 
minded arrogate the result to themselves, though they could not bring it about. 


7. Whatever the mind intends, comes verily to pass, and nothing is 
achieved without the application of the mind; whereupon the agency 
belongeth to the mind and not to the body. (An involuntary action is not a 
deed). 


8. The world doth proceed from the Mind (Divine); it is the mind (by being 
a development of it), and is situated in the (infinite and eternal) mind; 
knowing all things as such manifestations of the powers of the intellect, the 
wise man remains in the coolness of his desire or luke-warmness. 


9. The minds of spiritualists (or those knowing the soul), come to the state 
of that perfect insensibility of their desires, as when the false watery mirage is 
set down by the raining clouds, and the particles of morning dews, are dried 
up by the raging sun. It is then that the soul is said to rest in its perfect bliss. 
(The turya-sanssouci or impassibility). 


10. This is not the felicity of the gusto of pleasure, nor the dolour of sorrow 
or discontent; it consists not in the liveliness of living beings, nor in the 
torpidity of stones. It is not situated in the midst of these antitheses, (i.e., in 
the sandhisthdna or golden medium between these); but in the knowing mind 
which is Bhumdnanda, — all rapture and ravishment. (Neither is il allegro nor 
il spinseroso, the true bliss of man). 


11. But the ignorant mind (which is unacquainted with this state of 
transport) is transported by its thirst after the moving waters of earthly 
pleasures; as an elephant is misled to the foul pool, where he is plunged in its 
mud and mire, without finding any thing that is really good. 


12. Here is another instance of it based upon a stanza in the Sruti, which 
says that: — A man dreaming himself to be falling into a pit, feels the fear of 
his fall in his imagination even when he has been sleeping in his bed; but 
another who actually falls in a pit when he is fast asleep, is quite insensible of 


his falls. Thus it is the mind which paints its own pleasure and pains, and not 
the bodily action or its inactivity. 


13. Hence whether a man is the doer of an action or not, he perceives 
nothing of it, when his mind is engrossed in some other thought or action; but 
he views everything within himself, who beholds them on the abstract 
meditation of his mind. The thinking mind sees the outward objects, as 
reflexions of his pure intellect cast without him. (The spiritualist regards the 
outward as images of his inward ideas, in opposition to the materialist, who 
considers the internal ideas to be but reflexions derived from external 
impressions). 


14. Thus the man knowing the knowable soul, knows himself as 
inaccessible to the feelings of pleasure and pain. Knowing this as certain, he 
finds the existence of no other thing, apart from what is contained in the 
container of his soul, which is as a thousandth part of a hair. This being 
ascertained, he views everything in himself. With this certainty of knowledge, 
he comes to know his self as the reflector of all things, and present in all of 
them. After these ascertainments, he comes to the conclusion that he is not 
subject to pain or pleasure. Thus freed from anxieties, the mind freely 
exercises its powers over all customary duties, without being concerned with 
them. 


15. He who knows the self, remains joyous even in his calamity, and shines 
as the moonlight, which enlightens the world. He knows that it is his mind and 
not his self, that is the agent of his actions although he is the doer of them; and 
knowing the agency of the mind in all his actions, he does not assume to 
himself the merit of the exercise of his limbs, hands and feet, nor expects to 
reap the rewards of all his assiduous labours and acts. 


16. Mental actions, (thoughts), being brought to practice, tend to involve 
their unguarded agents of ungoverned minds, into the endurance of its 
consequence. Thus the mind is the seed, (root), of all efforts and exertions, of 
all acts and actions, of all their results and productions, and the source of 
suffering the consequences of actions. By doing away with your mind, you 
make a clean sweep of all your actions, and thereby avoid all your miseries 
resulting from your acts. All these are at an end with the anaesthesia of the 
mind. It is a practice in Yoga to allay (laisser aller), the excitement of the 
mind to its ever varying purposes. 


17. Behold the boy is led by his mind, (fancy), to build his toy or hobby- 
horse, which he dresses and daubs at his willful play, without showing any 


concern or feeling of pleasure or pain, in its making or breaking of it at his 
pleasure. So doth man build his aerial castle, and level it without the sense of 
his gain or loss therein. It is by his acting in this manner in all worldly 
matters, that no man is spiritually entangled to them. (Do your duties and deal 
with all with a total unconcernedness and indifference). 


18. What cause can there be for your sorrow, amidst the dangers and 
delights of this world, but that you have the one and not the other. But what 
thing is there that is delectable and delightful to be desired in this world, 
which is not evanescent and perishable at the same time, save yourself (soul), 
which is neither the active nor passive agent of your actions and enjoyments; 
though they attribute the actions and their fruitions to it by their error. 


19. The importance of actions and passions to living beings, is a mistake 
and not veritable truth. Because by the right consideration of things, we find 
no action nor passion bearing any relation to the soul. Its attachment or 
aversion to the senses and sensible actions and enjoyments, is felt only by the 
sensualist, and not by them that are unconscious of sensuous affections (as the 
apathetic ascetics). 


20. There is no liberation in this world for the worldly minded, while it is 
fully felt by the liberal minded Yogi, whose mind is freed from its attachments 
to the world, in its state of living liberation. (Jivan-mukta). 


21. Though the Sage is rapt in the light of his self-consciousness, yet he 
does not disregard to distinguish the unity and duality, the true entity from the 
non-entities, and to view the omnipotence in all potencies or powers that are 
displayed in nature, (for these display His power and goodness beyond our 
thought). 


22. (Verse). To him there is no bond or freedom, nor liberation nor 
bondage whatever, and the miseries of ignorance are all lost in the light of his 
enlightenment. (Bondage and freedom here refer to their causes or acts (Rh) 
by the figure of metonymy; and that these bear no relation to the abstracted or 
spiritualistic Yogi). 


23. It is in vain to wish for liberation, when the mind is tied down to the 
earth; and so it is redundant to talk of bondage, when the mind is already 
fastened to it. Shun them both by ignoring your egoism, and remain fixed to 
the true Ego, and continue thus to manage yourself with your unruffled mind 
on earth. (The whole of this is a lesson of the Stoical and Platonic philosophic 
and unimpassioned passivity). 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
ON THE UNITY OF ALL THINGS. 


Argument. Explanation of Divine Omnipotence, and inability of Vasishtha 
to give full exposition of it. 


Rama rejoined: — (Prose) Tell me, O high-minded sage, how could the 
creation proceed from the Supreme Brahma, whom you represent to remain as 
a painting in the tableau of vacuity. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — O prince, such is the nature of Brahma, that all 
power incessantly flows from him, wherefore every power is said to reside in 
him. (It is unvedantic to say, that Brahma is omnipotent or the reservoir of 
power, and not omnipotence or identic with all power himself). 


3. In him resides entity and non-entity, in him there is unity, duality and 
plurality, and the beginning and end of all things. (Because omnipotence has 
the power to be all things, which limited powers cannot do). 


4. This is one and no other else, (i.e., it is all that is, and there is none else 
beside it, Ud est non alter). It is as the sea, whose waters have endless 
varieties of shapes, and represent the images of myriads of stars in its bosom; 
rising spontaneously of themselves). 


5. The density of the Intellect makes the mind, and the mind brings forth all 
the powers of thinking, willing or volition, and of acting or action. These it 
produces, accumulates, contains, shows, and then absorbs in itself. 


6. (Verse) Brahma is the source of all living beings, and of all things seen 
all around us. His power is the cause of exhibiting all things, in their incessant 
course or quiescence. 


7. All things spring from the Supreme Spirit, and they reside in his all 
comprehensive mind. They are of the same nature with that of their source, as 
the water of the sweet and saltish lakes. 


8. Rama interrupted here and said: — Sir, your discourse is very dark, and I 
cannot understand the meaning of the words of your speech. 


9. There is that nature of Brahma, which you said to be beyond the 
perception of the mind and senses, and what are these perishable things, 
which you say to have proceeded from him. If your reasoning comes to this 
end, I cannot then rely upon it. 


10. Because it is the law of production, that anything that is produced from 
something, is invariably of the same nature with that of its producer. 


11. As light is produced from light, corns come from corn, and man is born 
of man, and all kinds come out of their own kind. 


12. And so the productions of the immutable Spirit, must also be 
unchangeable and spiritual too in their nature. 


13. Beside this the Intellectual Spirit of God, is pure and immaculate; while 
this creation is all impure and gross matter. 


14. The great Sage said upon hearing these words: — Brahma is all purity 
and there is no impurity in him; the waves moving on the surface of the sea 
may be foul, but they do not soil the waters of the deep. 


15. You cannot conceive, Rama, of there being a second person or thing 
beside the One Brahma; as you can have no conception of fire beside its heat. 
(Its light being adscititious). 


16. Rama rejoined: — Sir, Brahma is devoid of sorrow, while the world is 
full of sorrows. I cannot, therefore, clearly understand your words; when you 
say this to be the offspring of that. (The maculate equal to the immaculate or 
the perishable to the imperishable is absurd). 


17. Valmiki said to Bharadwaja: — The great Sage Vasishtha remained 
silent at these words of Rama; and stopped in his lecture with the 
thoughtfulness of his mind. 


18. His mind lost its wonted clearness (in its confusion), and then 
recovering its perspicacity, he pondered within himself in the following 
manner. 


19. The educated and intelligent mind, that has known the knowable One, 
has of itself got to the end of the subject of liberation, by its own reasoning 
and intuition as that of Rama. 


20. It is no fault of the educated to be doubtful of something, until it is 
explained to them to their full satisfaction, as in the case of Raghava. 
(Relating the identity of the cause and its effect). 


21. But the half-educated are not fit to receive spiritual instruction, because 
their view of the visibles, which dwells on obvious objects, proves the cause 
of their ruin (by obstructing their sight of the spiritual). 


22. But he who has come to the sight of transcendental light, and got a clear 
insight of spiritual truths, feels no desire for sensual enjoyments; but advances 
in course of time to the conclusion, that Brahma is All in all things (to pan). 


(The transcendental philosophy of modern German schools, has arrived at 
the same conclusion of Pantheism, Ho Theos to pan). 


23. The disciple is to be prepared and purified at first, with the precepts and 
practice of quietism and self-control (Sama and damd); and is then to be 
initiated in the creed that, “All this is Brahma, and that thyself art that pure 
Spirit.” 


24. But who so teaches the faith of, “all is Brahma,” to the half taught and 
the ignorant; verily entangles him in the strong snare of hell. (Because they 
take the visible for the invisible, which leads them to nature and idol worships 
which casts them to hell). 


25. The well discerning Sage should tell them, that are enlightened in their 
understandings, whose desire of sensual gratifications has abated, and who are 
freed from their worldly desires, that they are purged of the dirt of their 
ignorance, and are prepared to receive religious and spiritual instruction. 


26. The spiritual guide who instructs his pupil without weighing well his 
habits and conduct, is a silly pedagogue and sinks into hell and has to dwell 
there until the last day of judgment; (to answer for misleading his disciples). 


27. The venerable Vasishtha, who was the chief of sages, and like the 
luminous sun on earth, having considered these things, spoke to Rama as 
follows. (The sages are said to be luminous both from the fairness of their 
Aryan complexions, as also on account of their enlightened understandings). 


28. Vasishtha said: — I will tell thee Rama at the conclusion of this lecture, 
whether the attribution of the dross of gross bodies, is applicable to Brahma or 
not. (i.e., How a spiritual body may assume a material form, efc.). 


29. Know now that Brahma is almighty, all pervading, ubiquitous and is all 


himself, because of his omnipotence, which can do and become all and 
everything of itself. 


30. As you see the various practices of magicians and the trickeries of 
jugglers, in producing, presenting, and abstracting many things in the sight of 
men, that are all but unreal shows; so doth Brahma produce, present and 
retract all things from and into himself. 


31. The world is filled with gardens as those in fairy lands, and the sky is 
replenished with the airy castles of Gandharvas and the abodes of gods; and 
men are seen to descend from the cloudless sky, to the surface of the earth, 
and rise upwards to heaven (in vimanas or balloons). 


32. Fairy cities like the palaces of the Gandharvas of the ethereal regions, 
are shown on earth, and filled with the fairies of the Fairy land. (Ze., The 
courts and palaces of princes, which vie with the abodes of gods). 


33. Whatever there is or has been or is to be in this world in future, are like 
reflexions of the revolving sky and heavenly bodies, or a brazen ball affixed to 
the top of a tower, and darting its golden light below. 


34. All these are but exhibitions of the various forms of manifestations of 
the self-same God. (“These as they change, — these are but the varied God.” 
Thomson. So Wordsworth and the Persian Mystics). 


35. Whatever takes place at any time or place and in any form, is but the 
variety of the One Self-existent reality. Why, therefore, O Rama! should you 
give vent to your sorrow or joy, or wonder at any change of time or place or 
nature and form of things, which are full of the spirit of God, and exhibit the 
endless aspects of the Infinitive Mood. 


36. Let the intelligent preserve the sameness, (samata), of their minds and 
dispositions amidst all changes; knowing them as the varying conditions of 
the same unvarying Mind. 


37. He who sees his God in all, and is fraught with equanimity, has no 
cause of his wonder of surprise, his grief or delight or any fluctuation of his 
mind, in any change in nature or vicissitude of his fortune (because the one 
Omnipresence is present in all events, and its Omnipotence directs all 
potentialities). 


38. The unaltered mind continues to view the varieties of the power of his 
Maker, in all the variations of time and place, and of all external 
circumstances. 


39. The Lord proposes these plans in the formation of his creation, and 
exhibits as the sea does its waves in endless varieties and successions from the 
plenitude of his mind. 


40. So the Lord manifests the powers situated in himself, as the sea does its 
waves in itself. Or as the milk forms the butter, the earth produces the pot, 
(ghata), and the thread is woven into the cloth, (pata). So the bata or fig tree 
brings forth its fruit, and all other varied forms are contained in their sources. 
But these formal changes are phenomenal not real. They are mere appearances 
of the spectrum, as those of apparitions and spectres. 


41. There is no other agent or object, nor an actor and its act, or anything 
which is acted upon, nor is there anything that becomes nothing except it by 
but a variety of the one unity. Un nihilo riverti posse). 


42. The mind that witnesses the spiritual truths, and remains with its 
unimpaired equanimity, and is undepressed by external accidents, comes to 
see the light of truth in itself. (Truth like the sun shineth in the inmost soul). 


43. (Verse). There being the lamp, there is its light also; and the sun shining 
brings the day with him. Where there is the flower, there is its odour likewise; 
so where there is the living soul, there is the light or knowledge of the world 
in it. 


44. The world appearing all around, is as the light of the soul; it appears as 
the motion of the wind, whereof we have no notion of its reality or unreality. 
(So says Herbert Spencer concerning our notion of motion. We see the wheel 
in motion and changing its place, but have no idea of its motion). 


45. The immaculate Soul, is the prime mobile power of the appearance and 
disappearance of the myriads of gross bodies which like the revolving stars of 
the sky, and the season flowers of the spring, appear and reappear to us by 
turns, like the ups and downs of wheels in motion. (We see their revolutions, 
but neither see their motion nor the soul the giver of motion). 


46. All things die away when our souls are without us, but how can 
anything be null when we are in possession of our souls? (Everything exists 
with ourselves, but we lose all, with loss of our souls). 


47. All things appear before us in the presence of our souls, and they vanish 
from before us in their absence from the body. (Everything is existent with us 
with the existence of our souls, and nothing is perceived by us without them, 
as when we are dead). 


48. Everything is born with us with our souls, and is lost with loss of them. 
(The living have all, but the dead are lost to view. And the human soul, when 
in conjunction with the Divine, has a clear view of everything). 


51. The minds of men are endowed with their knowledge at their very birth. 
Then growing big by degrees in course of time, they expand themselves in the 
form of this spacious forest of the world. 


52. The wood of the world is the fastening post of the soul, where our 
blooming desires are fraught with fruits of poignant griefs. It branches out 
with gratifications, blossoms with hoary age, and is breaking its goodly post, 
and wandering at large of its free will. 


CHAPTER XXXX. 
BRAHMA IDENTIC WITH THE WORLD or 
IDENTITY OF THE WORLD WITH BRAHMA. 


Argument. Production and names of the Varieties of Animal Life and their 
spiritual Natures. 


Rama said: — Tell me, Sir, about the production of animal beings from 
Brahma, and let me know their different names and natures in full length. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The manner in which the different species of 
beings are produced from Brahma, and how they are destroyed afterwards, as 
also how they obtain their liberation at last: — 


3. Also the manner of their growth and sustentation, and fitness in the 
world, are all what you must hear me now tell you in brief. 


4. The power of the intellect of Brahma exerts of its free will, and this 
omnipotence becomes whatever is thought of, (chetya), in the Divine Intellect. 


5. The intellection becomes condensed to a certain subtle form, which 
having the powers of conception, (sankalpa), becomes the principle entitled 
the Mind. 


6. The mind then by an effort of its conception (called the Will), expands 
itself to an unreal (ideal) scenery like that of the Fairyland, by falling off from 
the nature of Brahmic Incogitancy. 


7. The intellect when remaining in its original state, appears as a vacuum or 
vacancy; but upon manifesting itself in the form of the mind, it is seen as the 
visible sky by men. 


8. Taking the conception of the lotus-born, it finds itself in its conceived 
form of the lotus, (Brahma), and then it thinks of creation in the form of 
Prajdpati or lord of creatures. 


9. He then formed from his thought, (chitta), this creation, containing the 
fourteen worlds with all the bustle of living beings in them. 


10. The mind itself is a vacuity with a vacuous body; its conception is the 
field of its action, and its sphere is full with the false workings of the mind. 


11. Here there are many kinds of beings, labouring under great ignorance 
as the beasts and brute creatures. There are some with enlightened minds as 
the sages; and others staggering in the intermediate class, as the majority of 
mankind. 


12. Among all living beings that are confined in this earth, it is only the 
human race living in this part, (India), that are capable of receiving instruction 
and civilization. 


13. But as most of these are subject to diseases and distress, and are 
suffering under the thrall of their ignorance, enmity and fear; it is for them 
that I will deliver my lecture on social and saintly conduct, — rdjatwiki niti, 
(in the 42nd chapter of this book). 


14. I will also treat there about the everlasting, imperishable and 
omnipresent Brahma, who is without beginning and end, whose mind is 
without error, and of the form of Intellectual light. 


15. How endless beings are put to motion, by the momentum of a particle 
of his motionless body; and resembling the rolling of boisterous waves on the 
surface of the clear and tranquil ocean. 


16. Rama asked: — How Sir, do you speak of a part of the infinite Spirit, 
and of the momentum of the motionless God; as also of a change and effort of 
it, that is altogether without them, (vikdrdvikrama). 


17. Vasishtha replied: — It is the usual and current mode of expression, 
both in the Sdstras and language of the people to say, “all this is made by or 
come from Him,” but it is not so in its real and spiritual sense. 


18. No change or partition, and no relation of space or time, bear any 
reference to the Supreme, who is unchangeable, infinite and eternal; nor is 
there any appearance or disappearance of Him at any time or place, who is 
ever invisible everywhere. 


19. There never was nor can there ever be any way, of representing the 
incomprehensible, except by symbolical expressions; it was therefore in 
accordance to common speech, that I have made use of those words. 


20. Whatever words or sentences are used here as symbolical of some 
sense, whether they express as, “produced from it, tajja,” or as a change of the 
same, — “tanmaya,” the same should be used, in that sense all along. 


21. It is tajja, as when we say “fire proceeds from fire” (meaning, the 
“mundane Brahma comes out of the spiritual Brahma.” Here fire is symbolical 
of Brahma and the world). It is tanmaya in the expression, “Brahma is the 
producer and produced,” (which means the identity, — and transformation of 
the creator to the creation). 


22. The first form is applied to the world as proceeding from Brahma; but 
the other form of the producer and produced, means also the creative power 
which made the world. 


23. The expression idam — anyat = idem alius, or this is one thing and that 
another, is false, the difference is verbal and not real; because there is no proof 
of it in the nature of God, which is one and all. 


24. The mind, by reason of its birth, (tajja), from Brahma, is possessed 
both of the power and intelligence of his Intellect, and is enabled to 
accomplish its intended purpose, by means of its intense application. 


25. To say that one flame of fire, is the producer of another, is mere 
logomachy, and there is no truth in this assertion. (Because it is no other thing 
produced by another, but the very thing). 


26. That one is the producer of another is also a paralogy; because the one 
Brahma being infinite, could produce no other thing, beside reproducing 
himself. (For where and whence could he get another thing to create a thing 
anew beside in himself?) 


27. It is the nature of disputation to contradict one another by replies and 
rejoinders; but it is not right to foil the adversary by false sophistry. 


28. The learned know Brahma as the ocean rolling in its endless waves, and 
as significant words and their significations, which go together as Brahma and 
his creation. 


29. Brahma is the Intellect, — Chit, Brahma is the mind, — manas, 
Brahma is intelligence, — Vijndna, and Brahma is substance, — Vasthu; He 
is Sound, — sabda, He is understanding, — chit, and He is in the principles of 
things, — Dhdtus. 


30. The whole universe is Brahma, and yet He is beyond all this. In reality 


the world is a nullity, for all is Brahma alone. 


31. This is one thing and that is another, and this is a part of the great soul, 
are all contradictory assertions of ignorance (false knowledge), as no words 
can express the true nature of the unknown. 


32. The spirit rises as the flame of fire, and this flame is significant of the 
mind. Its tremor signifies the fluctuation of the mind, which in reality is not 
the case, there being no rise or fall of the Divine Mind. 


33. It is untruth that wavers and equivocates in double entendres. It 
prevaricates the truth, as the defective eye views the double moon in the sky. 


34. Brahma being all (to pan) of himself, and all pervading and infinite of 
his own nature, there can be no other thing beside himself, and anything that 
is produced of him, is likewise himself. 


35. Beside the truth of the existence of Brahma, there is nothing which can 
be proved as absolutely certain; and it is a scriptural truth which says, “verily 
all this is Brahma.” 


36. This also must be the conclusion, which you will arrive at by your 
reasoning, and which I will propound with many instances and tenets in the 
Book of Nirvana or Extinction. 


37. There are many things here in connection with this single question of 
which you are ignorant, and all which you will come to know fully in future, 
for dispelling your doubts on the subject. 


38. The unreality having disappeared, the reality appears to view, as the 
darkness of night being dispelled, the visible world comes to sight. 


39. The spacious world which appears to your false sight of it, will vanish, 
O Rama! on your attaining to the state of calm quietism. The fallacious 
appearances must disappear from your vision, as soon as the light of truth 
comes to dawn upon your soul. 


CHAPTER XLI. 
DESCRIPTION OF IGNORANCE. 


Argument. Delusion the cause of error. 


Rama said: — Sir, I feel your speech to be as cooling and shining as the water 
of the milky sea; it is as deep and copious as the vast ocean: — 


2. I am sometimes darkened and enlightened at others, by the variety of 
your discourses, as a rainy day is now obscured by the cloud, and again shines 
forth brightly with sunshine. 


3. I understand Brahma as infinite and inconceivable, and the life and light 
of all that exists. I know that light never sets; but tell me, how they attribute 
many qualities that are foreign to his nature. 


4. Vasishtha replied: — The wording and meaning of my lectures to you, 
are all used in their right and ordinary sense, they are neither insignificant or 
meaningless, equivocal or ambiguous, or contradictory of one with another. 


5. You will understand the proper import of my phraseology, when the 
eyesight of your understanding becomes clearer, and when the light of reason 
will rise in your mind. 


6. Do not mistake the meanings of my words, or the phraseology I have 
used all along, in order to explain the subject of my lectures, and purport of 
the Sdstras, for your acquaintance with them. 


7. When you will come to know the clear Truth of Brahma, you will know 
more regarding the distinctions of significant words, and their significations 
and significates. 


8. The distinctive verbal signs are invented for the communication of our 
thoughts, in conveying our instructions to others, and for our knowledge of 
the purport of the Sdstras. 


9. Words and their meanings, phrases and their constructions, are used for 
the instruction of others; they are applied to the use of the ignorant, and never 
apply to those who are acquainted with truth (by their intention). 


10. There is no attribute, nor imputation, that bears any relation with the 
free and unsullied soul. It is the dispassionate spirit of the supreme Brahma, 
and the same is the soul of the existent world. 


11. This subject will again be fully discussed and dilated upon with various 
arguments, on the occasion of our arriving to the conclusion of this subject (in 
the book of Nirvana). 


12. I have said so far about verbiology at present, because it is impossible 
to penetrate into the deep darkness of ignorance, without the means of 
verbiage, (flux de mots). 


13. As conscious ignorance offers herself a willing sacrifice to the shrine of 
knowledge, she bids her adversary, — the destroyer of error, to take 
possession of her seat in the bosom of man. (Here is a double entendre of the 
word avidyd, the former meaning ignorance as well as a concubine, and the 
latter signifying the wife and knowledge; hence it implies the advance of 
knowledge upon disappearance of her rival ignorance). 


14. As one weapon is foiled by another, and one dirt is removed by the 
other (cow dung and ashes), and as one poison is destroyed by another, and 
also as one foe is driven out by another enemy, (similes curantur). 


15. So Rama, the mutual destruction of errors, brings joy to the soul. It is 
hard however to detect the error; but no sooner it is found out than it is put to 
destruction. It means the confutation of false doctrines by one another. 


16. Ignorance obscures our perspicacity, and presents the false and gross 
world before us. We all view this wonderful universe, but know not what and 
how it is. 


17. Unobserved it rushes to our view, but being examined with attention, it 
flies upon keen observation. We know it is a phantasm, and yet find it 
appearing with its dimensions and figures before us. 


18. O the wonderful enchantment, which has spread out this world, and 
made the unreality to appear as a sober reality, to the knowledge of every one 
of us. 


19. This earth is a distinct wide extended superfices, resting on the 


indistinct surface of an unknown substratum. He is the best of beings that has 
stretched this enchantment. 


20. When you are enlightened with the thought, that all this is inexistent in 
reality; you will then become the knower of the knowable, (God), and 
understand the import of my lectures. 


21. So long as you are not awakened to true knowledge, rely upon my 
words, and know this immensity as the creature of the incorrigible and 
immovable ignorance. 


22. All this immensity, that appears to sight, is but the picture of your 
mistaken thought; it is all unsubstantial, and a mere manifestation of your 
deluded mind only. 


23. He is entitled to liberation, whose mind is certain of the reality of 
Brahma; and knows the moving and unmoving figures without, as the 
thoughts of the mind presented to the sight. 


24. The whole scale of the earth, is as a net of birds to catch the fleeting 
mind; it is as false as a landscape in the dream; which represents the unreal as 
real ones to the mind. 


25. He who looks upon the world without his attachment to it, is never 
subject to grief or sorrow on any account. And he who thinks all these forms 
as formless, sees the formless spirit. 


26. The forms of the formless spirit, is the formation of ignorance, and 
when the blemishes of passions and mutations, do not even belong to great 
souls, how can these attributes relate to the greatest God. 


27. The attributes given to the Supreme Spirit, are as dust thrown upon the 
surface of limpid water; it is our thoughts only that attribute these qualities to 
the inconceivable One, as we attribute certain meanings to words (that bear no 
relation to them). 


28. It is usage that establishes the meanings of words, which continue to be 
inseparably joined with them; and it is usage that determines their use in the 
Sdstras. 


29. As the cloth cannot be thought of without its thread, so the soul is 
unintelligible without the medium of words giving its true definition. 


30. It is possible to gain the knowledge of the soul from the Sdstras, 
without one’s self-consciousness of it; as it is possible to get over the sea of 


ignorance, by means of spiritual knowledge. 


31. Rama! it is impossible to arrive at the state of what is called 
imperishable life and bliss, when the soul is any how polluted by the 
blemishes of ignorance. 


32. The existence of the world verily depends on the existence of the 
Supreme; know this, and do not question how and whence it came to exist. 


33. Let it be for thee to think only how thou shalt get rid of this unreality; 
for it is upon the disappearance of the unreality, that thou canst know the real 
truth. 


34. Leave off thinking whence is all this, how it is and how it is destroyed 
at last; believe it to be really nothing, but only appearing without being 
actually seen. 


35. How can one know, how the unreality appears as reality by his mistake 
of it, when the error of reality, in the unreal, has taken a firm footing in his 
mind? 


36. Try your best to destroy this prejudice of yours, and then you will know 
the truth. And verily such men are the greatest heroes and most learned in the 
world, who are freed from prejudices. 


37. Strive to destroy your baneful ignorance, or it is sure to overpower on 
thee as upon the rest of mankind. 


38. Take care, lest it should enthral thee to the pain of thy repeated 
transmigrations, and know ignorance to be the root of all evils and companion 
of every vice. It creates a man’s interest in what proves his peril. 


39. Avoid quickly this false view, the baneful cause of your fears and 
sorrows, and of your diseases and dangers; and the germ of errors in the mind; 
and thereby ford over this perilous ocean of the world. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
PRODUCTION OF JIVA OR LIVING SOULS. 


Argument. Condensation of Desires in the Intellect. And Formation of 
living souls thereby. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear now Rama! the antidote against the wide 
extended malady of Ignorance, and the raging endemic of unreality, which 
vanishes from view upon your close inspection of it. 


2. That which was proposed to be said, (in chapter XL), concerning the 
sdtwika and rdjasika qualities. I am now going to expound the same, on 
account of investigating into the powers of the mind. 


3. The same Brahma who is all-pervading, undecaying and immortal, is 
known as intellectual light and without beginning and end, and free from 
error. 


4. The Intellect, which is body of Brahma, and has its vibration in itself, 
becomes agitated and condensed at intervals, as the translucent water of the 
ocean has its motion of itself, and becomes turbid and thickened by its 
perturbation. 


(i.e., The mind is possessed of motion contrary to dull and motionless 
matter, and it is by its moving force, that it forms the gross bodies, as the huge 
surges of the sea). 


5. As the water of the sea, is agitated in itself without any motion or 
excitation from without; so the Almighty power exerts its force in itself, 
throughout all its eternity and infinity. (The water composed of the gases, is 
always in motion). 


6. As the air stirs in its own bosom of vacuity forever, so the power of the 
Divine Spirit, exerts itself spontaneously and freely in its own sphere of the 
spirit. 


7. And as the flame rises high of its own accord, so the power of the spirit, 
extends in itself in all directions. (It is the nature of the flame to rise upward 
only, but that of the Spirit, is to move in every way and all round the great 
circle of creation). 


8. As the sea seems to move with its sparkling waters, reflecting the sun 
and moonbeams upon its surface, so the almighty spirit appears to shake with 
the fleeting reflections of creation in its bosom. 


9. As the sea sparkles with the golden beams of the starry frame; so the 
translucent vast soul of God, shines with the light of its own intellectual 
sphere. 


10. As chains of pearly rays, glitter to our sight in the empty sky; so sundry 
forms of things fly about in the vast vacuity of the intellect. (These are as 
bubbles in the vast expanse of the Divine Mind). 


11. These intellectual images, being pushed forward by the force of 
intellect, they begin to roll in its vacuous sphere like waves in the sea. (They 
are the same in substance, though different in appearance). 


12. These images though inseparable from the intellect of the Divine spirit, 
yet they seem to be apart from it, like the light in the holes of needles and 
other cavities. (The glory of God, is the light and life of all). 


13. The universal Omnipotence exhibits itself in those particular forms, as 
the moon shows her various horns in her different phases. 


14. Thus the intellectual power of the Supreme spirit, coming to shine forth 
as light, refracts itself in various forms as the very many semblances of that 
great light. 


15. The Supreme spirit, though conscious of its nature of infinity and 
indivisibility, yet assumes to itself the state of its individuality, in every 
separate and limited form of created beings. 


16. When the supreme Entity takes upon itself these several forms, it is 
immediately joined by a train of qualities and properties, with quantity, 
modality, and the like as followers in its train. 


17. The unsubstantial intellect, deeming itself as a substance by its being 
separated from the supreme soul, becomes divided into infinity like the waves 
of the sea water (which is one and many). 


18. As there is no material difference of the armlet and bracelet, from their 


matter of the same gold; so it is the intellect and the soul the one and same 
thing. It is the thought that makes the difference in their different modes. 


19. As there is no difference between one lamp and the others, that are 
lighted from the same light; so it is of all souls and intellects, which are alike 
in their nature, but differ only in their particular attributes, — upadhis. 


20. The Intellect, being put to action by the force of the soul on particular 
occasions, pursues its desires and the objects of its fancy. 


21. The same intellect also, taking its volitive and active forms at different 
times and places; is styled the embodied soul or spirit, and known as 
Kshetrajna. 


22. It is so named from its familiarity with the body or Kshetra, and its 
knowledge of the inward and outward actions of it (or from its knowing its 
person and personality). 


23. This being fraught with its desires, is designated as Egoism or 
selfishness; and this again being soiled by its fancies, takes the name of the 
understanding. 


24. The understanding leaning to its wishes, is termed the mind; which 
when it is compacted for action, takes the name of the senses or sensation. 


25. The senses are next furnished with their organs called the organs of 
sense, which being joined with the organs of action, the hands and feet are 
jointly denominated the body. 


26. Thus the living soul being tied to its thoughts and desires, and being 
entrapped in the net of pain and sorrow, is termed Chitta or heart. 


27. Thus the gradual development of the intellect, produces its successive 
results (or phases as said above); so these are the different states or conditions 
of the living soul, and not so many forms of it, but all these are the impurities 
of the soul. 


28. The living soul becomes associated with egoism in its embodied state, 
and this being polluted by its egoistic understanding, it is entangled in the net 
of selfish desires, which becomes the mind. 


29. The concupiscent mind becomes eager to engraft itself in its consorts 
and offspring, and to secure the false possessions of the world to itself and 
without a rival. 


30. The tendencies of the mind, pursue their desired objects, as the cow 
follows the lusty bull; and the mind runs after its objects only to be polluted 
by them, as the sweet stream of the river, meets the sea to become bitter and 
briny. 


31. Thus the mind being polluted by its selfishness, loses the freedom of its 
will; and becomes bound to its desires, as the silkworm is enclosed in the 
cocoon. 


32. It is the mind that exposes the body to confinement, by its pursuit after 
its desires, until it comes to feel the gall of its own thraldom, and the bitter 
regret of the conscious soul. 


33. Knowing itself to be enslaved, it bids farewell to the freedom of its 
thought and knowledge; and begets within itself the gross ignorance, which 
rages and ranges free in the forest of this world, with its horribly monstrous 
appearance. 


34. The mind containing within it the flame of its own desires, is consumed 
to death like the fettered lion in a fire. 


35. It assumes to itself the agency of all its various acts, under its 
subjection to a variety of desires; and thus exposes itself to the changes of its 
state, in this life and all its future births. 


36. It labours continually under all its octuple state of understanding; 
namely that the knowledge, intelligence and activity or active agency, and its 
egoism or selfishness, all of which are causes of all its woe. 


37. It is sometimes styled the prakriti or character, and at others the mdyd 
or seat of self-delusion. The mind, — manas is often converted to malas or 
foulness, and very often to karman or activity. 


38. It is sometimes designated as bondage, and is often synonymous with 
the heart; it is called also as avidyd or ignorance, and frequently identified 
with the will or volition likewise. 


39. Know Rama, the heart is tied to the earth by a chain of sorrow and 
misery; it is brimful of avarice and grief, and the abode of passions. 


40. It is living dead with the cares of age and the fear of death, to which the 
world is subject; it is troubled with desire and disgust, and stained by its 
ignorance and passions. 


41. It is infested by the prickly thorns of its wishes, and the brambles of its 


acts; it is quite forgetful of its origin, and is beset by the evils of its own 
making. 


42. It is confined as the silkworm in its own cell, where it is doomed to 
dwell with its sorrow and pain; and though it is but a minim in its shape, it is 
the seat of endless hell-fire. (A hair as heart. — Pope. The heart is hell, etc. — 
Milton). 


43. It is as minute as the soul, and yet appears as huge as the highest hill; 
and this world is a forest of wild poisonous trees, branching out with their 
fruits of decay and death. 


44. The snare of desire is stretched over the whole world; its fruits are as 
those of the Indian fig trees, which has no pith or flavour within. 


45. The mind being burnt by the flame of its sorrow, and bitten by the 
dragon of its anger; and being drowned in the boisterous sea of its desires, has 
entirely forgotten its Great Father. 


46. It is like a lost stag straying out of its herd, and like one demented by 
his sorrows; or more like a moth singed by the flame of world affairs. 


47. It is torn away as a limb from its place in the Spirit, and thrown in an 
incongenial spot; it is withering away like a lotus plant plucked from its root. 


48. Being cast amidst the bustle of business, and among men who are 
inimical or as dumb pictures to him, every man is groveling in this earth 
amidst dangers and difficulties. 


49. Man is exposed to the difficulties of this dark and dismal world, like a 
bird fallen in the waters of the sea; he is entangled in the snare of the world, 
like one snatched to the fairy land in the sky. 


50. The mind is carried away by the current of business, like a man borne 
by the waves of the sea. Lift it, O brave Rama! from this pit, as they do an 
elephant sinking in the mud. 


51. Lift up thy mind by force, O Rama! like a bullock from this delusive 
puddle, (palvala), of the world, where it is shorn of its brightness and is 
weakened in its frame. 


52. Rama! the man whose mind is not troubled in this world, with 
successive joy and grief, and the vicissitudes of decrepitude, disease and 
death, is no human being; but resembles a monstrous Rdkshasa, although he 
may have the figure of a man on him. (It is not humanity to be devoid of 


human feeling). 


CHAPTER XLII. 
THE REPOSITORIES OF LIVING SOULS. 


Argument. The Transmigrations of Souls by virtue of their Acts, and the 
way of their salvation. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus the living soul being derived from Brahma, 
assumes to itself the form of the mind, and is tossed about with the thoughts 
and cares of the world. It is then changed into thousands and millions of 
forms, as it figures to itself in its imagination. 


2. It has undergone many prior births, and is in the course of migrating into 
many more; it will transmigrate into many more also, which are as 
multitudinous as the flitting particles of a water-fall (splitting to many atoms). 


3. These atomic souls of living beings, being subjected to their desires by 
the great variety of their wishes, are made to wander under many forms, to 
which they are bound by their desires. 


4. They rove incessantly to different directions, in distant countries both by 
land and water; they live or die in those places, as the bubbles blow out but to 
float and burst, and then sink in the water below. 


5. Some are produced for the first time in a new Kalpa age, and others are 
born a hundred times in it; some have had only two or three births, while the 
births of others are unnumbered (in a Kalpa). 


6. Some are yet unborn and are to be born yet on earth, and many others 
have passed their births by attainment of their liberation at last. Some are alive 
at present, and others are no more to be born. 


7. Some are born again and again, for myriads of Kalpas, some remaining 
in one state all along, and many in various states repeatedly changing their 
forms and natures. 


8. Some are subjected to the great misery of hell, and some are destined to 
a little joy on earth; some enjoying the great delights of the gods in heaven, 
and others raised to the glory of heavenly bodies above. 


9. Some are born as Kinnaras and Gandharvas and others as Vidyadharas 
and huge serpents; some appear in the forms of Sol, Indra, and Varuna, 
(Ouranas), and others in those of the triocular Siva and the lotus-born Brahma. 


10. Some become the Kushmanda and Vetala goblins, and others as Yaksha 
and Rdkshasa cannibals; some again become the Brahmanas and the ruling 
class, and others become Vaisyas and Stidras. (The four tribes of Indo- 
Aryans). 


11. Some become Swapacha and Chandala, (eaters of dog and hog-flesh), 
and others as Kiratas and Puskasa, (eaters of rotten bodies); some become the 
grass and greens on earth, and others as the seeds of fruits and roots of 
vegetables, and as moths and butterflies in the air. 


12. Some are formed into varieties of herbs and creeping plants, and others 
into stones and rocks; some into Jdma and Kadamba trees, and others into 
Sdla, Tala and Tamdla forests. 


13. There are some placed in prosperous circumstances, and become as 
ministers and generals and rulers of states; while others are clad in their rags 
and remain as religious recluses, munis and taciturn hermits in the woods. 


14. Some are born as snakes and hydras, worms, insects and ants; whilst 
there are others in the forms of great lions, big buffaloes, stags and goats, the 
bosguavas and fleet antelopes in forests. 


15. Some are begotten as storks and cranes, ruddy geese and cuckoos; and 
others are become their pastures in the shapes of lotuses and water lilies, the 
nilumbium and other aquatic shrubs and flowers. 


16. Some are brought forth as elephants and their cubs, and as wild boars, 
bulls and asses; and others come into being as bees and beetles, flies and 
gadflies, gnats and musquitoes. 


17. Many are born to difficulties and dangers, and many to prosperity and 
adversity; some are placed in hell pits and others in their heavenly abodes. 


18. Some are situated in the stars, and some in the hollows of trees; some 
move upon the wings of the winds, and others rest in the still air above or fly 
freely in the sky. 


19. Many dwell in the sunlight of the day, and many subsist under the 
moonbeams at night; while there be others subsisting upon the beverage, 
which they draw from the herbaceous plants. 


20. Some are liberated in their life-time, and rove about freely in this earth; 
while others live in their blissful states (in holy and lonely hermitage). Some 
are altogether emancipate in their reliance in the Supreme Spirit. 


21. There are some that require long periods for their blessed and ultimate 
liberation; and others there are that disbelieve the intellectuality and 
spirituality of mankind, and dislike their being reduced to the soliety of the 
soul, or to be reduced to their oneness or unity with the Supreme soul, — 
Kaivalya. 


22. Some become regents of the skies above, and others roll down in the 
form of mighty streams; some become females of beautiful appearances, and 
others as ugly hermaphrodites and abnormalities. 


23. Some are of enlightened understandings, and some are darkened in their 
minds. Some are preachers and lecturers of knowledge, and others in their 
ecstatic trance of Samddhi. 


24. The living souls that are under the subjection of their desires, are so 
powerless of themselves, that they have forgotten their freedom, and are fast 
chained to the fetters of their wishes. 


25. They rove about the world, now flying up and then falling down in their 
hopes and fears; and are incessantly tossed up and down, like playing balls 
flung on all sides, by the relentless hands of playful Death. 


26. Entrapped in the hundred fold snare of desire, and converted to the 
various forms of their wishes, they pass from one body to another, as the birds 
fly from one tree to alight on another. 


27. The endless desires of the living soul, bred and led by the false 
imaginations of the mind, have spread this enchanted snare of magic or mdyd, 
which is known by the name of the great world. 


28. So long are the stupefied souls doomed to rove about in the world, like 
the waters in a whirlpool; as they do not come to understand the true nature of 
their selves, as self-same with the Supreme-Self. 


29. Having known and seen the true Self, by forsaking their false 
knowledge of it, they come to their consciousness of themselves, as identic 


with the divine Self; and having attained this in process of time, they are 
released from their doom of revisiting this world of pain and sorrow. 


30. There are however some insensible beings, who notwithstanding their 
attainment of this knowledge, are so perverted in their natures, that they have 
to return again to this earth, after passing into a hundred lives in it in various 
shapes (owing to their disbelief in the self). 


31. Some there are who after having attained to higher states, fall down 
again by the lowness of their spirits, and appearing in the shapes of brute 
creatures, have to fall into hell at last. 


32. There are some great minded souls, who having proceeded from the 
state of Brahma, have to pass here a single life, after which they are absorbed 
in the Supreme soul. (Such were the sage Janaka and the sagely Seneca). 


33. There are multitudes of living beings in other worlds also, some of 
whom have become as the lotus-born Brahma, and others as Hara, (the Horus 
of the Egyptian trinity). 


34. There are others who have become as gods and brute creatures in them, 
and there are snakes and other reptiles also in them as well as in this earth. 
(Astronomers have descried kine in the moon, and Hindoos have found it to 
abound in deer, whence the moon is called mriganka by them. So are the 
constellations in the heavens). 


35. There are other worlds as obvious to view as this earth (in the starry 
heavens), and there are many such worlds that have gone by, and are yet to 
appear (in the immensity of space). 


36. There are various other creatures of different shapes, produced by 
various unknown causes in the other worlds also, which have their growths 
and deaths like those of this earth. 


37. Some are produced as Gandharvas, and others as Yakshas (the Yakkas 
at Ceylon); and some are generated as Suras (Sorians); and some others as 
Asuras, (Assyrians) and Daityas, (demons). 


38. The manners and modes of life of the peoples in other parts of the 
globe, are as those of the men living in this part of the earth. 


39. All creatures move according to their own natures and mutual relations 
for ever more, as the waves and currents of a river move forward, following 
and followed by others in regular succession. 


40. The whole creation moves onward in eternal progression, in its course 
of evolution and involution, and in its motions of ascension and descension 
like the waves of the ocean. 


41. In this manner do the multitudes of living beings, proceed from the 
Supreme Spirit, who with the consciousness of their self-existence, rise from 
and fall at last into it. (The consciousness of the universal soul, is divided into 
the individual souls of beings, that are derived and detached from it). 


42. All created beings are detached from their source, like the light from 
the lamp and the solar rays from the sun; they are like sparks of red hot iron, 
and the scintillation of fire. 


43. They are as the particles (or minute moments) of time, and the flying 
odours of flowers; or as the cold icicles and the minutial of rain water, borne 
by breeze and cooling the air all around. 


44. So the flitting particles of life, flying from one spot to another, and 
filling different bodies with animation, are at last absorbed in the main spring 
of vitality whence they had risen. 


45. The particles of vital air, being thus spread out and scattered over the 
universe, come to assume the various forms of animated beings in all the 
worlds, but they are all mere creations of our ignorance, and are in reality like 
the rolling waves of water in the vast ocean of eternity. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
THE INCARNATION OF HUMAN SOULS IN 
THE WORLD. 


Argument. Discussion about incarnation of the spirit, and its extinction by 
death and liberation. 


Rama asked: — I understand now how the particles of the Divine Spirit, take 
the forms of the living souls; but I cannot conceive how it assumes the 
corporeal body composed of bones and ribs. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Why don’t you know it Rama, when I have 
explained it to you before? Where have you lost your deductive reasoning of 
arriving to the conclusion from those premises. 


3. All these corporeal bodies in the world, and all these moving and 
unmoving persons and things, are but false representations, rising before us as 
the visions in our dreams. 


4. The phenomenal world differs only in its being but a longer and more 
delusive dream; it is as the sight of the double moon by optical deception, and 
of a mountain in the delusion of darkness. 


5. The enlightened mind which is cleared of its drowsiness of ignorance, 
and is freed from the fetters of its desire, views the world to be no more than a 
dream. 


6. The world is a creation of the imagination, by the nature of all living 
souls, and it remains therefore, impressed in the soul, until it attains its final 
liberation. 


7. The fleeting essence of the soul, is like the eddy of waters; or like the 
germ of the seed, or more like the leaflet of a sprout. 


8. And as the flower is contained in the branch, and the fruit within its 


flowers; so this creation of the imagination, is contained in the receptacle of 
the mind. 


9. As the ever-changing form of the chameleon, exhibits but a particular 
hue at a time; so the ever-varying mind shows only the figure, which is 
prominent in its thought for the time being (and this inward figure is reflected 
by the visual organs). 


10. The same thought assumes a visible form, as the clay takes the form of 
a pot; and the good thoughts and actions of the prior state of life, serve to give 
the soul a goodly form in its next birth on earth. 


11. We see the mighty lotus-born Brahma situated in the cell of that flower, 
and find it to be the effect of the good thoughts he had in his mind. 


12. This unlimited creation is the false fabrication of imagination; 
whereupon the living soul in conjunction with the mind, obtained the state of 
Virinchi the Brahma (vir inchoatious or incipiens the primary man, otherwise 
called ddima-purusha, — Adam or the first male). 


13. Rama said: — I require, Sir, to be fully informed, whether all other 
beings sprang from the same cause as Brahma, — the lotus-born. 


14. Vasishtha answered: — Hear me tell you, O long-armed Rama, the 
manner of Brahma’s having the body; and from his instance, you will learn 
about the existence of the world. 


15. The Supreme soul, which is unlimited by time or space, takes of his 
own will, and by the power of his Omnipotence, the limited forms of time and 
space upon himself. 


16. The same becomes the living soul, and is fraught with various desires in 
itself, of becoming many: — aham bahu syama. 


17. When this limited power which is Brahma, thinks on the state of his 
having been the Hiranyagarbha, in his former state of existence in the prior 
Kalpa; he is immediately transformed to that state which is in his mind, and 
which is ever busy with its thoughts and imaginations. 


18. It thinks first of the clear sky, the receptacle of sound, and which is 
perceptible by the auditory organs; and this thought being condensed in the 
mind, makes it vibrate as by the wind of the air. 


19. It thinks then on the vibrations of air, which are the objects of feeling, 
through the porous skin and the mind; and is moved by the thoughts of air and 


wind to assume that form, which are invisible to the naked eye. 


20. The condensation of the elements of air and wind together, produced 
the idea of light which is the cause of sight, and which has the colours and 
figures for its objects; and thus the mind being actuated by its triple thoughts 
of air, wind, and light, produced the property of fire. 


21. These joined immediately to produce the idea of coldness, the property 
of water; and the mind then came to form the quadruple ideas of the four 
elements of air, wind, fire and water. 


22. These united together produced the gross form of earth, — the 
receptacle of scent; and then the mind being filled with these minute 
elementary particles in its thoughts of them, forsook its fine form of the spirit 
for its gross body of the quintuple elements (called the quintessence of 
material bodies, (panchabhautika)). 


23. It saw this body shining as a spark of fire in the sky, which joined with 
its egoism and understanding, formed its personality. 


24. This is called the spiritual body, (Jingasarira), — the embodying 
octuple, which is situated as the bee in the pericarp of the lotus like heart, and 
which gives growth to the outer body by its inner working (as the inner seed 
grows the outer tree). 


25. It is thickened by the action of the heart of its internal process of 
calefaction, like the bel fruit or wood-apple. And the outer body receives the 
qualities of the inner mind, as the jewel shines with the lustre of the little 
particle of gold, which is infused in the melted state of the metal in the 
crucible. 


26. The quality of the inner soul or mind, manifests itself in the outer body, 
as the quality of the seed appears in the form and taste of its fruit. The mind 
then dwells upon the thoughts of its actions, which have their display in the 
several organs, and members of the bodily actions, which are produced by the 
motions of the inner thoughts and acts, as the leaves and branches of trees are 
projected by the inner process and operations of the seed. 


27. Its thoughts of upside and below, lifts and lowers its head and feet 
upward and downward; and its thought of both sides, extends its two arms to 
the right and left. 


28. Its thoughts of the backward and forward, places its back behind, and 
its breast and belly before it; and the hairs on the head and fingers of the 


hands, are as the filaments and twigs of trees. 


29. In this manner did Brahma, who is called a muni or mental being, from 
his having sprung from the mind of Brahma, produced the several parts of his 
body, according to his thoughts of their usefulness to it. 


30. He brought the body and its limbs to compactness, as the seasons bring 
their fruits and grains to perfection. Thus is everything perfected in time, and 
all beings have their beautiful bodies and figures. 


31. He, the lord Brahma, was the progenitor of all beings, and fraught with 
the qualities of strength and understanding, activity, dignity and knowledge. 
(The Smriti attributes the Siddhi chatushtaya or quadruple perfections to him). 


32. Being begotten by the vacuous Brahma, he resides in the lap of vacuity; 
and is of the form of melted gold, like every other luminous body in the 
heavens. 


33. Though situated in the Supreme, yet the mind of Brahma is liable to the 
mistakes of its own making; and at times, it quite forgets its having no 
beginning, middle nor end, like its source. 


34. Sometimes, the lord thinks himself as identic with the waters which 
existed before creation in his mind; and at another as the mundane egg, which 
was as bright as the fire of universal destruction, (see Manu I.) 


35. Sometimes the lord thought himself as the dark wood, which covered 
the earth before creation of living animals, and them as the lotus bed (wherein 
he was born). Afterwards he became of many forms at each phase and epoch 
of creation. (These epochs are called Kalpas or periods, in which the divine 
mind manifested itself according to its wish within the different stages of 
creation). 


36. Thus Brahma became the preserver of many kinds of beings, which he 
created of his own will from his mind at each stage or Kalpa-period; of which 
he was the first that issued from Brahma himself. (He was the first begotten, 
and nothing was created but by him). 


37. When Brahma was first begotten, he remained in his happy state of 
insensibility and forgetfulness (of his former existence); but being delivered 
from his torpor in the womb, he came to see the light. (7.e., He saw the light of 
heaven, after his delivery from the darkness of the womb). 


38. He took a corporeal body, with its breathings and respirations, 


(prdndpdna); it was covered with pores of hair, and furnished with gums of 
two and thirty teeth. It had the three pots of the thighs, backbone, and bones, 
standing on the feet below; with the five air, five partitions, nine cavities, and 
a smooth skin covering all the limbs. (The five airs are prdndpdna, etc. The 
five partitions are, the head, the legs, the breast, belly and the hands). 


40. It is accompanied by twice ten fingers and their nails on them; and with 
a couple of arms and palms and two or more hands and eyes (in the cases of 
gods and giants). 


41. The body is the nest of the bird of the mind, and it is hole of the snake 
of lust; it is the cave of the goblin of greediness, and the den of the lion of life. 


42. It is a chain at the feet of the elephant of pride, and a lake of the lotuses 
of our desire; The lord Brahma looked upon his handsome body, and saw it 
was good. 


43. Then the lord thought in himself, from his view of the three times of the 
past, present, and future, and from his sight of the vault of heaven, with a dark 
mist as a group of flying locusts. 


44. “What is this boundless space, and what had it been before. How came 
I to being?” Thus pondering in himself, he was enlightened in his soul. (Thus 
did Adam inquire about his birth, and the production of the world in Milton’s 
Paradise Lost). 


45. He saw in his mind the different past creations, and recollected the 
various religions and their various sects, which had grown upon earth one 
after the other. 


46. He produced the holy Vedas as the spring does its flowers; and formed 
with ease all varieties of creatures from their archetypes in his mind. 


47. He set them in their various laws and customs, as he saw them in the 
city of his mind, for the purpose of their temporal and spiritual welfare. 


48. He thought upon the innumerable varieties of Sdstras which had existed 
before, and all of which came to exist on earth in their visible forms, from 
their prototypes in his eternal mind; like the flowers springing from the womb 
of the vernal season. 


49. Thus, O Rama! did Brahma take upon him the form of the lotus-born, 
and create by his activity, all the different creatures upon their models existent 
in his mind, which took their various forms in the visible world at his will. (So 


the Sufi and Platonic doctrine of the phenomenal, as a copy of the noumena, 
or the suwari zahiri as but a shadow of the suvari manavi or catini. See 
Allami). 


CHAPTER XLV. 
DEPENDANCE OF ALL ON GOD. 


Argument. The mind being a finite production, its product of the world, is 
as unreal as the thoughts of the mind. 


Vasishtha continued: — The world appearing as substantial, has nothing 
substantive in it; it is all a vacuity and mere representation of the imageries 
and vagaries of the mind. 


2. Neither is time nor space filled by any world at all, but by the great spirit, 
who has no form except that of vacuum. (The spirit of God fills the infinite 
vacuity from all eternity). 


3. This is all imaginary, and as visionary as a city seen in a dream; 
whatever is seen anywhere is fallacy, and existing in the infinite vacuity. (All 
is void amidst the great void of Brahma’s Mind). 


4. It is a painting without its base, and a vision of unrealities; it is an 
uncreated creation, and a variegated picture in empty air (without its canvas). 


5. It is the imagination of the mind, that has stretched the three worlds, and 
made the many bodies contained in them. Reminiscence is the cause of these 
creations, as the eyesight is the cause of vision. 


6. The pageantry of the world is an erroneous representation, like the 
elevations and depressions in a painting; they are not distinct from the 
supreme spirit, in which they are situated as buildings stand on their 
foundation. (Or as statues in bas-relief). 


7. The mind has made the body for its own abode, as some worms make 
their cortices or coatings, and the soul also has its sheaths or koshas, (namely 
the annamaya kosha, etc.). 


8. There is nothing which the mind cannot get or build in its empty 


imagination, however difficult or unattainable it may appear to be. 


9. What impossibility is there of the same powers residing in Omnipotence, 
which are possessed by the mind in its secluded cell? (The spiritual powers 
must be greater than the mental). 


10. It is not impossible, O Rama! for anything to be or not to be at any time 
or always, when there is the omnipotent Lord, who can create or annihilate all 
things at his will. (The positive and the negative are co-eternal with the eternal 
Mind, though it is an impossibility in the order of nature, as, “It is impossible 
for the same thing to be, and not to be at the same time.” — Locke). 


11. Mind that, when the mind is empowered to make its own body, and to 
form others in its imagination, how much more is the power of the almighty to 
make and unmake all things at his will. 


12. It is divine will that has brought the gods, the demi-gods and all 
mankind into existence; and it is by the cessation of the (creative) will, that 
they cease to exist as the lamp is extinguished for want of its oil. 


13. Behold the sky and all things under it to be displayed by the divine will, 
and understand the universe as the visionary scene of thy dream laid open to 
thy sight. 


14. There is nothing that is born or dies here at any time, because 
everything is a nullity in its true sense. 


15. There is also nothing, that becomes more or less in any wise when there 
is nothing in existence; for how can that (soul) have a body when it is 
bodyless, and can it be parted, when it is an undivided whole? 


16. Rama! seeing by thy keen sightedness, that all these bodies are 
bodiless, (i.e., only imaginary beings), why shouldst thou fall into the error (of 
taking them for realities?) 


17. As the mirage is made to appear by the heat of the sun, so do these false 
appearances seem as true to thee from the certainty of thy mind. So also are 
Brahma and others but creatures of thy fancy. 


18. They are as false as the sight of two moons in the sky by thy false 
imagination, it is the great fallacy of thy mind, that represents these false 
forms of the world before thee. 


19. As the passenger in a boat sees the fixed objects on earth to be moving 
about him, so these varieties of visible objects offer themselves to thy view. 


20. Know the world as an enchanted scene, presented by the magic of thy 
error, (mdyd); it is a fabrication of the working of thy mind, and is a nullity 
though appearing as a reality. 


21. All this world is Brahma, what else is there beside him? What other 
adjunct can he have, what is that? Whence did it come, and where is it 
situated? 


22. That this is a mountain and that is a tree, are appendages affixed by our 
error and mistake, it is the prejudgment of the mind, that makes the unreality 
appear as a reality. 


23. The world is the creation of error and idol of fools; shun your fond 
desire and thoughts of it, Rama, and think of thy unworldly soul. 


24. It is as false as the visionary scene of a prolonged dream, and an aerial 
building of the fancies of the mind. 


25. Shun this grand display of the world, which is so substantial to sight, 
and so inane when felt; It is the den of the dragons of desire, foaming with the 
poison of their passions. 


26. Knowing the world as unreal, try to regard it as nothing; because the 
wise will never go after a mirage knowing it such. 


27. The foolish man that runs after some imaginary object of his heart’s 
desire, is surely exposed to trouble and disappointment for his folly. 


28. Whoever desires to have anything in this world, after knowing it as an 
unreality, surely perishes with his soul for his forsaking the reality. 


29. It is only that error of the mind, which makes it mistake a rope for a 
snake; and it is the variety of the thoughts and pursuits of men, that makes 
them roll about in the world. 


30. When some vain thought labors in the mind, like the moon appearing to 
move under the water; it beguiles little children only, and not the wise as 
yourself. 


31. He who pursues the virtues for his future happiness, surely kindles the 
fire of his intelligence to destroy the frost of his ignorance. 


32. All the gross bodies that are seen here in this world, are all the creatures 
of the working of the mind, as the building of aerial castles in our thought. 


33. It is the heart’s desire that produces these things, as it is want of desire 
that destroys them all. The unrealities appear as true as the fairylands 
appearing to view. (Fairy cities like the sight of castles in the icebergs). 


34. Know, Rama, that nothing that is existent is lost on the dissolution of 
the world, nor what is inexistent of its nature, can ever come into existence. 


35. Say, Rama, what things you call as entire or broken, or to be growing or 
decaying, when these ideas are but the formations of your sound or unsound 
mind or the working of your fancy. 


36. As children make and break their toy-dolls of clay at will, so the mind 
raises and erases its thoughts of all things in the world (by its repeated 
recollections and oblivions of them). 


37. As nothing is lost or drowned in the talismanic tank of a conjuror, so 
nothing is dead or dissolved in the magical sea of this world, (samsdra 
sdgara). 


38. The unrealities being all untrue, it is true that nothing is lost by their 
loss. Hence there is no cause for our joy or sorrow in this unreal world. (Why 
sorrow, when a fragile is broken, or a mortal is no more). 


39. If the world is altogether an unreality, I know not what may be lost in 
it; and if nothing whatever is really lost in it, what reason can there be for the 
wise to sorrow for it? 


40. If the Deity is the only absolute existence, what else is there for us to 
lose in it? The whole universe being full with Brahma, there can be no cause 
of our joy or sorrow for anything whatever. 


41. If the unreality can never come to existence, it cannot have its growth 
also. What cause is there of our sorrow for their want of growth or existence? 


42. Thus everything is but unreal and mere cause of our delusion, what is 
there that may be reckoned as the best boon for us, that the wiseman can have 
to desire. (No real bliss is to be found on earth). 


43. But all this when taken in the sense of their being full with the Divine 
Spirit, what thing is there so very trifling for the wise man to dispose or refuse 
to take? 


44. But he who considers the world as an unreality, is never subject to joy 
or sorrow at his gain or loss of anything. It is only the ignorant that is elated or 
depressed at the one or the other. 


45. That which was not before nor will remain afterwards, is likewise the 
same nihility at present; therefore, who so desires the nullity, is said in the 
Sruti to be null himself. (The Sruti says: Nothing there was, nothing there is, 
and nothing will last in the end except the being of God). 


46. What was before and what will be in the end, the same is in being (in 
esse) even at present; therefore, what is always in esse, it is that entity alone 
that is seen everywhere and at all times. 


47. There are the unreal sky and moon and stars, seen underneath the water; 
it is only the deluded boys that like to look at them, but never the wise, (who 
look at the reality and not at its shadow). 


48. Children take a liking for light, empty and gaudy baubles; which are of 
no good or use to them nor any body at all, and are rather led to sorrow at 
their loss, than derive any good from their gain whatever. 


49. Therefore, act not as a child, O lotus-eyed Rama! but conduct yourself 
as the wise, and by looking at these fleeting baubles as ever evanescent, rely 
in the Everlasting alone. 


50. Rama! be not sad or sorry to learn, that all these with thyself and myself 
are nothing in reality; nor be glad or joyous to know, that all these and 
ourselves are real entities. But reckon alike whether these be or not be; 
because it is the One Being, that becomes and unbecomes anything, it is the 
only Being, and all things that becomes. 


51. Valmiki said: — As the sage was saying in this manner, the day glided 
away to its dusk; the sun departed to his even tide and evening service, and 
with him the assembly parted to their evening ablutions and rest, after which 
they assembled again to the court with the rising sun. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
DESCRIPTION OF LIVING LIBERATION. 


Argument. The emancipation of Living souls from the thraldom of the 
World. 


Vasishtha said: — No man knows sorrow as long as he is in possession of his 
pleasant home, family and wealth; but why should he be sorrowful upon their 
disappearance, knowing them as a_ short-lived enchantment and 
accompaniment. 


2. What pleasure or pain can one derive, either from the grandeur or 
destruction of his aerial castle, and what cause of joy can he have in his 
ignorant children, or of sorrow upon their death? (An ignorant son is sorrow 
to his father. — Solomon). 


3. What joy is there in the increase of our wealth or family, seeing them as 
the increasing mirage of water which can never satisfy the thirsty. (The thirst 
for riches is never satisfied. Latin. Auri sacra fames. — Vergil.). 


4. There is increase of care with the increase of wealth and family; and 
there is no happiness in the increase of worldly possessions and affections. 
(Care follows increasing wealth. Little wealth little care). 


5. The abundance of carnal enjoyments, which are delightsome to the 
ignorant voluptuary, is quite distasteful and disgusting to the abstemious, wise 
and learned. (Carnal pleasures are brutish, but mental delights are relished by 
the wise). 


6. What joy is there in the possession of temporary wealth and family to the 
wise, that seek their lasting welfare, and are quite indifferent about these? 


7. Therefore, O Rama! be truly wise in thy conduct in this world; shun the 
transient as they are transitory, and lay hold on whatever offers of itself unto 
thee. (Be content with what thou gettest). 


8. Inappetency of what is ungotten, and enjoyment of what is in present 
possession, are the true characteristic of the wise and learned. (Contentment is 
abundance; and a contented mind as a continued feast). 


9. Take care of this bewildering world, where thy enemies are lurking in 
many a deceitful shape; and conduct thyself as the wise man, evading the 
dangers that wait upon the unwise. (The enemies are of seven shapes, viz.: a 
swordsman, a poisoner, an incendiary, a curser, an exorcist, a backbiter and an 
adulterer). 


10. They are great fools who do not look deeply into the things, and think 
the world to be without any fraud or guile. (The credulous are most imposed 
upon). 


11. Fools are led by the deceitful speech of cheats, to fall into the 
temptations of the world; but men of right understanding place no reliance in 
them, nor plunge themselves into the pit of errors. (It is cunningness to keep 
from the cunning). 


12. He who knowing the unrealities, place no reliance in anything; is said 
to have mastered all knowledge, and is never liable to error. (Discrimination 
of truth and untruth, and of right and wrong, constitute the highest wisdom of 
man). 


13. Who so knowing himself as frail as anything in this frail world, has his 
faith in neither, is never liable to fall into the error of taking either of them for 
real. 


14. Placed between the unreality and reality of this and next life, you must 
have the good sense of sticking to the Truth, and neither wholly reject or stick 
to this or the next. (The text says, stick not to the outward or inward alone: 
i.e., either to the outer world or the inner spirit entirely, but attend to your 
interests in both of them). 


15. Though engaged in business, yet you must remain, O Rama! quite 
indifferent to all things; because the apathetic and inappetent are truly happy 
in this world. 


16. He who has nothing to desire or leave, but lives as he is obliged to live, 
has his intellect as unsullied as the lotus-leaf, to which the laving waters never 
stick. 


17. Let thy accessory organs manage thy outward affairs or not; but keep 
thy apathetic soul quite unconcerned with all. (7.e., The body and mind may 


attend to business; but the soul must remain aloof from all). 


18. Let not thy mind be plunged in and deeply engaged with the objects of 
sense, by thinking them in vain to be thy properties and possessions; but 
manage them or not with utter indifference of thy mind. (i.e., Observe a 
stoical indifference in all thy worldly concerns). 


19. When thou comest to feel, Rama! that the sensible objects have ceased 
to give any relish to thy soul, then thou shalt know thyself to have reached the 
acme of thy spiritual edification, and got over the boisterous sea of the world. 


20. The embodied or disembodied soul, whether living or dead, that has 
ceased to have any taste for sensuous enjoyments, has attained its liberation 
without its wishing for it. 


21. Try Rama! by your superior intelligence, to separate your mind from its 
desires, as they extract the perfume from flowers. 


22. They that have not been swept away by the waves of their desires, to 
the midst of the ocean of this world, are said to have got over it; but the others 
are no doubt drowned and lost in it. (This is the first time that I found the 
word budita to occur in Sanskrit in the sense of drowned. See the vernacular 
Bengali dubita also). 


23. Sharpen your understanding to the edge of a razor, erase the weeds of 
doubt therewith, and after scanning the nature of the soul, enter into thy 
spiritual state of blessedness. 


24. Move about as those who have attained to true knowledge, and elevated 
their minds with true wisdom; and do not act as the ignorant worldling: who is 
mindful of the present state, and unmindful of the future. 


25. In conducting yourself in this world, you should imitate them that are 
liberated in their life time, who are great in their souls and understandings, 
and who are ever satisfied with themselves, and not follow the examples of 
the greedy and wicked. 


26. Those having the knowledge of both worlds, neither slight nor adhere 
to the customs of their country, but follow them like other people during their 
life time. (i.e., Act in harmony and conformity with approved custom and 
usage). 


27. Great men knowing the truth, are never proud of their power or good 
qualities, nor of their honour or prosperity like the vulgar people. 


28. Great men are not depressed by adversity, nor elated by prosperity; but 
remain fixed like the sun in the sky without anything to support it. 


29. Great minds like warriors ride in the chariots of their bodies, clad in the 
armour of their knowledge; they have no desire of their own, but conduct 
themselves according to the course of the time. 


30. You too Rama! have gained your extensive learning in philosophy, and 
it is by virtue of your prudence, that you can manage yourself with ease. 


31. Suppress the sight of the visibles, and avoid your pride and enmity; 
then roam wherever you will, and you will meet with success. 


32. Be sedate in all circumstances, unattached to the present, and wishing 
to know all other things in future; have the calm composure of your mind, and 
go where you will. 


33. Valmiki said: — Rama, being advised in this manner by the pure 
doctrines of the sage, brightened in his countenance; and being full within 
himself with the ambrosia of his knowledge; shone forth like the ambrosial 
moon with her cooling beams. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLDS AND THEIR 
DEMIURGI. 


Argument. Relation of many past and Future Worlds, and of the gods and 
other beings contained in them. 


Rama said: — O venerable Sir, that art acquainted with all religious doctrines 
and versed in all branches of the Vedas, I am set at perfect ease by thy holy 
preachings. 


2. I am never satiate with hearing your speech, which is equally copious, 
clear, and elegant. 


3. You have said Sir, of the birth of Brahma in course of your lecture on the 
productions of the satva and rdjasa qualities. I want you to tell me more on 
that subject. 


4. Vasishtha answered: — There have been many millions of Brahmas and 
many hundreds of Sivas and Indras, together with thousands of Narayanas, 
that have gone by (in the revolution of ages). 


5. There have been various kinds of beings also in many other worlds, 
having their manners and customs widely differing from one another. 


6. There will also be many other productions in the worlds, synchronous 
with others, and many to be born at times remotely distant from one another. 


7. Among these, the births of Brahma and the other gods in the different 
worlds, are as wonderful as the productions of many things in a magic show. 


8. Some creations were made with Brahma as the first born, others with 
Vishnu and some with Siva as the next created beings. There were some other 
(minor productions), having the munis for the patriarchs. (These are the 
different periods of the formation of the world under the different Demiurgi). 


9. One Brahma was lotus-born, another was produced from the water; and a 
third was born of an egg, and the fourth was produced in the air. (These are 
named as the Padmaja, Narayana, Andaja and Maruta). 


10. In one egg the sun was born with all his eyes, and in another, Vasava, 
— the Indra; in some one was born the lotus-eyed Vishnu, and in another he 
with his three eyes as Siva. 


11. In one age was born the solid earth, having no holes for the growth of 
vegetables, in another it was overgrown with verdure; it was again filled with 
mountains, and at last covered by living creatures. 


12. The earth was full of gold in some place, and it was hard ground at 
others; it was mere mud in many places, and incrusted with copper and other 
metals in some. 


13. There are some wondrous worlds in the universe, and others more 
wondrous still than they; some of them are luminous and bright, and others 
whose light have never reached unto us. 


14. There are innumerable worlds scattered in the vacuum of Brahma’s 
essence, and they are all rolling up and down like waves in the ocean. (Here 
the infinite vacuity, is represented as the body of Brahma, and the sole 
substance of all other bodies). 


15. The splendours of worlds, are seen in the SUPREME-like waves in the 
sea, and as the mirage in the sandy desert; they abide in Him as flowers on the 
mango tree. 


16. It may be possible to count the particles of the solar rays, but not the 
number of worlds abounding in the Supreme Spirit. 


17. These multitudes of worlds rise and fall in the Universal Spirit, like 
gnats flying and following others in swarms in the rainy season. 


18. It is not known since when they have been in existence, and what 
numbers of them have gone by, and are remaining at the present time. 


19. They have been rolling without beginning like the billows of the sea; 
those that are past and gone had their previous ones, and they their prior ones 
also. 


20. They rise over and over, to sink lower and lower again; just as the 
waves of the sea, rising aloft and falling low by turns. 


21. There are series of mundane worlds like the egg of Brahma, which pass 
away by thousands like the hours in course of the year. 


22. There are many such bodies revolving at present, in the spacious mind 
of Brahma; beside the mundane system of Brahma, (Brahmdnda). 


23. There will grow many more mundane worlds in the infinity of the 
divine mind, and they will also vanish away in course of time, like the 
evanescent sounds in the air. (The sounds are never lost, but remain in the air. 
Sabdonityam). 


24. Other worlds will come into existence in the course of other creations, 
as the pots come to be formed of clay, and the leaves grow from germs in 
endless succession. (Here Brahma is made the material cause of all). 


25. So long doth the glory of the three worlds appear to the sight, as long as 
it is not seen in the intellect, in the manner as it exists in the divine mind. 


26. The rising and falling of worlds are neither true nor wholly false; they 
are as the fanfaronade of fools, and as orchids of the air. 


27. All things are of the manner of sea waves, which vanish no sooner than 
they appear to view, and they are all of the nature of paintings, which are 
impressed in the mind. 


28. The world is a perspective, and all things are but paintings in it; they 
are not without the tableau of the mind, and are represented in it as the figures 
on a canvas. 


29. The learned in divine knowledge, consider the creations proceeding 
from the Spirit of God, as showers of rain falling from the waters contained in 
the clouds. 


30. The visible creation is no more distinct from God, than the sea water 
exuding from the earth and the earth itself, and the leaves and seeds of the 
Simul tree from the tree itself. 


31. All created things that you see in their gross or subtle forms, have 
proceeded from the vacuity of the Divine Mind, and are strung together, like a 
rosary of large and small gems and beads. 


32. Sometimes, the subtle air is solidified in the form of the atmosphere, 
and therefrom is produced the great Brahma, thence called the air-born lord of 
creatures. 


33. Sometimes, the atmospheric air is condensed into a solid form, and that 
gives birth to a Brahma; under the title of the atmospheric lord of creation. 


34. At another time it is light that is thickened to a luminous body, and 
thence is born another Brahma, bearing the appellation of the luminous lord of 
all creatures. 


35. Again the water being condensed at another time, produced another 
Brahma designated the aqueous lord of creation. 


36. Sometimes, the particles of earth take a denser form, and produce a 
Brahma known as the terrene Brahma. (Such was Adam made out of the dust 
of the ground). 


37. It is by extraction of the essences of these four Brahmas, that a fifth is 
formed under the name of the quintuple Brahma, who is the creation of the 
present world. 


38. It is sometimes by the condensation of water, air or heat, that a being is 
produced in the form of a male or female. 


39. It is sometimes from the speaking mouth of this being, and from his 
feet and back and the eyes, that different men are produced under the 
appellations of Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaisya and Stidras. (These Kshatriyas 
are born from the arms and eyes according to Manu). 


40. Sometimes, the great Being causes a lotus to grow out of his navel; in 
which is born the great Brahma known as the lotus-born. 


41. All these theories of creation (in the different Sdstras) are idle dreams, 
and as false as the dreams in our sleeping state; they are the reveries of fancy 
like the eddies of water. 


42. Tell me what do you think of these theories in your own judgment; do 
they not appear as the tales told to boys? 


43. Sometimes they imagine a being produced in the pure vacuity of the 
Divine mind, this they call the golden and mundane egg, which gave birth to 
the egg-born Brahma. 


44. It is said also that the first and divine Male, casts his seed in the waters, 
which grows up to a lotus-flower which they call the great world. 


45. This lotus is the great womb of the birth of Brahma, and at another time 
of the sun also; sometimes the gods, Varuna and Vayu, also are born of it, and 


are thence called oviparous. 


46. Thus Rama, are the different accounts of the production of Brahma, — 
the creator, so various also is the description of this unsolid and unsubstantial 
creation. 


47. I have related to you already about the creation of one of these 
Brahmas, and mentioned about the production of others without specifying 
their several works. 


48. It is agreed by all, that the creation is but the development of divine 
mind; although I have related for your acquaintance, the various processes of 
its production. 


49. The Sdtwika and other productions, of which I told you before, have all 
come to existence, in the manner I have narrated to you. 


50. Now know the endless succession of all things in the world; creation is 
followed by destruction as pleasure by pain; and as ignorance is followed by 
knowledge, and bondage by liberation. 


51. Past creations and objects of affection being gone, others come to rise 
in future, as the lamps are lighted and extinguished by turns at home. 


52. The production and destruction of all bodies, are as those of Brahma 
and the lamps, they assume their forms in their time, but become an 
undistinguishable mass after death. 


53. The four ages of the world, namely, the Satya, Tretaé, Dwapara, and 
Kali Yugas, revolve in endless rotation, like the wheel of the potter or of any 
other engine. 


54. The Manvantaras and Kalpa cycles succeed one another, as the day and 
night, the morning and evening, and the times of work follow those of rest by 
turns. 


55. All worlds and things are under the subjection of time. They are subject 
to repeated successions, and there is nothing without its rotation. 


56. They all proceed of their nature from the vacuum of Divine Intellect, as 
the sparks of fire scintillate from the red-hot iron. 


57. All things once manifest, are next concealed in the divine mind; just as 
the season, fruits and flowers, disappear after their appearance in season. 


58. All productions are but fluctuations of the mind of the Supreme spirit; 
their appearances to our view, are as the sight of two moons to infirm eyes. 


59. It is the intellect alone, which exhibits these appearances to our view; 
they are always situated in the intellect, though they appear without it like the 
beams in the inner disk. 


60. Know Rama, the world to be never in existence; it is a motionless show 
of that power, which resides only in the Supreme spirit. 


61. It is never as it appears to you, but quite a different thing from what it 
seems to be; it is a show depending on the power of the Omnipotent. 


62. What the world exists since the mahd Kalpa or great will of God, and 
there is no more any other world to come into existence in future, is the 
conclusion of the learned holds good to the present time. (This belief is based 
on the holy text, “so aikshata, — God willed, — ‘Let there be’, and there was 
all’). 


63. All this is Brahma to the intelligent, and there is no such thing as the 
world, which is a mere theory, (upapddya), of the unintelligent. 


64. The insapient consider the world as eternal, from the continued 
uniformity of its course; but it is the effect of the everlasting error, which 
raises the false supposition of the world. 


65. It is their theory of repeated transmigrations, that they cannot say 
anything otherwise; but must conclude the world as such, in order to keep 
pace with their doctrine. (The doctrine of perpetual metempsychosis of the 
Mimamsaka materialists, naturally makes them suppose the eternity of the 
world). 


66. But it is to be wondered why they do not consider the world to be 
destructible, seeing the incessant perishableness of all things all around. (They 
flash as momentary lightnings in their appearance, to be extinguished into 
nothingness soon after). 


67. So others, (the Sankhyas), seeing the continuous course of the sun and 
moon, and the stability of mountains and seas all about, come to the 
conclusion of the indestructibility of the world from these false analogies. 


68. There can be nothing whatever, which does not reside in the wide 
expanse of the Divine mind; but as these are but the conceptions of the mind, 
they can never have any visible or separate form or existence. 


69. All these appear in repetition, and so repeated is the course of our births 
and deaths; as those of pain and pleasure succeeding one another, and our rest 
and actions, following each other for evermore. 


70. This same vacuum and these quarters of the sky, with all these seas and 
mountains, appear in the recurrent course of creation with their various hues, 
like those of the solar rays seen through the chink of a wall. 


71. The gods and demi-gods appear again and again, and all people come 
and depart by turns; bondage and liberation are ever recurrent, and Indras and 
Somas ever reappear to view. 


72. The god Narayana and the demi-gods appear by turns, and the sky is 
always revolving with the regents of all its sides, the sun and moon, clouds 
and winds. 


73. The heaven and earth appear again like the lotus-flower full open to 
view, and having the mount Meru for its pericarp, and the Sahya peak for its 
filament. 


74. The sun resumes his course in the maze of the sky like a lion, and 
destroys the thick darkness with his rays, as the lion kills the huge elephant 
with his beaming nails. 


75. See again the moving moon shining with her bright beams, resembling 
the white filaments of flowers; and anointing the countenances of the ethereal 
goddesses, with sweet ambrosial light, and borne by the air and breezes of 
heaven. 


76. Again the holy arbour of heaven sheds its heap of flowers, on the 
deserts of meritorious men, as rewards of their virtuous acts. 


77. Behold again the flight of time, riding as the eagle on its two wings of 
acts and actions, and passing with the noise of pat-pat over the vast maze of 
creation. 


78. See another Indra appearing, after the by-gone lords of gods have 
passed away; and taking his seat on the lotus-like throne of heaven like a 
contemptible bee. (The passing lords of gods and men are as fleeting flies on 
flowers). 


79. Again the wicked age of Kali appears to soil the holy Satya Yuga, as the 
black body of Narayana fills the clear waters of the deep, or as a blast of wind 
sweeps the dust of the earth on its pellucid surface. 


80. Again doth time form the plate of the earth like a potter, and turn his 
wheel incessantly, to bring on the revolutions of his creations in successive 
Kalpas. 


81. Again doth the veteran time, who is skilled in the work of renovation, 
wither away the freshness of creation, as the autumnal winds blast the foliage 
of a forest, in order to produce them anew. 


82. Again the dozen of zodiacal suns, rising at once and burning the 
creation, leaves the dead bodies all around, like the white bones lying 
scattered in a country. 


83. Again the pushkara and dvartaka clouds, poured down their rain water, 
deluging the tops of the boundary mountains, and filling the face of the earth 
with foaming froth, swimming on the surface of one sheet of water. 


84. And after the waters had subsided and the winds had ceased to blow, 
the world appeared as a vast vacuum void of all beings. 


85. Again we see living beings filling the earth, and feeding for some years 
upon the moisture of its verdure, leaving their decayed bodies, and being 
mixed up with their souls in the universal spirit. 


86. Again the Divine Mind stretches out other creations at other times, and 
these are drawn like pictures of fairylands, (airy castles), in the canvas of 
vacuum. 


87. Again the creation appears to view, and again it is submerged in the 
water of deluvion, both of which follow one another like the axles of a wheel. 


88. Now consider, O Rama! if there is any stability of anything in this 
revolutionary world, beside its being a maze of continuous delusion. 


89. The revolution of the world resembles the hallucination of Dastra’s 
mind; it is a phantasia without any solidity in it. 


90. The world appearing so extensive and thickly peopled, is but a fancied 
unreality like the erroneous appearance of two moons in the sky. It is made of 
unreality though appearing as real, and is not worth reliance by our ignorance 
of its nature. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 
STORY OF DASURA. 


Argument. Description of the vanity of worldly enjoyments, illustrated in 
the tale of Dastra. 


Vasishtha continued: — All worldly men that are engaged in a variety of 
business, and are perverted in their understandings with a desire of opulence 
and enjoyments, can never learn the truth, until they get rid of their 
worldliness. 


2. He only who has cultivated his understanding, and subdued his sensual 
organs, can perceive the errors of the world, as one knows a bel fruit held in 
his hand, (i.e., as one knows the places on earth in a small globe). 


3. Any rational being, who scans well the errors of the world, forsakes his 
delusion of egoism, as a snake casts off his slough. 


4. Being thus paralysed, (unconscious), of his selfishness, he has no more 
to be born; as a fried grain can never germinate, though it is sown in the field, 
and lies forever in it. 


5. How pitiable is it that ignorant men take so much pains for the 
preservation of their bodies, which are ever subject to diseases and dangers; 
and liable to perish today or tomorrow at the expense of their souls. 


6. Do not, therefore, O Rama! take so much care for the dull body like the 
ignorant; but regard only for the welfare of thy soul. 


7. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, the story of Dastira, which is illustrative of 
the visionary and air-drawn form of this rotatory universe, which is all hollow 
within. 


8. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me rehearse to you, O Rama! the narrative of 
Dasura, in illustration of the delusive form of the world, which is no more 


than the air-built utopia of our brains. 


9. There is on the surface of this land, the great and opulent province of 
Magadha, which is full of flower trees of all kinds. 


10. There is a forest of wide extending kadamba groves, which was the 
pleasant resort of charming birds of various sorts and hues. 


11. Here the wide fields were full of corns and grains, and the skirts of the 
land were beset by groves and arbours; and the banks of rivulets were fraught 
with the lotuses and water lilies in their bloom. 


12. The groves and alcoves resounded with the melodious strains of rustic 
lasses, and the plains were filled with blades of blossoms, bedewed by the 
nightly frost, and appearing as arrows of the god of love, Kama. 


13. Here at the foot of a mountain, decked with karnikara flowers, and 
beset by rows of plantain plants and kadamba trees, was a secluded spot over- 
grown with moss and shrubs. 


14. It was sprinkled over with the reddish dust of crimson flowers borne by 
the winds, and was resonant to the warblings of water fowls, singing in unison 
with the melodious strains of aquatic cranes. 


15. On the sacred hill overhanging that spot, there rose a kadamba arbor, 
crowded by birds of various kinds; and there dwelt on it a holy sage of great 
austerity. 


16. He was known by the name of Dastira, and was employed in his austere 
devotion; sitting on a branch of his kadamba tree with his exalted soul, and 
devoid of passions. 


17. Rama said: — I want to know Sir, whence and how that hermit came to 
dwell in that forest, and why he took his seat on that high kadamba tree. 


18. Vasishtha replied: — He had for his father, the renowned sage 
Saraloman, residing in the same mountain, and resembling the great Brahma 
in his abstract meditation. 


19. He was the only son of that sire, like Kacha, the only progeny of 
Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods, with whom he came to dwell in the 
forest from his boyhood. 


20. Saraloma, having passed many years of his life in this manner, left his 
mortal frame for his heavenly abode, as a bird quits its nest to fly into the air. 


21. Dastra, being left alone in that lonely forest, wept bitterly and lamented 
over the loss of his father, with as loud wailings as the shrieks of a heron upon 
separation from its mate. 


22. Being bereft of both his parents, he was full of sorrow and grief in his 
mind; and then he began to fade away as the lotus blossom in winter. 


23. He was observed in this sad plight by the sylvan god of that wood, who 
taking compassion on the forlorn youth, and accosted him unseen in an 
audible voice, and said: — 


24. O sagely son of the sage! why weepest thou as the ignorant, and why 
art thou so disconsolate, knowing the instability of worldly things? 


25. It is the state of this frail world, that everything is unstable here; and it 
is the course of nature that all things are born to live and perish afterwards 
into nothingness. 


26. Whatever is seen here from the great Brahma down to the meanest 
object, is all doomed to perish beyond a doubt. 


27. Do not, therefore, wail at the demise of thy father, but know like the 
rising and falling sun, everything is destined to its rise and fall. (Here sun, — 
the lord of the day, — ahah-pati, is spelt aharpati by a varttika of Katyayna). 


28. Hearing this oracular voice, the youth wiped his eyes red hot with 
weeping; and held his silence like the screaming peacock at the loud sound of 
the clouds. (The peacock is said to cry at the sight, but to be hushed at the 
sound of a rainy cloud). 


29. He rose up and performed the funeral ceremonies of his sire, with 
devoutness of his heart; and then set his mind to the success of his steady 
devotion. 


30. He was employed in the performance of his austerities according to the 
Brahmanic law, and engaged himself in discharging his ceremonial rites by 
the Srauta ritual, for the accomplishment of his sundry vows. 


31. But not knowing the knowable, (Brahma), his mind could not find its 
rest in his ceremonial acts, nor found its purity on the surface of the stainless 
earth. (The earth appears sullied to the tainted soul, but it is all unstained to 
the taintless soul, which views it full with the holy spirit of God). 


32. Not knowing the fulness of the world with divine spirit, and the 
holiness of the earth in every place, he thought the ground polluted (by the 


original sin), and did not find his repose anywhere. 


33. Therefore he made a vow of his own accord, to take his seat on the 
branch of a tree, which was untainted with the pollution of the earth. (Because 
the Lord said, “Cursed is the ground for thy sake;”’ but not so the trees 
growing upon it). 


34. Henceforth, said he, “I will perform my austerities on these branching 
arbours, and repose myself like birds and sylvan spirits, on the branches and 
leaves of trees.” 


35. Thus sitting on high, he kindled a flaming fire beneath him, and was 
going to offer oblations of living flesh on it, by paring bits of his shoulder 
blade (mixed with blood). 


36. When the god of fire thought in himself that, as fire is the mouth 
whereby the gods receive their food, the offering of a Brahman’s flesh to it, 
would wholly burn down their faces. (Fire is the mouth of gods, says Veda, 
because the gods of early Aryans were distinguished from the savages for 
their taking cooked food and meat, while the latter took them raw for want of 
their knowledge of kindling fire. Again, all flesh was palatable to the gods, 
except that of their brotherhood, — Brahmans). 


37. Thinking so, the god of fire appeared before him in his full blaze, as the 
luminous sun appeared before the lord of speech, — Brihaspati or Jupiter. 


38. He uttered gently and said, “Accept young Brahman your desired boon 
from me, as the owner of a store, takes out his treasure from the chest in 
which it is deposited.” 


39. Being thus accosted by the god, the Brahman boy saluted him with a 
laudatory hymn; and after adoring him with suitable offerings of flowers, 
addressed him in the following manner. 


40. “Lord! I find no holy place upon earth, which is full of iniquity and 
sinful beings; and, therefore, pray of thee to make the tops of trees, the only 
places for my abode.” 


41. Being thus besought by the Brahman boy, the god pronounced, “Be it 
so,” from his flaming mouth, and vanished from his sight. 


42. As the god disappeared from before him, like the day-light from the 
face of the lotus-flower; the son of the sage being fully satisfied with his 
desired boon, shone forth in his face like the orb of the full moon. 


43. Conscious of the success of his desire, his gladdened countenance 
brightened with his blooming smiles; just as the white lotus blushes with its 
smiling petals, no sooner it perceives the smiling moonbeams falling upon it. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 
DESCRIPTION OF DASURA’S KADAMBA 
FOREST. 


Argument. Comparisons of the Kadamba tree, and its branches, leaves, 
fruits and flowers and birds. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus Dastira remained in the forest reaching to the 
region of the clouds, and forming a stage for the halting of the tired horses of 
the meridian sun at midday. (i.e., As high as to reach the sphere of the sun at 
noon). 


2. Its far stretching boughs spread a canopy under the vault of heaven on all 
sides, and it looked to the skies all around with its full-blown blossoming 
eyes. 


3. The gentle winds were shedding the fragrant dust from the tufts of its 
hanging hairs, which studded with swarms of fluttering bees, and its waving 
leaves like palms of its hands, were brushing over the face of its fairy welkin. 


4. The banks with their long shrubbery, and the crimson filaments of their 
milk-white blossoms, were smiling like the fair faces of beauties, with their 
teeth tinged with reddish hue of betel leaves. 


5. The creeping plants were dancing with delight, and shedding the dust 
from the pistils of their flowers, which were clustered in bunches and beaming 
with the lustre of the full bright moon. 


6. The earth with its thickening thickets, and the warbling chakoras as 
amongst them, appeared as the milky path of heaven studded with stars 
singing their heavenly strains. 


7. Groups of peacocks sitting on the tops of branching trees, appeared with 
variegated trains, like rainbows amidst the verdant foliage, seeming as bluish 


clouds in the azure sky. 


8. The white chauri deer with half of their bodies hidden under the coverts 
of the woods, and their fore parts appearing without the thickets, appeared as 
so many moons with their dark and bright sides in the sky. 


9. The warbling of chataks, joined with the trill of cuckoos, and the 
whistling of chakoras, filled the groves with a continuous harmony. 


10. Flocks of white herons sitting on their nestling boughs, seemed as 
bodies of siddha sylphs, sitting quietly beside their coverts in heaven. 


11. Waving creepers with their ruddy leaflets shaking with the breeze, and 
their blooming blossoms beset by bees, resembled the Apsaras of heaven, 
flapping their rosy palms and looking at the skies. 


12. The clusters of Kumuda or blue lotuses, moving on the sky-blue waters 
with their yellow filaments, and shedding their golden dust around, appeared 
as the rainbow and lightings, darting their radiance in the azure sky. 


13. The forest with thousands of uplifted branches, seemed as the god 
Visva-rupa lifting his thousand arms on high, and dancing with the breeze, 
with the pendant orbs of the sun and moon, suspended as the earrings to both 
his ears. 


14. The groups of elephants lying underneath the branches, and the clusters 
of stars shining above them, gave the woodlands an appearance of the sky, 
with its dark clouds moving below the blazing stars above. 


15. The forest was as the store house of all sorts of fruits and flowers, as the 
god Brahma was the reservoir of all sorts of productions. 


16. The ground glistened with the falling florets and the farina of the 
flowers, as the firmament glittered with the lustre of solar and stellar light. 


17. The flights of birds flying on the boughs of trees, and those fluttering 
about their nests, and the flocks of fowls feeding on the ground, made the 
forest appear as a city with its people above, below, and all about it. 


18. Its bowers resembled the inner apartments of houses, with the blossoms 
waving as flags over them, and strewn over with the white farina of flowers, 
as they decorate the floors with flowers and powders, and hung flowers over 
them, as upon the windows of houses. 


19. There was the joint harmony of the humming bees and buzzing beetles; 


the twittering of chakoras and parrots, and cooing of cokilas in the deep 
coverts of the woods; and issuing out of their holes like the music of 
songstresses, coming out in unison from the hollows of windows. 


20. Birds of various kinds hovered about the coverts of the sylvan 
goddesses; as they were the only guests of their lonely retreats. 


21. The bees were continually humming over the farinaceous pistils of 
flowers, and sounding water-falls were incessantly exuding from the high hills 
in its neighbourhood. 


22. Here the gentle zephyrs were continually playing with the waving 
flowers; and the hoary clouds overtopped the lofty trees, as they do the tops of 
mountains. 


23. The sturdy woods resembling high hills, were rubbed by the scabby 
cheeks of elephants, and stood unmoved though they were incessantly dashed 
by their huge legs and feet. (See kumara Sambhava). 


24. Birds of variegated plumage that dwelt in the hollows of the trees, were 
as the various races of beings dwelling in the person of Vishnu. (Vishnu 
means the residence of beings like Virata). 


25. With the movements of their painted leaves, resembling the fingers of 
their palms, the trees seemed to keep time with the dancing creepers, and 
point out the modes of their oscillation. 


26. They danced also with delight with their branching arms and clasping 
armlets of the creepers, to think on the subsistence, that every part of their 
body affords to all kinds of living beings. (The produce of trees supplies the 
supportance of all living creatures). 


27. And thinking how they are the support of thousands of creeping plants, 
which entwine round them as their consorts, they sing their joyous chime in 
the buzzing of the bees about them. 


28. The flowers dropped down by the kind siddha (sylphs) from the trees, 
were hailed by the bees and cuckoos with their joyous notes and tunes. 


29. The kadamba tree seemed by its blooming blossoms, to laugh to 
derision, the five woody arbors on the skirts which do not bear their flowers. 
(These are the banian, bata and ficus religiosus, the mango, the fig tree and 
frondos. (i.e., avrge, Wag, CURA, and Ae called If or lords of woods)). 


30. With its uplifted head reaching to the sky, and the flight of birds flying 


over it like the hairs on its head, it seemed to defy the pdrijata tree of Indra’s 
heaven. 


31. The body of bees thronging all about its person, gave it the appearance 
of the thousand eyed Indra, with whom it vied in the greater number of its 
eyes. 


32. It had a tuft of flowers on some part of its head, appearing as the hood 
of a snake decorated with gems, and seeming as the infernal serpent had 
mounted its top with his crowned head, in order to survey the wonders of 
heaven. 


33. Besmeared with the pollen of its flowers, it appeared as the god Siva 
anointed with his powdered ashes; while its shady bowers overhung with 
luscious fruits, refreshed the passing travellers with rest and repast. 


34. The kadamba arbour appeared as the garden of paradise, having alcoves 
under its thickening boughs, and grottos formed by the flowery creepers 
below it; while the birds of heaven hovered about it as its perpetual 
inhabitants. 


CHAPTER L. 
DASURA’S SURVEY OF THE HEAVENS. 


Argument. Dastira surveys all the sky from his seat on the Kadamba tree. 


Vasishtha continued: — Dastira remained in this flowery arbour, as if he 
dwelt on a hill of flowers; and he felt in his mind the delight, which the 
flowery spring and its fruitage could infuse in the heart. 


2. He mounted and sat over the high and airy top of the tree, and looked on 
all sides like the god Vishnu surveying the worlds. 


3. There sitting on a branch which reached to the sky, he was employed in 
his devotion, devoid of fear and desire. 


4. From this his leafy and easy couch of repose, he cast his curious eyes to 
view the wonders of nature on all sides. 


5. He beheld a river at a distance glittering as a necklace of gold, and the 
summits of distant hills rising as nipples on the breast of the earth. The fair 
face of the sky appeared as the face of a fairy, covered under the blue veil of a 
cloud. 


6. The verdant leaves of trees were as the green garb of this fairy, and the 
clusters of flowers were as garlands on her head; the distant lakes appearing as 
water-pots, were decorated by their aquatic plants and flowers. 


7. The fragrance of the blooming lotuses, seemed as the sweet breathing of 
the fairy; and the gurgling of the waterfalls, sounded as the trinkets fastened to 
her feet. 


8. The trees touching the skies, were as the hairs on her body, the thick 
forests resembled her thighs, and the orbs of the sun and moon, were as 
earrings pendant on her ears. 


9. The fields of corn seemed as pots of her sandal paste, and the rising hills 


were as her breasts, covered by the cloudy mantle on their tops. 


10. The seas with their lucent waters were as her mirrors, to reflect the rays 
of her jewels of the starry frame. (The stars are explained in the gloss as drops 
of sweat on her person). 


11. The season fruits and flowers were as embroideries on her bodice, and 
the rays of the sun and moon were as powders over her body, or as the pasted 
sandal on her person. 


12. The clouds covering the landscape were as her garment, and the trees 
and plants on the borders, were as the fringes or the skirts of her raiment. In 
this manner he beheld all the ten sides of heaven as full with the form of a 
fairy queen. 


CHAPTER LI. 
DASURA’S BEGETTING A SON. 


Argument: — Mental sacrifices of Ddastira, and his production and 
Instruction of a son begotten by the sylvan goddess. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thence forward Dastira remained as an ascetic in his 
hermitage, in that forest, and was known as the Kadamba Dastira, and a giant 
of austere devotion. 


2. There, sitting on the leaves of the creepers growing on the branch of that 
tree, he looked up to heaven, and then placing himself in the posture of 
padmasana, he called back his mind to himself. 


3. Unacquainted with spiritual adoration, and unpracticed to the ceremonial 
ritual, he commenced to perform his mental sacrifice, with a desire of gaining 
its reward. 


4. Sitting on the leaves of the creepers in his aerial seat, he employed his 
inward spirit and mind, in discharging his sacrificial rites, of the sacred fire 
and horse sacrifice. 


5. He continued there for the space of full ten years, in his acts of satisfying 
the gods with his mental sacrifices of the bull, horse, and human immolations, 
and paying their honorariums in his mind. 


6. In process of time, his mind was purified and expanded, and he gained 
the knowledge of the beatification of his soul. (It is believed that ceremonial 
acts, lead to the knowledge productive of spiritual bliss). 


7. His ignorance being dispelled, his heart became purified of the dirt of 
worldly desires; and he came to behold a sylvan goddess, standing beside his 
leafy and mossy seat. 


8. She was a body of light and dressed in a robe of flowers; her form and 


face were beautiful to behold, and her large bright eyes turned wistfully 
towards him. 


9. Her body breathed the fragrance of the blue lotus, and her figure 
charmed his inmost soul. He then spoke to the goddess, standing before him 
with her down cast looks. 


10. What art thou, O tender dame! That lookest like a creeper fraught with 
flowers, and defiest the god Cupid with thy beauteous form and eyes, 
resembling the petals of the lotus. 


11. Why standest thou as Flora, the befriending goddess of flowering 
creepers? Thus accosted, the dame with deer-like eyes and protuberant bosom 
replied to him. 


12. She said to the hermit with a sweet and charming voice in the following 
manner: — “Mayst thou prosper in obtaining the objects of thy wishes”: — 


13. “For anything which is desirable and difficult of attainment in this 
world, is surely obtainable when sought after with proper exertion by the 
great”: — 


14. “I am, O Brahman! a sylvan goddess of this forest, which is so full of 
creeping plants, and decorated by the beautiful kadamba trees. 


15. “Here I strayed to witness the festive mirth of the sylvan goddesses, 
which always takes place on this thirteenth day of the lunar month of chaitra 
in this forest. 


16. “I saw here my companions enjoying their festival of love, and felt 
myself sorry to think of my childlessness among them. 


17. “Finding thee accomplished in all qualifications, I have resorted hither 
with my suit of begetting a son by thee. 


18. “Please Sir, to procreate a son in me, or else I will put my person in the 
flames, to get rid of my sorrow of childlessness.” 


19. Hearing the sylvan dame speaking in this manner, the hermit smiled at 
her, and spoke kindly to her with presenting her a flower with his own hand, 
and said: — 


20. Depart, O damsel! and betake thyself to the worship of Siva for a whole 
month, and then thou shalt like a tender creeper, beget a boy as beautiful as a 
bud by this time of the year. 


21. But that son of thine, whom thou didst desire of me at the sacrifice of 
thy life, will betake himself to austerities like mine, and become a seer like 
myself, (because he will be born of my blessing to thee). 


22. So saying, the sage dismissed the suppliant dame now gladdened in her 
face, and promised to perform the necessary for her blessing’s sake. 


23. The lotus-eyed dame then retired from him, and went to her abode; and 
the hermit passed his months, seasons, and years in his holy meditation. 


24. After a long time the lotus-eyed dame returned to the sage with her boy, 
now grown up to the twelfth year of his age. 


25. She made her obeisance and sat before him with her boy of the moon 
bright face; and then uttered her words, sweet as the murmur of the humble 
bee, to the stately Amra tree. 


26. This Sir, is the would be son, (bhdvya), of both of us, who has been 
trained up by me in all the branches of learning. (The Veda and its branches. 
The future bhdvya, — would be, should be the preter bhdvita, — was to be). 


27. He is only untaught in the best knowledge, which releases the soul from 
its return to this world of troubles. (By the best or subha knowledge, is meant 
the para, — superior or spiritual learning). 


28. Do you now my lord! deign to instruct him in that knowledge, for who 
is there that should like to keep his own boy in ignorance (of his future and 
best welfare)? 


29. Being thus besought by her, he bespoke to the tender mother, to leave 
the child there and depart her own way. 


30. She being gone, the boy remained submissive to his father, and dwelt 
by his side as his pupil, like Aruna, (Ouranus), waiting upon the sun. 


31. Inured in austerity, the boy continued to receive his best knowledge 
from the various lectures of his father, and passed a long time with him in that 
place, under the name of the sage’s son. 


32. The boy was taught in various narratives and tales, and with many 
examples and ocular instances; as also in historical accounts and evidences of 
the Veda and Vedanta, (for his best knowledge of spirituality). 


33. The boy remained attendant on the lecture of his father, without feeling 
any anxiety; and formed his right notions of things by means of their 


antecedents. (The antecedent or preliminary causes of right judgements are, 
perceptions, inferences, comparisons and testimony or authoritative 
statements of Sdstras. (These are originally termed as pratyaksha, anumiti, 
Upamiti and Sabda or Sabda-bodha)). 


34. The magnanimous father thus instilled true knowledge into the mind of 
his boy, by means (of the quadruple process) of right reasoning and correct 
diction, rather than regarding the elegance of expression; as the cloud 
indicates the approaching rain to the peacock by its hoarse sounds. (The 
quadruple process as mentioned above.) 


CHAPTER LIL. 
GRANDEUR OF THE AIR-BORN KING. 


Argument. Description of Dominions of the Air-born King, and the Frailty 
of Worldly possessions. 


Vasishtha continued: — It was on one occasion that I passed by that 
(Dastira’s) way in my invisible body, to bathe in the heavenly stream of 
mandakini, (milky way), in the ethereal regions. 


2. After my departure from that region by the way of the Pleiades, 
(saptarshi), I arrived to the spot where Dastira dwelt on his high Kadamba 
tree. 


3. I came to listen to a voice proceeding from the hollow of the tree in the 
forest, which was as charming as the buzzing of the bee, fluttering about the 
bud of a lotus. 


4. Attend my intelligent son! said he, to a narrative that I will relate unto 
thee by way of a simile of worldly things, and it is pleasant to hear. 


5. There is a very powerful King renowned in all the three worlds for his 
great prosperity. His name is Khottha or Air-produced, and able to grasp the 
whole world. (Like the air whereof he was born. Kha, Khao, and Khavi yet un, 
is empty air in Sanskrit, Hebrew and Arabic, and Khali in Persian and Urdu). 


6. All the lords of the earth bend their heads lowly under his rule, and bear 
the badge of their submission to him with as great an honour, as poor men are 
proud to carry about a bright gem on the head. 


7. He exulted in his valour and the possession of all kinds of rarities, and 
there is no one in the three worlds, that is able to bring him under his 
subjection. 


8. His unnumbered acts and exploits, are fraught with successive pain and 


pleasure; and they are as interminable as the continuous waves of the sea. 


9. No one has been able to check the prowess of that mighty brave by force 
of fire or sword, as none hath ever been able to press the air or wind in his 
hand. 


10. Even the gods Indra, Upendra and Hara, have fallen short of following 
his steps in his ambitious pursuits, and the splendid inventions of his 
imagination. 


11. With his triple form of the sdtwika, rdjasika and tamasika qualities, he 
encompasses the world, and is enabled to accomplish all sorts of actions. 
(These are the qualities of goodness, moderation, and excess, or the three 
states of deficiency, mediocrity and excess of moral acts, according to the text 
of Aristotelean Ethics. But I would prefer to call them the positive, 
comparative, and superlative virtues, or rather the minimum, mean, and 
maximum states of virtues). 


12. He is born in the extensive vacuity (of the spirit of Brahma), with his 
triple body as that of a bird, (viz, the flesh and bones and the feathers, and 
remains in vacuum as the air and the sound). 


13. He has built a city in that unlimited space of the Universe, having 
fourteen provinces, (chaturdasa Bhuvana), (the planetary spheres), in its triple 
divisions, (tribhuvana), of the earth and regions above and below it. 


14. It is beautified with forests and groves and pleasure-lawns and hills, and 
bounded by the seven lakes of pearly waters on all sides. (The city signifies 
the earth and the lakes and the seven oceans in it). 


15. It is lighted by two lamps of hot and cooling light (the sun and moon), 
which revolve above and below it in their diurnal and nocturnal courses, as 
those of righteous and nefarious people. (The original words, as the courses 
diva, and nisdcharas or the day and nightfarers). 


16. The king has peopled this great city of his with many self-moving 
bodies, (animals), which move in their spheres quite ignorant of themselves, 
(i.e., of their origin, their course and their fates). 


17. Some of these are appointed in higher and some in lower spheres, and 
others move in their middle course; some destined to live a longer time, and 
others doomed to die in a day (as the ephemerids). 


18. These bodies are covered with black skins and hairs (as thatched huts), 


and furnished with nine holes, (as their doors or windows); which are 
continually receiving in and carrying out the air to keep them alive. 


19. They are supplied with five lights of sensation and perceptions and 
supported by three posts of the two legs and the back bone, and a frame work 
of white bones for the beams and bamboo rafters. It is plastered over with 
flesh as its moistened clay (or mud wall), and defended by the two arms as 
latches on door way. 


20. The Great king has placed his sentinel of the Yaksha of egoism as a 
guard of this house; and this guard is as ferocious as a Bhairava in dark 
(ignorance), and as timorous as a Bhairava by the day, (i.e., egoism brags in 
ignorance, but flies before the day-light of reason). 


21. The masters of these locomotive bodies, play many pranks in them, as a 
bird plays its frolics in its own nest. 


22. This tri-formed prince (the mind) is always fickle, and never steady in 
any; he resides in many bodies and plays his gambles there with his guard of 
egoism, and leaves one body for another at will, as a bird alights from one 
branch upon another. 


23. This fickle minded prince is ever changeful in his will; he resides in one 
city and builds another for his future habitation. 


24. Like one under the influence of a ghost, he stirs up from one place and 
runs to another, as a man builds and breaks and rebuilds his aerial castle at his 
hobby. 


25. The Mind sometimes wishes to destroy its former frame and remove to 
another, and effects its purpose at will. 


26. It is produced again as the wave of the sea, after it had subsided to rest; 
and it pursues slowly and gradually a different course in its renewed course of 
life. 


27. This prince sometimes repents of his own conduct and acts in his new 
life, and then laments for his ignorance and miseries and knows not what to 
do. 


28. He is sometimes dejected by sorrow and at others elated by success, 
like the current of a river, now going down in the hot season, and again 
overflowing its banks in the rains. 


29. This king is led by his hobbies like the waters of the sea by the winds; it 


puffs and swells, falls, and rises, runs fast and ceases to flow at once as in a 
calm. 


CHAPTER LIII. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MUNDANE CITY. 


Argument. Interpretation of the Parable of the Air-born prince, and 
exposition of the Universe as the production of our Desires. 


Vasishtha continued: — The boy then asked his holy sire, who was sitting 
reclined on his sacred Kadamba tree, in the midst of the forest of the great 
Jambudvipa in the gloom of the night. 


2. The son said: — Tell me Sir, who is this Air-born prince of Supernatural 
form, about whom you related to me just now; I do not fully comprehend its 
meaning, and want it to be explained to me clearly. 


3. You said, Sir, that this prince constructs for himself a new abode, whilst 
residing in his present body; and removes to the same after he has left the old 
frame. This seems impossible to me, as the joining of one tense with another, 
the present with the future. 


4. Dastira replied: — Hear me tell you my son, the meaning of this parable, 
which will explain to you the nature of this revolutionary world in its true 
light. 


5. I have told you at first that a non-entity sprang in the beginning from the 
entity of God, and this non-entity being stretched out afterwards (in the form 
of illusion), gave rise to this illusory world called the cosmos. 


6. The vacuous spirit of the Supreme Deity, gives rise to his formless will, 
which is thence called Air-born, (or the mind). It is born of itself in its 
formless state from the formless Spirit, and dissolves itself into the same; as 
the wave rising from and falling in the bosom of the sea. (Thus in the 
beginning was the Will and not the Word, and the Will was in God, and the 
will was God; and it rises and sets in the Spirit of God). 


7. It is the will which produces everything, and there is nothing produced 


but by the Will. The Will is self-same with its object, which constitutes and 
subsists in it; and it lives and dies also along with its object. (The will of the 
willful mind, dwells on some subject or other while it is living; but it perishes 
when it has no object to think upon, and melts into insensibility; or else it 
continues to transmigrate with its thoughts and wishes for ever). 


8. Know the gods Brahma, Vishnu, Indra, Siva and the Rudras, as offspring 
of the willful Mind; as the branches are the offshoots of the main tree, and the 
summits are projections of the principal mountain. 


9. This Mind builds the city of the triple world, in the vacuum of Brahma 
(like an air-drawn castle), by reason of its being endowed with intelligence 
from Omniscience, in its form of Virinchi, (vir-incho-ativus). 


10. This city is composed of fourteen worlds (planetary spheres) containing 
all their peoples; together with chains of their hills and forests and those of 
gardens and groves. 


11. It is furnished with the two lights of the sun and moon, (to shine as two 
fires by day and night); and adorned with many mountains for human sports. 
(Hence the mountainous Gods of old, are said to be the sportive Devas; divi 
devah divayanti). 


12. Here the pearly rivers are flowing in their winding courses, and bearing 
their swelling waves and rippling billows, shining as chains of pearls under 
the sunbeams and moonlight. 


13. The seven oceans appear as so many lakes of limpid waters, and 
shining with their sub-marine fires, resembling the lotus-beds and mines of 
gems beneath the azure sky. 


14. It is a distinguished place of gods, men, and savages, who make their 
commerce here, with commodities (of virtue and vice), leading either to 
heaven above or to the hell below. 


15. The self-willed King, (the mind), has employed here many persons (as 
dramatis personae), to act their several parts before him for his pleasure. 


16. Some are placed high above this stage to act as gods and deities, and 
others are set in lower pits of this earth and infernal regions, to act their 
miserable parts, — as men and Nagas. (The Nagas are snakes and snake 
worshippers, living in subterraneous cells like the serpentine race of Satan. 
The Bara and Chhota Naghores, and the Naga hill people of Assam are 
remnants of this tribe). 


17. Their bodies are made of clay, and their frame work is of white bones; 
and their plastering is the flesh under the skin as a pneumatic machine. 


18. Some of these bodies have to act their parts for a long while, while 
others make their exits in a short time. They are covered with caps of black 
hairs, and others with those of white and grey on their heads. 


19. All these bodies are furnished with nine crevices, consisting of the two 
earholes, two sockets of the eyes, and two nostrils with the opening of the 
mouth, which are continually employed in inhaling and exhaling cold and hot 
air by their breathings. (These airs are the oxygen and nitrogen gases). 


20. The earholes, nostrils, and the palate, serve as windows to the abode of 
the body; the hands and feet are the gate ways, and the five inner organs are as 
lights of these abodes. 


21. The mind then creates of its own will the delusion of egoism, which 
like a Yaksha demon takes possession of the whole body, but flies before the 
light of knowledge. 


22. The mind accompanied by this delusive demon, takes great pleasure in 
diverting itself with unrealities, (until it comes to perceive their vanity by the 
light of reason). 


23. Egoism resides in the body like a rat in the barn-house, and as a snake 
in the hollow ground. It falls down as a dew drop from the blade of a reed, 
upon advance of the sunlight of reason. 


24. It rises and falls like the flame of a lamp in the abode of the body, and 
is as boisterous with all its desires, as the sea with its ceaseless waves. 


25. The Mind constructs a new house for its future abode, by virtue of its 
interminable desires in its present habitation; and which are expected to be 
realized and enjoyed in its future state. 


26. But no sooner it ceases to foster its desires, than it ceases to exist, and 
loses itself in that state of Supreme bliss of which there can be no end. 
(Freedom from desire, is freedom from regeneration). 


27. But it is born and reborn by its repeated desires, as the child sees the 
ghost by its constant fear of it. (Every desire rises as a spectre to bind). 


28. It is egoism, (or the belief of one’s real entity), that spreads the view of 
this miserable world before him; but absence of the knowledge of self-entity, 
removes the sight of all objects from view, as the veil of thick darkness hides 


all things from sight. (Without the subjective there can be no knowledge of 
the objective). 


29. It is by one’s own attempt in this way, that he exposes himself to the 
miseries of the world; and then he wails at his fate like the foolish monkey, 
that brought on its own destruction, by pulling out the peg from the chink of 
the timber (which smashed its testes. See Hitopadesa). 


30. The mind remains in eager expectation of the enjoyment of its desired 
objects, as the stag stood with its lifted mouth, to have a drop of honey fall 
into it, from a honey-comb hanging on high. 


31. The wistful mind now pursues its desired objects, and now it forsakes 
them in disgust; now it longs for joy, and then grows sulky at its failure like a 
fretful child. 


32. Now try diligently, my boy, to extricate thy mind from all outward 
objects, and fix thy attention to the inward object of this meditation. 


33. The willful mind takes at its will its good, bad, and moderate or sober 
forms; known under the names of satva, rajas, and tamas, (as defined before). 


34. The bad or vitiated form of the mind delights in worldliness, and by 
bemeaning itself with all its greedy appetites, reduces itself to the state of 
worms and insects in its future births. 


35. The good disposition of the mind is inclined towards virtuous deeds, 
and the acquisition of knowledge; and by these means advances both to its 
soleness and self-enjoyment, (i.e., to its full liberation and the state of the 
highest Brahma). 


36. In its form of moderation, it is observant of the rules and laws of 
society, and conducts itself in the world in the company of friends and 
members of the family. 


37. After relinquishment of all these three forms, and abdication of egoism 
and desires, it reaches to the state of the absolute Supreme Being. 


38. Therefore, shun the sight of the visibles, and repress your fleeting mind 
by your sober intellect; and diminish your desires for all internal as well as 
external goods. (i.e., Both mental qualifications and outward possessions). 


39. For though you may practice your austerities for a thousand years, and 
crush your body by falling from a precipice upon stones; — 


40. Or although you burn your body alive on a flaming pyre, or plunge 
yourself into the sub-marine fire; or if you fall in a deep and dark pit or well, 
or rush upon the edge of a drawn and sharp sword; — 


41. Or if you have Brahma himself or even Siva for your preceptor, or get 
the very kind and tender hearted ascetic for your religious guide; — (The guru 
of this nature probably alludes to Buddha, or Jina according to some, or to 
Dattatreya or Durvasa according to others. — Gloss). 


42. Whether you are situated in heaven or on earth, or in the regions of 
pdtdla, — the antipodes below; you have no way of liberation, save by 
keeping your desires under subjection. 


43. Exert your manliness, therefore, in domineering over your irresistible 
and violent desires and passions, which will secure to you the pure and 
transcendent joy of peace and holiness. 


44. All things are linked together under the bandage of cupidity; and this 
band being broken asunder, makes the desired objects vanish into nothing. 


45. The real is unreal and the unreal is real, as the mind may make it appear 
to be; all reality and unreality consists in our conception of them, and in 
nothing besides. 


46. As the mind conceives a thing to be, so it perceives the same in 
actuality; therefore, have no conception of anything, if you want to know the 
truth of it. 


47. Do you act as the world goes, without your liking or disliking of 
anything; and thus the desires being at an end, the intellect will rise to the 
inscrutable beyond the knowledge of the mind. 


48. The mind which having sprung from the Supreme Soul in the form of 
goodness, is inclined afterwards towards the unrealities of the world; surely 
alienates itself from the Supreme, and exposes itself to all sorts of misery. 


49. We are born to the doom of death, but let us not die to be reborn to the 
miseries of life and death again. It is for the wise and learned to betake 
themselves to that state, which is free from these pains. 


50. First learn the truth, and attain to the true knowledge of your soul; and 
then abandon all your desire and dislike of the world. Being thus prepared 
with a dead-like insensibility of your internal feelings, you will be enabled to 
come to the knowledge of that transcendental state, which is full of perfect 


bliss and blessedness. 


CHAPTER LIV. 
CORRECTIVE OF DESIRES. 


Argument. The rise, progress and decline of Human Wishes. 


The Son asked: — What is this desire, father? how is it produced and grown, 
and how is it destroyed at last? 


2. Dastra replied: — The desire or will is situated in the mind or mental 
part of the one eternal, universal and spiritual substance of God. 


3. It gets the form of a monad from a formless unit, and then by its gradual 
expansion extends over the whole mind, and fills it as a flimsy cloud soon 
covers the sky. 


4. Remaining in the divine Intellect, the mind thinks of thinkables, as they 
are distinct from itself; and its longing after them is called its desire, which 
springs from it as a germ from its seed. 


5. The desire is produced by the desiring of something, and it increases of 
itself both in its size and quantity, for our trouble only, and to no good or 
happiness at all. 


6. It is the accretion of our desires which forms the world, as it is the 
accumulation of waters which makes the ocean; you have no trouble without 
your desire, and being free from it, you are freed from the miseries of the 
world (wherein one has to buffet as in the waves and waters of the sea). 


7. It is by mere chance, that we come to meet with the objects of our desire; 
as it is by an act of unavoidable chance also, that we are liable to lose them. 
They appear before us as secondary luminaries in the sky, and then fly away 
as the mirage vanishes from view. 


8. As a man who has the jaundice by eating a certain fruit, sees everything 
as yellow as gold with his jaundiced eye; so the desire in the heart of man, 


pictures the unreal as a reality before him. 


9. Know this truth that you are an unreality yourself, and must become an 
unreality afterwards. (Because there is but one self-existent entity, and all 
besides is but suppositions not entities). 


10. He who has learnt to disbelieve his own existence and that of all others, 
and knows the vanity of his joy and grief, is not troubled at the gain or loss of 
anything, (which is but vanity of vanities, the world is vanity). 


11. Knowing yourself as nothing, why do you think of your birth and your 
pleasures here? You are deluded in vain by the vanity of your desires. 


12. Do not entertain your desires, nor think of anything which is nothing; it 
is by your living in this manner, that you may be wise and happy. 


13. Try to relinquish your desire, and you will evade all difficulties; and 
cease to think of anything, and your desire for it will disappear of itself. 


14. Even the crushing of a flower is attended with some effort, but it 
requires no effort to destroy your desire, which vanishes of itself for want of 
its thought. 


15. You have to expand the palm of your hand, in laying hold of a flower; 
but you have nothing to do in destroying your frail and false desire. 


16. He that wants to destroy his desire, can do it in a trice, by forgetting the 
thought of his desired object. 


17. The thoughts being repressed from other objects, and fixed in the 
Supreme Spirit, will enable one to do what is impossible for others to effect. 


18. Kill your desire by desiring nothing, and turn your mind from all 
things, by fixing it in the Supreme, which you can easily do of yourself. 


19. Our desires being quieted, all worldly cares come to a stand-still, and 
all our troubles are put to a dead lock. 


20. Our wishes constitute our minds, hearts, lives, understandings and all 
our desiderative faculties; all which are but different names for the same thing 
without any difference in their signification. 


21. There is no other business of our lives than to desire and to be doing, 
and when done, to be desiring again; and as this restless craving is rooted out 
of the mind, it sets it free from all anxiety. 


22. The world below is as empty, as the hollow sky above us; both of those 
are empty nothings, except that our minds make something or other of them, 
agreeably to its desire or fancy. 


23. All things are unsubstantial and unsubstantiated by the unsubstantial 
mind; thus the world being but a creation of our fancy a desideratum, there is 
nothing substantial for you to think about. 


24. Our reliance on unrealities proving to be unreal, leaves no room for our 
thinking about them; the suppression of their thoughts produces _ that 
perfection, insouciance, than which there is nothing more desirable on earth. 
Forget, therefore, all that is unreal. 


25. The nice discernment of things, will preserve you from the excess of 
joy and grief, and the knowledge of the Vanity of things, will keep out your 
affection for or reliance on any person or thing. 


26. The removal of reliance upon the world, removes our attachment to it; 
and consequently prevents our joy or sorrow at the gain or loss of any thing. 


27. The mind which becomes the living principle, stretches out his city of 
the world by an act of its imagination; and then turns it about as the present, 
past, and future worlds, (i.e., the mind produces, destroys, and reproduces the 
world, as it builds and breaks and rebuilds its aerial castles). 


28. The mind being subject to the sensational, emotional, and volitive 
feelings, loses the purity of its intellectual nature, and plays many parts by its 
sensuousness. 


29. The living soul also forgets the nature of the universal soul from which 
it is derived, and is transformed to a puny animalcule in the heart of man, 
where it plays its pranks like an ape in the woods. 


30. Its desires are as irrepressible, as the waves of the ocean, and they rise 
and fall by turns like the waves, in expectation of having every object of the 
senses. 


31. Our desire like fire, is kindled by every straw; and it burns and blows 
out in its invisible form within the mind. 


32. Our desires are as fickle as flashes of lightning, and proceed from the 
minds of the ignorant, as the lightning darts itself from the watery clouds, 
(Sem); they are equally fleeting and misguiding, and must be speedily 
avoided by the wise. 


33. Desire is undoubtedly a curable disease, as long as it is a transient 
malady of the mind; but it becomes incurable when it takes a deep root in it. 


34. The knowledge of the unreality of the world, quickly cures the disease 
of desire; but the certainty of worldly knowledge, makes it as incurable as the 
impossibility of removing the blackness of a coal. 


35. What fool will attempt to wash a coal white, or convert a materialist to 
a spiritualist? Or turn a raven or Negro to whiteness? 


36. But the mind of a man, is as a grain of rice covered under its husk, 
which is soon unhusked upon the threshing-floor. 


37. The worldliness of the wise, is as soon removed as the husk of rice, and 
the blackness of a cooking kettle. 


38. The blemishes of a man, are blotted out by his own endeavours; 
wherefore you must try to exert yourself to action at all times. 


39. He who has not been able to master over his vain desires and hobby 
whims in this world, will find them vanish of themselves in course of time, as 
nothing false can last forever. 


40. The light of reason removeth the false conception of the world, as the 
light of the lamp dispels the darkness from the room at sight, and night vision 
removes the secondary moon (of optical deception). 


41. The world is not yours, nor are you of this world; there is nobody nor 
anything here akin to you, nor are you so to any; never think otherwise, nor 
take the false for true. 


42. Never foster the false idea in your mind, that you are master of large 
possessions and pleasant things; for know yourself and all pleasant things, are 
for the delight of the Supreme Maker and Master of all. 


CHAPTER LV. 
MEETING OF VASISHTHA AND DASURA. 


Argument. Dastira’s reception of Vasishtha, their conversation and Parting. 


Vasishtha said: — Hear me, Rama, that art the delight of Raghu’s race, and 
shinest as the moon in the firmament of Raghu’s family; that after I heard the 
conversation that was going on between Dastira and his son: — 


2. I alighted from the sky on the top of the Kadamba tree, which was 
decorated with its verdant leaves, and beautiful fruits and flowers; and then 
with my spiritual body, I sat myself slowly and silently on the top of the tree, 
as a light cloud alights on the summit of a mountain. 


3. I beheld Dastira there, sitting as a giant by subduing the organs of his 
body, and shining with the lustre of his devotion, as the fire blazing with its 
flame. 


4. The lustre issuing from his body, had strewn his seat with purple gold, 
and lighted that spot, as the sun-beams emblazon the world. 


5. Seeing me presenting myself before him, Dastira spread a leafy seat for 
me to sit down, and then honoured me according to the rules of ceremonial 
law. 


6. Then I joined with the luminous Dastra in continuation of his discourse, 
which was meant for the edification of his son, and salvation of mankind from 
the miseries of life. 


7. I then, with permission of Dastra, looked into the hollow of the tree, and 
the herds of stags pasturing fearlessly about it, and grazing and gathering 
about it. 


8. It was as delightful as a bower overhung with creepers, where the 
smiling flowers were shedding their light, and breathing their fragrance to the 


winds. 


9. The choury deer flapped their long hairy and moon-bright tails, against 
the herbaceous arbour, as the white flimsy clouds sweep over the sky. 


10. The tree was adorned with fringes of pearly dewdrops, and arrayed all 
over with the flowery garb of his blossoms. 


11. Smeared with the dust of its flowers, it appeared to be anointed with 
sandal paste; while its blowsy bark mantled it in roseate red. 


12. Decorated with flowers, the tree seemed to stand in its bridal attire; and 
resembled the bridegroom in mutual embrace with the twining brides. 


13. The bowers of shrubberies all around, resembled the leafy huts of 
hermits, which with their overtopping blossoms, seemed as a city, flaring with 
flying flags (or banners) in festivity. 


14. Shaken by the stages in the act of rubbing their bodies, the trees darted 
their flowers in abundance upon the ground; and the border-lands were as 
shattered, as if they were broken by the horns of fighting bulls. 


15. Peacocks daubed with dust of flowers, and flying on the top of the 
adjacent hill, appeared as evening clouds gliding over it. 


16. Here the goddess Flora seemed to be sporting in the lawns, with the 
roseate flowers in her hands, and smiling sweetly in the blooming blossoms; 
she revelled with the nectarine honey of flowers; and shed her beauty on all 
sides. 


17. The closing buds resembling her eyelids, were lulled to sleep by the 
forest breeze, breathing incessantly with the fragrance of the flowers. The 
clusters of flowers forming her breasts, were hid under the bodice of leaves. 


18. She sat at the window of her alcove, formed by the twining plants and 
creepers, and was dressed in the purple garb of the flying farina of flowers. 


19. She swang in her swinging cradle of bluish blossoms, and was adorned 
with various floral ornaments from her head to foot. 


20. She moved about the flowers in the garb of the sylvan goddess and 
looking with her cerulean eyes of fluttering blue-bees on all sides; and sang to 
them in the sweet notes of the black kokila in the arbours. 


21. The bees tired with their labour of love, refreshed themselves with 


sipping the dew-drops trickling on the tops of the flowers, and then making 
their repast on the farinaceous meal, slept together with their mates, in the 
cells of the flower cups. 


22. The couples of bees dwelling in the cells of flowers, and giddy with 
sipping the honey of the flower cups; were humming their love tunes to one 
another. 


23. The sage remained attentive for a moment to the murmur, proceeding 
from the village beyond the forest; and now he listened with pricked up ears, 
to the busy buzz of blue-bees and flies at a distance. 


24. The sages then beheld with their downcast looks on moon-beams, 
which were spread like a sheet of fine linen on the blades of grass upon the 
ground below. 


25. They beheld the beautiful antelopes, which slept in their leafy beds on 
the ground, below the stretching boughs of shady trees, as if they were the 
progeny of their native forest. 


26. They saw the fearless birds chirping upon the branches, and others 
sleeping confident in their nests; and they beheld the ground covered by living 
creatures, feasting on the ripe fruits fallen below. 


27. They saw the long lines of black-bees, lying mute on the ground like 
strings of beads, and blackening it with their sable bodies. 


28. The forest was redolent with fragrance, and the sky was overhung by a 
cloud of flowers; the dust of Kadamba blossoms tinged the ground with 
ambergrees, and the Kadamba fruits covered the face of the land. 


29. What need is there of saying more, than that there was no part of the 
tree, which was not useful to living beings. 


30. Here the deer were sleeping on the fallen leaves and there were others 
resting on the barren ground; the birds sat on the banks and beaches of the 
rivulets all about that lofty tree. 


31. As they were viewing in this manner the beauties of the forest, the night 
passed away as soon as a night of festivity. 


32. The son of the hermit kept conversing with me on many subjects, and 
derived many useful instructions from my teaching. 


33. As we had been conversing with one another on different subjects, the 


night passed away as soon as that of a conjugal pair. 


34. Now it began to dawn, and the blushing flowers commenced to ope 
their petals; while the host of the stars on high, disappeared from their arena 
of the sky. 


35. I then took my departure, and was followed by the hermit and his son to 
some distance from their Kadamba tree, where I left them for my aerial course 
to the heavenly stream. 


36. There having performed my holy ablution, I came down under the vault 
of heaven, and then entered the celestial region of the sages, which is situated 
in the midway sky. 


37. Now I have related to you, Rama, this story of Dastira, that you may 
learn from his instance the unreality of the apparent world, and as it is but a 
shadow of the ideal one (in the Divine mind). 


38. It was for this reason, that I have given you the narrations of Dastira, by 
way of explanation of the phenomenal world, as a shadow of the noumenal. 


39. Now, therefore, know the Spirit like Dastira, and imitate his example in 
the magnanimity of your soul. Forsake the unreal, and pursue the reality for 
your permanent delight. 


40. Rub out the dirt of desire from your mind, and see the image of truth in 
it as in a mirror; you will thus attain to the highest state of knowledge, and be 
honoured in all worlds as a perfect being. 


CHAPTER LVI. 
ON THE SOUL AND ITS INERTNESS. 


Argument. Consideration of the activity and inactivity of the Soul, and the 
Vanity of the Visibles. 


Vasishtha continued: — Knowing the world as a nihility, you must cease to 
take any delight in it; for what reasonable being is there in it that would 
delight in its unreality. 


2. If you take the phenomenal world for a reality, you may continue to 
enslave yourself to the unreal material; and lose the spiritual nature of your 
soul. 


3. Or if you know it to be a temporary existence, why then should you take 
any interest in what is so frail and unstable, rather than care for your immortal 
soul? 


4. The world is no substantial existence, nor are you a being of its 
unsubstantiality; it is only a clear reflection of the divine mind, and extending 
over all infinity. (And which is refracted into all individual minds as in 
prismatic glasses). 


5. The world is neither an agent itself, nor is it the act of any agent at all; it 
is simply the reflexion of the noumenal, without any agency of its own. 


6. Whether the world is with or without an agent, or has a maker or not, yet 
you cannot tell it as a real substance, except that it appears so to your mind. 


7. The soul is devoid of all organs of action, and with all its activity, it 
remains motionless and without action, as anything that is inactive and 
immovable. 


8. The world is the production of a fortuitous chance, (Kdkatdliya 
Sanyoga), and none but boys place any reliance in it. (The world here means 


our existence in it, which is an act of chance). 


9. The world is neither stable nor fragile, but it is mutable from one state to 
another, as it is known by its repeated reproductions and visibility to us. 


10. It is neither everlasting, nor is it a momenting thing; its constant 
mutability contradicts its firmness; and its nihility, (as stated before), is 
opposed to its temporarity. (The dictum of the Veda of the eternity of asat, — 
nullity, nullifies its temporariness). 


11. If the soul is the active power without its organs of action, it must be 
unfailing and entire; because the continuance of its inorganic operations 
cannot weaken its powers. (i.e., The performance of bodily actions debilitates 
the body; but the immaterial mind is not impaired by its activity). 


12. Therefore, there is an irresistible destiny, which is absolutely 
overruling; it is existence and inexistence itself, it is sedate and continuous, 
and all visible perturbations are but false appearances. 


13. The limit of a hundred years of human life, is but a very small portion 
of unlimited duration; it is, therefore, very astonishing that any one should be 
concerned with this small portion of his existence, here (in utter disregard of 
his eternal life). 


14. Granting the durability of worldly affairs, yet they are not deserving of 
your reliance; for what faith can you rely on the union of two such opposites 
as the mind and matter? (The one being sensible and the other insensible, the 
one being infinite and imperishable, and the other a finite and frail substance). 


15. But if the state of worldly things be unsteady and uncertain, it cannot be 
deserving of your confidence. Say, can you be sorry at the dissolving of the 
foam and froth of the milk or water, then why should you lament at the loss of 
the perishable? (So said the Grecian philosopher: — yesterday I saw a fragile 
breaking, and today I saw a mortal die). 


16. Know, O strong armed Rama! that reliance on the world, is the fetter of 
the soul to it; it does not behove anybody to join the perishable and 
imperishable together like the water and its froth. (The one being lasting and 
the other a transient thing). 


17. Although the soul is the agent (or source) of all actions, yet it remains 
as no agent at all; it is unconnected with its actions, as the lamp with its light. 
(The mind being the doer of actions and not the soul). 


18. Doing all, it does nothing, but like the sun directs the business of the 
day without doing anything by itself. It moves like the sun without moving 
from its place, but retains its station in its own orbit. (The sun is the causal 
agent of diurnal duties, but men are the active agents of their actions). 


19. There is some other hidden cause guiding the course of the world, 
beside the soul and body; as there is an unknown cause of the course of the 
Aruna river, notwithstanding its being blocked by stones. 


20. When you have known this for certain, O Rama, by your own 
proficience, and have well ascertained this truth by its clearest evidence: — 


21. You ought no more to place any reliance on material things, which are 
as false as an ambient flame, or a vision in dream, or as any falsehood 
whatever. 


22. As a stranger is not to be taken into your friendship, on his first 
appearance; so you must never trust or rely on anything of this world through 
your ignorance. 


23. Never place your reliance on anything of this world, with that fond 
desire, as the heated man looks to the moon, the cold stricken to the sun, and 
the thirsty doth to the water in the mirage. 


24. Do you look upon this ideal world (which is born of your brain), as you 
view a creature of your conception, a vision in your dream, or an apparition or 
the appearance of two moons in the sky, by your visual deception. 


25. Shun your reliance on the fair creation of your imagination, (the objects 
of sight, efc.), and without minding what you are, conduct yourself cheerfully 
in your sphere. 


26. Shun your desires and the thought of your agency, even when you are 
doing anything at all. (The soul residing in the body, is yet aloof from all its 
acts, though its presence in the body, justifies its being accessary to if not the 
accomplice of them. — Gloss). 


27. It is a general law, (niyati, or nature of things), that the propinquity of 
the cause, causes the act, even without the will of the actor; as the presence of 
the lamp, enlightens the room without the will of the lamp. (An involuntary 
action is no less the act of the actor than a voluntary one). 


28. Look at the kurchi tree blooming and blossoming under the influence of 
heavy clouds, and not of its own accord. So it is destined for the three worlds 


to appear to sight, under the influence of the Supreme Being, (though he may 
not will or ordain it so). (So also the presence of matter, effects the work by 
material laws, without the special behest or employment of the matter to the 
performance of same. — Gloss). 


29. As the appearance of the sun in the sky, employs all beings to their 
diurnal duties without his will or injunction, so the omnipresence of God 
causes the actions of all beings of their own spontaneity, and without his will, 
act, or fiat. (This is called the overruling and universal destiny). 


30. And as a bright gem reflects its light, without any will on its part; so the 
mere existence of the Deity, causes the existence of all worlds (as they are in 
attendance upon His presence). 


31. Thus are causality and its want also both situated in your soul, which is 
thence called the cause of your actions, because of its presence in the body; 
and as no cause likewise owing to its want of will (which is the property of 
the mind; and not of the soul). 


32. The entity of the soul being beyond the perception of sense, it is neither 
the agent nor recipient of any action; but being confined in the sensible body, 
it is thought to be both an active and passive agent. 


33. Thus the properties both of causality and its want, reside in the soul; 
you may take it in any light, you may choose for your purpose, and rest 
content with your belief. 


34. But by firmly believing yourself to be situated in the body, and your 
doing of actions without thinking yourself as their author, will save you from 
the culpability of all your acts. 


35. The man that does not employ his mind to his actions, becomes 
indifferent, (virdga), to the world; and he is freed from it, who is certain of his 
being no agent of his actions. 


36. Whether a man is fond of his enjoyments, or forsakes them in disgust; it 
is all the same to him, if he but think himself to be no actor of them. (Set not 
your mind to act, if you want to be set free in fact). 


37. But if you wish to remain, Rama, with your high ambition of doing 
everything in the world, that is also good, and you may try to do the same. 


38. But if I do not fall to so great an error, as to have this high aspiration of 
yours, I am never liable to the passions of anger and enmity, and other violent 


emotions in this world. 


39. The bodies that we bear, are nourished by some and immolated by 
others: such being the state of our own being; we have no cause for our joy or 
sorrow in it. 


40. Knowing ourselves to be the authors of our own happiness and misery, 
and as causes of the rise and dissolution of the world from our view, we have 
no reason to be joyous or sorry in it. 


41. Then there is an end of the joys and sorrows of our own making, when 
we have that sweet composure, which is a balm to all the diseases in our soul. 


42. Fellow feeling to all living beings, makes the best state of the mind; and 
the soul that is so disposed, is not subject to transmigration. 


43. Or make this the best lesson, Rama! for your conduct in life, that with 
all your activities, you continue to think yourself as no actor at all. (Because 
the belief of one’s agency, leads him to the fruition of this act in repeated 
births). 


44. Remain quiet and steady as thou art, by resigning all things to 
themselves; and never think that it is thou that dost or undoest anything 
(which is destined to be so or otherwise by the Divine will). 


45. But if you look to the different modes of your doing one thing or the 
other, you can have no rest or quiet, but must run in the way leading to the 
trap of perpetual toil and misery. 


46. The belief of a man’s corporeality, that he is a destructible body, and no 
spiritual being, is to him but a bed of thorns; it must, therefore, be avoided by 
all means, in order to evade the danger of his imminent destruction. 


47. Corporeality is to be shunned as a hell-hound feeding on canine meat; 
and after disappearance of the cloud of corporeity from view, the light of 
spirituality will appear before the sight. 


48. The pure light of spirituality, presents the appearance of the bright 
moon-beams of holiness, after dispersion of clouds of corporeal desires; and it 
is by the help of this light, that the spiritualist is enabled to steer across the 
ocean of this world. 


49. Do you, O Rama, remain in that best and blessed state, wherein the 
wisest, best and holiest of men have found their rest; and it is the constant 
habit of thinking yourself as nothing nor doing anything; or that you are all 


things and doing everything, as the Supreme soul knows itself to be; and that 
you are some person, having a personality of your own, and yet no body, (i.e., 
not the body in which thou dost abide); but a spiritual and transcendent being. 


CHAPTER LVILI. 
NATURE OF VOLLEITY AND NOLLEITY. 


Argument. The bondage of volition causing our perdition, and the freedom 
of Nolition as leading to salvation. 


Rama said: — Thy words, O Brahman! are true and well spoken also. I find 
the soul to be the inactive agent of actions, and the impassive recipient of their 
effects, as also the spiritual cause of the corporeal. 


2. I find the soul to be the sole lord of all, and ubiquitous in its course; it is 
of the nature of intelligence and of the form of transparency. It resides in all 
bodies, as the five elements compose the terraqueous bodies. 


3. I now come to understand the nature of Brahma, and I am as pacified by 
thy speech, as the heated mountain is cooled by rain waters. 


4. From its secludedness and nolleity, it neither does nor receives any 
thing; but its universal pervasion, makes it both the actor and sufferer. 


5. But, Sir, there is a doubt too vivid and rankling in my mind, which I pray 
you to remove by your enlightened speech, as the moon-beams dispel the 
darkness of the night. 


6. Tell me, Sir, whence proceed these dualities, as the reality of one and the 
unreality of the other, and that this is I and this not myself. And if the soul is 
one and indivisible, how is this one thing and that another. 


7. There being but one self-existent and self-evident soul from the 
beginning, how comes it to be subjected to these oppositions, as the bright 
disk of sun comes to be obscured under the clouds. 


8. Vasishtha answered: — Rama! I will give the right answer to this 
question of yours, as I come to the conclusion; and then you will learn the 
cause of these biplicities. 


9. You will not be able, Rama! to comprehend my answers to these queries 
of yours, until you come to be acquainted with my solution of the question of 
liberation. 


10. As it is the adult youth only, who can appreciate the beauty of a love- 
song; so it is the holy man only, who can grasp the sense of my sayings on 
these abstruse subjects. 


11. Sayings of such great importance, are as fruitless with ignorant people, 
as a work on erotic subjects is useless to children. 


12. There is a time for the seasonableness of every subject to men, as it is 
the season of autumn which produces the harvest and not the vernal spring. 


13. The preaching of a sermon is selectable to old men, as fine colourings 
are suitable to clean canvas; and so a spiritual discourse of deep sense, suits 
one who has known the Spirit. 


14. I have ere while mentioned something, which may serve to answer your 
question, although you have not fully comprehended its meaning, to remove 
your present doubts. 


15. When you shall come to know the Spirit in your own spirit, you will 
doubtlessly come to find the solution of your query by yourself. 


16. I will fully expound to you the subject matter of your inquiry, at the 
conclusion of my argument; when you shall have arrived to a better 
knowledge of these things. 


17. The spiritualist knows the spirit in his own spirit; and it is the good 
grace of the Supreme spirit, to manifest itself to the spirit of the spiritualist. 


18. I have already related to you Rama! the argument concerning the 
agency and inertness of the soul, yet it is your ignorance of this doctrine, that 
makes you foster your doubts. 


19. The man bound to his desires is a bondsman, and one freed from them 
is said to be set free from his slavery; do you but cast away your desires, and 
you will have no cause to seek for your freedom (as you are then perfectly 
free yourself). 


20. Forsake first your foul (tdmasi) desires, and then be freed from your 
desire of worldly possessions; foster your better wishes next, and at last 
incline to your pure and holy leanings. 


21. After having conducted yourself with your pure desires, get rid of these 
even at the end; and then being freed from all desires, be inclined to and 
united with your intellect, (7.e., knowing all and longing for nothing). 


22. Then renounce your intellectual propensity, together with your mental 
and sensible proclivities; and lastly having reached to the state of staid 
tranquility, get rid of your mind also in order to set yourself free from all other 
desires. 


23. Be an intellectual being, and continue to breathe your vital breath (as 
long as you live); but keep your imagination under control, and take into no 
account the course of time, and the revolution of days and nights. 


24. Forsake your desire for the objects of sense, and root out your sense of 
egoism, which is the root of desire. Let your understanding be calm and quiet, 
and you will be honoured by all. 


25. Drive away all feelings and thoughts from your heart and mind; for he 
that is free from anxieties, is superior to all, (who labour under anxious 
thoughts and cares). 


26. Let a man practice his hybernation or other sorts of intense devotion or 
not, he is reckoned to have obtained his liberation, whose elevated mind has 
lost its reliance on worldly things. 


27. The man devoid of desires, has no need of his observance or avoidance 
of pious acts; the freedom of his mind from its dependence on anything, is 
sufficient for his liberation. 


28. A man may have well studied the Sdstras, and discussed about them in 
mutual conversation; yet he is far from his perfection, without his perfect 
inappetency and taciturnity. 


29. There are men who have examined every thing and roved in all parts of 
the world; yet there are few among them that have known the truth. 


30. Of all things that are observed in the world, there is nothing among 
them which may be truly desirable, and is to be sought after by the wise. 


31. All this ado of the world, and all the pursuits of men, tend only towards 
the supportance of the animal body; and there is nothing in it, leading to the 
edification of the rational soul. 


32. Search all over this earth, in heaven above and in the infernal regions 
below; and you will find but few persons, who have known what is worth 


knowing. (The true nature of the soul and that of God, is unknown to all finite 
beings everywhere). 


33. It is hard to have a wise man, whose mind is devoid of its firm reliance 
on the vanities of the world; and freed from its desire or disgust of something 
or others, as agreeable or disagreeable to its state. 


34. A man may be lord of the world, or he may pierce through the clouds 
and pry in heaven (by his Yoga); yet he cannot enjoy the solace of his soul 
without his knowledge of it. 


35. I venerate those high-minded men, who have bravely subdued their 
senses; it is from them that we can have the remedy to remove the curse of our 
repeated births. (It is by divine knowledge alone that we can avoid the doom 
of transmigration). 


36. I see every place filled by the five elements, and a sixth is not to be seen 
anywhere in the world. Such being the case everywhere, what else can I 
expect to find in earth or heaven or in the regions below. 


37. The wise man relying on his own reason and judgment, outsteps the 
abyss of this world, as easily as he leaps over a ditch; but he who has cast 
aside his reason, finds it as wide as the broad ocean. (The original word for 
the ditch is gospada, — the cove of a cows hoof, — a cul-de-sac). 


38. The man of enlightened understanding, looks upon this globe of the 
earth, as the bulb of a Kadamba flower, round as an apple or a ball, — teres 
atque rotundus; he neither gives nor receives nor wants of aught in this world. 


39. Yet fie for the foolish that fight for this mite of the earth, and wage a 
warfare for destruction of millions of their fellow creatures. 


40. What, if anyone is to live and enjoy the blessings of this world for a 
whole Kalpa when, he cannot escape the sorrow, consequent on the loss of all 
his friends during that period. 


41. He who has known the self, has no craving for heavenly bliss within 
himself; because he knows his gain of all the three worlds, can never conduce 
to the strengthening of his soul. 


42. But the avaricious are not content with all they have, and like the body 
of this earth, is not full with all its hills and mountains and surrounding seas. 
(The earth is never full with all its fullness). 


43. There is nothing in this earth or in the upper and lower worlds, which is 


of any use to the sage acquainted with spiritual knowledge. 


44. The mind of the self-knowing sage, is one vast expanse like the 
spacious firmament, it is tranquil and sedate and unconscious of itself. 


45. It views the body as a network of veins and arteries, pale and white as 
frost, and all cellular within. 


46. It sees the mountains floating as froth, on the surface of the pellucid 
ocean of Brahma; it looks upon the intellect blazing as brightly as the sun, 
over the mirage of existence. 


47. It finds the nature of the soul, to be as extensive as the vast ocean, 
containing the creations as its billows; and it considers the all-pervasive soul 
as a big cloud, raining down in showers of Sdstras or knowledge. 


48. The fire, moon, and the sun, appear as the fuel in a furnace, requiring to 
be lighted by the blaze of the intellect, as every opaque atom in nature. 


49. All embodied souls of men, gods and demi-gods, rove in the wilderness 
of the world, for feeding upon their fodder of food, as the deer graze in their 
pasturage. 


50. The world is a prison house, where everyone is a prisoner with his 
toilsome body. The bones are the latches of this dungeon, the head is its roof, 
and the skin its leather; and the blood and flesh of the body, are as the drink 
and food of the imprisoned. 


51. Men were as dolls covered with skin for the amusement of boys, and 
they are continually roving in quest of sustenance, like the cattle running 
towards their pasture grounds. 


52. But the high-minded man is not of this kind; he is not moved by 
worldly temptations, as the mountain is not to be shaken by the gentle breeze. 


53. The truly great and wise man, rests in that highest state of eminence; 
where the stations of the sun and moon, are seen as the nether regions. 


54. It is by the light of the Supreme Spirit, that all the worlds are lighted, 
and the minds of all are enlighted. But the ignorant are immerged in the ocean 
of ignorance, and nourish their bodies only in disregard of their souls. 


55. No worldly good can allure the heart of the wise, who have tested the 
vanity of temporal things; and no earthly evil can obscure their souls, which 
are as bright as the clear sky which no cloud can darken. 


56. No worldly pleasure can gladden the soul of the wise man, as the dance 
of monkeys can give no joy to the heart of Hara, that delights in the dancing 
of Gauri. 


57. No earthly delight can have its seat in the heart of the wise, as the sun- 
light is never reflected in a gem hidden under a bushel. 


58. The material world appears as a solid rock to the stolid ignorant; but it 
seems as the evanescent wave to the wise. The ignorant take a great pleasure 
in the transitory enjoyments of the world; but the wise take them to no 
account, as the swan disdains to look upon the moss of the lake. 


CHAPTER LVIII. 
THE SONG OF KACHA. 


Argument. The Pantheistic views of the soul as the one in all, is shown in 
the song of Kacha. 


Vasishtha said: — On this subject I will tell you, Rama! the holy song which 
was sung of old by Kacha, the son of Vrihaspati, — the preceptor of the gods. 


2. As this son of the divine tutor, resided in a grove in some part of the 
mount Meru, (the Altain chain, — the homestead of the gods); he found the 
tranquility of his spirit in the Supreme soul; by means of his holy devotion. 


3. His mind being filled with the ambrosial draughts of divine knowledge, 
he derived no satisfaction at the sight of the visible world, composed of the 
five elemental bodies. 


4. Being rapt in his mind with the vision of the Holy Spirit, he saw nothing 
else beside him, and then fervently uttered to himself in the following strain. 


5. What is there for me to do or refuse or to receive or reject, and what 
place is there for me to resort or refrain from going to, when this whole is 
filled by the Divine Spirit, (to pan), as by the water of the great deluge. 


6. I find pleasure and pain inherent in the soul, and the sky and all its sides 
contained in the magnitude of the soul. Thus knowing all things to be full of 
the holy spirit, I forget and sink all my pains in my spirit. 


7. The spirit is inside and outside of all bodies, it is above and below and 
on all sides of all. Here, there, and everywhere is the same spirit, and there is 
no place where it is not. 


8. The spirit abides everywhere and all things abide in the spirit; all things 
are self-same with the spirit, and I am situated in the same spirit. 


9. There is nothing intelligent or insensible which is not the spirit, all is 


spirit and so am I also. The spirit fills the whole space and is situated in every 
place. 


10. I am as full of that spirit and its ineffable bliss, as the all-encompassing 
water of the great deluge. In this manner was Kacha musing in himself in the 
bower of the golden mountain. (The Altain chain is called the golden 
mountain for its abounding in gold mines). 


11. He uttered the sound Om, (on or amen), and it rang on all sides as the 
ringing of a bell; he first uttered a part of it the vocal part, — o, and then the 
nasal, — n, which tops it as a tuft of hair. He remained meditating on the 
spirit in his mind, not as situated in or without it (but as the all-pervasive 
soul). 


12. Thus Rama! did Kacha continue to muse in himself and chant his holy 
hymn, being freed from the foulness of flesh, and rarefied in his spirit like the 
breath of the wind. His soul was as clear as the atmosphere in autumn, after 
dispersion of the dark clouds of the rainy season. 


CHAPTER LIX. 
WORKS OF BRAHMA’S CREATION. 


Argument. Vanity of the World born of Brahma’s conception. Its 
Disappearance and Liberation. 


Vasishtha continued: — There is nothing in this world except the 
gratification of the carnal appetites, and the pleasure of eating, drinking and 
concupiscence with the vulgar; but it is the lasting good of men, which is 
desired by the good and great. 


2. The crooked and creeping beings and things, and beasts and wicked men 
and ignorant people only are gratified with carnal pleasures; they are all fond 
of everything conducing to their bodily enjoyments. 


3. They are human asses, who dote on the beauty of female bodies, which 
are no better than lumps of flesh, blood, and bones. 


4. This may be desirable to dogs and devouring animals, but not to man 
(who is a rational and spiritual being). All animals have their fleshy bodies, as 
the trees have their trunks of wood, and the minerals their forms of earth. 


5. There is the earth below and the sky above, and nothing that is 
extraordinary before us; the senses pursue the sensible objects, but human 
reason finds no relish in them. 


6. The consciousness (or intuition) of men, leads them only to error; and 
true happiness, which is desired by all is situated beyond all sensible objects 
and gratifications. 


7. The end of worldly pleasure is sorrow and misery, as the product of a 
flame is soot and blackness; and the functions of the mind and senses are all 
fleeting, having their rise and fall by turns. All enjoyments are short lived, 
owing to the fugacity of the objects, and the decay of the powers of our 
enjoying. 


8. Prosperity fades away as plant encircled by a poisonous viper; and our 
consorts die away as soon as anything born of blood and flesh. (Fortune is 
fleeting and life a passing dream). 


9. The delusion of love and lust, makes one body to embrace another, both 
of which are composed of impure flesh and blood. Such are the acts, O Rama! 
that delight the ignorant. 


10. Wise men take no delight in this unreal and unstable world, which is 
more poisonous than poison itself, by infecting them that have not even tasted 
the bitter gall. 


11. Forsake, therefore, your desire of enjoyment, and seek to be united with 
your spiritual essence; because the thought of your materiality (or being a 
material body), has taken possession of your mind, (and separated you from 
yourself and the spirit of God). 


12. Whenever the thought of making the unreal world, rises in the mind of 
Brahma the creator, he takes an unreal body upon him of his own will. 


13. It becomes as bright as gold by his own light, and then he is called 
Virinchi, (virincipiens), on account of his will; and Brahma also for his being 
born of Brahma. (He is represented as of red colour, as Adam is said to be 
made of red earth). 


14. Rama asked: — How does the world become a solid substance, from its 
having been of a visionary form in the spirit or mind of God? 


15. Vasishtha replied: — When the lotus-born male, (Brahma), rose from 
his cradle of the Embryo of Brahma, he uttered the name of Brahma whence 
he was called Brahma. (The word Brahm answers the Hebrew Brahum, — 
create them, and corresponds with the Latin ficet, — bhuya ¥alg). 


16. He then had the conception (Sankalpa) of the world in his own 
imagination, and the same assumed a visible and solid form by the power of 
his will, called the conceptional or conceived world. (Sankalpasri). 


17. He conceived at first luminous idea of light, which having assumed a 
visible form spread on all sides, as a creeping plant is outstretched all about in 
autumn. (Light was the first work of creation). 


18. The rays of this light pierced all sides like threads of gold; they shone 
and spread themselves both above and below. 


19. Concealed amidst this light, the lotus-born Hiranyagarbha, conceived in 


his mind a figure like his luminous form, and produced it as the four faced 
Brahma. 


20. Then the sun sprung forth from that light, and shone as a globe of gold 
amidst his world encircling beams. 


21. He held the locks of his flaming hair on his head, which flashed as fire 
all around him; and filled the sphere of heaven with heat and light. 


22. The most intelligent Brahma, produced afterwards some other luminous 
forms from portions of that light, which proceeded from it like the waves of 
the ocean (and these are thence called the Marichis or rays, who were the first 
patriarchs of other created beings). 


23. These most potent and competent beings, were also possessed of their 
concepts and will, and they produced in a moment the figures as they thought 
of and willed. 


24. They conceived the forms of various other beings also, which they 
produced one after the other, as they desired and willed. 


25. Then did Brahma bring to his recollection the eternal vedas and the 
many ceremonial rites, which he established as laws in his house of this 
world. 


26. Having taken the gigantic body of Brahma, and the extensive form of 
the mind, — manas, he produced the visible world as his own offspring, — 
Santati. (Brahma means brihat, — great; and santate derived from the root 
tan. Latin — leoreo means continuation of race). 


27. He stretched the seas and mountains, and made the trees and upper 
worlds. He raised the Meru on the surface of the earth, and all the forests and 
groves upon it. 


28. It was he who ordained happiness and misery, birth and death and 
disease and decay; and he created the passions and feelings of living beings, 
under their threefold divisions of satva, rajas, and tamas. 


29. Whatever has been wrought by the hands, (faculties), of the mind of 
Brahma before, the same continues to be still perceived by our deluded vision. 


30. He gave the mind and laws to all beings, and makes the worlds anew as 
they are situated in his mind. 


31. It is error, that has given rise to the erroneous conception of the eternity 


of the world, whereas it is the conception of the mind alone that creates the 
ideal forms. (The world is neither material nor substantial, but a conceptual 
and ideal creation of the mind). 


32. The acts of all things in the world, are produced by their conception and 
wishes; and it is the concept or thought, that binds the gods also to their 
destiny. 


33. The great Brahma that was the source of the creation of the world, sits 
in the meditative mood, contemplating on all that he has made. 


34. It was by a motion of the mind, that the wonderful form of the living 
principle was formed; and it was this that gave rise to the whole world, with 
all its changeful phenomena. 


35. It made the gods Indra, Upendra, and Mahendra and others, and also the 
hills and seas in all the worlds above and below us, and in the ten sides of the 
heaven above: — 


36. Brahma then thought in himself, “I have thus stretched out at large the 
network of my desire, I will now cease from extending the objects of my 
desire any further.” 


37. Being so determined, he ceased from the toil of his creation, and 
reflected on the eternal spirit in his own spirit. (According to the Sruti: — the 
spirit is to be reflected in the spirit). 


38. By knowing the spirit, his mind was melted down by its effulgence, and 
reclined on it with that ease, as one finds in his soft sleep after long labour. 


39. Being freed from his selfishness and egoism, he felt that perfect 
tranquility which the soul receives by resting in itself, and which likens the 
calmness of the sea by its subsidence in itself. 


40. The Lord sometimes leaves off his meditation, as the reservoirs of 
water sometimes overflow their banks and boundaries. 


41. He beholds the world as a vale of misery, with very little of happiness 
in it; and where the soul is fast bound to its alternate passions, and led by the 
changes of its hopes and fears. 


42. He takes pity on the miserable condition of man, and with a view of 
their welfare, promulgates the sacred Sdstras and rites, which are full of 
meaning for their guidance. 


43. He propounds the Vedas and their branches, — the Vedangas, which 
are fraught with spiritual knowledge, and precepts of wisdom, and he revealed 
the Puranas and other Sdstras for the salvation of mankind. 


44. Again, the spirit of Brahma reclined on the supreme spirit, and was 
relieved from its toil; and then remained as tranquil as the becalmed ocean, 
after its churning by the Mandara. 


45. Brahma, having observed the efforts of mankind on earth, and 
prescribed to them the rules of their conduct, returned to himself, where he sat 
reclined on his lotus seat. 


46. He remains sometimes entirely devoid of all his desires; and at others 
he takes upon him his cares for mankind from his great kindness to them. 


47. He is neither simple in his nature, nor does he assume or reject his form 
in the states of his creation and cessation. He is no other than intelligence, 
which is neither present in nor absent from any place. 


48. He is conversant with all states and properties of things, and is as full as 
the ocean without intermixture of any crude matter in him. 


49. Sometimes he is quite devoid of all attributes and desires, and is only 
awakened from his inertness, by his own desire of doing good to his creatures. 


50. I have thus expounded to you concerning the existence of Brahma, 
(Brahmi Sthiti), and his real states of Sdtwika, Vidhyanika, and Suranikas 
creation. (The first is the creation of his intellectual nature, and the second that 
of his mind or will or mental form). 


51. The intellectual creation is what rises of itself in the Spirit of Brahma, 
and the mental is the result of his mind and will. The first is the direct 
inspiration of Brahma into the Spirit of Brahma. 


52. After creation of the material world by the rdjasika nature of Brahma, 
there rises the visible creation in the air by the will of the creator. (This is 
called the madhyanika, because it is the intermediate creation, between the 
elemental and animal creations). 


53. In the next step of animal creation, some were born as gods (angels) 
and others as Yakshas, — demi-gods, and this is called the suranika, because 
the suras or gods were created in it. 


54. Every creature is born in the shape of its inherent nature, and then it is 
either elevated or degraded, according to the nature of its associations. It lays 


also the foundation of its future state of bondage to birth or liberation, by its 
acts, commenced in the present life. 


55. In this manner, O Rama! has the world come to existence. Its creation is 
evidently a work of labour, as it is brought to being by various acts of motion 
and exertion of the body and mind; and all these products of the god’s will, 
are sustained also by continuous force and effort on his part. 


CHAPTER LX. 
PRODUCTION OF LIVING BEINGS. 


Argument. Production of the bodies of Living Beings, according to the 
degrees of their Reason. 


Vasishtha continued: — O strong armed Rama! after the great father of 
creation, he took himself to his activity, he formed and supported the worlds 
by his energy and might. 


2. All living and departed souls, are tied like buckets by the rope of their 
desire, and made to rise and fall in this old well of the world, by the law of 
their predetermined destiny (or Fate that binds Siva or Jove himself). 


3. All beings proceeding from Brahma, and entering the prison house of the 
world, have to be concentrated into the body of the air-born Brahma; as all the 
waters of the sea have to be whirled into the whirlpool in the midst of the sea. 
(All things were contained in and produced from Brahma the Demiurge). 


4. Others are continually springing from the mind of Brahma, like sparks of 
fire struck out of a red-hot iron; while many are flying to it as their common 
centre. 


5. Rama! all lives are as the waves in the ocean of the everlasting spirit of 
Brahma; they rise and fall in him according to his will. 


6. They enter into the atmospheric air, as the smoke rises and enters the 
clouds, and are at last mixed up together by the wind, in the spirit of Brahma. 


7. They are then overtaken by the elementary particles, or atoms flying in 
the air, which lay hold on them in a few days, as the demons seize the host of 
gods with violence. (These become the living and embodied souls, joined with 
the many properties of the elements). 


8. Then the air breathes the vital breath in these bodies; which infuses life 


and vigour in them. 


9. Thus do living beings manifest themselves on earth, while there are other 
flyings in the form of smoke as living spirits. (So the spiritualists view the 
spirits in the ethereal clouds). 


10. Some of them appear in their subtle elemental forms in their airy cells 
in the sky, and shine as bright as the beams of the luminous moon. (These are 
lingadehas or individual spiritual bodies). 


11. Then they fall upon the earth like the pale moon-beams falling upon the 
milky ocean. 


12. There they alight as birds in the groves and forests, and become 
stiffened by sipping the juice of fruits and flowers. 


13. Then losing their aerial and bright forms of the moon-beams, they settle 
on those fruits and flowers, and suck their juice like infants hanging upon the 
breasts of their mothers. (These are the protozoa, the first and embryonic state 
of living beings). 


14. The protozoa are strengthened by drinking the juice of the fruits, which 
are ripened by the light and heat of the sun, and then they remain in a state of 
insensibility; until they enter the animal body. 


15. The animated animalcules, remain in the womb with their undeveloped 
desires; in the same manner as the unopening leaves, are contained in the seed 
of the bata or Indian fig tree. 


16. All lives are situated in the Great God, as fire is inherent in the wood, 
and the pot resides in the earth; and it is after many processes that they have 
their full development. 


17. One that has received no bodily form, and yet moves on without 
manifesting itself, is said to be a satya or spiritual being, and has a large scope 
of action (as the gods). 


18. He is said to have a sdtvika birth, who gets his liberation in or after his 
life-time; but whoever is obliged to be reborn by his acts, is said to belong to 
the rdjas-sdtvika class. 


19. Any one of this class who is born to rule over others, becomes giddy 
with pride, (tamas), he is said to be of the nature of ignorance, tdmasika, and I 
will now speak of this class of beings. 


20. Those who are born originally with their sdtwika nature, are pure in 
their conduct and have never to be born again. 


21. Men of rdja-sdtwika temperament have to be reborn on earth; but being 
elevated by their reasoning powers, they have no more to be born in this 
nether world. 


22. Those who have directly proceeded from the Supreme Spirit (without 
any intermixture of these natures), are men fraught with every quality, and are 
very rare on earth. 


23. The various classes of tdmasa creatures of ignorance, are both 
insensible and speechless; and are of the nature of immovable vegetables and 
minerals, that need no description. 


24. How many among the gods and men, have been reborn to the cares of 
the world, owing to the demerit of their past action; and I myself, though 
fraught with knowledge and reason, am obliged to lead a life of the rdjasa- 
sdtwika kind (owing to my interference in society). 


25. It is by your ignorance of the Supreme, that you behold the vast 
extension of the world; but by considering it rightly you will soon find all this 
to be but the One Unity. 


NOTES ON THE SURANIKA, SATWIKA etc. 


1. The Vidhyanika; is the sphere of the eternal laws of God, presided over 
by Brahma, who is thence styled the Vidhi or dispensator of the laws of the 
creation of the mundane system. 


2. The Suranika; is the sphere of the Supernatural powers or the divine 
agencies, governing and regulating the management of created nature. This is 
the angelic sphere of deities. 


3. Nardnika; is the sphere of human being, consisting also of the 
subordinate orders of beings, placed under the dominion of man. This is the 
sublunary sphere wherewith we are concerned. 


4. The Sdtwika; are righteous men, endued with the quality of goodness. 


5. The Rajasika; is the body politic, guided by the laws of society. 


6. The Tamasika; is the ignorant rabble, and infatuated people. 


CHAPTER LXI. 
ON BIRTH, DEATH AND EXISTENCE. 


Argument. The Liberation of the Rajasa-sdtwika natures, and description of 
knowledge and Indifference. 


Vasishtha continued: — Those that are born with the nature of Rdjasa- 
sdtwika, remain highly pleased in the world, and are as gladsome in their 
faces, as the face of the sky with the serene light of the moon-beams. 


2. Their faces are not darkened by melancholy, but are as bright as the face 
of heaven; they are never exposed to troubles, like the lotus flowers to the 
frost of night. 


3. They never deviate from their even nature, but remain unmoved as the 
immovable bodies; and they persist in their course of beneficence, as the trees 
yield their fruits to all. 


4. Rama! the rdja and sdtva natured man, gets his liberation in the same 
manner, as the disk of the moon receives its ambrosial beams. 


5. He never forsakes his mildness, even when he is in trouble; but remains 
as cool as the moon even in her eclipse. He shines with the lovely virtue of 
fellow-feeling to all. 


6. Blessed are the righteous, who are always even tempered, gentle and as 
handsome as the forest trees, beset by creepers with clusters of their blossoms. 


7. They keep in their bounds, as the sea remains within its boundaries, and 
are meek like yourself in their even tempers. Hence they never desire nor wish 
for anything in the world. 


8. You must always walk in the way of the godly, and not run to the sea of 
dangers; thus you should go on without pain or sorrow in your life. 


9. Your soul will be as elevated as the rdjasa and sdtwika states, by your 


avoiding the ways of the ungodly, and considering well the teachings of the 
Sdstras. 


10. Consider well in your mind the frail acts, which are attended with 
various evils; and do those acts which are good for the three worlds, both in 
their beginning and end, and forever to eternity. 


11. The intelligent think that as dangerous to them, and not otherwise; by 
reason of their being freed from narrow views, and the false spectres, — the 
offspring of ignorance. 


12. You should always consider in yourself for the enlightenment of your 
understanding, and say: O Lord! what am I, and whence is this multiplicity of 
worlds? 


13. By diligently considering these subjects in the society of the wise and 
righteous, you must neither be engaged in your ceremonial acts, nor continue 
in your unnecessary practices of the rituals. 


14. You must look at the disjunction of all things in the world from you, 
(i.e., the temporaneousness of worldly things); and seek to associate with the 
righteous, as the peacock yearns for the rainy clouds. 


15. Our inward egoism, outward body, and the external world, are the three 
seas encompassing us one after the other. It is right reasoning only which 
affords the raft to cross over them, and bring us under the light of truth. 


16. By refraining to think of the beauty and firmness of your exterior form, 
you will come to perceive the internal light of your intellect hid under your 
egoism; as the thin and connecting thread is concealed under a string of 
pearls. (The hidden thread underlying the links of souls, is termed Sutrdtmd.) 


17. It is that eternally existent and infinitely extended blessed thread, which 
connects and stretches through all beings; and as the gems are strung to a 
string, so are all things linked together by the latent spirit of God. 


18. The vacuous space of the Divine Intellect, contains the whole universe, 
as the vacuity of the air, contains the glorious sun; and as the hollow of the 
earth, contains an emmet. 


19. As it is the same air which fills the cavity of every pot on earth, so it is 
the one and the same intellect and spirit of God, which fills, enlivens, and 
sustains all bodies in every place. (The text says, “The Intellect knows no 
difference of bodies, but pervades alike in all”). 


20. As the ideas of sweet and sour are the same in all men, so is the 
consciousness of the Intellect alike in all mankind. (i.e., we are all equally 
conscious of our intellectuality, as we are of the sweetness and sourness of 
things). 


21. There being but one and only one real substance in existence, it is a 
palpable error of your ignorant folks to say, “this one exists, and the other 
perishes or vanishes away.” (Nothing is born or extinct, but all exist in God. 
So is Malebranche’s opinion of seeing all things in God). 


22. There is no such thing, Rama, which being once produced, is resolved 
into naught at any time; all these are no realities nor unrealities, but 
representations or reflexions of the Real One. 


23. Whatever is visible and of temporary existence, is without any 
perceptible substantiality of its own; it is only an object of our fallacy, beyond 
which it has no existence. (Hence, they are no more than unrealities). 


24. Why, O Rama! should any body suffer himself to be deluded by these 
unrealities? All these accompaniments here, being no better than causes of our 
delusion. 


25. The accompaniment of unrealities, tends only to our delusion here; and 
if they are taken for realities, to what good do they tend than to delude us the 
more. (It is better to let the unreal pass as unreal, than to take them for real, 
and be utterly deceived at last). 


CHAPTER LXILI. 
SPEECH OF THE DIVINE MESSENGER. 


Argument. Relation of the virtues of Rama as dictated in the Sdstras, and of 
the advancement of others, by means of good company and self-exertion. 


The diligent and rationalistic inquirer after truth, has a natural aptitude to 
resort to the society of the sapient and good natured Guru, and discusses on 
matters of the Sdstras by the rules of the Sdstras he has learnt before and not 
talk at random. 


2. It is thus by holding his argumentation on the abstruse science of Yoga, 
with the good and great and unavaricious learned, that he can attain to true 
wisdom. 


3. The man that is thus acquainted with the true sense of the Sdstra, and 
qualified by his habit of dispassionateness in the society of holy men, shines 
like yourself as the model of intelligence. 


4. Your liberal mindedness and self-reliance, combined with your cool- 
headedness and all other virtues, have set you above the reach of misery and 
all mental affliction; and also freed you from future transmigration, by your 
attainment of liberation in this life. 


5. Verily have you become as the autumnal sky, cleared of its gloomy 
clouds; you are freed from worldly cares, and fraught with the best and 
highest wisdom. 


6. He is truly liberated, whose mind is freed from the fluctuations of its 
thoughts, and the flights and fumes of its thickening fancies, and ever 
crowding particulars. (The ultimate generalization of particulars into unity, is 
reckoned the highest consummation of man). 


7. Henceforward will all men on earth, try to imitate the noble disposition 
of the equanimity of your mind, which is devoid of its passions of love and 


hatred, as also of affection and enmity. 


8. Those who conform with their customs of the country, and conduct 
themselves in the ordinary course of men in their outward demeanour, and 
cherish their inward sentiments in the close recesses of their bosoms, are 
reckoned as truly wise, and are sure to get over the ocean of the world on the 
floating raft of their wisdom. 


9. The meek man who has a spirit of universal toleration like thine, is 
worthy of receiving the light of knowledge; and of understanding the import 
of my sayings. 


10. Live as long as you have to live in this frail body of yours, and keep 
your passions and feelings under the sway of your reason; act according to the 
rules of society, and keep your desires under subjection. 


11. Enjoy the perfect peace and tranquility of the righteous and wise, and 
avoid alike both the cunning of foxes and silly freaks of boys. 


12. Men who imitate the purity of the manners and conduct of those, that 
are born with the property of goodness, acquire in process of time the purity 
of their lives also. (Men become virtuous by imitation of virtuous examples). 


13. The man who is habituated in the practice of the manners, and the 
modes of life of another person, is soon changed to that mode of life, though it 
be of a different nature, or of another species of being. (Habit is second 
nature). 


14. The practices of past lives accompany all mankind in their succeeding 
births, as their preordained destiny; and it is only by our vigorous efforts that 
we are enabled to avert our fates, in the manner of princes overcoming the 
hostile force, by greater might of their own. 


15. It is by means of patience only, that one must redeem his good sense; 
and it is by patient industry alone, that one may be advanced to a higher birth 
from his low and mean condition. 


16. It is by virtue of their good understanding, that the good have attained 
their better births in life; therefore, employ yourself, O Rama! to the polishing 
of your understanding. 


17. The god-fearing man is possessed of every good, and exerts his efforts 
for attainment of godliness; it is by means of manly efforts only, that men 
obtain the most precious blessings. 


18. Those of the best kind on earth, long for their liberation in future, which 
also requires the exertion of devotion and meditation for its attainment. 


19. There is nothing in this earth, below, or in the heaven of the celestials 
above, which is unattainable to the man of parts, by means of his manly 
efforts. 


20. It is impossible for you to obtain the object of your desire, without the 
exercise of your patience and dispassionateness, and the exertion of your 
prowess and austerities of Brahmacharya. Nor is it possible to succeed in any 
without the right use of reason. 


21. Try to know yourself, and do good to all creatures by your manliness; 
employ your good understanding to drive all your cares and sorrows away; 
and you will thus be liberated from all pain and sorrow. 


22. O Rama! that art fraught with all admirable qualities, and endued with 
the high power of reason; keep thyself steady in the acts of goodness, and 
never may the erroneous cares of this world betake thee in thy future life. 


YOGA VASISHTHA. 


BOOK V. 
THE UPASAMA KHANDA ON 
QUIETISM. 


CHAPTER I. 
THE AHNIKA OR DAILY RITUAL. 


Argument. The Book on calm, quiet, and rest, necessarily follows those of 
Creation and sustentation; as the sleeping time of night succeeds the working 
time of the Day, and as the rest of God followed his work of Creation and 
supportance. 


Vasishtha said: — Hear me, Rama, now propose to you the subject of 
quietude or rest, which follows that of Existence and sustentation of the 
universe; and the knowledge of which will lead you to nirvana or final 
extinction, (as the evening rest leads to sound sleep at night, and quietude is 
followed by quietus). 


2. Valmiki says: — As Vasishtha was delivering his holy words, the 
assembly of the princes remained, as still as the starry train, in the clear sky of 
an autumnal night. 


3. The listening princes looking in mute gaze at the venerable sage amidst 
the assembly, resembled the unmoving lotuses looking at the luminous sun 
from their breathless beds. 


4. The princesses in the harem forgot their joviality at hearing the sermon 
of the sage; and their minds became as cool and quiet as in the long absence 
of their consorts. 


5. The fanning damsels with flappers in their hands, remained as still as a 
flock of flapping geese resting on a lotus-bed; and the jingling of the gems and 
jewels on their arms, ceased like the chirping of birds on the trees at night. 


6. The princes that heard these doctrines, sat reflecting on their hidden 
meanings, with their index fingers sticking to the tip of their noses in 
thoughtfulness; and others pondered on their deep sense, by laying the fingers 
on their lips. 


7. The countenance of Rama flushed like the blushing lotus in the morning, 
and it brightened by casting away its melancholy, as the sun shines by 
dispelling the darkness of night. 


8. The king of kings, — Dasaratha, felt as delighted in hearing the lectures 
of Vasishtha, as the peacock is gladdened at the roaring of raining clouds. 


9. Sarana, the king’s minister, removed his apish fickle mind from his state 
affairs, and applied it intensely to attend to the teachings of the sage. 


10. Laxmana, who was well versed in all learning, shone as a digit of the 
bright crescent moon, with the internal light of Vasishtha’s instructions, and 
the radiance of his Spiritual knowledge. 


11. Satrughna, the subduer of his enemies, was so full of delight in his heart 
at the teaching of the sage, that his face glowed with joy, like the full moon 
replete with all her digits. 


12. The other good ministers, whose minds were absorbed in the cares of 
state affairs; were set at ease by the friendly admonition of the sage, and they 
glowed in their hearts like lotus-buds expanded by the sun-beams. 


13. All the other chiefs and sages, that were present in that assembly, had 
the gems of their hearts purged of their dross by the preachings of Vasishtha; 
and their minds glowed with fervour from his impressive speech. 


14. At this instant there rose the loud peal of conch shells, resembling the 
full swell of the sounding main, and the deep and deafening roar of summer 
clouds, filling the vault of the sky, and announcing the time of midday service. 
(The trisandhya services are performed at the rising, setting and vertical sun). 


15. The loud uproar of the shells, drowned the feeble voice of the muni 
under it, as the high-sounding roar of rainy clouds, puts down the notes of the 
sweet cuckoo. (It is said, the cuckoo ceases to sing in the rains. 44 Gd Hd AF 


calfehel: STARA 1) 


16. The muni stopped his breath and ceased to give utterance to his speech; 
because it is in vain to speak where it is not heeded or listened to. (The wise 
should hold their tongue, when it has lost its power to hold people by their 
ears). 


17. Hearing the midday shout, the sage stopped for a moment, and then 
addressed to Rama! after the hubbub was over and said: — 


18. Rama! I have thus far delivered to you my daily lecture for this day; I 


will resume it the next morning, and tell you all that I have to say on the 
subject. 


19. It is ordained for the twice born classes to attend to the duties of their 
religion at midday; and, therefore, it does not behove us to swerve from 
discharging our noonday services at this time. 


20. Rise, therefore, O fortunate Rama! and perform your sacred ablutions 
and divine services, which you are well acquainted with, and give your alms 
and charities also as they are ordained by law. 


21. Saying so, the sage rose from his seat with the king and his courtiers, 
and resembled the sun and moon, rising from the eastern mountain with their 
train of stars. 


22. Their rising made the whole assembly to rise after them, as a gentle 
breeze moves the bed of lotuses, with their nigrescent eyes of the black bees 
sitting upon them. 


23. The assembled princes rose up with their crowned heads, and they 
marched with their long and massive arms like a body of big elephants of the 
Vindhyan hills with their lubberly legs. 


24. The jewels on their persons rubbed against each other, by their pushing 
up and down in hurry, and displayed a blaze like that of the reddened clouds 
at the setting sun. 


25. The jingling of the gems on the coronets, resembled the humming of 
bees; and the flashing rays of the crowns, spread the various colours of the 
rainbow around. 


26. The beauties in the court hall resembling the tender creepers, and 
holding the chouri flappers like clusters of blossoms in their leaf-like palms, 
formed a forest of beauties about the elephantine forms of the brave princes. 
(It means the joint egress of a large number of damsels employed to fan the 
princes in the Court hall). 


27. The hall was emblazoned with the rays of the blazing bracelets, and 
seemed as it was strewn over with the dust of manddra flowers, blown away 
by the winds. 


28. There were crystal cisterns of pure water, mixed with ice and 
pulverized camphor; and the landscape around was whitened by the kusa 
grass and flowers of autumn. 


29. The gems hanging down the head-dresses of the princes, cast a reddish 
colour over the hollow vault of the hall; and appeared as the evening twilight 
preceding the shade of night, which puts an end to the daily works of men. 


30. The fair faces of the fairy damsels, were like lotuses floating on the 
watery lustre of the strings of pearls pendant upon them; and resembling the 
lines of bees fluttering about the lotuses; while the anklets at their feet, 
emitted a ringing sound as the humming of bees. 


31. The large assemblage of the princes, rose up amidst the assembled 
crowds of men; and presented a scene never seen before by the admiring 
people. 


32. The rulers of the earth bowed down lowly before their sovereign, and 
departed from his presence and the royal palace in large bodies; likening the 
waves of the sea, glistening as rainbows by the light of their gemming 
ornaments. 


33. The chief minister Sumantra and others, that were best acquainted with 
royal etiquette, prostrated themselves before their king and the holy sage, and 
took their way towards the holy stream; for performance of their sacred 
ablutions. 


34. The Rishis Vamadeva, Viswamitra and others, stood in the presence of 
Vasishtha; and waited for his leave to make their departure. 


35. King Dasaratha honored the sages one by one, and then left them to 
attend to his own business. 


36. The citizens returned to the city, and the foresters retired to their 
forests, the aerials flew in the air, and all went to their respective abodes for 
rejoining the assembly on the next morning. 


37. The venerable Viswamitra, being besought by the king and Vasishtha, 
stayed and passed the night at the abode of the latter. 


38. Then Vasishtha being honoured by all the princes, sages and the great 
Brahmanas, and adored by Rama and the other princes of king Dasaratha’s 
royal race: — 


39. Proceeded to his hermitage, with the obeisance of the assembled crowd 
on all sides; and followed by a large train, as the god Brahma is accompanied 
by bodies of the celestials. 


40. He then gave leave to Rama and his brother-princes, and to all his 


companions and followers, to return to their abodes from his hermitage in the 
woods. 


41. He bade adieu to the aerial, earthly, and the subterraneous beings, that 
kept company with him with their encomiums on his merits; and then entering 
his house, he performed his Brahmanical rites with a duteous disposition. 


CHAPTER II. 
RAMA’S RECAPITULATION OF VASISHTHA’S 
LECTURES. 


Argument. Performance of Daily Rites, and Rdama’s Reflection of 
Vasishtha’s Teaching at night. 


Valmiki continued his relation to Bharadwaja and said: — After the moon- 
bright princes had got to their residence, they discharged their daily services 
according to the diurnal ritual. 


2. Even Vasishtha and the other saints, sages, and Brahmans, not excepting 
the king and the princes, were all engaged in their holy services at their own 
houses. 


3. They bathed in the sacred streams and fountains, filled with floating 
bushes of lotuses and other aquatic plants, and frequented by the ruddy geese, 
cranes, and storks on their border. 


4. After they had performed their ablutions, they made donations of lands 
and kine, of seats and beddings, and of sesamum grains, with gold and gems, 
and food and raiments to the holy Brahmans. 


5. They then worshipped the gods Vishnu and Siva in their temples, and 
made oblations to the sun and regents of the skies in their own houses, with 
offerings of gold and gems; which are sacred to particular deities and the 
planets. (Particular gems and metals are sacred to their presiding divinities). 


6. After their offerings were over, they joined with their sons and 
grandsons, friends, and relatives, and their guests also, in partaking of their 
lawful food. (Unlawful food is hateful to the faithful). 


7. Shortly after this, the daylight faded away at the eighth watch, 
(yamdrdha), of the day; and the charming scene of the city began to disappear 


from sight. 


8. The people then employed themselves to their proper duties at the 
decline of the day, and betook to their evening service with the failing beams 
of the setting sun. 


9. They recited their evening hymn, (Sandhya), repeated their japamantras, 
and uttered their prayer for the forgiveness of sins, (agha marshana); they 
read aloud their hymns and sang their evening song of praise. 


10. Then rose the shade of night to allay the sorrow of lovelorn damsels, as 
the moon arose from the milky ocean of the east, to cool the heat of the setting 
sun. 


11. The princes of Raghu’s race then reclined on their downy and flowery 
beds, sprinkled over with handfuls of camphor powder, and appearing as a 
sheet of spreading moon-light. 


12. The eyes of all men were folded in sleep, and they passed the live-long 
night as a short interval; but Rama kept waking in his bed, meditating on all 
things he had heard from the sage. 


13. Rama continued to reflect on the lectures of Vasishtha, which appeared 
as charming to him, as the cry of the parent elephant, is gladsome to its tender 
young, (karabha). 


14. What means this wandering of ours, said he, in this world, and why is it 
that all these men and other animals, are bound to make their entrances and 
exits in this evanescent theatre? 


15. What is the form of our mind and how is it to be governed? What is this 
illusion, (Mdyd), of the world, whence hath its rise and how is it to be 
avoided? 


16. What is the good or evil of getting rid of this illusion, and how does it 
stretch over and overpower on the soul, or is made to leave it by any means in 
our power? 


17. What does the muni say with regard to the means, and effect of curbing 
the appetites of the mind? What does he say regarding the restraining of our 
organs, and what about the tranquility of the soul? 


18. Our hearts and minds, our living souls and their delusion, tend to 
stretch out the phenomenal world before us; and our very souls make a reality 
of the unreal existence. 


19. All these things are linked together in our minds, and are weakened 
only by the weakening of our mental appetites. But how are these to be 
avoided in order to get rid of our misery. 


20. The slender light of reason is over-shadowed, like a single crane in the 
air, by the dark cloud of passions and appetites; how am I then to distinguish 
the right from wrong, as the goose separates the milk from the water? 


21. It is as hard to shun our appetites on the one hand, as it is impossible to 
avoid our troubles here, without the utter annihilation of our appetency. Here 
is the difficulty in both ways. 


22. Again, the mind is the leader to our spiritual knowledge on the one 
hand, and our seducer also to worldliness on the other. We know not which 
way to be led by it. The difficulty is as great as a man’s mounting on a 
mountain, or a child’s escaping from the fear of a Yaksha. 


23. All worldly turmoil is at an end, upon one’s attainment of true felicity; 
as the anxieties of a maiden are over, after she has obtained a husband. 


24. When will my anxieties have their quietism, and when will my cares 
come to an end? When will my soul have its holiness, and my mind find its 
rest from acts of merit and demerit? 


25. When shall I rest in that state of bliss, which is as cooling and complete 
in itself; as the full-moon with all her digits, and when shall I rove about the 
earth at large, free from worldly cares and ties? 


26. When will my fancy stop from its flight, and concentrate into the 
inward soul? When will my mind be absorbed in the Supreme soul, like the 
turbulent wave subsiding in the breast of the quiet sea? 


27. When shall I get over this wide ocean of the world, which is disturbed 
by the turbulent waves of our desires, and is full of the voracious crocodiles of 
our greedy avarice, and get rid of this feverish passion? 


28. When shall I rest in that state of complete quiescence and unfeelingness 
of my mind, which is aimed at by the seekers of liberation, and the all-tolerant 
and indifferent philosopher. 


(It is the sullen apathy of stoicism, which constitutes the true wisdom and 
happiness of asceticism also). 


29. Ah! when will this continuous fever of my worldliness abate, which has 
irritated my whole body by its inward heat, and deranged my humours out of 


their order! 


30. When will this heart of mine cease to throb from its cares, like the light 
of the lamp ceasing to flutter without the wind; and when will my 
understanding gain its light, after dispersion of the gloom of my ignorance. 


31. When will these organs and members of my body, have their respite 
from their incessant functions; and when will this parched frame of mine get 
over the sea (flame?) of avarice, like the phoenix rising from its ashes. 


32. When will the light of reason like the clear atmosphere of the autumnal 
sky, dispel this dark cloud of my ignorance, that envelopes my heavenly 
essence under the veil of this sorry and miserable form. 


33. Our minds are filled with the weeds of the mandara plants of the garden 
of paradise, (i.e., desiring the enjoyments of heaven). But my soul pants for its 
restitution in the Supreme spirit. 


34. The dispassionate man is said to be set in the pure light of reason; it is, 
therefore, that passionless state of my mind which I long to attain. 


35. But my restless mind has made me a prey to the dragon of despair, and 
I cry out in my sorrow, O my father and mother! help me to get out of this 
difficulty. 


36. I exclaim also saying: — O my sister understanding! condescend to 
comply with the request of thy poor brother; and consider well the words of 
the wise sage for our deliverance from misery. 


37. I call thee also, O my good sense to my aid, and beg of thee, O progeny 
of thy virtuous mother! to remain firm by my side, in my struggle of breaking 
the bonds of the world. 


38. Let me first of all reflect on the sayings of the sage on Resignation, 
(Vairdgya), and then on the conduct of one who longs for his liberation, and 
next about the creation of the world, (in the Srishti Prakarana). 


39. Let me remember afterwards all that he has said on the Existence of the 
universe, (Sthiti Prakarana), together with its beautiful illustrations; all of 
which are replete with sound wisdom and deep philosophy. 


40. Although a lesson may be repeated a hundred times over, it proves to 
be of no effect, unless it is considered with good understanding and right 
sense of its purport. Otherwise, it is as the empty sound of autumn clouds 
without a drop of rain. 


CHAPTER ITI. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE ROYAL ASSEMBLY. 


Argument. The Meeting of the next morning, and the concourse of 
attendants. 


Valmiki continued: — Rama passed in this manner the live-long night, in his 
lengthened chain of reflection; and in eager expectation of dawn, as the lotus 
longs for the rising sun at day break. 


2. Gradually the stars faded away at the appearance of aurora in the east, 
and the face of the sky was dimly pale, before it was washed over with the 
white of twilight. 


3. The beating of the morning and the alarm of trumpets, roused Rama 
from his reverie; and he rose with his moonlike face, blooming as the full- 
blown lotus in its leafy bed. 


4. He performed his morning ablution and devotion, and joined with his 
brothers and a few attendants, in order to repair to the hermitage of the sage 
Vasishtha. 


5. Having arrived there, they found the sage entranced in his meditation in 
his lonely solitude; and lowly bent down their heads before him from a 
respectful distance. 


6. After making their obeisance, they waited on him in the compound, until 
the twilight of morning brought the day-light over the face of the sky. 


7. The princes and chiefs, the saints, sages and Brahmans, thronged in that 
hermitage, in the manner of the celestials meeting at the empyrean of Brahma. 


8. Now the abode of Vasishtha was full of people, and the crowds of the 
cars, horses, and elephants waiting at the outside, made it equal to a royal 
palace in its grandeur. 


9. After a while the sage rose from his deep meditation, and gave suitable 
receptions to the assembled throng that bowed down before him. 


10. Then Vasishtha accompanied with Viswamitra, and followed by a long 
train of munis and other men, came out of the hermitage, and ascended and sat 
in a carriage, in the manner of the lotus-born Brahma sitting on his lotus seat. 


11. He arrived at the palace of Dasaratha, which was surrounded by a large 
army on all sides, and alighted there from his car, as when Brahma descends 
from his highest heaven to the city of Indra, beset by the whole host of the 
celestials. 


12. He entered the grand court hall of the king, and was saluted by the 
courtiers lowly bending down before him; as when the stately gander enters a 
bed of lotuses, amidst a body of aquatic birds (all staring at him). 


13. The king also got up, and descended from his high throne; and then 
advanced three paces on barefoot to receive the venerable sage. 


14. Then there entered a large concourse of chiefs and princes, with bodies 
of saints and sages and Brahmans and hori, potri priests. 


15. The minister Sumantra and others came next with the learned pandits 
Saumya and others; and then Rama and his brothers followed them with the 
sons of royal ministers. 


16. Next came the ministerial officers, the ministerial priests, (hotripotris), 
and the principle citizens, with bodies of the Malava wrestlers and servants of 
all orders, and townsmen of different professions. 


17. All these took their respective seats, and sat in the proper order of their 
ranks, and kept looking intently on the sage Vasishtha, with their uplifted 
heads and eyes. 


18. The murmur of the assembly was hushed, and the recitation of the 
panegyrists was at a stop; the mutual greetings and conferences were at an 
end, and there ensued a still silence in the assembly. 


19. The winds wafted the sweet fragrance from the cups of full-blown 
lotuses; and scattered the dulcet dust of the filaments in the spacious hall. 


20. The clusters of flowers hung about the hall, diffused their odours all 
around; and the whole court house seemed, as it were sprinkled over with 
perfumes of all sorts. 


21. The queens and princesses sat at the windows, and upon their couches 
in the inner apartment, which was strewn over with flowers, and beheld the 
assemblage in the outer hall. 


22. They saw everything by the light of the sun, which shed upon their 
open eyes through the network on the windows; and also by the radiance of 
the gems, which sparkled on their delicate persons. The attendant women 
remained silent, and without waving their fans and chouries (for fear of the 
sounding bracelets on their arms). 


23. The earth was sown with orient pearls by the dawning sun-beams, and 
the ground was strewn over with flowers glistening at the sun-light. The 
lightsome locusts did not light upon them, thinking them to be sparks of fire, 
but kept hovering in the midway sky as a body of dark and moving cloud. 


24. The respectable people sat in mute wonder, to hear the holy lectures of 
Vasishtha; because the agreeable advice, which is derived from the society of 
the good, is beyond all estimation. 


25. The Siddhas, Vidyadharas, saints, Brahmans and respectable men, 
gathered from all sides of the sky and forests, and from all cities and towns 
round about Vasishtha, and saluted him in silence, because deep veneration is 
naturally mute and wanting in words. 


26. The sky was strewn over with the golden dust, borne by the fluttering 
bees from the cups of farinaceous lotuses; wherein they were enclosed at 
night; and the soft airs blew sonant with the tinkling sounds of ringing bells, 
hanging in strings on the door ways of houses. (The Gloss says: — it is usual 
in Nepal and at Deccan, to suspend strings of small bells over the gate ways). 


27. The morning breeze was now blowing with the fragrance of various 
flowers, and mixing with the perfume of the sandal paste; and making the bees 
fly and flutter on all sides, with their sweet humming music. 


CHAPTER IV. 
INQUIRIES OF RAMA. 


Argument. Dasaratha’s Praise of Vasishtha’s speech, and Rama’s Queries 
by behest of the sage. 


Valmiki continued: — Then king Dasaratha made this speech to the chief of 
sages, and spoke in a voice sounding as a deep cloud, and in words equally 
graceful as they were worthy of confidence. 


2. Venerable Sir, said he, your speech of yesterday bespeaks of your 
intellectual light, and your getting over all afflictions by your extremely 
emaciating austerities. 


3. Your words of yesterday, have delighted us by their perspicacity and 
gracefulness, as by a shower of enlivening ambrosia. 


4. The pure words of the wise, are as cooling and edifying of the inward 
soul; as the clear and nectarious moon-beams, serve both to cool and dispel 
the gloom of the earth. 


5. The good sayings of the great, afford the highest joy resulting from their 
imparting a knowledge of the Supreme, and by their dispelling the gloom of 
ignorance all at once. 


6. The knowledge of the inestimable gem of our soul, is the best light that 
we can have in this world; and the learned man is as a tree beset by the 
creepers of reason and good sense. 


7. The sayings of the wise serve to purge away our improper desires and 
doings, as the moon-beams dispel the thick gloom of night. 


8. Your sayings, O sage, serve to lessen our desires and avarice which 
enchain us to this world, as the autumnal winds diminish the black clouds in 
the sky. 


9. Your lectures have made us perceive the pure soul in its clear light, as 
the eye-salve of antimony, (collyrium antigoni nigrum); makes the born-blind 
man to see the pure gold with his eyes. 


10. The mist of worldly desires, which has overspread the atmosphere of 
our minds, is now beginning to disperse by the autumnal breeze of your 
sayings. 


11. Your sayings of sound wisdom, O great sage! have poured a flood of 
pure delight into our souls, as the breezy waves of nectarious water, or the 
breath of mandara flowers infuse into the heart. 


12. O my Rama! those days are truly lightsome, that you spend in your 
attendance on the wise; otherwise, the rest of the days of one’s life time, are 
indeed darksome and dismal. 


13. O my lotus-eyed Rama! propose now what more you have to know 
about the imperishable soul, as the sage is favourably disposed to 
communicate everything to you. 


14. After the king had ended his speech, the venerable and high-minded 
sage Vasishtha, who was seated before Rama, addressed him saying: — 


15. Vasishtha said: — O Rama, — the moon of your race, do you 
remember all that I have told you ere this, and have you reflected on the sense 
of my sayings from first to the last. 


16. Do you recollect, O victor of your enemies? the subject of creation, and 
its division into the triple nature of goodness, etc.; and their subdivision into 
various kinds? 


17. Do you remember what I said regarding the One in all, and not as the 
all, and the One Reality ever appearing as unreality; and do you retain in your 
mind the nature and form of the Supreme Spirit, that I have expounded to 
you? 


18. Do you, O righteous Rama, that art deserving of every praise, bear in 
your mind, how this world came to appear from the Lord God of all? 


19. Do you fully retain in your memory the nature of illusion, and how it is 
destroyed by the efforts of the understanding; and how the Infinite and Eternal 
appears as finite and temporal as space and time? (These though infinite 
appear limited to us). 


20. Do you, O blessed Rama! keep in your mind, that man is no other than 


his mind, as I have explained to you by its proper definition and arguments? 


21. Have you, Rama! considered well the meanings of my words, and did 
you reflect at night the reasonings of yesterday in your mind? (As it behoves 
us to reflect at night on the lessons of the day). 


22. It is by repeated reflection in the mind, and having by heart what you 
have learnt, that you derive the benefit of your learning, and not by your 
laying aside of the same in negligence. 


23. You are then only the proper receptacle of a rational discourse and a 
holy sermon, when you retain them like brilliant pearls in the chest of your 
capacious and reasoning breast. 


24. Valmiki said: — Rama being thus addressed by the sage, — the valiant 
progeny of the lotus-seated Brahma, found his time to answer him in the 
following manner. (Vasishtha’s valour is described in his services to king 
Sudasa). 


25. Rama replied: — You Sir, who are acquainted with all Sdstras and 
creeds have expounded to me, the sacred truths, and I have, O noble Sir, fully 
comprehended their purport. 


26. I have deposited everything verbatim that you said in the casket of my 
heart, and have well considered the meaning of your words during the 
stillness of my sleepless nights. 


27. Your words like sun-beams dispel the darkness of the world, and your 
radiant words of yesterday, delighted me like the rays of the rising sun. 


28. O great Sir, I have carefully preserved the substance of all your past 
lectures in my mind, as one preserves the most valuable and brilliant gems in 
a casket. 


29. What accomplished man is there, that will not bear on his head the 
blessings of admonitions, which are so very pure and holy, and so very 
charming and delightful at the same time? 


30. We have shaken off the dark veil of the ignorance of this world, and 
have become as enlightened by your favor, as the days in autumn after 
dispersion of rainy clouds. 


31. Your instructions are sweet and graceful in the first place (by the 
elegance of their style); they are edifying in the midst (by their good 
doctrines); and they are sacred by the holiness they confer at the end. 


32. Your flowery speech is ever delightsome to us, by the quality of its 
blooming and unfading beauty, and by virtue of its conferring our lasting 
good to us. 


33. O Sir, that are learned in all Sdstras, that art the channel of the holy 
waters of divine knowledge, that art firm in thy protracted vows of purity, do 
thou expurgate us of the dross of our manifold sins by your purifying lectures. 


CHAPTER V. 
LECTURE ON TRANQUILLITY OF THE SOUL 
AND MIND. 


Argument. The existence of the world in ignorant minds, and tranquility of 
the spirit. 


Vasishtha said: — Now listen with attention to the subject of quietism for 
your own good, wherein you will find the best solutions (of many questions 
adduced before). 


2. Know Rama, this world to be a continuous illusion, and to be upheld by 
men of rdjasa and tdmasa natures, consisting of the properties of action and 
passions or ignorance, that support this illusory fabric, as the pillars bear up a 
building. 


3. Men born with the sdtwika nature of goodness like yourself, easily lay 
aside this inveterate illusion, as a snake casts off its time-worn skin, (slough). 


4. But wise men of good dispositions (or sdtwika natures), and those of the 
mixed natures of goodness and action, (rdjasa-sdtwika), always think about 
the structure of the world, and its prior and posterior states (without being 
deluded by it). 


5. The understandings of the sinless and which have been enlightened by 
the light of the Sdstras, or improved in the society of men or by good conduct, 
become as far sighted as the glaring light of a torch. 


6. It is by one’s own ratiocination, that he should try to know the soul in 
himself; and he is no way intelligent, who knows not the knowable soul in 
himself. 


7. The intelligent, polite, wise, and noble men, are said to have the nature 
of rdjasa-sdtwika, (or the mixed nature of goodness and action) in them; and 


the best instance of such a nature is found, O Rama! in thy admirable 
disposition. 


8. Let the intelligent look into the phenomena of the work themselves, and 
by observing what is true and untrue in it, attach themselves to the truth only. 


9. That which was not before, nor will be in being at the end, is no reality at 
all but what continues in being both at first and last, is the true existence and 
naught besides. 


10. He whose mind is attached to aught, which is unreal both at first and at 
last, is either an infatuated fool or a brute animal, that can never be brought to 
reason. 


11. It is the mind that makes the world and stretches it as in its imagination; 
but upon a comprehensive view (or closer investigation) of it, the mind is in 
its nothingness. 


12. Rama said: — I am fully persuaded to believe, Sir, that the mind is the 
active agent in this world, and is subject to decay and death (like the other 
organs of sensation). 


13. But tell me Sir, what are the surest means of guarding the mind from 
illusion, because you only are the sun to remove the darkness of Raghu’s race. 


14. Vasishtha replied: — The best way to guard the mind from delusion, is 
first of all the knowledge of the Sdstras, and next the exercise of 
dispassionateness, and then the society of the good, which lead the mind 
towards its purity. 


15. The mind which is fraught with humility and holiness, should have 
recourse to preceptors who are learned in philosophy. 


16. The instruction of such preceptors, makes a man to practice his rituals 
at first, and then it leads the mind gradually to the abstract devotion of the 
Most-Holy. 


17. When the mind comes to perceive by its own cogitation, the presence of 
the supreme spirit in itself; it sees the universe spread before it as the cooling 
moon-beams. 


18. A man is led floating as a straw on the wide ocean of the world, until it 
finds its rest in the still waters under the coast of reason. 


19. Human understanding comes to know the truth by means of its 


reasoning, when it puts down all its difficulties, as the pure water gets over its 
sandy bed. 


20. The reasonable man distinguishes the truth from untruth, as the 
goldsmith separates the gold from ashes; but the unreasonable are as the 
ignorant, incapable to distinguish the one from the other. 


21. The divine Spirit is imperishable after it is once known to the human 
soul; and there can be no access of error into it, as long as it is enlightened by 
the light of the holy spirit. 


22. The mind which is ignorant of truth, is ever liable to error, but when it 
is acquainted with truth, it becomes freed from its doubts; and is set above the 
reach of error. 


23. O ye men! that are unacquainted with the divine spirit, you bear your 
souls for misery alone; but knowing the spirit, you become entitled to eternal 
happiness and tranquility. 


24. How are ye lost to your souls by blending with your bodies, expand the 
soul from under the earthly frame, and you will be quite at rest with 
yourselves. 


25. Your immortal soul has no relation to your mortal bodies, as the pure 
gold bears no affinity to the earthen crucible in which it is contained. 


26. The Divine Spirit is distinct from the living soul, as the lotus flower is 
separate from the water which upholds it; as a drop of water is unattached to 
the lotus-leaf whereon it rests. My living soul is crying to that Spirit with my 
uplifted arms, but it pays no heed to my cries. 


27. The mind which is of a gross nature, resides in the cell of the body, like 
a tortoise dwelling in its hole; it is insensibly intent upon its sensual 
enjoyments, and is quite neglectful about the welfare of the soul. 


28. It is so shrouded by the impervious darkness of the world, that neither 
the light of reason, nor the flame of fire, nor the beams of the moon, nor the 
gleams of a dozen of zodiacal suns, have the power to penetrate into it. 


29. But the mind being awakened from its dormancy, begins to reflect on 
its own state; and then the mist of its ignorance flies off, like the darkness of 
the night at sun-rise. 


30. As the mind reclines itself constantly on the downy bed of its 
meditation, for the sake of its enlightenment; it comes to perceive this world 


to be but a vale of misery. 


31. Know Rama! the soul to be as unsullied by its outer covering of the 
body, as the sky is unsoiled by the clouds of dust which hide its face; and as 
the petals of the lotus are untainted by the dew-drops, falling upon them at 
night. (No liquid is attached to the oily surface of lotus-leaves). 


32. As dirt or clay clinging to the outer side of a gold ornament, cannot 
pierce into the inside; so the gross material body is attached outside the soul, 
without touching its inside. 


33. Men commonly attribute pleasure and pain to the soul; but they are as 
separate from it, as the rain drops and the flying dust, are afar and apart from 
the sky. 


34. Neither the body nor the soul is subject to pain or pleasure, all which 
relate to the ignorance of the mind; and this ignorance being removed, it will 
be found that they appertain to neither. (The mind alone is subject to both 
through its ignorance; but the philosophic mind knows all partial evils, 
sarvarti, to be universal good). 


35. Take not to your mind O Rama! the pain or pleasure of either; but view 
them in an equal light, as you view things in the tranquility of your soul. 


36. All the outspreading phenomena of the world, which are beheld all 
about us, are as the waves of the boundless ocean of the Divine Spirit; or as 
the gaudy train of the peacock, displayed in the sphere of our own souls. (So 
the mind displays its thoughts in a train). 


37. The bright substance of our soul, presents to us the picture of creation, 
as a bright gem casts its glare to no purpose; but by its own nature. (And so 
the mind deals with its dreams in vain). 


38. The spirit and the material world, are not the same thing; the spirit is 
the true reality, and the duality of the world, is only a representation or 
counterpart of the Spirit. 


39. But Brahma, is the whole totality of existence, and know the universe 
as the expansion of the universal soul; therefore, O Rama! give up your error 
of the distinction of one thing from another, (lit.: such as I am this one, and 
the other is another). 


40. There can be no distinction, Rama, in the everlasting and all extensive 
plenum of Brahma; as there is no difference in the whole body of water of the 


wide extended ocean. 


41. All things being one and alike in the self-same substratum of the 
Supreme Soul, you cannot conceive of there being any other thing (a duality) 
in it, as you cannot imagine a particle of frost to abide in the fire. 


42. By meditating on the Supreme Soul in yourself, and by contemplation 
of the intelligent Spirit in your own intellect, you will find the glory of the 
Supreme Spirit, shining brightly in your pure spirit. 


43. Therefore, ease your mind, O Rama! and know that there is no mistake 
nor error in your believing the all as one; and that there is no new-birth or a 
new born being (in the world), but all that is or has come to existence, is ever 
existent in the Supreme. 


44. Ease yourself, O Rama! by knowing that there is no duality (save the 
Unity of God); and that there is no contrariety of things (as that of heat and 
cold), except their oneness in the Divine moniety. Then knowing yourself as a 
spiritual being, and situated in the purity of Divine essence, you shall have no 
need of devotion or adoration (in order to appease or unite yourself with the 
Deity). And knowing also that you are not separated from God, forsake all 
your sorrow (to think of your helpless state). 


45. Be tolerant, composed and even-minded; remain tranquil, taciturn and 
meek in your mind; and be as a rich jewel, shining with your internal light. 
Thus you will be freed from the feverish vexations of this worldly life. 


46. Be rational and dispassionate and calm in your desire; remain sober 
minded and free from ardent expectations; and rest satisfied with what you get 
of your own lot, in order to be freed from the feverish heat of worldliness. 


47. Be unimpassioned and unperturbed with earthly cares; be pure and 
sinless, and neither be penurious nor prodigal, if you will be freed from the 
fever heat of this world. 


48. Be free from all anxiety, O Rama! by your obtaining of that good which 
the world cannot give, and which satisfies all our earthly wants. Have this 
supermundane bliss, O Rama, and be as full as the ocean, and free from the 
feverish cares of this world. 


49. Be loosened from the net of thy loose desires, and wipe off the unguent 
of delusive affections from thy eyes: let thy soul rest satisfied with thyself, and 
be freed from the feverish anxieties of the world. 


factored PAfat Aeassedfsta: | 
HATA AMAA AATTS | SG 


50. With your spiritual body reaching beyond the unbounded space, and 
rising above the height of the highest mountain, be freed from the feverish and 
petty cares of life. 


51. By enjoyment of what you get (as your lot), and by asking of naught of 
anybody anywhere; by your charity rather than your want or asking of it, you 
must be free from the fever of life. 


52. Enjoy the fulness of your soul in yourself like the sea, and contain the 
fulness of your joy in your own soul like the full moon. Be self-sufficient with 
the fulness of your knowledge and inward bliss. 


53. Knowing this world as unreal as a pseudoscopic sight, no wise man is 
misled to rely in its untruthful scenes. So you, Rama, that are knowing and 
visionary, and are sane and sound headed, and of enlightened understanding, 
must be always charming with your perfect ease from sorrow and care. 


54. Now Rama! reign over this unrivalled sovereignty, by the direction of 
your sovereign Sire, and manage well everything under your own inspection. 
This kingdom is fraught with every blessing, and the rulers are all loyal to 
their king. Therefore, you must neither leave out to do what is your duty, nor 
be elated with your happy lot of royalty. 


CHAPTER VI. 
LECTURE ON THE DISCHARGE OF DUTY. 


Argument. Effect of Acts, Transmigration of souls and their Liberation in 
Life time. 


Vasishtha continued: — In my opinion, a man is liberated who does his works 
from a sense of his duty, and without any desire of his own or sense of his 
own agency in it. (Here subjection to allotted duty, is said to be his freedom; 
but that to one’s own desire or free choice, is called to be his bondage and 
slavery). 


2. Who so having obtained a human form, is engaged in acts out of his own 
choice and with a sense of his own agency, he is subjected to his ascension 
and descension to heaven and hell by turns (according to the merit or demerit 
of his acts, while there is no such thing in the doing of his duty). 


3. Some persons who are inclined to unduteous (or illegal) acts, by 
neglecting the performance of their destined (or legal) duties, are doomed to 
descend to deeper hells, and to fall into greater fears and torments from their 
former states. 


4. Some men who are fast bound to the chain of their desires, and have to 
feel the consequences of their acts, are made to descend to the state of 
vegetables from their brutal life, or to rise from it to animal life again. 


5. Some who are blessed with the knowledge of the Spirit, from their 
investigation of abstruse philosophy, rise to the state of moniety, (Kaivalya), 
by breaking through the fetters of desire. (Kaivalya is the supreme bliss of 
God in his soliety, to which the divine sage aspires to be united. Or it is the 
complete unity with oneself irrespective of all connections). 


6. There are some men, who after ascending gradually in the scale of their 
creation in former births, have obtained their liberation in the present life of 


rdjas-sdtwika or active goodness. 


7. Such men being born again on earth, assume their bright qualities like 
the crescent moon, and are united with all prosperity, like the Kurchi plant 
which is covered with blossoms in its flowering time of the rainy season. (The 
good effects of former acts, follow a man in his next birth). 


8. The merit of prior acts follows one in his next state, and the learning of 
past life meets a man in his next birth, as a pearl is born in a reed. (A 
particular reed is known to bear pearly seeds within them, well known by the 
name of Vansalochana). 


9. The qualities of respectability and amiableness, of affability and 
friendliness, and of compassion and intelligence, attend upon these people like 
their attendants at home. (i.e., He becomes master of them). 


10. Happy is the man who is steady in the discharge of his duties, and is 
neither overjoyed nor depressed at the fruition or failure of their results. 
(Duties must be done, whether they repay or not). 


11. The defects of the dutiful and their pain and pleasure, in the 
performance of duties, are all lost under the sense of their duteousness; as the 
darkness of night, is dispelled by the light of the day, and the clouds of the 
rainy season, are dispersed in autumn. 


12. The man of a submissive and sweet disposition, is liked by everybody; 
as the sweet music of reeds in the forest, attracts the ears of wild antelopes. 
(The deer and snakes, are said to be captivated by music of pipe). 


13. The qualities of the past life, accompany a man in his next birth; as the 
swallows of the rainy weather, attend on a dark cloud in the air. (This bird is 
called a hansa or hernshaw by Shakespeare; as, when it is autumn, I can 
distinguish a swallow from a hernshaw). 


14. Being thus qualified by his prior virtues, the good man has recourse to 
an instructor for the development of his understanding, who thereupon puts 
him in the way to truth. 


15. The man with the qualities of reason and resignation of his mind, 
beholds the Lord as one, and of the same form as the imperishable soul within 
himself. 


16. It is the spiritual guide, who awakens the dull and sleeping mind by his 
right reasoning; and then instils into it the words of truth, with a placid 


countenance and mind. 


17. They are the best qualified in their subsequent births, who learn first to 
awaken their worthless and dormant minds, as they rouse the sleeping stags in 
the forest. 


18. It is first by diligent attendance on good and meritorious guides (or 
gurus), and then by cleansing the gem of their minds by the help of reasoning 
that the pure hearted men come to the light of truth, and perceive the divine 
light shining in their souls. 


CHAPTER VII. 
ON ATTAINMENT OF DIVINE KNOWLEDGE. 


Argument. Attainment of knowledge by Intuition, compared to the falling 
of a fruit from heaven. 


Vasishtha continued: — I have told you Rama, the usual way to knowledge 
for mankind in general; I will now tell you of another method distinct from 
the other. 


2. Now Rama! we have two ways which are best calculated for the 
salvation of souls, born in human bodies on earth: the one is by their 
attainment of heavenly bliss, and the other by that of their final beatitude, 
(apavarga). 


3. And there are two methods of gaining these objects; the one being the 
observance of the instructions of the preceptor, which gradually leads one to 
his perfection in the course of one or reiterated births. 


4. The second is the attainment of knowledge by intuition, or by self- 
culture of a partly intelligent being; and this is as the obtaining of a fruit 
falling from heaven. 


5. Hear now of the attainment of intuitive knowledge, as that of getting a 
fruit fallen from the sky, from the old tale which I will now recite to you. 


6. Hear the happy and holy story, which removes the fetters of our good 
and evil deeds, and which the last born men, (now living), must taste with a 
zest for their enlightenment, as others relish a fruit fallen from heaven for 
their entertainment. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
SONG OF THE SIDDHAS OR HOLY ADEPTS. 


Argument. Wandering of Janaka in a Vernal garden, and hearing the Song 
of Siddhas. 


Vasishtha continued: — There lives the mighty king of the Videhas, 
(Tirhutians), Janaka by name, who is blessed with all prosperity and 
unbounded understanding. 


2. He is as the ever-fruitful Kalpa tree to the host of his suitors, and as the 
vivifying sun to his lotus-like friends; he is as the genial spring to the florets 
of his relatives, and as the god Cupid to females. 


3. Like the dvija-rdja or changeful moon, he gives delight to the dvija, — 
or twice born Brahmans, as that luminary gives the lilies to bloom; and like 
the luminous sun he destroys the darkness of his gloomy enemies. He is an 
ocean of the gems of goodness to all, and the support of his realm, like Vishnu 
the supporter of the world. 


4. He chanced on a vernal eve to wander about a forest, abounding in 
young creepers with bunches of crimson blossoms on them, and resonant with 
the melody of mellifluous kokilas, warbling in their tuneful choirs. 


5. He walked amidst the flowery arbours, resembling the graceful beauties 
with ornaments upon them, and sported in their bowers as the god Vasava 
disports in his garden of Nandana. (Eden or Paradise). 


6. Leaving his attendants behind him, he stepped to a grove standing on the 
steppe of a hill, in the midst of that romantic forest, which was redolent with 
the fragrance of flowers borne all about by the playful winds. 


7. He heard in one spot and within a bower of tdmala trees, a mingled voice 
as that of some invisible aerial spirits (siddhd), proceeding from it. 


8. I will now recite to you, O lotus-eyed Rama! the songs of the Siddhas, 
residing in the retired solitudes of mountainous regions, and dwelling in the 
caverns of hills, and which relate principally to their spiritual meditations. 


9. The Siddhas sang: — We adore that Being which is neither the 
subjective nor objective, (not the viewer nor the view); and which in our 
beliefs is the positive felicity, that rises in our souls, and has no fluctuation in 
it. 


10. Others chanted: — We adore that Being which is beyond the triple 
states of the subject, its attribute and its object; (who is neither the sight, 
seeing and the seer). It is the light of that soul, or spiritual light which exists 
from before the light of vision, which is derived from the light of the sun. 
(Sruti: — The light of the Spirit shone before the physical lights of the sun, 
moon, stars, lightning and fire). 


11. Others chanted: — We adore that Being, which is in the midst of all 
what is and what is not, (i.e., between existence and non-existence); and that 
spiritual light, which enlightens all lightsome objects. 


12. Some sang: — We adore that real existence which is all, whose are all 
things, and by whom are all made, from whom have all sprung, for whom 
they exist, in whom they subsist, unto whom do all return, and into which they 
are all absorbed. 


13. Some caroled: — We adore that Spirit, which begins with the letter a 
and ends in / with the dot m, (i.e., aham or ego); and which we continually 
inspire and respire in our breathings. (Aham) hansah. 


14. Others said: — Those who forsake the God, — Isha, that is situated 
within the cavity of their hearts, (hrid), and resort to others, that are without 
them, are verily in search of trifles by disregarding the gem kaustabha, 
(philosopher’s stone); which is placed in their hands. 


15. Others again declared: — It is by forsaking all other desires, that one 
obtains this object of his wish; and this being had, the poisonous plants of all 
other desires, are entirely uprooted from the heart. 


16. Some of them pronounced saying: — The foolish man who knowing 
the insipidity of all worldly things, attaches his mind to earthly object, is an 
ass and no human being. 


17. Others said: — The sensual appetites, which incessantly rise as snakes 
from the cavities of the body, are to be killed by the cudgel of reason, as Indra 


broke the hills by his thunderbolts. 


18. At last they said: — Let men try to secure the pure happiness of 
quietism, which serves to give tranquility to the minds of the righteous. The 
sober-minded that are situated in their real and natural temperament, have 
their best repose in the lap of undisturbed and everlasting tranquility. 


CHAPTER IX. 
REFLECTIONS OF JANAKA. 


Argument. Abstraction of Janaka’s mind, from the Vanities of the World. 


Vasishtha continued: — Upon hearing these sonatas of the Siddhas, (holy 
spirits), Janaka was dejected in his mind, like a coward at the noise of a 
conflict. 


2. He returned homeward, and conducted himself in silence to his domicile, 
as a stream glides in its silent course under the beachening trees, to the bed of 
the distant main. 


3. He left behind all his domestics in their respective dwellings below, and 
ascended alone to the highest balcony, as the sun mounts on the top of a 
mountain. 


4. Hence he saw the flights of birds, flying at random in different directions; 
and reflected on the hurrying of men in the same manner, and thus bewailed in 
himself on their deplorable conditions. 


5. Ah me miserable! that have to move about in the pitiable state of the 
restless mob, that roll about like a rolling stone (or ball), pushed backward 
and forward by another. 


6. I have a short span of endless duration, alloted to my share of lifetime; 
and yet I am a senseless fool to rely my trust in the hope of its durability. 


7. Short is the duration of my royalty also, which is limited to the period of 
my lifetime only; how is it then that I am secure of its continuance as a 
thoughtless man. 


8. I have an immortal soul lasting from before, and to continue even after 
my present existence, the present life is a destructible One, and yet I am a fool 
to rely in it, like a boy believing the painted moon as real. 


9. Ah! what sorcerer is it that hath thus bewitched me by his magic wand, 
as to make me believe I am not spell-bound at all. 


10. What faith can I rely in this world which has nothing substantial nor 
pleasant, nor grand nor real in it; and yet I know not why my mind is deluded 
by it. 


11. What is far from me, (i.e., the object of sense), appears to be near me 
by my sensation of the same; and that which is nearest to me, (i.e., my inmost 
soul), appears to be farthest from me, (by my want of its perception). 
Knowing this I must abandon the outward (sensible objects), in order to see 
the inward soul. 


12. This hurry of men in their pursuits, is as impetuous and transient as the 
torrent of a whirlpool. It precipitates them to the depth of their dangers, and is 
not worth the pain it gives to the spirit. 


13. The years, months, days, and minutes, are revolving with succession of 
our pains and pleasures; but these are swallowed up, by the repeated trains of 
our misery (rather than that of happiness). 


14. I have well considered everything, and found them all perishable and 
nothing durable or lasting; there is nothing to be found here worthy of the 
reliance of the wise. 


15. Those standing at the head of great men today, are reduced low in the 
course of a few days; what worth is there in giddy and thoughtless greatness, 
which is deserving of our estimation. 


16. I am bound to the earth without a rope, and am soiled herein without 
any dirt (in my person); I am fallen though sitting in this edifice. O my soul! 
how art thou destroyed while thou art living. 


17. Whence has this causeless ignorance over-powered my intelligent soul, 
and whence has this shadow overspread its lustre, as a dark cloud overshades 
the disk of the sun? 


18. Of what avail are these large possessions and numerous relations to me, 
when my soul is desponding in despair, like children under the fear of ghosts 
and evil spirits. 


19. How shall I rest any reliance in my sensual enjoyments which are the 
harbingers of death and disease, and what dependence is there on my 
possessions, which are fraught only with anxieties and cares? 


20. It matters not whether these friends, the feeders on my fortune, may last 
or leave me at once; my prosperity is but a bubble and a false appearance 
before me. 


21. Men of greatest opulence and many good and great men and our best 
friends and kindest relatives, that have gone by, now live in our remembrance 
only. 


22. Where are the riches of the monarchs of the earth, and where the former 
creations of Brahma. The past have given way to the present, and these are to 
be followed by future ones; hence there is no reliance in anything. 


23. Many Indras have been swallowed up like bubbles in the ocean of 
eternity; hence, the like expectation of my longevity, is ridiculous to the wise. 


24. Millions of Brahmas have passed away, and their productions have 
disappeared under endless successions; the kings of earth have fled like their 
ashes and are reduced to dust; what is the confidence then in my life and 
stability? 


25. The world is but a dream by night, and the sensuous body is but a 
misconception of the mind. If I rely any credence on them I am really to be 
blamed. 


26. My conception of myself and perception of other things, are false 
imaginations of my mind. It is my egoism that has laid hold of me, as a demon 
seizes an idiot. 


27. Fool that I am, that seeing I do not see, how the span of my life is 
measured every moment by the imperceptible instants of time, and their 
leaving but a small portion behind. 


28. I see the juggler of time seizing on Brahmas, Vishnus and Rudras, and 
making playthings of them on his play ground of the world, and flinging them 
as balls all about. 


29. I see the days and nights are incessantly passing away, without 
presenting me an opportunity which I can behold the true imperishable one. 


30. The objects of sensual enjoyment, are larking in the minds of men, like 
cranes gabbling in the lakes, and there is no prospect of the true and best 
object in the mind of any body. 


31. We meet with one hardship after another, and buffet in the waves of 
endless miseries in this earth; and yet are we so shameless, as not to feel 


ourselves disgusted with them. 


32. We see all the desirable objects to which we attach our thoughts, to be 
frail and perishing; and yet we do not seek the imperishable one, and our 
everlasting good in the equanimity of the Soul. 


33. Whatever we see to be pleasant in the beginning (as pleasures), or in 
the middle (as youth), or in the end (as virtuous deeds), and at all times (as 
earthly goods), are all unholy and subject to decay. 


34. Whatever objects are dear to the hearts of men, they are all found to be 
subject to the changes of their rise and fall, (i.e., their growth and decay). 


35. Ignorant people are everywhere inclined to evil acts, and they grow day 
by day more hardened in their wicked practices. They repent every day for 
their sins, but never reprove themselves for the better. 


36. Senseless men are never the better for anything, being devoid of sense 
in their boyhood, and heated by their passions in youth. In their latter days, 
they are oppressed with the care of their families, and in the end thy are 
overcome by sorrow and remorse. 


37. Here the entrance and exit, (ie., the birth and death), are both 
accompanied with pain and sorrow, (for men come to and go away from the 
world with crying). Here every state of life is contaminated by its reverse, (as 
health by disease, youth by age, and affluence by poverty). Everything is 
unsubstantial in this seeming substantial world, and yet the ignorant rely in its 
unreal substantiality. 


38. The real good that is derived here by means of painful austerities, are 
the arduous sacrifices of rdjasttyd asvamedha and others, or the attainment of 
heaven; which has no reality in it, by reason of its short duration of the small 
portion of a Kalpa compared with eternity. (The Hindu heaven is no lasting 
bliss). 


39. What is this heaven and where is it situated, whether below or above us 
or in this nether world; and where its residents are not overtaken by 
multitudes of locust-like evils? (The Sruti says: — “Evil spirits infest the 
heavens and they drove the gods from it.” So we read of the Titan’s and 
Satan’s band invading heaven). 


40. We have serpents creeping in the cells of our hearts, and have our 
bodies filled with the brambles of diseases and dangers, and know not how to 
destroy them. 


41. I see good is intermixed with evil, and pain abiding with pleasure; there 
is sorrow seated on the top (excess) of joy, so I know not whereto I shall 
resort. 


42. I see the earth full of common people, who are incessantly born and 
dying in it in multitudes; but I find few honest and righteous men in it. 


43. These beautiful forms of women, with their eyes like lotuses, and the 
gracefulness of their blandishments, and their charming smiles, are made so 
soon to fade and die away. 


44. Of what note am I among these mighty beings, (as Brahma and 
Vishnu), who at the twinkling of their eyes, have created and destroyed the 
world; and yet have succumbed to death at last. (This last passage shows that 
the Hindu gods were mortal heroes of antiquity). 


45. You are constantly in search of what is more pleasant and lasting than 
others, but never seek after that highest prosperity, which is beyond all your 
earthly cares. 


46. What is this great prosperity in which you take so much delight, but 
mere vexation of your spirit, which proves this vanity to be your calamity 
only. 


47. Again, what are these adversities which you fear so much, they may 
turn to your true prosperity, by setting you free from earthly broils and leading 
you to your future felicity. 


48. The mind is broken to pieces by its fears, like the fragments of the 
moon, floating on the waves of this ocean of the world. Its selfishness has 
tossed it to and fro, and this world being got rid of, it is set at perfect ease 
(from all vicissitudes of fortune). 


49. There is an unavoidable chance, (necessity), actuating our worldly 
affairs and accidents; it is impudence, therefore, to welcome some as good, 
and to avoid others as evil. 


50. We are prone to things that are pleasant to the sight, but bear a mortal 
flame in them, and consume us like poor moths in the flames, which it is 
bright to see but fatal to feel. 


51. It is better to roll in the continual flame of hell-fire to which one is 
habituated, than rise and fall repeatedly in the furnace of this world, as from 
the frying pan into the fire. 


52. This world is said by the wise, to be a boundless ocean of woes, (vale 
of tears); how then can anybody who has fallen amidst it, expect any 
happiness herein? 


53. Those who have not fallen in the midst and been altogether drowned in 
woe, think the lesser woes as light and delight, as one condemned to be 
beheaded, is glad to escape with a light punishment. 


54. Iam grown as the vilest of the vile, and resemble a block of wood or 
stone; there is no difference in me from the ignorant clown, who has never 
had the thought of his eternal concerns in his head. 


55. The great arbour of the world, with its very many branches and twigs 
and fruits, hath sprung from the mind and is rooted in it. (The outer world has 
its existence in the sensitive mind only; because the insensible bodies of the 
dead and inanimate things, have no consciousness of it). 


56. It is the conception, (sankalpa), of the world, in my mind, that causes 
its existence and presents its appearance before me, I will now try to efface 
this conception from my mind, and forget this world altogether. (This doctrine 
of idealism was derived, by Janaka from his own Intuition, (Svena-Jndtena)). 


57. I will no longer allow myself to be deluded like monkeys with the 
forms of things, which I know are not real; mere ideal, but changeful and 
evanescent. (Here also Janaka learns by intuition not to rely on concrete 
forms, but to have their general and abstract ideas). 


58. I have woven and stretched out the web of my desires, and collected 
only my woes and sorrows; I fell into and fled from the snare of my own 
making, and am now resolved to take my rest in the soul. 


59. [have much wailed and bitterly wept, to think of the depravity and loss 
of my soul, and will henceforth cease to lament, thinking that I am not utterly 
lost. 


60. I am now awakened, and am glad to find out the robber of my soul; it is 
my own mind, and this I am determined to kill, as it had so long deprived me 
of the inestimable treasure of my soul. 


61. So long was my mind at large as a loose and unstrung pearl, now will I 
pierce it with the needle of reason, and string it with the virtues of self- 
controul and subjection to wisdom. 


62. The cold icicle of my mind, will now be melted down by the sun-heat 


of reason; and will now be confined in the interminable meditation of its 
Eternal Maker (from where it cannot return. — Sruti). 


63. 1am now awakened to my spiritual knowledge, like these holy Siddhas, 
saints and sages; and will now pursue my spiritual inquiries, to the 
contentment of my soul. 


64. Having now found my long-lost soul, I will continue to look upon its 
pure light with joy in my lonely retirement; and will remain as quiet and still 
in contemplation of it, as a motionless cloud in autumn. 


65. And having cast away the false belief of my corporeality, (i.e., of being 
an embodied being), and that these possessions and properties are mine, and 
having subdued my force by mighty enemy of the Mind, I will attain the 
tranquility of my soul by the help of my reason. 


CHAPTER X. 
SILENT AND SOLITARY REFLECTIONS OF 
JANAKA. 


Argument. Janaka though employed in Ritual service, continues firm in his 
meditation, and comes to the conclusion of his immortality. 


Vasishtha related: — While Janaka was thus musing in his mind, there 
entered the chamberlain before him, in the manner of Aruna standing before 
the chariot of the sun. 


2. The Chamberlain said: — O sire! thy realm is safe under thy protecting 
arms; now rise to attend to the daily rites, as it becomes your majesty. 


3. There the maidservants are waiting with their water pots, filled with 
water perfumed with flowers, camphor and saffron for your bathing, as the 
nymphs of the rivers, have presented themselves in person before you. 


4. The temples are decorated with lotuses and other flowers, with the bees 
fluttering upon them; and hung over with fine muslin, as white as the fibers of 
lotus stalks. 


6. The altars are filled with heaps of flowers, aromatic drugs and rice; and 
adorned with every decoration in the princely style. 


7. The Brahmans are waiting there for your majesty’s presence, after 
making their sacred ablution and purifications, and offering their prayers for 
the remission of sins; and are expecting to get their worthy gifts from thee. 


8. The hand-maids are attending to their duties, graced with flappers, 
(chamaras), in their hands; and the feasting ground is cleansed with sandal 
paste and water. 


9. Rise, therefore, from thy seat, and be it well with thee to perform the 
prescribed duties; because it does not become the best of men, to be belated in 


the discharge of their duties. 


10. Though thus besought by the head chamberlain, yet the king remained 
in his meditative mood, thinking on the wonderful phenomena of nature. 


11. This royalty and these duties of mine, said he, are for a very short time; 
I do not require these things that are so transitory in their nature. 


12. I must leave these things, that are at best but waters of the mirage; and 
remain close to myself in my lonesome seclusion, like a calm and solitary lake 
or sea. 


13. These pleasures of the world, that are displayed around us, are entirely 
useless to me; I will leave them with promptness on my part, and remain in 
my happy retirement. 


14. Abandon, O my heart! thy shrewdness in pursuing after the objects of 
thy desire; in order to avoid the snares of disease and death (which have been 
set on thy way). 


15. In whatever state or condition of life, the heart is set to hanker for its 
delight; it is sure to meet with some difficulty, distress or disappointment 
coming out of the same. 


16. Whether your heart is engaged in, or disengaged from the objects of 
sense, you will never find any one of them, either in act or thought, conducing 
to the true happiness of your soul. 


17. Forsake, therefore, the thoughts of the vile pleasure of your senses, and 
betake yourself to those thoughts, which are fraught with the true happiness of 
the soul. 


18. Thinking in this manner, Janaka remained in mute silence, and his 
restless mind became as still, as it made him sit down like a picture in painting 
or as a statue. 


19. The chamberlain uttered not a word any more, but stood silent in mute 
respect through fear of his master, from his knowledge of the dispositions of 
kings. 


20. Janaka in his state of silent meditation, reflected again on the vanity of 
human life, with cool calmness of his mind, and said: — 


21. Now must I be diligent to find out the best and most precious treasure 
in the world, and know what is that imperishable thing, to which I shall bind 


my soul as its surest anchor. 


22. What is the good of my acts or my cessation from them, since nothing 
is produced of anything, which is not perishable in its nature. (Thence the 
product of acts is perishing, and its want is a lasting good). 


23. It matters not whether the body is active or inactive, since all its actions 
end in utter inaction at last as all force is reduced to rest. It is the pure intellect 
within me that is always the same, (i.e., ever active and undecaying), and 
which loses nothing from the loss of the body or by want of bodily actions. 
(The body is a dead mass without the active principle of the mind). 


24. I do not wish to have what I have not, nor dare leave what I have 
already got; Iam content with myself; so let me have what is mine and what I 
have. (The Yogis like Stoics, were fatalists and content with their lot). 


25. I get no real good by my acts here, nor lose anything by refraining from 
them. What I get by my acts or want of action, is all Nil and Null of Vanity or 
Vanities, and nothing to my purpose or liking. 


26. Whether I am doing or not doing, and whether my acts are proper or 
improper; I have nothing to desire here, nor anything desirable that I have to 
expect from them. (Hence, no exertion will bring on the desired object, unless 
it is given by our lot). 


27. I have got what was due to my past actions, and this body is the result 
of my former acts. It may be in its motion and action, or it may be still and 
fade away, which is the same thing to me. 


28. The mind being set at ease by want of its action or passion, the actions 
of the body and its members, are alike in their effects to those of not doing 
them. (Involuntary actions done without the will are of no account). 


29. The acts of men are reckoned as no acts of theirs, which happen to take 
place as the results of their destiny or previous actions. (The action or passion 
relates to the mind only, but the doing of destiny being involuntary, such 
action of men is accounted as no action of theirs). 


30. The impression which the inward soul bears of its past actions and 
passions, the same gives its colour to the nature and character of the actions of 
men afterwards. Now that my soul has obtained its imperishable state of 
spirituality, I am freed from the mutabilities of the transmigrations of my 
body and mind. 


Commentary: — Janaka arrives after all his previous reasonings and 
deductions, to the conclusion of the certainty of his being an intellectual and 
spiritual being, endowed with an immortal soul, and entitled to everlasting 
life, after the destruction of the frail body and the changeful mind with it. 


CHAPTER XI 
SUBJECTION OF THE MIND. 


Argument. Janaka’s Discharge of his Daily Rites, and Admonition to his 
Mind. 


Vasishtha related: — Having thought so, Janaka rose up for performance of 
his daily rites as usual, and without the sense of his agency in them. He did his 
duty in the same manner as the sun rises every day to give the morn, without 
his consciousness of it. 


2. He discharged his duties as they presented themselves to him, without 
any concern or expectation of their rewards. He did them awaking as if it were 
in his sleep. Gloss: — He did his acts by rote, but wot not what he did in his 
insensibility of them; and such acts of insensibility are free from culpability or 
retribution. 


3. Having discharged his duties of the day and honoured the gods and the 
priests, he passed the night absorbed in his meditations. 


4. His mind being set at ease, and his roving thoughts repressed from their 
objects, he thus communed with his mind at the dead of night, and said: — 


5. O my mind that art roving all about with the revolving world, know that 
such restlessness of thine, is not agreeable to peace of the soul; therefore, rest 
thou in quiet from thy wanderings abroad. 


6. It is thy business to imagine many things at thy pleasure, and as thou 
thinkest thou hast a world of thoughts present before thee every moment. (For 
all things are but creations of the imaginative mind). 


7. Thou shootest forth in innumerable woes by the desire of endless 
enjoyments, as a tree shoots out into a hundred branches, by its being watered 
at the roots. 


8. Now as our births and lives and worldly affairs, are all productions of 
our wistful thoughts, I pray thee, therefore, O my mind! to rest in quiet by 
abandonment of thy earthly desires. 


9. O my friendly mind! weigh well this transient world in thy thoughts, and 
depend upon it, shouldst thou find aught of substantiality in it. 


10. Forsake thy fond reliance on these visible phenomena; leave these 
things, and rove about at thy free will without caring for anything. 


11. Whether this unreal scene, may appear to or disappear from thy sight, 
thou shouldst not suffer thyself to be affected by it in either case. 


12. Thou canst have no concern with the visible objects, (phenomenal 
world); for what concern can one have with any earthly thing which is 
inexistent of itself as an unsubstantial shadow? 


13. The world is an unreality like thyself, hence there can be no true 
relation between two unrealities. It is but a logomachy to maintain the relation 
of two negatives to one another. 


14. Granting, thou art a reality and the world is unreal, still there can be no 
agreement between you, as there is none between the living and the dead, and 
between the positive and negative ideas. 


15. Should the mind and the world be both of them realities and co-existent 
forever, then there can be no reason for the joy or sorrow of the one at the 
gain or loss of the other. 


16. Now, therefore, avoid the great malady of worldliness, and enjoy the 
silent joy in thyself, like one sitting in the undisturbed depth of the Ocean, 
with the rolling tide and waves above his head. 


17. Do not consume like a puppet in pyrotechnics with the fiery remorse of 
worldliness, nor be burnt down to the darkness of despair in this gloomy scene 
of the world. 


18. O wicked mind! there is nothing here so good and great, whereby thou 
mayest attain thy high perfection, except by the forsaking of all frivolities and 
dependance on thy entire resignation to the unchangeable One. 


CHAPTER XII. 
ON THE GREATNESS OF INTELLIGENCE. 


Argument. The Living Liberation of Janaka, and the pre-eminence of 
reason and intelligence. 


Vasishtha continued: — Janaka having expostulated in his manner with his 
mind, attended to the affairs of the state without shrinking from them by his 
mental abstraction. 


2. He was however not gladdened by the gladsome tasks and tidings, but 
was indifferent to them as in his slumber of fixed mindedness in his maker. 


3. Hence forward, he was not intently employed in his duties, nor forsook 
them altogether; but attended unconcernedly to the business which presented 
itself to him. 


4. His constant habit of reasoning, enabled him to understand the eternal 
verity; and preserved his intellect from blunders, as the sky is untouched by 
the flying dust. 


5. By his cultivation of reasoning, his mind was enlightened and fraught 
with all knowledge. 


6. Unaccustomed to duality, his mind had learnt to know the sole unity 
only; and his intelligent soul shone within him, as the full bright sun in the 
sky. (He felt a flood of light in himself, as the believer finds in his inmost 
soul. — Gloss). 


7. He became acquainted with the Soul, that is inherent in all bodies, and 
beheld all things abiding in the omnipotence of the Intellect, and identic with 
the infinite. 


8. He was never too joyous nor exceedingly sorrowful, but preserved his 
equanimity amidst the conflicts of his soul and sensible objects (between 


spirituality and materiality). 


9. The venerable Janaka, became liberated in his living state since that 
time; and is since renowned as a veteran theosophist among mankind. 


10. He continues thence forward to reign over the land of the Videha 
people, without being subject to the feelings of joy or sorrow for a moment. 


11. Knowing the causes of good and evil, he is neither elated nor dejected 
at any favourable or unfavourable circumstances of his life, nor does he feel 
glad or sad at the good or bad accident relating the state. 


12. He did his duties without setting his mind to them, which was wholly 
employed in his intellectual speculations. 


13. Remaining thus in his hypnotic state of sound sleep, (abstraction), his 
thoughts are quite abstracted from all objects about him. 


14. He is unmindful of the past, and heedless about the future; and enjoys 
the present moment only, with a gladsome heart and cheerful mind. 


15. He obtained the obtainable what is worthy to be obtained, by his own 
ratiocination (or self-reflection), and not O lotus-eyed Rama! by any other 
desire, (i.e., by abandoning all his worldly desires). 


16. Therefore, we should reason (or reflect) in our minds, so long as we 
succeed to arrive at the conclusion of the subject. 


17. The presence of the Holy Light, is not to be had either by the lectures of 
a preceptor, or the teaching of the Sdstras; it is not the result of meritorious 
acts, nor of the company of the holy men; but the result of your own 
intellection. 


18. A good understanding assisted by the power of its accompanying 
percipience, (prajand), leads to the knowledge of that highest state, which the 
acts of your piety cannot do. 


19. He who has set before his sight the keen light of the lamp of his 
percipience, is enabled to see both the past and future in his presence; and no 
shadow of ignorance intercepts his vision. 


20. It is by means of his percipience, that one is enabled to cross over the 
sea of dangers; as a passenger goes across a river in a boat or raft. 


21. The man that is devoid of his prescience, is overtaken even by small 


mishaps; as a light straw is blown away by the slightest breeze. 


22. One who is endued with foresight, passes over the eventful ocean of the 
world, without the assistance of friends and guidance of the Sdstras. 


23. The man with foreknowledge, sees the result of his actions beforehand; 
but one without his pre-vision, is at a loss to judge of the imminent events. 


24. Good company and learning, strengthen the understanding; as the 
watering of a plant, tends towards its growth and fructification. 


25. The infant understanding like a tender shoot, takes a deep root in time; 
and having grown up like a tree, bears the sweet fruit in its season; like the 
cooling moon-beams at night. 


26. Whatever exertions are made by men for the acquisition of external 
properties, the same should be more properly devoted for the improvement of 
their understandings at first. (Ze., Intellectual improvement should precede 
that of outward circumstances). 


27. Dullness of the understanding, which is the source of all evils, and the 
storehouse of misery, and the root of the arbour of worldliness, must be 
destroyed first of all. 


28. Great minded men get in their understandings, whatever good they may 
expect to find in this earth, in heaven above and in the nether world. (The 
mind is the seat of all treasures). 


29. It is by means of one’s good understanding only, that he can get over 
the ocean of the world; and not by his charities, pilgrimages, or religious 
austerities. 


30. The divine blessing attending on mortal men on earth, is the sweet fruit 
of the tree of knowledge. (Here is a contrast with the mortal taste of the 
forbidden fruit of knowledge). 


31. Wisdom nips with its sharp nails, the heads of the elephantine, 
(gigantic), bonds of giddiness, with as much ease as the lion kills the deer, or 
as if it were destroying a strong lion by a weak jackal. (Weak wisdom having 
the power of destroying the wild worldliness). 


32. An ordinary man is often seen to become the ruler of men, by means of 
his greater knowledge than others; and the wise and discreet are entitled to 
glory in both worlds. 


33. Reason overcomes all its adversaries, dealing in diverse forms of 
sophistry; as a disciplined warrior, overpowers on a host of untrained savage 
people. 


34. Reasoning is as the philosopher’s stone, which converts the base metals 
to gold; and is hidden in the casket of rational souls as the best treasure. It 
yields the desired fruits of men like the kalpa plant of Paradise at a thought. 


35. The right reasoner gets across the wide ocean of the world, by means of 
his reasoning, while the unreasonable rabble are born away by its waves; as 
the skillful boat-man cuts across the current, while the unskilled waterman is 
tossed about by the waves. 


36. A well-directed understanding leads to the success of an undertaking, 
but the misguided intellect goes to the rack and ruin; the one sails to the shore 
before the wind; but the other is tossed in his wrecked vessel over the wide 
gulph of the world. 


37. The keen sighted and unbiassed wise man, is never overcome by the 
evils arising from his desires, as the arrows of the adversary, do not pierce the 
body of a soldier in armour. 


38. The sapience of a man, gives him an insight into everything in the 
world, and the all-knowing man, is neither subjected to dangers nor reverses 
of his fortune. 


39. The dark and wide-stretching cloud of blind egoism, which 
overshadows the sun-light of the Supreme Spirit within us, is driven away by 
the breath of intelligence. 


40. The improvement of the understanding, is the first requisite towards the 
knowledge of the Supreme soul; as the cultivation of the ground, is of primary 
importance to the farmer, desirous of reaping a rich harvest. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
GOVERNMENT OF THE MIND. 


Argument. Reasons and Rules of Restraining the Mind from the instance of 
Janaka’s insouciance. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now Rama! Reflect on the Supreme spirit, in thy 
own spirit like Janaka; and know the object of the meditation of the wise, 
without any difficulty or failing. 


2. The wise men of the latter genus, rdjasa-sdtvika, or active goodness, 
obtain their desired objects by themselves (of their own institution), like 
Janaka and other holy sages. 


3. As long as you continue to restrain your organs of sense from their 
objects, so long will the divine soul grace your own inward soul with its 
presence. 


4. The Lord God and Supreme soul, being thus gracious to thee, thou shalt 
see a halo of light cast over all things, and dispersing all thy woes from thy 
sight. 


5. The sight of the Supreme spirit, will remove the plentiful seeds of bias 
from thy mind; and it will drive away the woeful sights of misery, pouring 
upon thy view in copious showers. 


6. Continue like Janaka in the willful discharge of thy duties, and prosper 
by placing thy intellectual sight, on the divine light shining in thy inward 
spirit. 


7. It was by his inward cogitations, that Janaka found the transitoriness of 
the world; and by placing his faith in the unchangeable Spirit, he found its 
grace in time. 


8. Hence, neither the pious acts of men, nor their riches nor friends, are of 


any use to them for their salvation from the miseries of life, unless it be by 
their own endeavor for the enlightenment of their soul. 


9. They who rely their faith in the gods, and depend upon them for 
fulfilment of their desires and future rewards, are perverted in their 
understandings, and cannot be heirs of immortality. 


10. It is by reliance in one’s reasoning and resignation, and by his spiritual 
vision of the Supreme spirit, that he is saved from his misery in this ocean of 
the world. 


11. The attainment of this blessed knowledge of intuition, which removeth 
our ignorance, is as what they call thy getting of fruit fallen from heaven, (i.e., 
a heavenly and accidental fruit). 


12. The intelligence which looks into itself as Janaka’s, finds the soul 
developing of itself in it, as the lotus-bud opens of itself in the morning. 


13. The firm conviction of the material world, melts into nothing under the 
light of percipience; as the thick and tangible ice, dissolves into fluidity under 
the heat of the sun. 


14. The consciousness that this is I, (i.e., one’s self-consciousness), is as 
the shade of night, and is dispelled at the rise of the sun of intellect, when the 
Omnipresent light appears vividly to sight. 


15. No sooner one loses his self-consciousness that, ‘this is himself,’ than 
the All-pervading Soul opens fully to his view. 


16. As Janaka has abandoned the consciousness of his personality, together 
with his desires also; so do you, O intelligent Rama, forsake them by your 
acute understanding and of the mind discernment. 


17. After the cloud of egoism is dispersed, and the sphere is cleared all 
around; the divine light appears to shine in it, as brightly as another sun. 


18. It is the greatest ignorance to think of one’s egoism, (or self- 
personality); this thought being relaxed by the sense of our nothingness, gives 
room to the manifestation of holy light in the soul. 


19. Neither think of the entity nor non-entity of thyself or others; but 
preserve the tranquility of thy mind from both the thoughts of positive and 
negative existences; in order to get rid of thy sense of distinction between the 
producer and the produced, (i.e., of the cause and effect, the both of which are 
identic in Vedanta or spiritual philosophy). 


20. Again, your fostering a fondness for something as good, and a hatred to 
others as bad; is but a disease of your mind for your uneasiness only. (Since 
all things are good in their own kinds, and nothing bad in its nature, and in the 
sight of God, who pronounced all things good). 


21. Be not fond of what you think to be beautiful, nor disgusted at what 
appears hateful to you, get rid of these antagonist feelings, and be even- 
minded by fixing it on One, before whom all things are alike and equally 
good, (all partial evil is universal good. — Pope.) 


22. They that view the desirable and the detestable in the same light, are 
neither fond of the one nor averse to the other. 


23. Until the fancy of the desirableness of one thing and dislike of the 
other, is effaced from the mind, it is as hard to have the good grace of 
equanimity, as it is difficult for the moonlight to pierce through the cloudy 
sky. 


24. The mind which considers one thing as something a propos, and 
another as nothing to the purpose (the one as desirable and the other 
worthless); is deprived of the blessing of indifference, as the brier sdkota is 
despised, not standing with all its fruits and flowers. 


25. Where there is a craving for the desirable, and an aversion to what is 
unseemly, and when there is a cry for gain and an outcry at one’s loss; it is 
impossible for even-mindedness, dispassionateness, and tranquility of the 
mind, to abide then and there in that state. 


26. There being only the essence of one pure, — Brahma diffused 
throughout the universe, how very improper is it to take the one as many, and 
among them something as good or bad; (when the Maker of all has made all 
things good). 


27. Our desires and dislike, are the two apes abiding on the tree of our 
hearts; and while they continue to shake and swing it with their jogging and 
jolting, there can be no rest in it. 


28. Freedom from fear and desire, from exertions and action, together with 
sapience and equanimity, are the inseparable accompaniments of ease and 
rest. 


29. The qualities of forbearance and fellow feeling, accompanied with 
contentment and good understanding, and joined with a mild disposition and 
gentle speech, are the indispensable companions of the wise man, who has got 


rid of his desires and the feelings of his liking or dislike. 


30. The mind running to meanness, is to be repressed by restraining the 
passions and appetites; as the current of water running below, is stopped by its 
lock gate. 


31. Shun the sight of external things, which are the roots of error and 
fallacy; and consider always their internal properties both when you are 
awake and asleep, and also when you are walking about or sitting down. 


32. Avaricious men are caught like greedy fishes, in the hidden net of their 
insatiable desires, and which is woven with the threads of worldly cares, and 
is under the waters of worldly affairs. 


33. Now Rama! cut the meshes of this net, with the knife of thy good 
understanding; and disperse it in the water, as a tempest rends the thick cloud 
and scatters it about the air. 


34. Try, O gentle Rama! to uproot the root of worldliness, which sprouts 
forth in the weeds of vice, with the hatchet of your perseverance and the 
eliminating shovel of your penetration. 


35. Employ your mind to hew down the cravings of your mind, as they use 
the axe to cut down a tree, and you will then rest in quiet as you arrive at the 
state of holiness. 


36. Having destroyed the former state of your mind by its present state, try 
to forget them both by your heedless mind in future, and manage yourself 
unmindful of the world. (There is a play of the word mind in the original). 


37. Your utter oblivion of the world, will prevent the revival of your mind; 
and stop the reappearance of ignorance which is concomitant with the mind. 


38. Whether you are waking or sleeping or in any other state of your life; 
you must remember the nihility of the world, and resign your reliance in it. 


39. Leave off your selfishness, (mamatd or meitatem), O Rama! and rely in 
the disinterestedness of your soul; lay hold on whatever offers of itself to you 
and without seeking for it all about. 


40. As the Lord God doth everything, and is yet aloof from all; so must 
thou do all thy acts outwardly, and without thyself mixing in any. 


41. Knowing the knowable, one finds himself as the increate soul and Great 
Lord of all; but being apart from that soul, he views only the material world 


spread before him. 


42. He who has the sight of the inner spirit, is freed from the thoughts of 
the external world, and is not subjected to the joy or grief or sorrow and other 
evils of his life. 


43. He is called a Yogi who is free from passions and enmity, and looks on 
gold and rubbish in the same light; he is joined with his Joy in his Yoga, and 
disjoined from all worldly desires. 


44. He enjoys the fruit of his own acts, and minds not what he wastes or 
gives away; he has the evenness of his mind in every condition, and is 
unaltered by pain or pleasure. (The Sanskrit sukh-dukkha means also 
prosperity and adversity, and good and evil of every kind). 


45. He who receives what he gets, and is employed with whatever offers of 
itself to him, without considering the good or evil that he is to gain by it, is 
not plunged into any difficulty. 


46. He who is certain of the truth of the spiritual essence of the world, pants 
not for its physical enjoyments, but he is even-minded at all times. 


47. The dull mind follows the active intellect in accomplishing its objects, 
as the carnivorous cat or fox follows the lion in quest of meat. 


48. As the servile band of the lion feeds on the flesh acquired by his 
prowess, so the mind dwells upon the visible and sensible object, which it 
perceives by power of the intellect. 


49. Thus the unsubstantial mind, lives upon the outer world by the help of 
the intellect; but as it comes to remember its origination from the intellect, it 
recoils back to its original state. 


50. The mind which is moved and lighted, by the heat and light of the lamp 
of the intellect, becomes extinct without its physical force, and grows as 
motionless as a dead body. 


51. The nature of the intellect is known to exclude the idea of motion or 
pulsation from it; and the power which has vibration in it, is called intellection 
or the mind in the Sdstras. 


52. The breathing (or vibration) of the mind, like the hissing of a snake, is 
called its imagination, (kalpana); but by knowing the intellect as the Ego, it 
comes to the true knowledge of the inward soul. 


53. The intellect which is free from thoughts, (chetyas), is the ever-lasting 
Brahma; but being joined with thought, it is styled the imaginative principle 
or Mind. 


54. This power of imagination having assumed a definite form, is termed 
the mind; which with its volition and options, is situated in the heart of living 
beings. 


55. With its two distinct powers of imagination and volition, it is employed 
in the acts of discriminating and choosing the agreeable from what is 
disagreeable to it. (i.e., The imagination and volitive faculties of the mind, 
supply it with the power of discrimination and option, between what is fit or 
unfit for or suitable to it). 


56. The intellect being seated in the heart with its thoughts and volitions, 
forgets its spiritual nature, and remains as a dull material substance, (i.e., the 
passivity of the heart as opposed to the activity of the mind). 


57. The intellect being thus confined in the hearts of all animals in this 
world, continues in utter oblivion of its nature; until it is awakened of itself, 
either by its intuition or instruction of preceptors, etc. 


58. So it is to be wakened by means of instruction, derived from the Sdstras 
and preceptors; as also by the practice of dispassionateness, and subjection of 
the organs of sense and action. 


59. When the minds of living beings, are roused by learning and self- 
control, they tend towards the knowledge of the Great Brahma, or else they 
rove at random about the wide world. 


60. We must, therefore, awaken our minds, which are rolling in the pit of 
worldliness, through the inebriety of the wine of error, and which are dormant 
to divine knowledge. 


61. As long as the mind is unawakened, it is insensible of everything (in its 
true light); and though it perceives the visibles, yet this perception of them is 
as false as the sight of a city in our fancy. 


62. But when the mind is awakened by divine knowledge, to the sight of 
the supreme Being; it presents everything in itself, as the inward fragrance of 
flowers pervades the outer-petals also. (i.e., The inward sight of God, 
comprehends the view of everything in it). 


63. Though the intellect has the quality of knowing everything, contained 


in all the three worlds; yet it has but a little knowledge of them from the 
paucity of its desire of knowing them. (ie., Though the capacity of the 
intellect is unlimited, yet its knowledge is proportionate to its desire of 
gaining it). 


64. The mind without the intellect is a dull block of stone; but it is opened 
by divine light, like the lotus-bud expanding under the light of the sun. 


65. The imaginative mind is as devoid of understanding, as a statue made 
of marble, is unable to move about by itself. 


66. How can the regiments drawn in painting, wage a war in a mutual 
conflict, and how can the moon-beams, make the medicinal plants emit their 
light? (i.e., As it is life that makes the armies fight, so it is the intellect that 
actuates the mind to its operations. And as the plants shine by night by the 
sun-beams, which are deposited in them during day, so shines the mind by 
means of its intellectual light). 


67. Who has seen dead bodies besmeared with blood to run about on the 
ground, or witnessed the fragments of stones in the woods to sing in musical 
strains? 


68. Where does the stone idol of the sun, dispel the darkness of the night; 
and where does the imaginary forest of the sky spread its shade on the 
ground? 


69. Of what good are the efforts of men, who are as ignorant as blocks of 
stones, and are led by their error in many ways; except it be to endanger 
themselves by the mirage of their minds? (The exertions of the ignorant are as 
vain as the labour of a Sisyphus). 


70. It is the imagination that displays the non-existent as existent in the 
soul, as it is the sun-beams, which exhibit the limpid main in the mazy sands. 


71. It is the moving principle in the body, which the sophists designate as 
the mind; but know it as a mere force of the winds, like the vital breath of 
living beings. 


72. Those whose self-consciousness is not disturbed, by the currents of 
their passions and desires; have their spiritual souls like an unperturbed 
stream (of psychic fluid). 


73. But when this pure consciousness is befouled by the false fancies of 
this and that, and that this is I, and that is mine; then the soul and the vital 


principle, are both taken together to form a living being. 


74. The mind, the living soul and understanding, are all but fictitious names 
of an unreality, according to the conceptions of false thinkers, and not of them 
that know the true spirit. 


75. There is no mind nor understanding, no thinking principle, nor the body 
in reality; there is the only reality of the One universal spirit, which is ever 
existent everywhere. (So says the Sruti: — All else are but transitory creations 
of imagination, and so pass into nothing). 


76. It is the soul, which is all this world, it is time and all its fluctuations, it 
is more transparent than the atmosphere, and it is clear as it is nothing at all. 


77. It is not always apparent, owing to its transparency; yet it is ever 
existent, owing to our consciousness of it. The spirit is beyond all things, and 
is perceived by our inward perception of it. 


78. The mind vanishes into nothing, before our consciousness of the 
Supreme Soul; just as darkness is dispelled from that place, where the 
sunshine is present. 


79. When the transparent and self-conscious soul, raises other figures of its 
own will; then the presence of the soul is forgotten, and hid under the grosser 
creations of the mind. 


80. The Volitive faculty of the Supreme Spirit, is denominated the mind; 
but it is unmindedness and want of volition on our part, which produces our 
liberation. (i.e., Our submission to the Divine Will, sets us free from all 
liability, as it is said in the Common prayer: — “Let thy will (and not mine) 
be done’). 


81. Such is the origin of the mind which is the root of creation; it is the 
faculty of the volition of the principle of our consciousness, otherwise called 
the soul. (The mind is the volitive faculty of the Spirit, see 80). 


82. The intellectual essence being defiled by its desires, after falling from 
its state of indifference, becomes the principle of production or producing the 
desired objects. (This is called the mind or the creative power, and is 
represented as the first male or the agent of procreation). 


83. The mind becomes extinct, by loss of the vital power; as the shadow of 
a thing disappears, by removal of the substance. (This passage establishes the 
extinction of the mind, with all its passions, feelings, and thoughts upon the 


death of a man). 


84. The living body perceives in its heart, the notion of a distant place 
which exists in the mind, and this proves the identity of the vital breath and 
the thinking mind. (Again, the communication of the passions and feelings 
between the heart and mind, proves them to be the same thing). (Hence the 
word, antah-karana, or inward sense, is applied both to the heart as well as 
mind). 


85. It is, therefore, by repressing the mind, that the vital breath is also 
repressed, to produce longevity and healthiness. (It is done by the following 
methods, viz; by dispassionateness, suppression of breathing, by Yoga 
meditation, and by cessation from bodily labour in the pursuit of worldly 
objects). 


86. The stone has the capability of mobility, and the fuel of inflammability; 
but the vital breath and mind, have not their powers of vibration or thinking 
(without the force of the intellect and the spirit). 


87. The breath of life is inert by itself, and its pulsation is the effect and 
composed of the surrounding air; so the action of the mind, is owing to the 
force of the intellect; whose pellucidity pervades all nature. 


88. It is the union of the intellectual and vibrating powers, which is thought 
to constitute the mind. Its production is as false, as the falsity of its 
knowledge. (All mental phenomena are erroneous). 


89. The mental power is called error and illusion also, and these in 
ignorance of the Supreme Brahma, produce the knowledge of this poisonous 
world (which springs from illusion of the mind). 


90. The powers of the intellect and vibration, combined with those of 
imagination and volition which constitute the mind, are productive of all 
worldly evils, unless they are weakened and kept under restraint. 


91. When the intellect thinks on or has the perception by the pulsation 
caused by the air, the wind of breath gives pulsation to the intellect, and 
causes its power of intellection; and this intellectual power gives rise to all the 
thoughts and desires of the mind. 


92. The percussive intellect which extends over the undivided sphere of the 
universe, is verily the thinking power, the mind is a false imagination like the 
ghost of infants. 


93. The intellect is the power of intellection, which cannot be intercepted 
by anything else, like the mind anywhere; as there is no power to rise in 
contest against the almighty Indra. (The Intellect or chit being the Divine 
mind). 


94. Thus there being no relation between intellection and the mind, it is 
wrong to attribute the mind with the power of thinking, which is not related 
with it. 


95. How can this union of the intellect with its vibration only, be styled the 
mind with its multifarious functions. The commander alone cannot be called 
an army without its component parts of horse, elephants, and others. 


96. Hence there is no such thing as a good or bad mind in any of the three 
worlds, (when there is no mind at all). The bias of its existence will be utterly 
removed by full knowledge of spirituality, (tatwajnana). (That there is but one 
Spirit only). 


97. It is in vain and to no purpose, that they imagine the being of the mind. 
It is proved to be an unreality and having no substantiality of its own. 


98. Therefore, O magnanimous Rama! never give rise to false imaginations 
of any kind, and particularly that of the mind which never exists anywhere. 


99. False phantasies rise as the mirage, from want of a full knowledge of 
things; they spring in the heart which is as barren as a desert, for want of the 
rain of full knowledge. 


100. The mind is a dead thing owing to its want of a form or activity, and 
yet it is a wonder as it is idolized in the circles of common people. 


101. It is a wonder that the mind, having no soul nor essence, nor a body 
nor size or support of its own, should spread its net over all ignorant minds. 


102. One who falls a victim to his unarmed and impotent mind, likens a 
man who says, he is hurt in his body by the falling of a lotus-flower upon it. 


103. The man that is undone by his inert, dumb, and blinded mind, (that 
neither sees nor seizes nor talks to him), is as one who complains of his being 
burnt by the cool full-moon-beams. 


104. People are verily killed by an antagonist, who is present before them; 
but it is a wonder that the ignorant are foiled by the inexistent mind of their 
own making. 


105. What is the power of that thing, which is a creation of mere fancy, and 
an unreal presentation of ignorance; and which being sought after, is nowhere 
to be found. 


106. It is a great wonder, that men should be overcome by their impotent 
minds, dealing in their delusions only. 


107. It is ignorance that is ever exposed to dangers, and the ignorant are 
always the victims of error. Know the unreal world to be the creation of 
ignorance and of the ignorant only. 


108. Oh! the misery of miseries, that the ignorant make of this creation of 
their ignorance to themselves, and that they fabricate a living soul for their 
sufferings only. (A separate living soul, jivatmd, is denied in Vedanta). 


109. I weet this frail world to be a creation of the false imagination of the 
ignorant, and this earth to be as fragile as to be broken and borne away by the 
waves of the ocean. 


110. It is like the dark collyrium, which is broken down by the surrounding 
waters or seas, serving as its grinding mill; and yet men are maddened with it, 
as those struck by moon-beams. (Moonstruck lunatics). 


111. The visible world disappears at the sight of reason, as a man flies from 
the sight of his foe; and the train of imaginary creations fly before it, like hosts 
of demons vanquished by the gods. 


112. Thus is this world, which is a false creation of fancy, and exists 
nowhere except in the idle brains of the ignorant, lost into nothing at the sight 
of reason. 


113. He who is not able to govern his mind, and efface the thoughts of this 
false world, arising in the minds of the ignorant only, is not worthy of being 
advised in the abstruse doctrines of spirituality. 


114. Those who are confirmed in their belief of the visibles, and are self- 
sufficient in their knowledge of these, are unable to grasp the subtle science of 
abstract philosophy, and are, therefore, unfit to receive spiritual instruction. 


115. These men are insensible of the soft tunes of the lute who are 
accustomed to the loud beatings of drum, and they are startled at seeing the 
face of a sleeping friend, (i.e., their hidden soul). 


116. They who fly with fear from the loud songs (preachings) of false 
preachers, cannot have the patience to listen to the silent lesson of their 


inward monitor; and they who are deluded by their own minds, can hardly be 
reclaimed by any other. 


117. Those who are tempted to taste the gall of worldly pleasures for sweet, 
are so subdued by its effects on their understandings, that they lose the power 
of discerning the truth altogether; and it is, therefore, useless to remonstrate 
with them. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
ASCERTAINMENT OF THE THINKING 
PRINCIPLE. 


Argument. People unworthy of persuasion, their transmigrations, and 
purification of the mind. 


Vasishtha said: — These multitudes of men, that are carried away by the 
waves of the torrents of the sea of worldly pursuits; are deaf and dumb to the 
admonitions of their spiritual instructors. 


2. They are not fit to derive the benefit of the spiritual knowledge, which I 
have propounded in this yogasdstra by my rational discourses. 


3. They who are born blind and can see nothing, are not to be presented 
with the picture of a garden, portrayed with blooming blossoms and beautiful 
flowers by the intelligent artist. 


4. There is no such fool that would present fragrant odours to one, whose 
nostrils are snorting under some nasal disease, (pinasa. Polypus), nor so great 
a dolt, that would consult an ignorant man on spiritual matters. 


5. What lack-wit is there, that would refer a question on law or religious 
subjects, to one of ungoverned passions and organs of sense, or whose 
eyeballs are rolling with the intoxication of wine. 


6. Who asks of the dead the way he should go, or one in the grave about the 
concourse in the city; and what witless man is there that resorts to an idiot to 
clear his doubts. 


7. Of what good is it to advise a witling, whose serpentine mind is coiling 
and creeping in the cave of his heart; and though it lies there in silence and 
sightless, is yet ungovernably wild? 


8. Know there is no such a thing as a well governed mind, for though you 


may fling it at a distance from you, yet it is never lost or annihilated. (The 
unsubdued mind recurs to us in repeated births). 


9. The simpleton who does not bear his sway over his false and delusive 
mind, is tormented to death by its venomous smart, as if stung by a deadly 
reptile. 


10. The learned know the vital powers, and the operations of the organs of 
action, to depend on the action and force of the soul; say then, O Rama, what 
is that thing which they call the mind. (The three functions of motion, thought, 
and organic action, being conducted by force of the vital breath, it is in vain to 
suppose the existence of the mind). 


11. The vital breath gives the force for bodily actions, and the soul 
produces the power of knowledge; the organs act by their own force, and the 
supreme spirit is the main source of all. 


12. All forces are but parts of the omnipotence of the supreme Spirit; their 
different appellations are but inventions of men. 


13. What is it that they call the living soul, and which has blindfolded the 
world; and what they term as the mind, is really an unreality and without any 
power of its own. 


14. Rama! I have seen the continued misery arising from their false 
conception of the unreal mind; and my pity for them has caused my incessant 
sorrow. 


15. But why should I sorrow for the ignorant rabble, who bring their woe 
by their own error? The common herd is born to their misery like beasts and 
brutes. 


16. The ignorant rabble are born in their dull material bodies, for their 
destruction only. They are born to die away incessantly, like the waves of the 
ocean. 


17. What pity shall I take for them, that are seen every day to perish under 
the jaws of death, like numbers of animals immolated in the shambles. 


18. For whom shall I sorrow, when I see billions and trillions of gnats and 
moths, are destroyed day by day, by gusts of wind (which is their element and 


support). 


19. Whom shall I sorrow for, when I observe on every side the millions of 
deer and beasts of chase, that are killed every day in the hills and forests, by 


their hunters and sportsmen. 


20. Whom shall I feel for, when I find innumerable shoals of small fishes, 
that are devoured every day in the waters, by the bigger ones! 


21. I see an infinite number of animalcules, to be eaten up by flies and fleas; 
which in their turn, are devoured by the voracious spiders and scorpions. 


22. The frog feeds on flies, and is on its turn devoured by snakes. The birds 
of prey swallow the snake, and the weasel preys upon them. 


23. The weasel is killed by the cat, which is killed again by the dog; the 
bear destroys the dog, and is at last destroyed by the tiger. (Glave: — 
One animal is food to another.) 


24. The lion overcomes the tiger, and is overcome on its turn by the 
sarabha, (a fabulous beast with eight feet). The sarabha is overthrown by its 
fall on rocky steeps, in its attempt to jump over the gathering clouds. 


25. The clouds are worsted by tempests, and these again are obstructed by 
the rising rocks and mountains. The mountains are split by thunder claps, and 
the thunderbolts of heaven are broken by the thundering Sakra, (Jove). 


26. This Sakra or Indra is vanquished by Upendra or Vishnu (his younger 
brother), and Vishnu is made to undergo his incarnations in the shapes of men 
and beasts. He is subjected to the vicissitudes of pain and pleasure, and to the 
conditions of disease, decay, and death. (Change is the order of nature.) 


27. Big-bodied beasts are fed upon by the leeches and fleas that stick to 
their bodies to suck their blood; and men fraught with knowledge and armed 
with weapons, are infested by their bloodsucking bugs and gnats. 


28. Thus the whole host of living bodies, are continually exposed to feed 
upon and to be fed by one another, with remorseless voracity. 


29. There is an incessant growth of leaches, fleas and ants, other small 
insects and worms on the one hand; and a continued dissolution of both the 
big and puny bodies in every place on earth. 


30. The womb of the waters, bears the breed of fishes, whales, 
hippopotami, and other aquatic animals; and the bowels of the earth, produce 
the multitudes of worms and reptiles to infinity. 


31. The air teems with the brood of birds of various kinds, and the woods 
abound with wild beasts, and lions and tigers, the fleet deer, and other brutes. 


32. There are inborn worms growing in the intestines, and upon the skin of 
animal bodies; and parasitical insects and animalcules, feeding upon the bark 
and leaves of trees. 


33. Insects are seen to be born in the crusts of stones, as frogs, vajrakitas, 
and others; and many kinds of worms and insects, are found to grow in and 
subsist upon the faeces and excrements of animals. 


34. In this manner an endless number of living beings, are being born and 
perishing for ever and ever; and it is of no avail to them, whether kind hearted 
men are joyous or sorrowful at their births and deaths. 


35. The wise can have no cause for their joy or grief, in this continued 
course of incessant births and deaths of the living world. 


36. Such is the nature of all the different series of animal beings, that they 
incessantly grow to fall off like the leaves of trees. (These are known as the 
ephemerids and the heirs and poor pensioners of a day). 


37. The kind-hearted man, who wishes to remove the sorrows of the 
ignorant by his advice, attempts an impossibility, as that of shrouding the all- 
pervasive sunshine, by means of his umbrella. 


38. It is useless to give advice to the ignorant, who are no better than beasts 
in their understandings; as it is fruitless to talk to a rock or block of wood or 
stone in the wilderness. 


39. The dull-headed ignorant, who are no better than beasts, are dragged by 
their willful minds, like the cattle by their halters. 


40. It would make even the stones to melt into tears, to see the ignorant 
plunged in the slough of their perverted minds, and employed in acts and rites 
for their own ruin. (The ruin of their souls caused by ritualistic observances.) 


41. Men of ungoverned minds, are always exposed to dangers and 
difficulties; but the expurgated minds of the wise, are free from the evils and 
mishaps of life. 


42. Now Rama, consider well the miseries of ungoverned minds; and 
betake yourself to the knowledge of the knowable One. (i.e., The One alone 
that is worthy of being known). 


43. Never entertain in your imagination the vain bugbear of a mind, which 
has no real existence of its own; and beware of this false belief, which may 
betray you like the ideal ghost of children. 


44. As long as you are forgetful of the soul, you must remain in utter 
ignorance; and so long will you continue to be tortured by the dragon, residing 
in the recess of your heart. 


45. Now you have known the whole truth, as I have expounded to you; that 
it is your imagination only, that presents you with the idea of your mind, of 
which you must get rid forever. 


46. If you rely in the visibles, you are subject to the delusion of your mind; 
but no sooner, you shun your reliance in them, than you are liberated from 
your illusion of it. 


47. The visible world is a combination, of the three qualities of satva, rajas, 
and tamas; and it is exposed before you, by your maya or illusion only, as a 
snare is spread for entanglement of beasts. 


48. Think of the inexistence both of the subjective-self and the objective 
world; and remain as firm as a fixed rock on earth, and behold the Lord only, 
in the form of infinite space in thy heart. (This is Vasishtha’s Vacuism). 


49. Shun, Rama, the false thoughts of thy self-existence, and that of the 
visible world also; and forsake thy belief in the duality, in order to settle 
thyself in the infinite unity. 


50. Continue to meditate on the soul, as it is situated between the subjective 
viewer, and the objective view of this world; and as it is existent in thy vision, 
which lies between the two. (i.e., Between yourself and the visible object, 
which is empty space). 


51. Forsake the ideas of the subject and object of your taste, (i.e., of the 
taster and tastable); and thinking on their intermediate state of gustation or 
tasting, be one with the soul. 


52. Rama, place yourself in the position of your thought or power of 
thinking, which lieth betwixt the thinker and thinkables; support your soul on 
the supportless soul of all, and remain steady in your meditation. 


53. Forsake the cares of the world, and be exempt from the thoughts of 
existence and non-existence; meditate on the universal soul and be settled 
with thy soul in that soul. 


54. When you have learnt to think on the thinkable one, by relinquishing 
the thought of your own existence, you shall then arrive to that state of the 
unconsciousness, which is free from misery (or the state of supreme bliss). 


55. Know your thoughts to be your fetters, and your self-consciousness as 
your binding chain; therefore, O Rama! loosen the lion of your soul, from the 
prison house of your mind. 


56. By departing from the state of the Supreme Soul, and falling to the 
thoughts of the mind, you will be crowded by your imaginations, and see only 
the objects of your thought all about you. 


57. The Knowledge, that intellection or thinking power is distinct from the 
soul, introduces the existence of the unhappy mind, which must be got rid of 
for the sake of true happiness. (by knowing them as the one and same thing). 


58. When you become conscious of the Supreme soul in you, and as 
permeated throughout all nature, you will then find the thinker and his 
thinking, the thinkables and their thoughts, vanish into nothing. 


59. The thought that, “I have a soul and a living soul also,” brings on us all 
the miseries to which we are exposed to all eternity. (i.e., consciousness of a 
personal entity, causes the woes which personality is ever liable to). 


60. The consciousness that, “I am the one soul, and not a living being or 
distinct existences;” (because all things distinct from the universal soul are 
nothing at all), is called the tranquility of the spirit and its true felicity. 


61. When you are certain, O Rama! that the world is the universal soul 
itself, you will find the false distinctions of your mind and living soul, to be 
nothing in reality. 


62. When you come to perceive that all this is your very self, your mind 
will then melt away into the soul, as the darkness dissolved in the sunlight, 
and the shadow disappears in the air. 


63. As long as you cherish the snake of your mind within yourself, you are 
in danger of catching its poison; but this being removed by your Yoga 
meditation, you escape the danger at once. 


64. Be bold, O Rama! to destroy the mighty demon of the deep-rooted error 
of your mind, by the power of incantation, (mantras), of your perfect 
knowledge. 


65. Upon disappearance of the demon of the mind from the dwelling of 
your body, as when a Yaksha disappears in the air, you will be free from every 
disease, danger, care, and fear. 


66. Dispassionateness, and disinterestedness, joined with the knowledge of 


unity, melt down the substance of the mind, and confer the best and highest 
state of felicity and rest in the Supreme spirit; and bring on that state of 
tranquility which is the main aim of everybody. May all these blessings attend 
upon you. 


CHAPTER. XV. 
ON AVARICE. 


Argument. Description of avarice as the Root of all Evils. 


Vasishtha continued: — The soul by following the unholy essence of the 
mind, which is the source of the world, is led to fall into the snare, which is 
laid by it for all living beings. 


2. The soul then loses the brightness of its spiritual form, and takes the 
gross shape of the senses; it waits upon the guidance of the mind, and 
indulges in its impure imaginations. 


3. It falls into avarice, which like a poisonous plant makes it senseless, and 
spreads a fearful anesthesia over it. 


4. Avarice, like a dark night, hides the soul under the gloom of oblivion, 
and produces endless pangs to the soul. 


5. The god Siva withstood the flame of the Kalpa conflagration, but nobody 
can withstand the fierce fire of avarice. 


6. It bears a form as formidable as that of a long, sharp, and sable dagger; 
which is cold in appearance, but very injurious in her effects. 


7. Avarice is an evergreen plant, bearing bunches of plenteous fruits on 
high; which when they are obtained and tasted, prove to be bitter and galling. 


8. Avarice is a voracious wolf, prowling in the recess of the heart; and 
feeding unseen on the flesh and blood and bones of its sheltering body. 


9. Avarice is as a rainy stream, full of foul and muddy water now 


overflowing and breaking down its banks, and then leaving empty its dirty 
bed. 


10. The man stricken with avarice, remains niggardly and broken-hearted at 
all times; his spirits are damped, and his sordid soul is debased before 
mankind. He is now dejected, and now he weeps and lays himself down in 
despair. 


11. He who has not this black adder of greediness, burrowing in the recess 
of his heart, has the free play of his vital breath, which is otherwise poisoned 
by the breath of the viper rankling in his breast. 


12. The heart which is not darkened by the gloomy night of greediness, 
feels the rays of humanity sparkling in it, like the glancing of the bright moon- 
beams. 


13. The heart that is not eaten up by the corroding cares of avarice, is as an 
uncankered tree, blooming with its blossoms of piety. 


14. The current of avarice, is ever running amidst the wilderness of human 
desires, with ceaseless torrents and billows, and hideous whirlpools and 
vortices around. 


15. The thread of avarice, like the long line of a flying kite or tossing top, 
whirls and furls and pulls mankind, as its toys and playthings. 


16. The rude, rough, and hard-hearted avarice, breaks and cuts down the 
tender roots of virtues, with the remorseless axe of its hardihood. 


17. Foolish men led by avarice, fall into the hell-pit, like the ignorant deer 
into the blackhole; by being enticed by the blades of grass, scattered upon its 
covering top. 


18. Men are not so much blinded by their aged and decayed eyesight, as 
they are blinded by the invisible avarice seated in their hearts. 


19. The heart which is nestled by the ominous owl of avarice, is as 
bemeaned as the god Vishnu, who became a dwarf in begging a bit of ground 
from Bali. 


20. There is a divine power, which hath implanted this insatiable avarice in 
the heart of man, which whirls him about, as if tied by a rope, like the sun 
revolving round its centre in the sky. 


21. Fly from this avarice, which is as heinous as the venomous snake. It is 


the source of all evils, and even of death in this mortal world. 


22. Avarice blows on men as the wind, and it is avarice that makes them sit 
still as stones; avarice makes some as sedate as the earth, and avarice ransacks 
the three worlds in its rapid course. 


23. All this concourse of men, is impelled to and fro by avarice, as if they 
are pulled by ropes; it is easy to break the band of ropes, but not the bond of 
avarice. (There is a play of words here, as that of band, bond, and bondage). 


24. Then, Rama, get rid of avarice by forsaking your desires; because it is 
ascertained by the wise, that the mind dies away by want of its desires (to 
dwell upon). 


25. Never observe the distinctions of my, thy, and his, in all thy wishes, but 
wish for the good of all alike; and never foster any bad desire (which is foul in 
its nature). 


26. The thought of self in what is not the self, is the parent of all our woe; 
when you cease to think the not-self as the self you are then reckoned among 
the wise. 


27. Cut off your egoism, O gentle Rama! and dwell in thy unearthly self by 
forgetting yourself, and by dispelling your fear from all created being. (Here 
is an alliteration of the letter bh, ©, in the last line, as ¥, 84, ©). 


CHAPTER XVI. 
HEALING OF AVARICE. 


Argument. The way to forsake the desires, and become liberated in this life 
and the next. 


Rama said: — It is too deep for me Sir, to understand what you say to me, for 
the abandonment of my egoism and avarice. 


2. For how is it possible, Sir, to forsake my egoism, without forsaking this 
body and everything that bears relation to it? 


3. It is egoism which is the chief support of the body, as a post or prop is 
the support of a thatched house. 


4. The body will surely perish without its egoism, and will be cut short of 
its durability, as a tree is felled by application of the saw to its root. 


5. Now tell me, O most eloquent Sir, how I may live by forsaking my 
egoism (which is myself); give me your answer, according to your right 
judgment. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — O lotus-eyed and respectful Rama! abandonment 
of desires, is said to be of two kinds by the wise, who are well acquainted with 
the subject; the one is called the jneya or knowable and the other is what they 
style the thinkable, (or dhyeya). 


7. The knowledge that I am the life of my body and its powers, and these 
are the supports of my life, and that I am something. 


8. But this internal conviction being weighed well by the light of reason, 
will prove that neither am I related with the external body, nor does it bear 
any relation with my internal soul. 


9. Therefore, the performance of one’s duties, with calmness and coolness 
of his understanding, and without any desire of fruition, is called the 


abandonment of desire in thought. 


10. But the understanding which views things in an equal light, and by 
forsaking its desires, relinquishes the body without taking any concern for it, 
and is called the knowing abandonment of desires. (i.e., Of which the Yogi has 
full knowledge). 


11. He who foregoes with ease the desires arising from his egoism, is styled 
the thinking abjurer of his desires, and is liberated in his life time. 


12. He who is calm and even-minded, by his abandonment of vain and 
imaginary desires; is a knowing deserter of his desires, and is liberated also in 
this world. 


13. Those who abandon the desires in their thought, and remain with 
listless indifference to everything, are like those who are liberated in their life 
time. 


14. They are also called the liberated, who have had their composure, 
(insouciance), after abandonment of their desires, and who rest in the 
Supreme Spirit, with their souls disentangled from their bodies. (This is called 
the disembodied liberation, facw& We). 


15. Both these sorts of renunciation are alike entitled to liberation, both of 
them are extricated from pain; and both lead the liberated souls to the state of 
Brahma. 


16. The mind, whether engaged in acts or disengaged from them, rests in 
the pure spirit of God, by forsaking its desires. (There is this difference only 
between them, that the one has an active body, while the other is without its 
activity). 


17. The former kind of Yogi is liberated in his embodied state, and freed 
from pain throughout his life time; but the latter that has obtained his 
liberation in his bodiless state after his demise, remains quite unconscious of 
his desires. (The liberated soul is freed from desire after death. Their desires 
being dead with themselves, they have nothing to desire). 


18. He who feels no joy nor sorrow at the good or evil, which befalls to 
him in his life time, as it is the course of nature, is called the living liberated 
man. 


19. He who neither desires nor dreads the casualties of good or evil, which 
are incidental to human life, but remains quiet regardless of them as in his 


dead sleep, is known as the truly liberated man. 


20. He whose mind is freed from the thoughts, of what is desirable or 
undesirable to him, and from his differentiation of mine, thine and his, (i.e., of 
himself from others), is called the truly liberated. 


21. He whose mind is not subject to the access of joy and grief, of hope and 
fear, of anger, boast and niggardliness, is said to have his liberation. 


22. He whose feelings are all obtundent within himself as in his sleep, and 
whose mind enjoys its felicity like the beams of the full moon, is said to be 
the liberated man in this world. 


23. Valmiki says: — After the sage had said so far, the day departed to its 
evening service with the setting sun. The assembled audience retired to their 
evening ablutions, and repaired again to the assembly with the rising sun on 
the next day. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
ON THE EXTIRPATION OF AVARICE. 


Argument. Liberation of Embodied or Living Beings. 


Vasishtha said: — It is difficult, O Rama! to describe in words the 
inexplicable nature of the liberation of disembodied souls; hear me therefore 
relate to you further about the liberation of living beings. 


2. The desire of doing one’s duties without expectation of their reward, is 
also called the living liberation, and the doers of their respective duties, are 
said to be the living liberated. 


3. The dependance of beings on their desires, and their strong attachment to 
external objects, are called to be their bondage and fetters in this world, by the 
doctors in divinity. 


4. But the desire of conducting one’s self according to the course of events, 
and without any expectation of fruition, constitutes also the liberation of the 
living; and is concomitant with the body only, (without vitiating the inner 
soul). 


5. The desire of enjoying the external objects, is verily the bondage of the 
soul; but its indifference to worldly enjoyments, is what constitutes one’s 
freedom in his living state. 


6. Want of greediness and anxiety prior to and on account of some gain, 
and absence of mirth and change in one’s disposition afterwards, (i.e., after 
the gain); is the true freedom of men. 


7. Know, O high-minded Rama! that desire to be the greatest bondage of 
men, which is in eager expectation of the possession of anything. (Lit.: that 
such things may be mine). 


8. He who is devoid of desire of everything, whether existent or inexistent 


in the world; is the truly great man, with the greatest magnanimity of his soul. 


9. Therefore, Rama! forsake the thoughts both of thy bondage and 
liberation, and also of thy happiness and misery; and by getting rid of thy 
desire of the real and unreal, remain as calm as the undisturbed ocean. 


10. Think thyself, O most intelligent Rama! to be devoid of death and 
decay, and do not stain thy mind with the fears of thy disease or death 
(because thy soul is free from them). 


11. These substances are nothing, nor are you any of these things that you 
see; there is something beyond these, and know that you are that very thing 
(which is the soul or a spiritual being). 


12. The phenomenon of the world is an unreality, and everything here is 
unreal, that appears real in thy sight; knowing then thyself to be beyond all 
these, what earthly thing is there that thou canst crave for? 


13. All reasoning men, O Rama! consider themselves in some one of these 
four different lights in their minds, which I shall now explain to you in brief. 


14. He who considers his whole body (from his head to foot), as the 
progeny of his parents, (i.e., devoid of his spiritual part), is surely born to the 
bondage of the world. (This is the first kind). 


15. But they who are certain of their immaterial soul, which is finer than 
the point of a hair, are another class of men; who are called the wise and are 
born for their liberation. (This is the second). 


16. There is a third class of men, who consider themselves as same with the 
universal soul of the world; such men O support of Raghu’s race, are also 
entitled to their liberation. (These belong to the third kind.) 


17. There is again a fourth class, who consider themselves and the whole 
world to be as inane as the empty air (or vacuum); these are surely the 
partakers of liberation. 


18. Of these four kinds of beliefs, the first is the leader to bondage; while 
the three others growing from purity of thought, lead to the path of liberation. 


19. Among these, the first is subject to the bondage of avarice; but the other 
three proceeding from pure desire, are crowned with liberation. 


20. Those of the third kind, who consider themselves same with the 
universal soul, are in my opinion never subject to sorrow or pain. 


21. The magnitude of the Supreme spirit, extends over and below and about 
all existence; hence the belief of, “all in One, or One in all,” never holds a 
man in bondage. 


22. The fourth kind, — vacuists (or stinyavddis), who believe in the 
vacuum, and maintain the principles of nature or illusion, are in ignorance of 
divine knowledge, which represents God as Siva, Isha, male, and eternal soul. 


23. He is all and everlasting, without a second or another like him; and he 
is pervaded by his omniscience, and not by the ignorance called mdyd or 
illusion. 


24. The spirit of God fills the universe, as the water of the ocean fills the 
deep, (pdtdla); and stretches from the highest heaven, (empyrean), to the 
lowest abyss of the infernal regions. 


25. Hence it is his reality only which is ever existent, and no unreal world 
exists at any time. It is the liquid water which fills the sea, and not the 
swelling wave which rises in it. 


26. As the bracelets and armlets are no other than gold, so the varieties of 
trees and herbs, are not distinct from the Universal Spirit. 


27. It is the one and same omnipotence of the Supreme spirit, that displays 
the different forms in its works of the creation. 


28. Never be joyous nor sorry for anything belonging to thee or another, 
nor feel thyself delighted or dejected at any gain or loss, that thou mayest 
happen to incur. (For know everything to be the Lord’s and nothing as thine 
own. Or: — “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away.” — Job). 


29. Be of an even disposition, and rely on thy essence as one with the 
Supreme soul. Attend to thy multifarious duties, and thus be observant of 
unity in thy spiritual concerns, and dualities in thy temporal affairs. 


30. Take care of falling into the hidden holes of this world, in your pursuit 
after the varieties of objects; and be not like an elephant falling into a hidden 
pit in the forest. 


31. O Rama of great soul! There cannot be a duality, as it is thought in the 
mind; nor, O Rama of enlightened soul, can there be any unity or duality of 
the soul. The true essence is ever existent without its unity or duality, and is 
styled the all and nothing particular, and as itself, — Svarupa or suiform. (The 
soul is not unity, because one is the prime number of all others by addition 


with itself; nor is it a duality, having no second or another like it. It is the 
indefinite all or whole, and no definite that this or so says the Sruti: TAM 


asaya +e Aled fort 1) 


32. There is no ego or thy subjective-self, nor the objective worlds that thou 
seest. All this is the manifestation of the eternal and imperishable 
omniscience, and know this world as neither an entity nor non-entity by itself. 


33. Know the Supreme being to be without beginning and end, the 
enlightener of all lights, the undecaying, unborn and incomprehensible one. 
He is without part, and any change in him. He is beyond imagination and all 
the imaginary objects all about us. 


34. Know for certain in thy mind, that the Lord is always present in the full 
light of thy intellect. He is the root of thy consciousness, and is of the nature 
of thy inward soul. He is conceivable in the intellect, and is the Brahma, — 
the all and everlasting, and the all-pervading, the subjective I, and the 
objective thou and this world. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
LIVING LIBERATION OR TRUE FELICITY OF 
MAN IN THIS LIFE. 


Argument. The True Enfranchisement of the Soul, in the Living state of 
man in this world. 


Vasishtha continued: — I will now relate to you, O Rama! the nature of those 
great men, who conduct themselves in this world, with their desires under 
their subjection, and whose minds are not blemished by evil inclinations. 


2. The sage whose mind is freed in his life-time, conducts himself 
unconcerned in this world; he smiles secure at its occurrences, and is 
regardless of the first, last, and middle stages of his life, (namely: the pains of 
his birth and death, and the whole course of his life). 


3. He is attentive to his present business, and unmindful of every other 
object about him; he is devoid of cares and desires, and his thought is of his 
internal cogitations only. 


4. He is free from anxiety in all places, who tolerates whatever he happens 
to meet with; he sees the light of reason in his soul, and walks in the romantic 
groves of his musings. 


5. He rests in that transcendental bliss, with prospects as bright as the 
cooling beams of the full-moon, who is neither elated nor depressed in any 
state of his life, nor droops down under any circumstance. 


6. Whose generosity and manliness do not forsake him, even when he is 
beset by his bitterest enemies; and who is observant of his duties to his 
superiors, such a man is not crest-fallen in this world. 


7. Who neither rejoices nor laments at his lot, nor envies nor hankers after 
the fortune of another; but pursues his own business in quiet silence, is the 


man that is never down-cast in this world. 


8. Who, when asked, says what he is doing, but unasked remains as a dead 
block; and is freed from desire and disgust; he is never depressed in his heart 
and mind. (The Urdu poet expresses this sort of unconcern, more beautifully, 
when he says: — Should one ask you of aught, look to his face and reply him 
not. Koi kuch’h puchhe to munh dekh kar chup rahjana, etc. And who so 
understands the hearts of men, is never sick at his heart). 


9. He speaks agreeably to everyone, and utters gently what he is required to 
say; he is never put out of countenance, who understands the intentions of 
others. (Speaking agreeably or his questioners means what pleases everybody, 
be it good or bad for him as it is said in Chdnakya’s excerpta: Aco Fad 
frargard, 7 gald AcsHfwas. Because says Bharavi: ‘It is rare to have a useful 
saying, which is delectable also at the same time.’ fed FAletagettaaa). 


10. He sees the right and wrong dealings of men, and the acts of the 
depraved desires of their minds; but knowing all human affairs as clearly as in 
a mirror in his hand, he holds his peace with everyone. 


11. Standing on his firm footing (of nonchalance), and knowing the frailty 
of worldly things, he smiles at the vicissitudes of nature with the cold frigidity 
(sang froid) of his heart, (like the laughing philosopher). 


12. Such is the nature, Rama, of the great souls, who have subdued their 
minds, and know the course of nature, as I have described to you. 


13. I am unable to describe to you, the fond beliefs of the minds of the 
ignorant populace, who are plunged in the mud of their sensual enjoyments 
(like earthly worms). (Who are of ungoverned minds). 


14. Women, devoid of understanding, and graced with their personal 
charms, are the idols of these people; who are fond of their golden forms, 
without knowing them to be the flames of hell fire. 


15. Wealth, the fond object of the foolish people, is fraught with every ill 
and evil desire; its pleasure is poison and productive of misery, and its 
prosperity is replete with dangers. 


16. Its use in the doing of meritorious deeds, and various acts of piety, is 
also fraught with a great many evils, which I have not the power to recount. 
(The works of merit being productive of pride and passions, and those of piety 
being the source of transmigration). 


17. Therefore, Rama! keep your sight on the full view (clairvoyance) of 
your spirit, by retracting it from the external visibles and internal thoughts; 
and conduct yourself in this world as one liberated in his life-time. 


18. Being free from all your inward passions and feelings of affection, and 
having given up all your desires and expectations; continue in the 
performance of your outward duties in this world. 


19. Follow all your duties in life with a noble pliability of your disposition; 
but preserve the philosophic renunciation of everything in your mind, and 
conduct yourself accordingly in this world. 


20. Think well on the fleeting states of all earthly things, and fix your mind 
in the lasting nature of your soul; and thus conduct yourself in this transitory 
stage, with the thoughts of eternity in your mind. 


21. Conduct yourself, Rama, with your inward indifference and want of all 
desire; but show your outward desire for whatever is good and great. Be cold 
blooded within yourself but full of ardour in your external demeanour. 


22. Conduct yourself among men, O Rama! with a feigned activity in your 
outward appearance, but with real inaction in your mind; show yourself as the 
doer of your deeds, but know in your mind to be no actor at all. 


23. Conduct yourself such, O Rama! with your full knowledge of this 
world, as if you are acquainted with the natures of all beings herein; and go 
wherever you please with your intimate acquaintance of everything there. 


24. Demean yourself with mankind, with a feigned appearance of joy and 
grief, and of condolence and congratulation with others, and an assumed 
shape of activity and action among mankind. 


25. Manage yourself, O Rama! with full possession of your mind, and 
untinged by pride and vanity, as if it were as clear as the spotless sky. 


26. Go on through your life unshackled by the bonds of desire, and join in 
all the outward acts of life, with an unaltered evenness of your mind under 
every circumstance. 


27. Do not give room to the thoughts of your bondage or liberation in this 
world, nor of the embodiment or release of your soul here; but think the 
revolving worlds to be a magic scene, and preserve perfect tranquility of your 
mind. 


28. Know all this as an illusion, and it is ignorance only, that presents the 


false appearance of the world to sight; and yet we take them for true, as you 
view the water in the burning beams of the sun in a desert. 


29. The unobstructed, uniform, and all-pervading soul, can have no 
restriction or bondage; and what is unrestricted in itself, cannot have its 
release also. 


30. It is want of true knowledge, that presents the false view of the world 
before us; but the knowledge of truth disperses the view; as the knowledge of 
the rope, dispels the fallacy of the snake in it. 


31. You have known the true essence of your being by your right 
discernment, (that it is He, — the Sat); you are thereby freed from the sense of 
your personality, and are set free as the subtle air. 


32. You have known the truth, and must give up your knowledge of 
untruth, together with the thoughts of your friends and relatives, all which are 
unreal in their natures. 


33. Such being the case, you must consider yourself, (your soul), as 
something other than those, and that you have received the same, from the 
Supreme source of all. 


34. This soul bears no relation to your friends or possession, to your good 
or evil actions, or to anything whatever in this world; why then should you 
think of or be sorry for anything at all? 


35. When you are convinced that this very soul constitutes your essence; 
you have nothing to fear from the erroneous conception of the world, which is 
no more than a misconception. 


36. You can have no concern, with the weal or woe of a friend or foe, who 
is not born so to you; for every one being born for himself, you have no cause 
of joy or grief for anybody (whether he is friendly or not to you). 


37. If thou knowest that thou hadst been before (creation), and shalt be so 
forever afterwards (to eternity); you are truly wise. 


38. Shouldst thou feel so much for the friends, by whom thou art beset in 
this life; why dost thou then not mourn for them, that are dead and gone in thy 
present and past lives? 


39. If thou wert something otherwise than what thou art at present, and 
shalt have to be something different from what now thou art, why then 
shouldst thou sorrow for what has not its self-identity? (7.e., the body which is 


changed in all its transmigrations). 


40. If thou art to be born no more, after thy past and present births, (i.e., if 
there be no further transmigration of thy soul), then thou hast no cause for 
sorrow, being extinct thyself in the Supreme Spirit. 


41. Therefore, there is no cause of sorrow, in aught that occurs according to 
the course of nature; but rather be joyous in pursuing the duties of thy present 
life (for want of thy knowledge of thy past and future states). 


42. But do not indulge the excess of thy joy or grief, but preserve thy 
equanimity everywhere; by knowing the Supreme Spirit to pervade in all 
places. 


43. Know thyself to be the form of the infinite spirit, and stretching wide 
like the extended vacuum; and that thou art the pure eternal light, and the 
focus of full effulgence. 


44. Know thy eternal and invisible soul, to be distinct from all worldly 
substances; and to be a particle of that universal soul, which dwells in and 
stretches through the hearts of all bodies; and is like the unseen thread, 
running through the holes and connecting the links of a necklace, (or like the 
string in the beads of a rosary). (This connecting soul is denominated the 
Sutrdtmd, which fills, bounds, connects and equals all). 


45. That the continuation of the world, is caused by the reproduction of 
what has been before, is what you learn from the unlearned; and not so from 
the learned (who know the world to be nothing). Know this and not that, and 
be happy in this life. 


46. The course of the world and this life, is ever tending to decay and 
disease. It is ignorance that represents them to be progressing to perfection. 
But you who are intelligent, knowest their real natures (of frailty and 
unreality). 


47. What else can be the nature of error but falsehood, and what may the 
state of sleep be, but dream and drowsiness? (So is this world a mistaken 
existence, and this life a mere dream of unreal appearance, which so vividly 
shines before you). 


48. Whom do you call your good friend, and whom do you say your great 
enemy? They all belong to the Sole One, and proceed alike from the Divine 
will. 


49. Everything is frail and fickle, and has its rise and fall from and into the 
Supreme Spirit; it likens the wave of the sea, rising and falling from and into 
the same water. 


50. The worlds are rolling upward and going down again, like the axis and 
spokes of a wheel. (The rotations of the planets in their circuits above and 
below the sun). 


51. The celestials sometimes fall into hell, and the infernals are sometimes 
raised to heaven; animals of one kind are regenerated in another form, and the 
people of one continent and island are reborn in another (as men are led from 
one country and climate to another, and settle there). 


52. The opulent are reduced to indigence, and the indigent are raised to 
affluence; and all beings are seen to be rising and falling in a hundred ways. 


53. Who has seen the wheel of fortune, to move on slowly in one straight 
forward course forever, and not tumbling in its ups and downs, nor turning to 
this side and that in its winding and uneven route. Fixedness of fortune is a 
fiction, as that of finding the frost in fire. 


54. Those that are called great fortunes, and their components and 
appendages as also many good friends and relations; are all seen to fly away 
in a few days of this transient life. 


55. The thought of something as one’s own and another’s, and of this and 
that as mine, thine, his or others’, are as false as the appearance of double suns 
and moons in the sky. 


56. That this is a friend and this other a foe, and that this is myself and that 
one is another, are all but false conceptions of your mind, and must be wiped 
off from it (since the whole is but the one Ego). 


57. Make it thy pleasure, however, to mix with the blinded populace, and 
those that are lost to reason; and deal with them in thy usual unaltered way. 
(Mix with the thoughtless mob, but think with the thoughtful wise. So says 
Sadi: — I learnt morals from the immoral, adabaz bedabanamokhtam). 


58. Conduct thyself in such a manner in thy journey through this world, 
that thou mayst not sink under the burden of thy cares of it. 


59. When thou comest to thy reason, to lay down thy earthly cares and 
desires, then shalt thou have that composure of thy mind, which will 
exonerate thee from all thy duties and dealings in life. 


60. It is the part of low-minded men, to reckon one as a friend and another 
as no friend; but noble-minded men do not observe such distinctions between 
man and man. (Lit. Their minds are not clouded by the mist of distinction). 


61. There is nothing wherein I am not (or where there is not the Ego); and 
nothing which is not mine, (ie., beyond the Ego: the learned who have 
considered it well, make no difference of persons in their minds). 


62. The intellects of the wise, are as clear as the spacious firmament, and 
there is no rising nor setting of their intellectual light, which views everything 
as serenely as in the serenity of the atmosphere and as plainly as the plain 
surface of the earth. 


63. Know Rama! all created beings, are friendly and useful to you, and 
there is no body nor any in the world, wherewith you are not related in some 
way on your part. (Nobody is a unit himself, but forms a part of the universal 
whole). 


64. It is erroneous to look on any one as a friend or foe, among the various 
orders of created beings in the universe; which in reality may be serviceable 
to you, however unfriendly they may appear at first. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
ON HOLY KNOWLEDGE. 


Argument. Story of Punya and Pavana, and the instruction of the former to 
the latter. 


Vasishtha continued: — I will now set before you an example on the subject 
(of the distinction of friend and foe), in the instance of two brothers, who were 
born of a sage on the banks of Ganges, going in three directions of tripatha or 
trisrot as trivia. 


2. Hear then this holy and wonderful tale of antiquity, which now occurs to 
my mind on the subject of friends and enemies, which I have been relating to 
you. 


3. There is in this continent of Jambudvipa, (Asia), a mountainous region 
beset by groves and forests, with the high mount of Mahendra rising above the 
rest. 


4. It touched the sky with its lofty peaks, and the arbour of its kalpa trees; 
spread its shadow over the hermits and kinnaras that resorted under its bower. 


5. It resounded with the carol of the sages, who chaunted the Samaveda 
hymns on it, in their passage from its caverns and peaks to the region of Indra 
(the god of the vault of heaven). 


6. The fleecy clouds which incessantly drizzled with rain water from its 
thousand peaks; and washed the plants and flowers below, appeared as tufts of 
hair hanging down from heaven to earth. 


7. The mountain re-echoed to the loud roars of the impetuous octopede 
Sarabhas, with the thunder claps of kalpa clouds from the hollow mouths of 
its dark and deep clouds. (So Himalaya is said to warble to the tunes of 
Kinnaras from its cavern mounts). 


8. The thundering noise of its cascades falling into its caverns from 
precipice to precipice, has put to blush the loud roar of the Surges of the sea. 


9. There on tableland upon the craggy top of the mountain, flowed the 
sacred stream of the heavenly Ganges, for the ablution and beverage of the 
hermits. 


10. There on the banks of the trivious river, — tripatha, — Ganga, was a 
gemming mountain, sparkling as bright gold, and decorated with blossoming 
trees. 


11. There lived a sage by name of Dirghatapas, who was a personification 
of devotion, and a man of enlightened understanding; he had a noble mind, 
and was inured in austerities of devotion. 


12. This sage was blessed with two boys as beautiful as the full moon, and 
named Punya and Pavana, (the meritorious and holy), who were as intelligent 
as the sons of Brihaspati, known by the names of the two Kachas. 


13. He lived there on the bank of the river, and amidst a grove of fruit trees, 
with his wife and the two sons born of them. 


14. In course of time the two boys arrived to their age of discretion, and the 
elder of them named Punya or meritorious, was superior to the other in all his 
merits. 


15. The younger boy named Pavana or the holy, was half awakened in his 
intellect, like the half-blown lotus at the dawn of the day; and his want of 
intelligence kept him from the knowledge of truth, and in the uncertainty of 
his faith. 


16. Then in the course of the all-destroying time, the sage came to complete 
a century of years, and his tall body and long life, were reduced in their 
strength by his age and infirmity. 


17. Being thus reduced by decrepitude in his vitality, he bade adieu to his 
desires in this world, which was so frail and full of a hundred fearful accidents 
to human life, (namely, the pains attending upon birth, old age and death, and 
the fears of future transmigration and falling into hell fire). 


18. The old devotee, Dirghatapas, quitted at last his mortal frame in the 
grotto of the mount; as a bird quits its old nest forever, or as a water-bearer 
lays down the log of his burthen from his shoulders. 


19. His spirit then fled like the fragrance of a flower to that vacuous space, 


which is ever tranquil, free from attributes and thought, and is of the nature of 
the pure intellect. 


20. The wife of the sage finding his body lying lifeless on the ground, fell 
down upon it, and remained motionless like a lotus flower nipt from its stalk. 


21. Having been long accustomed to the practice of Yoga, according to the 
instruction of her husband; she quitted her undecayed body, as a bee flits from 
an unfaded flower to the empty air. 


22. Her soul followed her husband’s, unseen by men, as the light of the 
stars disappears in the air at the dawn of the day. 


23. Seeing the demise of both parents, the elder son Punya was busily 
employed in performing their funeral services; but the younger Pavana was 
deeply absorbed in grief at their loss. 


24. Being overwhelmed by sorrow in his mind, he wandered about in the 
woods; and not having the firmness of his elder brother, he continued to wail 
in his mourning. 


25. The magnanimous Punya performed the funeral ceremonies of his 
parents, and then went in search of his brother mourning in the woods. 


26. Punya said: — Why my boy, is thy soul overcast by the cloud of thy 
grief; and why dost thou shed the tears from thy lotus-eyes, as profusely as the 
showers of the rain, only to render thee blind. 


27. Know my intelligent boy, that both thy father and mother, have gone to 
their ultimate blissful state in the Supreme Spirit, called the state of salvation 
or liberation. 


28. That is the last resort of all living beings, and that is the blessed state of 
all self-subdued souls; why then mourn for them, that have returned to and are 
reunited with their own proper nature. 


29. Thou dost in vain indulge thyself in thy false and fruitless grief, and 
mournest for what is not to be mourned for at all: (rather rejoice at it owing to 
their ultimate liberation). 


30. Neither is she thy mother nor he thy father; nor art thou the only son of 
them, that have had numerous offspring in their repeated births. 


31. Thou hadst also thousands of fathers and mothers in thy by-gone births, 
in as much as there are the streams of running waters in every forest. 


32. Thou art not the only son of them, that had innumerable sons before 
thee; for the generations of men, have passed away like the currents of a 
running stream. 


33. Our parents also had numberless offspring in their past lives, and the 
branches of human generation are as numerous, as the innumerable fruits and 
flowers on trees. 


34. The numbers of our friends and relatives in our repeated lives in this 
world, have been as great, as the innumerable fruits and flowers of a large 
tree, in all its passed seasons. 


35. If we are to lament over the loss of our parents and children, that are 
dead and gone; then why not lament also for those, that we have lost and left 
behind in all our past lives? 


36. It is all but a delusion, O my fortunate boy, that is presented before us 
in this illusive world; while in truth, O my sensible child, we have nobody, 
whom we may call to be our real friends or positive enemies in this world. 


37. There is no loss of anybody or thing in their true sense in the world; but 
they appear to exist and disappear, like the appearance of water in the dry 
desert. 


38. The royal dignity that thou seest here, adorned with the stately umbrella 
and flapping fans; is but a dream lasting for a few days. 


39. Consider these phenomena in their true light, and thou wilt find my 
boy, that none of these nor ourselves nor any one of us, are to last forever; 
shun, therefore, thy error of the passing world from thy mind forever. 


40. That these are dead and gone, and these are existent before us, are but 
errors of our minds, and creatures of our false notions and fond desires, and 
without any reality in them. 


41. Our notions and desires, paint and present these various changes before 
our sight; as the solar rays represent the water in the mirage. So our fancies 
working in the field of our ignorance, produce the erroneous conceptions, 
which roll on like currents in the eventful ocean of the world, with the waves 
of favorable and unfavorable events to us. 


CHAPTER Xx. 
REMONSTRATION OF PAVANA. 


Argument. Punya’s relation of his various transmigrations and their woes to 
Pavana. 


Punya said: — Who is our father and who our mother, and who are our 
friends and relatives, except our notion of them as such; and these again are as 
the dust raised by the gusts of our airy fancy? 


2. The conceptions of friends and foes, of our sons and relations are the 
products of our affection and hatred to them; and these being the effects of our 
ignorance, are soon made to disappear into airy nothing, upon enlightenment 
of the understanding. 


3. The thought of one as a friend, makes him a friend, and thinking one as 
an enemy makes him an enemy; the knowledge of a thing as honey and of 
another as poison, is owing to our opinion of it. 


4. There being but one universal soul equally pervading the whole, there 
can be no reason of the conception of one as a friend and of another as an 
enemy. 


5. Think my boy in thy mind what thou art, and what is that thing which 
makes thy identity, when thy body is but a composition of bones, ribs, flesh 
and blood, and not thyself. 


6. Being viewed in its true light, there is nothing as myself or thyself; it is a 
fallacy of our understanding, that makes me think myself as Punya and thee as 
Pavana. 


7. Who is thy father and who thy son, who thy mother and who thy friend? 
One Supreme-self pervades all infinity, whom callest thou the self, and whom 
the not self, (i.e., thine and not thine). 


8. If thou art a spiritual substance, (Jinga sarira), and hast undergone many 
births, then thou hadst many friends and properties in thy past lives, why dost 
not think of them also? 


9. Thou hadst many friends in the flowery plains, where thou hadst thy 
pasture in thy former form of a stag; why thinkest not of those deer, who were 
once thy dear companions? 


10. Why dost thou not lament for thy lost companions of swans, in the 
pleasant pool of lotuses, where thou didst dive and swim about in the form of 
a gander? 


11. Why not lament for thy fellow arbors in the woodlands, where thou 
once stoodest as a stately tree among them? 


12. Thou hadst thy comrades of lions on the rugged craigs of mountains, 
why dost not lament for them also? 


13. Thou hadst many of thy mates among the fishes, in the limpid lakes 
decked with lotuses; why not lament for thy separation from them? 


14. Thou hadst been in the country of Dasarna, (confluence of the ten 
rivers), as a monkey in the grey and green woods; a prince hadst thou been in 
land of frost; and a raven in the woods of Pundra. 


15. Thou hadst been an elephant in the land of Haihayas, and an ass in that 
of Trigarta; thou hadst become a dog in the country of Salya, and a bird in the 
wood of sarala or sdl trees. 


16. Thou hadst been a pipal tree on the Vindhyan mountains, and a wood 
insect in a large oak (bata) tree; thou hadst been a cock on the Mandara 
mountain, and then born as a Brahman in one of its caverns (the abode of 
Rishis). 


17. Thou wast a Brahman in Kosala, and a partridge in Bengal; a horse 
hadst thou been in the snowy land, and a beast in the sacred ground of Brahma 
at Pushkara, (Pokhra). 


18. Thou hadst been an insect in the trunk of a palm tree, a gnat in a big 
tree, and a crane in the woods of Vindhya, that art now my younger brother. 


19. Thou hadst been an ant for six months, and lain within the thin bark of 
a bhugpetera tree in a glen of the Himalayan hills, that art now born as my 
younger brother. 


20. Thou hadst been a millepede in a dunghill at a distant village; where 
thou didst dwell for a year and half, that art now become my younger brother. 


21. Thou wast once the youngling of a Pulinda, (a hill tribe woman), and 
didst dwell on her dugs like the honey sucking bee on the pericarp of a lotus. 
The same art thou now my younger brother. 


22. In this manner my boy, wast thou born in many other shapes, and hadst 
to wander all about the Jambudvipa, for myriads of years: And now art thou 
my younger brother. 


23. Thus I see the post states of thy existence, caused by the antecedent 
desires of thy soul; I see all this by my nice discernment, and my clear and all- 
viewing sight. 


24. I also remember the several births that I had to undergo in my state of 
(spiritual) ignorance, and then as I see clearly before my enlightened sight. 


25. I also was a parrot in the land of Trigarta, and a frog at the beach of a 
river; I became a small bird in a forest, and was then born in these woods. 


26. Having been a Pulinda huntsman in Vindhya, and then as a tree in 
Bengal, and afterwards a camel in the Vindhya range, I am at last born in this 
forest. 


27. I who had been a chdtaka bird in the Himalayas, and a prince in the 
Paundra province; and then as a mighty tiger in the forests of the sahya hill, 
am now become your elder brother. 


28. He that had been a vulture for ten years, and a shark for five months 
and a lion for a full century; is now thy elder brother in this place. 


29. I was a chakora wood in the village of Andhara, and a ruler in the 
snowy regions; and then as the proud son of a priest named Sailacharya in a 
hilly tract. 


30. I remember the various customs and pursuits of different peoples on 
earth, that I had to observe and follow in my repeated transmigrations among 
them. 


31. In these several migrations, I had many fathers and mothers, and many 
more of my brothers and sisters, as also friends and relatives to hundreds and 
thousands. 


32. For whom shall I lament and whom forget among this number; shall I 


wail for them only that I lose in this life? But these also are to be buried in 
oblivion like the rest, and such is the course of the world. 


33. Numberless fathers have gone by, and unnumbered mothers also have 
passed and died away; so innumerable generations of men have perished and 
disappeared, like the falling off of withered leaves. 


34. There are no bounds, my boy, of our pleasures and pains in this 
sublunary world; lay them all aside, and let us remain unmindful of all 
existence (whether past, present, or future)! 


35. Forsake thy thoughts of false appearances, and relinquish thy firm 
conviction of thy own egoism, and look to that ultimate course which has led 
the learned to their final beatitude. 


36. What is this commotion of the people for, but a struggling for rising or 
falling (to heaven or hell); strive, therefore, for neither, but live regardless of 
both like indifferent philosopher (and permit thyself to heaven). 


37. Live free from thy cares of existence and inexistence, and then thou 
shalt be freed from thy fears of decay and death. Remember unruffled thyself 
alone, and be not moved by any from thy self-possession by the accidents to 
life like the ignorant. 


38. Know thou hast no birth nor death, nor weal or woe of any kind, nor a 
father or mother, nor friend nor foe anywhere. Thou art only thy pure spirit, 
and nothing of an unspiritual nature. 


39. The world is a stage presenting many acts and scenes; and they only 
play their parts well, who are excited neither by its passions and feelings. 


40. Those that are indifferent in their views, have their quietude amidst all 
the occurrences of life; and those that have known the True One, remain only 
to witness the course of nature. 


41. The knowers of God do their acts, without thinking themselves their 
actors; just as the lamps of night witness the objects around, without their 
consciousness of the same. 


42. The wise witness the objects as they are reflected in the mirror of their 
minds, just as the looking glass and gems receive the images of things. 


43. Now my boy, rub out all thy wishes and the vestiges of thy 
remembrance from thy mind, and view the image of the serene spirit of God 
in thy inmost soul. Learn to live like the great sages with the sight of thy 


spiritual light, and by effacing all false impressions from thy mind. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
REPRESSION OF DESIRES BY MEANS OF 
YOGA-MEDITATION. 


Argument. Desires are the shackles of the soul, and release from them 
leading to its liberation. 


Vasishtha continued: — Pavana being admonished by Punya in the said 
manner, became as enlightened in his intellect, as the landscape at the dawn of 
day. 


2. They continued henceforward to abide in that forest, with the perfection 
of their spiritual knowledge, and they wandered about in the woods to their 
hearts content. 


3. After a long time they had both their extinction, and rested in their 
disembodied state of nirvana; as the oilless lamp wastes away of itself. 


4. Thus is the end of the great boast of men, of having large trains and 
numberless friends in their embodied states of lifetime, of which, alas! they 
carry nothing with them to their afterlife, nor leave anything behind, which 
they can properly call as theirs. 


5. The best means of our release from the multifarious objects of our desire, 
is the utter suppression of our appetites, rather than the fostering of them. 


6. It is the hankering after objects, that augment our appetite, as our 
thinking on something increases our thoughts about it. Just so as the fire is 
emblazoned by supply of the fuel, and extinguished by its want. 


7. Now rise, O Rama! and remain aloft as in thy aerial car, by getting loose 
of your worldly desires; and looking pitifully on the miseries of grovelling 
mortals from above. 


8. This is the divine state known as the position of Brahma, which looks 


from above with unconcerned serenity upon all. By gaining this state, the 
ignorant also are freed from misery. 


9. One walking with reason as his companion, and having his good 
understanding for his consort, is not liable to fall into the dangerous trap- 
doors, which lie hid in his way through life. 


10. Being bereft of all properties, and destitute of friends, one has no other 
help to lift him up in his adversity, beside his own patience and reliance in 
God. 


11. Let men elevate their minds with learning and dispassionateness, and 
with the virtues of self-dignity and valour, in order to rise over the difficulties 
of the world. 


12. There is no greater good to be derived by any other means, than by the 
greatness of mind. It gives a security which no wealth nor earthly treasure can 
confer on men. 


13. It is only men of weak and crazy minds, that are often made to swing to 
and fro, and to rise and sink up and below, in the tempestuous ocean of the 
world. 


14. The mind that is fraught with knowledge, and is full with the light of 
truth in it, finds the world filled with ambrosial water, and moves over it as 
easily, as a man walking on his dry shoes, or on a ground spread over with 
leather. 


15. It is the want of desire, that fills the mind more than the fulfilment of its 
desires; dry up the channel of desire, as the autumnal heat parches a pool. 


16. Else it empties the heart (by sucking up the heart blood), and lays open 
its gaps to be filled by air. The hearts of the avaricious are as dry as the bed of 
the dead sea, which was sucked up (drained), by Agasti (son of the sage 
Agastya). 


17. The spacious garden of human heart, doth so long flourish with the 
fruits of humanity and greatness, as the restless ape of avarice does not infest 
its fair trees. (The mental powers are the trees, and the virtues are the fruits 
and flowers thereof). 


18. The mind that is devoid of avarice, views the triple world with the 
twinkling of an eye. The comprehensive mind views all space and time as a 
minim, in comparison to its conception of the infinite Brahma with itself. 


19. There is that coolness (sangfroid) in the mind of the unavaricious man, 
as is not to be found in the watery luminary of the moon; nor in the icy 
caverns of the snow-capt Himalayas. And neither the coldness of the plantain 
juice nor sandal paste, is comparable with the cool-headedness of 
inappetency. 


20. The undesirous mind shines more brightly, than the disk of the full 
moon, and the bright countenance of the goddess of prosperity, (Lakshmi). 


21. The urchin of appetence darkens the mind in the same manner, as a 
cloud covers the disk of the moon, and as ink-black obliterates a fair picture. 


22. The arbour of desire stretches its branches, far and wide on every side, 
and darkens the space of the mind with their gloomy shadow. 


23. The branching tree of desire being cut down by its root, the plant of 
patience which was stinted under it, shoots forth in a hundred branches. 


24. When the unfading arbour of patience, takes the place of the uprooted 
desires, it produces the tree of paradise, yielding the fruits of immortality. 
(Patience reigns over the untransmuted ill). 


25. O well-intentioned Rama! if you do not allow the sprouts of your 
mental desires, to germinate in your bosom, you have then nothing to fear in 
this world. 


26. When you become sober-minded after moderating your heart’s desires, 
you will then have the plant of liberation growing in its full luxuriance in your 
heart. 


27. When the rapacious owl of your desire, nestles in your mind, it is sure 
you will be invaded by every evil, which the foreboding bird brings on its 
abode. 


28. Thinking is the power of the mind, and the thoughts dwell upon the 
objects of desire; abandon, therefore, thy thoughts and their objects, and be 
happy with thy thoughtlessness of everything. 


29. Anything that depends on any faculty, is lost also upon inaction of that 
faculty; therefore, it is by suppression of your thinking (or thoughts), that you 
can put down your desires, and thereby have rest and peace of your mind. 


30. Be free minded, O Rama! by tearing off all its worldly ties, and become 
a great soul by suppressing your mean desires of earthly frailties: for who is 
there that is not set free, by being loosened from the fetters of desire, that bind 


his mind to this earth. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
NARRATIVE OF VIROCHANA. 


Argument. Account of King Bali and his Kingdom, and the Infernal 
Regions; His Resignation of the World, and Rambles over the Sumeru 
mountains. 


Vasishtha said: — O Rama! that art the bright moon of Raghu’s race, you 
should also follow the example of Bali, in acquiring wisdom by self- 
discernment. (Bali the Daitya king and founder of Maha Bali Pura, called 
Mavalipura in Deccan, and in Southey’s poem on its Ruins). 


2. Rama said: — Venerable Sir, that art acquainted with all natures, it is by 
thy favour that I have gained in my heart all that is worth gaining; and that is 
our final rest in the purest state of infinite bliss. 


3. O Sir, it is by your favor, that my mind is freed from the great delusion 
of my multifarious desires; as the sky is cleared of the massy clouds of the 
rainy weather in autumn. 


4. My soul is at rest and as cold as a stone; it is filled with the ambrosial 
draught of Divine knowledge and its holy light; I find myself to rest in perfect 
bliss, and as illumined as the queen of the stars, rising in her full light in the 
evening. 


5. O thou dispeller of my doubts, and resemblest the clear autumnal sky, 
that clears the clouds of the rainy season! I am never full and satiate with all 
thy holy teachings to me. 


6. Relate to me Sir! for the advancement of my knowledge, how Bali came 
to know the transcendental truth. Explain it fully unto me, as holy saints 
reserve nothing from their suppliant pupils. 


7. Vasishtha replied: — Attend Rama! to the interesting narrative of Bali, 
and your attentive hearing of it, will give you the knowledge of the endless 


and everlasting truth and immutable verities. 


8. There is in the womb of this earth, and in some particular part of it, a 
place called the infernal region, which is situated below this earth. (The Infra 
or Pdtdla means the antipodes and is full of water). 


9. It is peopled by the milk white Naiades or marine goddesses, born in the 
milky ocean-sweet water, and of the race of demons, who filled every gap and 
chasm of it with their progeny. (The subterranean cells, were peopled by the 
earth-born Titans). 


10. In some places it was peopled by huge serpents, with a hundred and 
thousand heads; which hissed loudly with their parted and forky tongues, and 
their long projected fangs. 


11. In other places there were the mountainous bodies of demons, walking 
in their lofty strides, and seeming to fling above the balls of the worlds as their 
bonbons, in order to devour them. 


12. In another place there were big elephants, upholding the earth on their 
elevated probosces, and supporting the islands upon their strong and projected 
tusks. (These elephants were of the antediluvian world, whose fossiled 
remains are found under the ground). 


13. There were ghosts and devils in other places, making hideous shrieks 
and noise; and there were groups of hellish bodies, and putrid carcasses of 
ghostly shapes. 


14. The depth of the nether world concealed in its darksome womb, rich 
mines of gems and metals, lying under the surface of the earth, and reaching 
to the seventh layer of pdtdla or infernal regions. 


15. Another part of this place, was sanctified by the dust of the lotus-like 
feet of the divine Kapila, (Siva or Pluto); who was adored by the gods and 
demi-gods, by prostration of their exalted heads at his holy feet. 


16. Another part of it was presided by the god Siva, in his form of a golden 
phallus, (dinga); which was worshipped by the ladies of the demons, with 
abundant offerings and merry revelries. (Siva or Pluto, — the infernal god was 
fond of Bacchanals and revels). 


17. Bali the son of Virochana, reigned in this place as the king of demons, 
who supported the burden of his kingdom, on the pillars of their mighty arms. 


18. He forced the gods, Vidyadharas, serpents, and the king of the gods, to 


serve at his feet like his vassal train, and they were glad to serve him as their 
lord. 


19. He was protected by Hari, who contains the gemming worlds in the 
treasure of his bowels (brahmdnda, — bhdndodara), and is the preserver of 
all embodied beings, and the support of the sovereigns of the earth. 


20. His name struck terror in the heart of Airavata, and made his cheeks 
fade with fear; as the sound of a peacock petrifies the entrails of serpents 
(because the peacock is a serpivorous bird). 


21. The intense heat of his valour, dried up the waters of the septuple 
oceans of the earth; and turned them to seven dry beds, as under the fire of the 
universal Conflagration. 


22. But the smoke of his sacrificial fire, was an amulet to the people for 
supply of water; and it caused the rains to fall as profusely from above as the 
seas fallen below from the waters above. (This alludes to the dynamite which 
was ignorantly believed to be a talisman). 


23. His frowning look, made the high heads of mountains stoop low to the 
ground; and caused the lofty skies to lower with water, like the high branches 
of trees when overloaded with fruits. (It means, that the mountains and skies 
were obedient to his bidding). 


24. This mighty monarch reigned over the demons for myriads of years, 
after he had made an easy conquest of all the treasures and luxuries of the 
world. 


25. Thus he lived for many ages, which glided on like the course of a river 
rolling about like the waters of the whirlpool; and witnessed the incessant flux 
and reflux of the generations of gods, demons, and men of the three worlds. 


26. The king of the demons felt at last, a distaste to all the enjoyments of 
life, which he had tasted to surfeit; and he felt also an uneasiness amidst the 
variety of his pleasures. 


27. He retired to the farthest polar mount of Meru, and there sitting at the 
balcony of one of its gemming pinnacles, he reflected on the state of this 
world and the vanity of mortal life. 


28. How long yet, thought he in himself, shall I have to rule over this world 
with my indefatigable labour; and how much more must I remain to roam 
about the triple world, in my successive transmigrations? 


29. Of what use is it to me to have this unrivaled sovereignty, which is a 
wonder in the three worlds; and of what good is it to me, to enjoy this 
plenteous luxury, which is so charming to the senses? 


30. Of what permanent delight are all these pleasures to me, which are 
pleasant only for the present short time, and are sure to lose all their taste with 
my zest in them in the next moment? 


31. There is the same rotation of days and nights in unvarying succession, 
and the repetition of the same acts day after day. It is rather shameful and no 
way pleasant to any one, to continue in the same unvaried course of life for a 
great length of time. 


32. The same embraces of our beloved ones, and partaking of the same 
food day by day, are amusements fit for playful boys only, but are disgraceful 
and disgusting to great minds. 


33. What man of taste is there, that will not be disgusted to taste the same 
sweets over and over again, which he has tasted all along, and which have 
become vapid and tasteless today; and what sensible man can continue in the 
same course, without the feelings of shame and remorse? 


34. The revolving days and nights bring the same revolution of duties, and I 
ween this repetition of the same acts, — kritasya karanam, is as ridiculous to 
the wise, as the mastication of his grinded meat, — charbita charbana. 
(Kritasya karanam ndsti, mritasya maranam yathd. There is no doing of an 
act, which has been done? Nor the dying of a man, that’s already dead). 


35. The actions of men are as those of the waves, which rise to fall and then 
rise again to subside in the waters. (This rising and falling over and anon 
again, is to no purpose whatever). 


36. The repetition of the same act, is the employment of mad men; and the 
wise man is laughed at, who reiterates the same chime, as the conjugation of a 
verb by boys, in all its moods, tenses and inflexions. 


37. What action is that which being once completed, does not recur to us 
anymore, but crowns its actor with his full success all at once? (It is cessation 
from repetition of the same action, i.e., inaction). 


38. Or if this bustle of the world, were for a short duration only, yet what is 
the good that we can derive from our engaging in this commotion? 


39. The course of actions is as interminable, as the ceaseless repetends of 


boyish sports; it is hollow harping on the same string, which the more it is 
played upon, the more it reverberates to its hollow sound. (The acts of men 
make a renown and vain blustering sound only, and no real good to the actor). 


40. I see no such gain from any of our actions, which being once gained, 
may prevent our further exertions. (Action leads to action, but non-action is a 
leader to quiescence or naiskarma). 


41. What can our actions bring forth, beside the objects of sensible 
gratification? They cannot bring about anything that is imperishable. Saying 
so, Bali fell in a trance of his profound meditation. 


42. Coming then to himself, he said: — “Ah! I now come to remember, 
what I had heard from my father;” so saying, he stretched his eye-brows, and 
gave vent to what he thought in his mind. 


43. “I had formerly asked my father Virochana, who was versed in spiritual 
knowledge, and acquainted with the manners of the people of former and later 
ages.” 


44. Saying: — what is that ultimate state of being, where all our pains and 
pleasures cease to exist; and after the attainment of which, we have no more 
to wander about the world, or pass through repeated transmigrations. 


45. What is that final state towards which all our endeavours are directed, 
and where our minds are freed from their error; and where we obtain our full 
rest, after all our wanderings and transmigrations? 


46. What is that best of gains, which gives full satisfaction to the cravings 
of the soul; and what is that glorious object, whose sight transcends all other 
objects of vision? 


47. All those various luxuries and superfluities of the world, are no way 
conducive to our real happiness; in as much as they mislead the mind to error, 
and corrupt the souls of even the wisest of men. 


48. “Therefore, O father, show me that state of imperishable felicity, 
whereby I may attain to my everlasting repose and tranquility.” 


49. My father having heard these words of mine, as he was then sitting 
under the shade of the kalpa tree of paradise, whose flowers were fairer far 
than the bright beams of the nocturnal luminary, and overspread the ground 
all around; spoke to me in his sweet mellifluous accents the following speech, 
for the purpose of removing my error. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
SPEECH OF VIROCHANA ON SUBJECTION OF 
THE MIND. 


Argument. The soul and mind personified as a monarch and his minister. 


Virochana said: — There is an extensive country, my son, somewhere in this 
universe, with a spacious concavity therein, whose ample space is able to hold 
thousands of worlds and many more spheres in it. 


2. It is devoid of the wide oceans and seas and high mountains, as there are 
in this earth; and there are not such forests, rivers and lakes, nor holy places of 
pilgrimage, as you see here below. 


3. There is neither land nor sky, nor the heavenly orbs as on high; nor are 
there these suns and moons, nor the regents of the spheres, nor their 
inhabitants of gods and demons. 


4. There are no races of Yakshas and Rakshas, nor those tribes of plants and 
trees, woods or grass; nor the moving and immovable beings, as you see upon 
the earth. 


5. There is no water, no land, no fire nor air; nor are there the sides of the 
compass, nor the regions you call above and below. There is no light nor 
shadow, nor the peoples, nor the gods Hari, Indra and Siva, nor any of the 
inferior deities or demi-gods there. 


6. There is a great sovereign of that place, who is full of ineffable light. He 
is the creator and pervader of all, and is all in all, but quite quiescent in all 
places and things. 


7. He had elected a minister, who was clever in administration and brought 
about what was impossible to be done, and prevented all mishaps from 
coming to pass. 


8. He neither ate nor drank, nor did nor knew anything, beside minding and 
doing his master’s behests. In all other respects he was as inactive as a block 
of stone. 


9. He conducted every business for his master, who remained quite retired 
from all his business, with enjoyment of his rest and ease in his seclusion, 
leaving all his concerns to be managed by his minister. 


10. Bali said: — Tell me Sir, what place is that which is devoid of all 
population, and free from all disease and difficulty; who knows that place, and 
how can it be reached at by anybody. 


11. Who is that sovereign of sovran power, and who that minister of so 
great might; and who being quite apart from the world, are inseparably 
connected with it, and are invincible by our almighty demoniac power. (This 
monarch and master is the soul and his minister is the mind). 


12. Relate to me, O thou dread of the gods! this marvelous story of the 
great might of that minister, in order to remove the cloud of doubt from my 
mind, and also why he is unconquerable by us. 


13. Virochana replied: — Know, my son, this mighty minister to be 
irresistible by the gigantic force of the Asura giants, even though they were 
aided by millions of demons fighting on their side. 


14. He is invincible, my son, by the god of a thousand eyes, (Indra), and 
also by the gods of riches and death, (Kubera and Yama), who conquer all, 
and neither the immortals nor giants, can ever overpower him by their might. 


15. All weapons are defeated in their attempt to hurt him, and the swords 
and mallets, spears and bolts, disks and cudgels, that are hurled against him, 
are broken to pieces as upon their striking against a solid rock. 


16. He is unapproachable by missiles, and invulnerable by arms and 
weapons, and unseizable by the dexterity of warriors; and it is by his resistless 
might, that he has brought the gods and demi-gods under his subjection. 


17. It was he, (the proud mind), that defeated our forefathers, the mighty 
Hiranyas, (Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu), before they were destroyed by 
the great Vishnu; who felled the big Asuras, as a storm breaks down the 
sturdy and rocklike oaks. 


18. The gods Narayana and others, (who had been the instructors of men), 
were all foiled by him and confined in their cells of the wombs of their 


mothers (by an imprecation of the sage Bhrigu, who denounced them to 
become incarnate in human forms). 


19. It is by his favour that Kama, (Cupid), the god with his flower bow and 
five arrows, has been enabled to subdue and overcome the three worlds, and 
boasts of being their sole emperor. (Kdma called also Manoja, is the child of 
mana or mind, and Kandarpa for his boast of his triumph). 


20. The gods and demi-gods, the intelligent and the foolish, the deformed 
and the irascible, are all actuated by his influence. (Love is the leader to action 
according to Plato). 


21. The repeated wars between the gods and Asuras, are the sports of this 
minister (who deliberates in secret the destinies of all beings. The restless 
mind is continually at warfare). 


22. This minister is only manageable by its lord, — the silent soul, or else it 
is as dull as an immovable rock or restless as the wind. 


23. It is in the long run of its advancement in spiritual knowledge, that the 
soul feels a desire in itself to subdue its minister; who is otherwise 
ungovernable of its nature by lenient measures. (Govern your mind or it will 
govern you. The mind is best taught by whip). 


24. You are then said to be valiant, if you can conquer this greatest of the 
giants in the three worlds, who has been worrying all people out for their 
breath. (The mind longs for occupation). 


25. After the rising of the intellect, the world appears as a flower garden, 
and like the lake of blooming lotuses at sunrise; and its setting covers the 
world in darkness as at sunset, (i.e., in unconsciousness). 


26. It is only by the aid of this intellect of yours, and by removal of your 
ignorance, that you can subdue this minister, and be famed for your wisdom. 
(Good government of the mind, is more renowned than that of a realm). 


27. By subduing this minister, you become the subduer of the world, 
though you are no victor of it; and by your unsubjection of this, you can have 
no subjection over the world, though may be the master of it. 


28. Therefore, be diligent to overcome this minister, by your best and most 
ardent exertions, on account of effecting your perfect consummation, and 
securing your everlasting happiness. 


29. It is easy for him to overcome the triple world, and keep all its beings 


of gods and demons, and the bodies of Nagas and men, together with the races 
of Yakshas and Rakshas, and the tribes of serpents and Kinnaras, who has 
been able to subdue this minister by his superior might. (Govern yourself, and 
you govern all besides). 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
ON THE HEALING AND IMPROVEMENT OF 
THE MIND. 


Argument. Quelling of the misleading mind, and waiting upon the 
sovereign soul, with the perfection of Platonic Quietism. 


Bali said: — Tell me Sir, plainly, who is this minister of so great might, and 
by what expedients can so mighty a being be vanquished and brought under 
subjection. 


2. Virochana replied: — Though that minister, is invincible and stands 
above all in his great might; yet I will tell you the expedients, whereby he may 
be overcome by you or anyone else. 


3. Son! It is by employment of proper means that he may be easily brought 
under subjection, and by neglect of which he will have the upper hand of you 
like the snake poison, if it is not repelled in time by means of efficacious 
mantras and incantations. 


4. The ministerial mind being brought up like a boy in the right way he 
should go, leads the man to the presence of the sovran soul, as the rdja Yoga 
or royal service advances the servant before his king. 


5. The appearance of the master makes the minister disappear from sight; 
as the disappearance of the minister, brings one to the full view of his king. 


6. As long as one does not approach to the presence of his king, he cannot 
fail to serve the minister; and so long as he is employed in service of the 
minister, he cannot come to the sight of his king. 


7. The king being kept out of sight, the minister is seen to exercise his 
might; but the minister being kept out of view, the king alone appears in full 
view. 


8. Therefore, must we begin with the practice of both these exercises at 
once; namely, approaching by degrees to the sight of the king, and slighting 
gradually the authority of the minister. 


9. It must be by the exercise of your continued manly exertions and diligent 
application, that you employ yourself in both these practices, in order to arrive 
to the state of your well-being. 


10. When you are successful in your practice, you are sure to reach to that 
blissful country; and though you are a prince of the demons, you can have 
nothing to obstract your entrance into it. 


11. That is a place for the abode of the blessed, whose desires are at rest 
and whose doubts are dissipated, and whose hearts are filled with perpetual 
joy and calmness. 


12. Now hear me explain to you, my son, what that place is which I called a 
country. It is the seat of liberation, (moksha), and where there is an end of all 
our pains. 


13. The king of that place is the soul of divine essence, which transcends 
all other substances; and it is the mind which is appointed by that soul as its 
wise minister. 


14. The mind, which contains the ideal world in its bosom, exhibits its 
sensible form to the senses afterwards; as the clod of clay containing the 
mould of the pot, shows itself as the model of a pot to view; and the smoke 
having the pattern of the cloud in its essence, represents its shadowy forms in 
the sky. (The pattern of everything is engraven in the mind). 


15. Hence the mind being conquered, everything is subdued and brought 
under subjection; but the mind is invincible without adoption of proper means 
for its subjugation. 


16. Bali interrogated: — What are these means, Sir, which we are to adopt 
for quelling the mind; tell it plainly to me, that I may resort to the same, for 
this conquering invincible barrier of bliss. 


17. Virochana answered: — The means for subduing the mind, are the want 
of reliance and confidence on all external and sensible things, and absence of 
all desire for temporal possessions. 


18. This is the best expedient for removal of the great delusion of this 
world, and subduing the big elephant of the mind at once. 


19. This expedient is both very easy and practicable on one hand, as it is 
arduous and impracticable on the other. It is the constant habit of thinking so 
that makes it facile, but the want of such habitude renders it difficult. 


20. It is the gradual habit of renouncing our fondness for temporal objects, 
that shows itself in time in our resignation of the world; as continuous 
watering at the roots of plants, makes them grow to large trees afterwards. 


21. It is as hard to master anything even by the most cunning, without its 
proper cultivation for some time; as it is impossible to reap the harvest from 
an unsown and uncultivated field. 


22. So long are all embodied souls destined to rove about the wilderness of 
the world, as there is the want of resignation in their heart of all the sensible 
objects in nature. 


23. It is impossible without the habit of apathy, to have a distaste for 
sensible objects, as it is no way possible for an able-bodied man, to travel 
abroad by sitting motionless at home. 


24. The firm determination of abandoning the stays of life, and a habitual 
aversion to pleasures and enjoyments, make a man to advance to purity, as a 
plant grows in open air to its full height. 


25. There is no good to be derived on earth, without the exertion of one’s 
manliness, and man must give up his pleasure and the vexation of his spirit, in 
order to reap the fruit of his actions. 


26. People speak of a power as destiny here, which has neither any shape 
nor form of itself. It means whatever comes to pass, and is also called our lot 
or fatality. 


27. The word destiny is used also by mankind, to mean an accident over 
which they have no control, and to which they submit with passive obedience. 


28. They use the word destiny for repression of our joy and grief (at what is 
unavoidable); but destiny, however, fixed as fate, is overcome and set aside by 
means of manly exertions (in many instances). 


29. As the delusion of the mirage, is dispelled by the light of its true nature, 
so it is the exertion of manliness, which upsets destiny by effecting whatever 
it wishes to bring about. 


30. If we should seek to know the cause for the good or bad results of our 
actions, we must learn that they turn as well as the mind wishes to mould 


them to being. 


31. Whatever the mind desires and decrees, the same become the destiny; 
there is nothing destined (or distinctly to be known), as what we may call to 
be destined or undestined. 


32. It is the mind that does all this, and is the employer of destiny; it 
destines the destined acts of destiny. 


33. Life or the living soul is spread out in the hollow sphere of the world, 
like air in vacuum. The psychic fluid circulates through all space. 


(The psychic fluid extending throughout the universe, according to the 
theory of Stahl). 


34. Destiny is no reality, but a term invented to express the property of 
fixity, as the word rock is used to denote stability. Hence there is no fixed fate 
or destiny, as long as the mind retains its free will and activity. 


35. After the mind is set at rest, there remains the principle of the living 
soul (Jiva — zoo). This is called the purusha, or embodied spirit, which is the 
source of the energies of the body and mind. 


36. Whatever the living soul intends to do by means of its spiritual force, 
the same comes to take place and no other. (There being not even the 
influence of the mind to retard its action. So, my son, there is no other power 
in the world except that of spirit or spiritual force). 


37. Reliance on this spiritual power will uproot your dependance on bodily 
nutriments; and there is no hope of spiritual happiness, until there is a distaste 
towards temporal enjoyments. 


38. It is hard to attain to the dignity of the all-conquering self-sufficiency, 
as long as one has the dastardly spirit of his earthly cravings. 


39. As long as one is swinging in the cradle of worldly affairs, it is hard for 
him to find his rest in the bower of peaceful tranquility. 


40. It is hard for you to get rid of your serpentine (crooked) desires, without 
your continued practice of indifference to and unconcernedness with worldly 
affairs. 


41. Bali rejoined: — Tell me, O lord of demons! in what manner, 
indifference to worldly enjoyments, takes a deep root in the human heart; and 
produces the fruit of longevity of the embodied spirit on earth. (By longevity 


is meant the spiritual life of man, and his resting in the divine Spirit, by being 
freed from the accidents of mortal life). 


42. Virochana replied: — It is the sight of the inward spirit, which is 
productive of indifference to worldly things; as the growth of vines is 
productive of the grapes in autumn. 


43. It is the sight of the inward Spirit, which produces our internal 
unconcernedness with the world; as it is the glance of the rising sun, which 
infuses its lustre in the cup of the lotus. 


44. Therefore, sharpen your intellect, by the whetstone of right reasoning; 
and see the Supreme Spirit, by withdrawing your mind from worldly 
enjoyments. 


45. There are two modes of intellectual enjoyment, of which one consists 
of book learning, and the other is derived from attendance on the lectures of 
the preceptor, by those that are imperfect in their knowledge. (i.e., The one is 
theoretical for adepts and the other is practical for novices). 


46. Those who are a little advanced in learning, have the double advantage 
of their mental enjoyment, namely: their reflection of book learning and 
consultation with wise preceptors on practical points. (Hence the practice of 
Yoga requires a Yogi guide also). 


47. Those who are accomplished in learning, have also two parts of their 
duties to perform; namely, the profession of the Sdstras teaching them to 
others, and the practice of indifference for themselves. (But the last and lowest 
kind, only have to wait on the guru and reflect on what they hear from him). 


48. The soul being purified, the man is fitted for Spiritual learning; as it is 
the clean linen only which is fit to receive every good tincture upon it. 


49. The mind is to be trained by degrees, like a boy in the path of learning; 
namely by means of persuasion and good lectures, and then by teaching of the 
Sdstras, and lastly by discussion of their doctrines. 


50. After its perfection in learning and dispersion of all difficulties and 
doubts, the mind shines as a piece of pure crystal, and emits its lustre like the 
cooling moonbeams. 


51. It then sees by its consummate knowledge and clear understanding, in 
both the form of its God the Spirit, and the body which is the seat of its 
enjoyments on earth. 


52. It constantly sees the spirit before it, by means of its understanding and 
reason; which help it also to relinquish its desire for worldly objects and 
enjoyments. 


53. The sight of the Spirit produces the want of desires, and the absence of 
these shows the light of the spirit to its sight; therefore, they are related to 
each other like the wick and oil of the lamp, in producing the light, and 
dispelling the darkness of the night. 


54. After the loss of relish in worldly enjoyments, and the sight of the 
Supreme Spirit, the soul finds its perpetual rest in the essence of the Supreme 
Brahma. 


55. The living souls that place their happiness in worldly objects, can never 
have the taste of true felicity, unless they rely themselves wholly in the 
Supreme Spirit. 


56. It may be possible to derive some delight from acts of charity, 
sacrifices, and holy pilgrimage; but none of these can give the everlasting rest 
of the Spirit. 


57. No one feels a distaste for pleasure, unless he examines its nature and 
effects in himself; and nothing can teach the way of seeing the soul, unless the 
soul reflects on itself. 


58. Those things are of no good whatever, my boy, that may be had without 
one’s own exertion in gaining it; nor is there any true happiness, without the 
resignation of earthly enjoyments. 


59. The Supreme felicity of rest in the state of Brahma, is to be had 
nowhere in this wide world, either in this mundane sphere, or anywhere else 
beyond these spheres. 


60. Therefore, expect always how your soul may find its rest in the divine 
Spirit, by relying on the exertion of your manliness, and leaving aside your 
dependance on the eventualities of destiny. 


61. The wise man detests all worldly enjoyments as if they are the strong 
bolts or barriers at the door of bliss; and it is the settled aversion to earthly 
pleasures, that brings a man to his right reason. 


62. As the increasing gloominess of rainy clouds, is followed by the 
serenity of autumnal skies, so clear reasoning comes after detestation of 
enjoyments, which fly at the advance of reason. 


63. As the seas and the clouds of heaven, help one another by lending their 
waters in turn; so apathy to pleasures and right reasoning, tend to produce 
each other by turns. 


64. So disbelief in destiny, and engagement in manly exertion, are 
sequences of one another, as reciprocities of service are consequences of 
mutual friendship. 


65. It must be by the gnashing of your teeth, (i.e., by your firm resolve), 
that you should create a distaste even of those things, which you have 
acquired by legal means and conformably to the custom of your country. 


66. You must first acquire your wealth by means of your manly exertions, 
and then get good and clever men in your company by means of your wealth, 
(i.e., patronise the learned therewith, and improve your mind by their 
instructions). 


67. Association with the wise produces an aversion to the sensual 
enjoyments of life, by exciting the reasoning power, which gains for its 
reward an increase of knowledge and learning. 


68. These lead gradually to the acquirement of that state of consummation, 
which is concomitant with the utter renunciation of worldly objects. 


69. It is then by means of your reasoning that you attain to that Supreme 
State of perfection, in which you obtain your perfect rest and the holiness of 
your soul. 


70. You will then fall no more in the mud of your misconceptions; but as a 
pure essence, you will have no dependance on anything, but become as the 
venerable Siva yourself. 


71. Thus the steps of attaining consummation, are first of all the acquisition 
of wealth, according to the custom of the caste and country; and then its 
employment in the service of wise and learned men. Next follows your 
abandonment of the world, which is succeeded by your attainment of Spiritual 
knowledge, by the cultivation of your reasoning powers. 


CHAPTER XXvV. 
REFLECTIONS OF BALI. 


Argument. Rise of intellectual light in Bali’s mind, and his Reference to 
Sukra for Advice. 


Bali said: — In this manner did my sapient father advise me before on this 
subject, which I fortunately remember at the present moment for the 
enlightenment of my understanding. 


2. It is now that I feel my aversion to the enjoyments of life, and come to 
perceive by my good luck the bliss of tranquility, to liken the clear and 
cooling ambrosial drink of heavenly bliss. 


3. I am tired of all my possessions, and am weary of my continued 
accumulation of wealth, for the satisfaction of my endless desires. The live- 
long care of the family also has grown tiresome to me. 


4. But how charming is this peace and tranquility of my soul, which is quite 
even and all cool within itself. Here are all our pleasures and pains brought to 
meet upon the same level of equality and indifference. 


5. I am quite unconcerned with anything and am highly delighted with my 
indifference to all things; I am gladdened within myself as by the beams of the 
full-moon, and feel the orb of the full moon rising within myself. 


6. O! the trouble of acquiring riches, which is attended by the loud bustle of 
the world and agitation in the mind, and the heart burn and fatigue of the 
body; and is accompanied with incessant anxiety and affliction of the heart. 


7. The limbs and flesh of the body, are smashed by labour; and all bodily 
exercises that pleased me once, now appear to be the long and lost labours of 
my former ignorance. 


8. I have seen the sights of whatever was worth seeing, and enjoyed the 


enjoyments which knew no bounds; I have overcome all beings; but what is 
the good (that I have derived from all this)? 


9. There is only a reiteration of the very same things, that I had there, here 
and elsewhere; and I found nowhere now anything new, that I had not seen or 
known before. 


10. I am now sitting here in full possession of myself, by resigning 
everything and its thought from my mind; and thereby, I find that nothing 
whatever nor even its thought forms any component-part of myself. 


11. The best things in the heaven above, earth and in this infernal region, 
are reckoned to be their damsels, gems and jewels; but all these are destroyed 
and wasted sooner or later by the cruel hand of time. 


12. I have acted foolishly all this time, by waging a continuous struggle 
with the gods, for the sake of the trifle of worldly possessions. (The wars of 
the earth-born demons and the foreign deities are well known in the early 
history of the world). 


13. What is this phantom of the world, but a creation of the brain; what 
then is the harm of forsaking it forever in which great souls take no delight 
whatever? 


14. Alas! that I have spent such a large portion of my life-time, in pursuing 
after trifles in the ignorant giddiness of my mind. 


15. My fickle and fluctuating desires, have led me to do many acts of 
foolishness in this world of odds and trifles, which now fill me with remorse 
and regret. (Remembrance of the past, is fraught with regret). 


16. But it is in vain to be overwhelmed with the sad thoughts of the past, 
while I should use my manly exertions to improve the present. (The present 
time is in our hand, but who the past can recall, or the future command). 


17. It is by reflecting on the eternal cause of the endless infinity of souls in 
the soul, that one can attain his perfect felicity; as the gods got the ambrosia 
from the Milky ocean. (True bliss is to be derived from the blissful Deity). 


18. I must consult my preceptor Sukra, concerning the Ego and the soul and 
spiritual vision, of the soul of souls in order to expel my ignorance in these 
matters. 


19. I must refer these questions to the most venerable Sukra, who is always 
complacent to his favorites; and then it is possible that by his advice I shall be 


settled in the highest perfection of seeing the supreme spirit, in my spirit, 
because the words of the wise, are ever fraught with full meaning and are 
fruitful of the desired object. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
ADMONITION OF SUKRA TO BALI. 


Argument. Sukra’s appearance at the call of Bali; and his advice to him on 
the attainment of divine knowledge. 


Vasishtha said: — So saying, the mighty Bali closed his eyes, and thought 
upon the lotus-eyed Sukra, abiding in his heavenly abode. (Sukra the planet 
Venus represented as the preceptor of demons, as Vrihaspati the planet Jupiter 
is said to be the Spiritual guide of the deities). 


2. Sukra, who sat intently meditating on the all-pervading spirit of God, 
came to know in his mind, that he was remembered by his disciple Bali in his 
city. 


3. Then Sukra the son of Bhrigu, whose soul was united with the all- 
pervading infinite and omniscient spirit, descended with his heavenly body at 
the gemming window of Bali (decorated with glass doors). 


4. Bali knew the body of his guide by its lustre, as the lotus-flower 
perceives the rising sun by his dawning beams. 


5. He then honoured his guru or guide, by adoring his feet on a seat decked 
with gems, and with offering of manddra flowers upon him. 


6. As Sukra took his rest on the gemming seat from the labour of his 
journey, he was strewn over with offerings of gems on his body, and heaps of 
mandara flowers upon his head; after which Bali addressed him thus: — 


7. Venerable Sir, this illustrious presence of thy grace before me, 
emboldens me to address to thee, as the morning sun-beams send all mankind 
to their daily work. 


8. I have come to feel an aversion, Sir, to all kinds of worldly enjoyments, 
which are productive of the delusion of our souls; and want to know the truth 


relating to it, in order to dispel my ignorance of myself. 


9. Tell me, Sir, in short, what are these enjoyments good for, and how far 
they extend; and what am I, thou or these people in reality. (Extent of 
enjoyments, — bhoga, means their limitation and duration). 


10. Sukra answered: — I cannot tell you in length about it, as I have soon 
to repair to my place in the sky. Hear me, O monarch of demons, tell this 
much briefly to you at present. 


11. There is verily but the intellect in reality, and all this existence beside is 
verily the intellect and full of intellect: The mind is the intellect, and I, thou 
and these people are collectively the very intellect. (Gloss. — These sayings 
are based on the Srutis, namely: All these are but different aspects of the one 
intellect. Again: All things depend on the chit. Also: — This chit am I, thou 
and this Brahma and Indra and all others. There is no other looker or the 
subjective; or the hearer or objective beside the chit: and so forth). 


12. If you are wise, know you derive everything from this Chit, — the 
universal Intellect; or else all gifts of fortune are as useless to you as the 
offering of butter on ashes (which cannot consume it, or make a burnt offering 
of it to the gods). 


13. Taking the intellect as something thinkable or object of thought, is the 
snare of the mind; but the belief of its freeness or incomprehensibility, is what 
confers liberation to the soul. The incomprehensible intellect is verily the 
universal soul, which is the sum of all doctrines. (All faiths and doctrines tend 
to the belief of one unknowable God). 


14. Knowing this for certain, look on everything as such; and behold the 
spirit in thy spirit, in order to arrive to the state of the Infinite spirit. (Or else 
the adoration of a finite object, must lead to a finite state). 


15. I have instantly to repair to the sky, where the seven munis are 
assembled, (the seven planets or the seven stars of the Pleiades, — 
saptarshi?), where I have to continue in the performance of my divine service. 


16. I tell you, O king! that you must not of yourself get rid of your duties, 
as long as you are in this body of yours, even though your mind may be freed 
from everything. (The embodied being must continue in the discharge of his 
bodily duty). 


17. So saying, Sukra flew as a bee besmeared with the farinaceous gold- 
dust of the lotus, to the aureate vault of heaven; and passed through the watery 


path of the waving clouds, to where the revolving planets were ready to 
receive him. 


CHAPTER XXVILI. 
HEBETUDE OF BALI. 


Argument. Bali attains to his state of Ecstacy, by his observance of Sukra’s 
precepts. 


Vasishtha said: — After Sukra, the son of Bhrigu and senior in the assembly 
of gods and demi-gods, had made his departure, Bali, the best among the 
intelligent, reflected thus in himself. 


2. Truly has the seer said, that the Intellect composes the three worlds, and 
that I am this Intellect, and the Intellect fills all the quarters, and shows itself 
in all our actions. 


3. It is the Intellect which pervades the inside and outside of everything, 
and there is nothing anywhere which is without the Intellect. 


4. It is the Intellect that perceives the sunbeams and moonlight, or else 
there would be no distinction between them and darkness, had not there been 
this intellectual perception. 


5. If there were no such intellectual perception as this earth is land, then 
there would be no distinction of earth and water, nor the word earth apply to 
land. 


6. If the Intellect would not understand the vast space as the quarters of the 
sky, and the mountains as vast protuberances on earth; then who would call 
the sides and the mountains by those names? 


7. If the world were not known as the world and the vacuum as vacuity, 
then who would distinguish them by the names that are in common use? 


8. If this big body was not perceived by the intellect, how proper could the 
bodies of embodied beings be called by their names? 


9. The Intellect resides in every organ of sense, it dwells in the body, mind 


and all its desires; the intellect is in the internal and external parts of the body, 
and the intellect is all that is in existent and non-existent. (Because the 
intellect has the notions of all these things, which would not come to exist, if 
they were not in the intellect). 


10. The Intellect forms my whole-self, by its feeling and knowing of 
everything that I feel and know; or else I can neither perceive or conceive nor 
do anything with my body alone, and without guidance of the intellect. 


11. What avails this body of mine, which is inert and insensible as a block 
of wood or stone; it is the intellect that makes my self, and it is the intelligent 
spirit which is the universal Soul. 


12. I am the intellect which resides in the sun and in the sky, and I am the 
intellect which dwells in the bodies of all beings; I am the same intellect 
which guides the gods and demi-gods, and dwells alike in the movables and 
immovable bodies. 


13. The intellect being the sole existence, it is in vain to suppose aught 
besides; and their being naught otherwise, there can be no difference of a 
friend or foe to us. 


14. What is it if I, Bali, strike off the head of a person from his body, I 
cannot injure the soul which is everywhere and fills all space. 


15. The feelings of love and enmity are properties of the intellect, (Soul), 
and are not separated from it by its separation from the body. Hence the 
passions and feelings are inseparable from the Intellect or soul. 


16. There is nothing to be thought of beside the Intellect, and nothing to be 
obtained anywhere, except from the spacious womb of the Intellect, which 
comprehends all the three worlds. 


17. But the passions and feelings, the mind and its powers, are mere 
attributes and not properties of the Intellect; which being altogether a simple 
and pure essence, is free from every attribute. 


18. The Intellect, — chit, is the Ego, the omnipresent, all pervasive and 
ever felicitous soul; it is beyond all other attributes, and without a duality or 
parts. 


19. The term Intellect, — chit, which is applied to the nameless power of 
intellection, — chiti, is but a verbal symbol signifying the omniscient 
Intelligence, which is manifest in all places. (i.e., The Divine Intellect is both 


omniscient as well as omnipresent, while human understanding is narrow and 
circumscribed). 


20. The Ego is the Supreme Lord, that is ever awake and sees all things 
without manifesting any appearance of himself. He is purely transparent and 
beyond all visible appearances. 


21. All its attributes are lame, partial, and imperfect. Even time, which has 
its phases and parts, is not a proper attribute for it. It is but a glimpse of its 
light that rises before us, but the eternal and infinite light, is beyond our 
comprehension. 


22. I must think of it only in the form of light in my own self, and know it 
apart from all other thinkables and thoughts, and quite aloof from all shades 
and colours. 


23. I salute his self-same form of Intelligence, and the power of 
Intellection, unaccompanied by the intelligible, and employed in its proper 
sphere. 


24. I salute that light of his in me, which represents everything to me; 
which is beyond all thought, and is of the form of Intellect, going everywhere 
and filling all space. 


25. It is the quiet consciousness of all beings, the real Intellect, (sach-chit), 
the Ego and the Great; the Ego which is as infinite as space, and yet minuter 
than an atom, and spreading in all alike. 


26. I am not subject to the states of pleasure and pain, I am conscious of 
myself and of no other existence besides myself; and I am Intelligence 
without the intelligibles spread out before me. 


27. No worldly entity nor non-entity, (i.e., neither the gain of any object 
nor its want), can work any change in me; for the possession of worldly 
objects would destroy me at once (by their separating my soul from God). 


28. In my opinion there is nothing that is distinct from me, when we know 
all things as the produce of the same source. 


29. What one gets or loses is no gain or loss to any, (i.e., to the gainer or 
loser), because the same Ego always abides in all, and is the Maker of all and 
pervading everywhere. 


30. Whether I am any of the thinkable objects or not, it matters me little to 
know; since the Intellect is always a single thing, though its intelligibles, (Ze., 


its productions or thoughts), are endless. 


31. I am so long in sorrow, as my soul is not united with the Holy spirit. So 
saying, the most discerning Bali fell to a deep meditation. 


32. He reflected on the half mantra of Om, (i.e., the dot only); an emblem 
of the Infinite God; and sat quietly with all his desires and fancies lying 
dormant in him. 


33. He sat undaunted, by suppressing his thoughts and his thinking powers 
within him; and remained with his subdued desires, after having lost the 
consciousness of his meditation, and of his being the meditator and also of 
meditated object. (i.e., Without knowing himself as the subject or object of his 
thoughts and acts). 


34. While Bali was entranced in this manner at the window which was 
decked with gems, he became illumined in his mind as a lighted lamp flaming 
unshaken by the wind. And he remained long in his steady posture as a statue 
carved of a stone. 


35. He sat with his mind as clear as the autumnal sky after having cast off 
all his desires and mental anxieties, and being filled within himself with his 
spiritual light. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 
DESCRIPTION OF BALIP’S ANAESTHESIA. 


Argument. Anxiety of the demons at the supineness of Bali, and the 
Appearance of Sukra with them before him. 


Vasishtha continued: — The servile demons of Bali, (being impatient at this 
numbness of their king), ascended hastily to his high crystal palace, and stood 
at the door of his chamber. 


2. There were his ministers Dimbha and others among them, and his 
generals Kumuda and others also. There were likewise the princes Sukra and 
others in the number, and his champions Vritta and the rest. 


3. There were Hayagriva and the other captains of his armies, with his 
friends Akraja and others. His associates Laduka and some more joined the 
train, with his servants Valluka and many more. 


4. There were also the gods Kubera, Yama, and Indra that paid him their 
tribute; and the Yakshas, Vidyadhars and Nagas that rendered him their 
services. (Were the Vidyadhars the Vedias or gipsies of modern India?). 


5. There were the heavenly nymphs, Rambha and Tilottama, in the number, 
with the fanning and flapping damsels of his court; and the deputies of 
different provinces and of hilly and maritime districts, were also in 
attendance. 


6. These accompanied by the Siddhas inhabiting different parts of the three 
worlds, all waited at that place to tender their services to Bali. 


7. They beheld Bali with reverence, with his head hanging down with the 
crown upon it, and his arms hanging loosely with the pendant bracelets on 
them. 


8. Seeing him thus, the great Asuras made their obeisance to him in due 


form, and were stupified with sorrow and fear, and struck with wonder and 
joy by turns at this sad plight of his. 


9. The ministers kept pondering about what was the case with him, and the 
demons besought their all-knowing preceptor Sukra, for his explaining the 
case to them. 


10. Quick as thought they beheld the shining figure of Sukra, standing 
confest to their sight, as if they saw the phantom of their imagination 
appearing palpable to view. 


11. Sukra being honoured by the demons, took his seat on a sofa; and saw 
in his silent meditation, the state of the mind of the king of demons. 


12. He remained for a while to behold with delight, how the mind of Bali 
was freed from errors, by the exercise of its reasoning powers. 


13. The illustrious preceptor, the lustre of whose person put to shame the 
brightness of the milky ocean, then said smiling to the listening throng of the 
demons: 


14. Know ye demons, this Bali to have become an adept in his spiritual 
knowledge, and to have fixed his seat in holy light, by the working of his 
intellect, (i.e., by his intuition only). 


15. Let him alone, ye good demons, remain in this position, resting in 
himself and beholding the imperishable one within himself in his reverie. 


16. Lo! here the weary pilgrim to have got his rest, and his mind is freed 
from the errors of this false world. Disturb him not with your speech, who is 
now as cold as ice. 


17. He has now received that light of knowledge amidst the gloom of 
ignorance, as the waking man beholds the full blaze of the sun, after 
dispersion of the darkness of his sleep at dawn. 


18. He will in time wake from his trance, and rise like the germ of a seed, 
sprouting from the seed vessel in its proper season. 


19. Go ye leaders of the demons from here, and perform your respective 
duties assigned to you by your master; for it will take a thousand years, for 
Bali to wake from his trance, (as a moment’s sleep makes a myriad of years in 
a dream). 


20. After Sukra, the Guru and guide of the demons, had spoken in this 


manner, they were filled with alternate joy and grief in their hearts, and cast 
aside their anxiety about him, as a tree casts its withered leaves away. 


21. The Asuras then left their king Bali to rest in his palace in the aforesaid 
manner, and returned to their respective offices, as they had been employed 
heretofore. 


22. It now became night, and all men retired to their earthly abodes, the 
serpents entered into their holes, the stars appeared in the skies, and the gods 
reposed in their celestial domes. The regents of all sides and mountainous 
tracts, went to their own quarters, and the beasts of the forest and birds of the 
air, fled and flew to their own coverts and nests. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
BALIT’S RESUSCITATION TO SENSIBILITY. 


Argument. Self-confinement of the Living-liberated Bali in the Infernal 
Regions. 


Vasishtha related: — After the thousand years of the celestials had rolled on 
in Bali’s unconsciousness; he was roused to his sensibility, at the beating of 
heavenly drums by the gods above: (the loud peal of clouds). 


2. Bali being awake, his city, (Mavalipuram), was renovated with fresh 
beauty, as the lotus-bed is revivified by the rising sun in the eastern horizon, 
(Vairincha or Brahma-loka, placed at the sunrising points). 


3. Bali not finding the demons before him after he was awaked, fell to the 
reflecting of the reveries during his state of entrancement, (Samddhi). 


4. O how charming! said he, was that cooling rapture of spiritual delight, in 
which my soul had been enrapt for a short time. 


5. O how I long to resume that state of felicity! because these outward 
enjoyments which I have relished to my fill, have ceased to please me 
anymore. 


6. I do not find the waves of those delights even in the orb of the moon, as I 
felt in the raptures which undulated in my soul, during the entranced state of 
my insensibility. 


7. Bali was again attempting to resume his state of inexcitability, when he 
was interrupted by the attendant demons, as the moon is intercepted by the 
surrounding clouds. 


8. He cast a glancing look upon them, and was going to close his eyes in 
meditation; after making his prostration on the ground; but was instantly 
obtruded upon by their gigantic statures standing all around him. 


9. He then reflected in himself and said: — The intellect being devoid of its 
option, there is nothing for me to desire; but the mind being fond of pleasures, 
vainly pursues after them; (which it cannot fully gain, enjoy or long retain). 


10. Why should I desire my emancipation, when I am not confined by or 
attached to anything here; it is but a childish freak to seek for liberation, when 
I am not bound or bound to anything below. (The soul is perfectly free of 
itself, but it is the mind that enchains it to earth). 


11. Ihave no desire of enfranchisement nor fear for incarceration, since the 
disappearance of my ignorance; what need have I then of meditation, and of 
what good is meditation to me? 


12. Meditation and want of meditation are both mistakes of the mind, (there 
being no efficacy or inefficacy of either). We must depend on our manliness, 
and hail all that comes to pass on us without rejoicing or shrinking, (since all 
good and evil proceed from God). 


13. I require neither thoughtfulness nor thoughtlessness, nor enjoyments 
nor their privation, but must remain unmoved and firm as one sane and sound. 


14. I have no longing for the spiritual, nor craving for temporal things; I 
have neither to remain in the meditative mood, nor in the state of giddy 
worldliness. 


15. I am not dead (because my soul is immortal); nor can I be living 
(because the soul is not connected with life). I am not a reality (as the body), 
nor an unreality (composed of spiritual essence only); nor am I a material or 
aerial body (being neither this body nor Vital air). Neither am I of this world 
or any other, but self-same ego, — the Great. 


16. When I am in this world, I will remain here in quiet; I am not here, I 
abide calmly in the solace of my soul. 


17. What shall I do with my meditation, and what with all my royalty; let 
anything come to pass as it may; I am nothing for this or that, nor is anything 
mine. 


18. Though I have nothing to do (because I am not a free agent; nor master 
of my actions); yet I must do the duties appertaining to my station in society. 
(Doing the duties of one’s station in life, is reckoned by some as the only 
obligation of man here below. So says the poet: — “Act well thy part, there 
all the honor lies.”’). 


19. After ascertaining so in his mind, Bali the wisest of the wise, looked 
upon the demons with complacence, as the sun looketh upon the lotuses. 


20. With the nods and glancings of his eyes, he received their homages; as 
the passing winds bear the odours of the flowers along with them, (meaning to 
say: His cursory glances bore their regards, as the fleet winds bear the 
fragrance of flowers the rose). 


21. Then Bali, ceasing to think on the object of his meditation, accosted 
them concerning their respective offices under him. 


22. He honoured the devas and his gurus with due respect, and saluted his 
friends and officers with his best regards. 


23. He honoured with his largesse, all his servants and suitors; and he 
pleased the attendant maidens with various persons. 


24. So he continued to prosper in every department of his government, until 
he made up his mind to perform a great sacrifice, (yajna), at one time. 


25. He satisfied all beings with his great gifts, and gratified the great gods 
and sages with due honour and veneration. He then commenced the ceremony 
of the sacrifice under the guidance of Sukra and the chief gurus and priests. 


26. Then Vishnu the lord of Lakshmi, came to know that Bali had no desire 
of earthly fruition; and appeared at his sacrifice to crown him with the success 
of his undertaking, and confer upon him his desired blessing. 


27. He cunningly persuaded him, to make a gift of the world to Indra his 
elder brother, who was insatiably fond of all kinds of enjoyment. (Indra was 
elder to Vishnu, who was thence called Upendra or the junior Indra). 


28. Having deceived Bali by his artifices of dispossessing him of the three 
worlds, he shut him in the nether world, as they confine a monkey in a cave 
under the ground. (This was by Vishnu’s incarnation in the form of a dwarf or 
puny man, who was considered to be the most cunning among men; multum in 
parvo; or a man in miniature). 


29. Thus Bali continues to remain in his confinement to this day, with his 
mind fixed in meditation, for the purpose of his attainment of Indraship again 
in a future state of life. 


30. The living liberated Bali, being thus restrained in the infernal cave, 
looks upon his former prosperity and present adversity in the same light. 


31. There is no rising or setting of his intelligence, in the states of his 
pleasure or pain; but it remained one and the same in its full brightness, like 
the disk of the sun in a painting. 


32. He saw the repeated flux and reflux of worldly enjoyments, and thence 
settled his mind in an utter indifference about them. 


33. He overcame multitudes of the vicissitudes of life for myriads of years, 
in all his transmigrations, in the three worlds, and found at last, his rest in his 
utter disregard of all mortal things. 


34. He felt thousands of comforts and disquiets, and hundreds of pleasures 
and privations of life, and after his long experience of these, he found his 
repose in his perfect quiescence. 


35. Bali, having forsaken his desire of enjoyments, enjoyed the fulness of 
his mind in the privation of his wants; and rejoiced in self-sufficiency of his 
soul, in the loneliness of his subterranean cave. 


36. After a course of many years, Bali regained his sovereignty of the 
world, and governed it for a long time to his heart’s content. 


37. But he was neither elated by his elevation to the dignity of Indra, — the 
lord of gods; nor was he depressed at this prostration from prosperity. 


38. He was one and the same person in every state of his life, and enjoyed 
the equanimity of his soul, resembling the serenity of the ethereal sphere. 


39. I have related to you the whole story of Bali’s attainment of true 
wisdom, and advise you now, O Rama! to imitate his example for your 
elevation, to the same state of perfection. 


40. Learn as Bali did by his own discernment, to think yourself as the 
immortal and everlasting soul; and try to reach to the state of your oneness or 
soliety with the Supreme Unity, by your manliness (of self-controul and self- 
resignation). 


41. Bali the lord of the demons, exercised full authority over the three 
worlds, for more than a millennium; but at last, he came to feel an utter 
distaste, to all the enjoyments of life. 


42. Therefore, O Victorious Rama, forego the enjoyments of life, which are 
sure to be attended with a distaste and nausea at the end, and betake yourself 
to that state or true felicity, which never grows insipid at any time. 


43. These visible sights, O Rama! are as multifarious as they are 
temptations to the soul; they appear as even and charming as a distant 
mountain appears to view; but it proves to be rough and rugged as you 
approach to it. (The pleasant paths of life, cannot entice the wise; they are 
smooth without, but rugged within). 


44. Restrain your mind in the cavity of your heart, from its flight in pursuit 
of the perishable objects of enjoyment, either in this life, or in the next, which 
are so alluring to all men of common sense. 


45. Know yourself, as the self-same intellect, which shines as the sun 
throughout the universe; and illumines every object in nature, without any 
distinction of or partiality to one or the other. 


46. Know yourself, O mighty Rama! to be the infinite spirit, and the 
transcendent soul of all bodies; which has manifested itself in manifold forms, 
that are as the bodies of the internal intellect. 


47. Know your soul as a thread, passing through, and interwoven with 
everything in existence; and like a string connecting all the links of creation, 
as so many gems of a necklace or the beads of a rosary. (This hypostasis of 
the supreme spirit, is known as the sutrdtmd or the all-connecting soul of the 
universe; as the poet expresses it. Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal 
part, as full as perfect in a hair as heart. — Pope). 


48. Know yourself as the unborn and embodied soul of Virdj, which is 
never born nor ever dies; and never fall into the mistake of thinking the pure 
intellect, to be subject to birth or death. (The embodied soul of Virdj, is the 
universal soul as what the poet says: — “Whose body nature is, and god the 
soul.”’) 


49. Know your desires to be the causes of your birth, life, death and 
diseases; therefore, shun your cupidity of enjoyments, and enjoy all things in 
the manner of the all witnessing intellect. (ie., Indulge yourself in your 
intellectual and not corporeal enjoyments). 


50. If you remain in the everlasting light of the sun of your intellect, you 
will come to find the phenomenal world to be but a phantom of your dream. 


51. Never regret nor sorrow for anything, nor think of your pleasures and 
pains, which do not affect your soul; you are the pure intellect and the all- 
pervading soul, which manifests itself in everything. 


52. Know the desirables (or worldly enjoyments) to be your evils, and the 


undesirable (self-mortification) to be for your good. Therefore, shun the 
former by your continued practice of the latter. 


53. By forsaking your views of the desirables and undesirables, you will 
contract a habit of hebetude; which when it takes a deep root in your heart, 
you have no more to be reborn in the world. 


54. Retract your mind from everything, to which it runs like a boy after 
vain baubles; and settle it in yourself for your own good. 


55. Thus by restraining the mind by your best exertions, as also by your 
habit of self-control, you will subdue the rampant elephant of your mind, and 
reach to your highest bliss afterwards. 


56. Do not become as one of those ignorant fools, who believe their bodies 
as their real good; and who are infatuated by sophistry and infidelity, and 
deluded by impostors to the gratification of their sensual appetites. 


57. What man is more ignorant in this world and more subject to its evils, 
than one who derived his Spiritual knowledge from one who is a smatterer in 
theology, and relies on the dogmas of pretenders and false doctors in divinity. 


58. Do you dispel the cloud of false reasoning from the atmosphere of your 
mind, by the hurricane of our right reasoning, which drives all darkness before 
it. 


59. You cannot be said to have your right reasoning, so long as you do not 
come to the light and sight of the soul, both by your own exertion and grace of 
the Supreme Spirit. 


60. Neither the Veda nor Vedanta, nor the science of logic or any other 
Sdstras, can give you any light of the soul, unless it appears of itself within 
you. 


61. It is by means of your self-culture, aided by my instruction and divine 
grace, that you have gained your perfect knowledge, and appear to rest 
yourself in the Supreme Spirit. 


62. There are three causes of your coming to spiritual light. Firstly, your 
want of the knowledge of a duality, and then the effulgence of your 
intellectual luminary, (thy soul), by the grace of God and lastly, the wide 
extent of your knowledge derived from my instructions. 


63. You are now freed from your mental maladies, and have become sane 
and sound by abandonment of your desires, by removal of your doubts and 


errors, and by forsaking the mist of your fondness for external objects. 


64. O Rama! as you get rid of the faults (errors) of your understanding, so 
you advance by degrees in gaining your knowledge, in cherishing your 
resignation, in destroying your defects, in imbibing the bliss of ecstacy, in 
wandering with exultation, and in elevating your soul to the sixth sphere. But 
all this is not enough unless you attend to Brahmahood itself. (These are 
called the Sapta bhimika or seven stages of the practice of Yoga). 


CHAPTER XXX. 
FALL OF HIRANYAKASIPU AND RISE OF 
PRAHLADA. 


Argument. Slaughter of Demons by Hari. 


Vasishtha continued: — Attend Rama, to the instructive narrative of Prahlada, 
— the lord of demons; who became an adept by his own intuition. 


2. There was a mighty demon in the infernal regions, Hiranyakasipu by 
name; who was as valiant as Narayana himself, and had expelled the gods and 
demi-gods from their abodes. 


3. He mastered all the treasures of the world, and wrested its possession 
from the hands of Hari; as the swan encroaches upon the right of the bee, on 
the large folia of the lotus. 


4. He vanquished the Gods and Asuras, and reigned over the whole earth, 
as the elephant masters the lotus-bed, by expulsion of the drove of swans from 
it. 


5. Thus the lord of the Asuras, having usurped the monarchy of the three 
worlds, begot many sons in course of time, as the spring brings forth the 
shoots of trees. 


6. These boys grew up to manhood in time, with the display of their manly 
prowess; and like so many brilliant suns, stretched their thousand rays on all 
sides of the earth and skies. 


7. Among them, Prahlada, the eldest prince became the regent, as the 
Kaustubha diamond has the pre-eminence among all other precious gems. 
(The Kaustubha gem was set in the breast-plate of Vishnu). 


8. The father Hiranyakasipu delighted exceedingly in his fortunate son 
Prahlada, as the year rejoices in its flowering time of the spring, (i.e., the 


father delights in his promising lad, as the year in its vernal season). 


9. Supported by his son on one hand, and possessed of his force and 
treasures on the other; he became puffed up with his pride, as the swollen 
elephant emitting his froth from his triangular mouth. (Composed of the two 
sides of the tusks, and the lower part). 


10. Shining with his lustre and elated by his pride, he dried and drew up the 
moisture of the earth, by his unbearable taxation; as the all-destroying suns of 
universal dissolution, parch up the world by their rays. (Here is a play of the 
word Kara, in its triple sense of the hand, tax, and solar rays). 


11. His conduct annoyed the gods and the sun and moon, as the behaviour 
of a haughty boy, becomes unbearable to his fellow comrades. 


12. They all applied to Brahma, for destruction of the arch demon; because 
the repeated misdemeanours of the wicked, are unbearable to the good and 
great. 


13. It was then that the leonine Hari-Narasingha, clattered his nails 
resembling the tusks of an elephant; and thundered aloud like the rumbling 
noise of the Dig-hastes, (the regent elephants of all the quarters of heaven), 
that filled the concave world as on its last doomsday. 


14. The tusk-like nails and teeth of Vishnu, glittered like flashing lightnings 
in the sky; and the radiance of his earrings filled the hollow sphere of heaven, 
with curling flames of living fire. (The word dwija or twice born is applied to 
the nails and teeth, as to the moon and a twice-born Brahman). 


15. The sides and caverns of mountains presented a fearful aspect; and the 
huge trees were shaken by a tremendous tempest, that rent the skies and tore 
the vault of heaven. (This is the only place where the word dodruma occurs 
for the Greek dendron in Sanskrit, shortened to dru, a tree, the root of Druid, a 
woodman). 


16. He emitted gusts of wind from his mouth and entrails, which drove the 
mountains before them; and his eyeballs flashed with the living fire of his 
rage, which was about to consume the world. 


17. His shining mane shook with the glare of sun-beams, and the pores of 
the hairs on his body, emitted the sparks of fire like the craters of a volcano. 


18. The mountains on all sides, shook with a tremendous shaking, and the 
whole body of Hari, shot forth a variety of arms in every direction. 


19. Hari in his leoantheopic form of half a man and half a lion, killed the 
gigantic demon by goring him with his tusks, as when an elephant bores the 
body of a horse with a grating sound. 


20. The population of the Pandemonium, was burnt down by the gushing 
fire of his eye balls; which flamed as the all-devouring conflagration of the 
last doomsday. 


21. The breath of his nostrils like a hurricane; drove everything before it; 
and the clapping of his arms, (bahwasphota), beat as loud surges on the 
hollow shores. 


22. The demons fled from before him as moths from the burning fire, and 
they became extinct as extinguished lamps, at the blazing light of the day. 


23. After the burning of the Pandemonium, and expulsion of the demons, 
the infernal regions presented a void waste, as at the last devastation of the 
world. 


24. After the Lord had extirpated the demoniac race, at the end of the 
Titanic age, he disappeared from view with the grateful greetings of the synod 
of gods. 


25. The surviving sons of the demon, who had fled from the burning of 
their city, were afterwards led back to it by Prahlada; as the migrating fowls 
are made to return to the dry bed of a lake by a shower of rains. 


26. There they mourned over the dead bodies of the demons, and lamented 
at the loss of their possessions, and performed at last the funeral ceremonies 
of their departed friends and relatives. 


27. After burning the dead bodies of their friends, they invited the relics of 
the demons, that had found their safety by flight, to return to their deserted 
habitations again. 


28. The Asuras and their leaders, now continued to mourn with their 
disconsolate minds and disfigured bodies, like lotuses beaten down by the 
frost. They remained without any effort or attempt as the figures in a painting; 
and without any hope of resuscitation, like a withered tree or an arbour 
stricken by lightning. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 
PRAHLADA’S FAITH IN VISHNU. 


Argument. Prahlada’s Lamentations at the slaughter of the demons, and his 
conversion to Vishnuism. 


Vasishtha continued: — Prahlada remained disconsolate in his subterranean 
region, brooding over the melancholy thoughts of the destruction of the 
Ddnavas and their habitations. 


2. Ah! what is to become of us, said he, when this Hari is bent to destroy 
the best amongst us, like a monkey nipping the growing shoots and sprouts of 
trees. 


3. I do not see the Daityas anywhere in earth or in the infernal regions, that 
are left in the enjoyment of their properties; but are stunted in their growth 
like the lotuses growing on mountain tops. 


4. They rise only to fall like the loud beating of a drum, and their rising is 
simultaneous with their falling as of the waves in the sea. (i.e., no sooner they 
rise, than they are destined to fall). 


5. Woe unto us! that are so miserable in both our inward and outward 
circumstances; and happy are our enemies of light, (Devas), that have their 
ascendency over us. O the terrors of darkness! 


6. But our friends of the dark infernal regions, are all darkened in their 
souls with dismay; also their fortune is as transitory as the expansion of the 
lotus-leaf by day, and its contraction at night. 


7. We see the gods, who were mean servants at the feet of our father, to 
have usurped his kingdom; in the manner of the timid deer, usurping the 
sovereignty of the lion in the forest. (So said the sons of Tipu Sultan, when 
they saw the English polluting his library with their hands). 


8. We find our friends on the other hand, to be all disfigured and effortless; 
and sitting melancholy and dejected in their hopelessness, like lotuses with 
their withered leaves and petals. 


9. We see the houses of our gigantic demons, filled with clouds of dusts 
and frost, wafted by gusts of wind by day and night; and resembling the fumes 
of fire which burnt them down. 


10. The inner apartments are laid open without their doors and enclosures, 
and are overgrown with the sprouts of barley, shooting out as blades of 
sapphires from underneath the ground. 


11. Ah! what is impossible to irresistible fate, that has so reduced the 
mighty demons; who are while used to pluck the flowers from the mountain 
tops of Meru like big elephants, and are now come to the sad plight of the 
wandering Devas of yore. 


12. Our ladies are lurking like the timorous deer, at the rustling of the 
breeze amidst the leaves of trees, for fear of the darts of the enemy whistling 
and hurling in the open air. 


13. O! the gemming blossoms of the guluncha arborets, with which our 
ladies used to decorate their ears, are now shorn and torn and left forlorn, 
(desolate), by the hands of Hari, like the lorn and lonesome heaths of the 
desert. 


14. They have robbed us of the all-producing kalpa-trees, and planted them 
in their mandana pleasure gardens now teeming with their shooting gems and 
verdant leaflets in the ethereal sphere. 


15. The eyes of haughty demons, that formerly looked with pity on the 
faces of their captured gods; are now indignantly looked upon by the 
victorious gods, who have made captives of them. 


16. It is known, that the water (liquid ichor) which is poured from the 
mouths of the spouting elephants of heaven on the tops of the mountains, falls 
down in the form of cascades, and gives rise to rivers on earth. (It means the 
water spouts resembling the trunks of elephants, which lifted the sea water to 
the sky, and let them fall on mountain tops to run as rivers below). 


17. But the froth exuding from the faces of our elephantic giants, is dried 
up to dust at the sights of the Devas, as a channel is sucked up in the dry and 
dreary desert of sand. 


18. Ah! where have those Daityas fled, whose bodies were as big as the 
peaks of mount Meru once, and were fanned by the fragrant breeze, breathing 
with the odorous dust of Mandara flowers. (Mandara is the name of a flower 
of the garden of Paradise). 


19. The beauteous ladies of the gods and Gandharvas, that were once 
detained as captives in the inner apartments of demons, are now snatched 
from us, and placed on Meru (the seat of the gods), as if they are transplanted 
there to grow as heavenly plants. 


20. O how painful is it to think! that the fading graces of our captured girls, 
are now mocked by the heavenly nymphs, in their disdainful dance over their 
defeat and disgrace. 


21. O it is painful to think! that the attending damsels, that fanned my 
father with their chouri flappers, are now waiting upon the thousand-eyed 
Indra in their servile toil. 


22. O! the greatest of our grief is, this sad and calamitous fall of ours at the 
hands of a single Hari, who has reduced us to this state of helpless impotency. 


23. The gods now reposing under the thick and cooling shades of trees, are 
as cool as the rocks of the icy mountain (Himalaya); and do not burn with 
rage nor repine in grief like ourselves. 


24. The gods protected by the power of Sauri, (Hari), are raised to the 
pinnacle of prosperity, have been mocking and restraining us in these caves, 
as the apes on trees do the dogs below. (The enmity of dogs and apes is 
proverbial, as obstructing one another from alighting on or rising above the 
ground). 


25. The faces of our fairies though decked with ornaments, are now 
bedewed with drops of their tears; like the leaves of lotuses with the cold 
dews of night. 


26. The old stage of this aged world, which was worsted and going to be 
pulled down by our might, is now supported upon the azure arms of Hari, like 
the vault of heaven standing upon the blue arches of the cerulean sky. 


27. That Hari has become the support of the celestial host, when it was 
about to be hurled into the depth of perdition; in the same manner as the great 
tortoise supported the mount Mandara, as it was sinking in the Milky ocean in 
the act of churning it. (Samudra manthana). This was the act of the post- 
diluvians reclaiming from the sea all that had been swept into it at the great 


deluge. 


28. This our great father, and these mighty demons under him, have been 
laid down to dust like the lofty hills, that were levelled with the ground by the 
blasts of heaven at the end of the Kalpa. 


29. It is that leader of the celestial forces, the peerless destroyer of Madhu, 
(Satan), that is able to destroy all and everything by the fire in his hands, (the 
flaming lightnings preceding the thunder bolts of Indra). (The twin gods, the 
thundering (vajrapani) Indra and the flaming (analapani) Upendra, bear great 
affinity to Jupiter tonitruous or the thundering Jove, and his younger brother 
the trident-bearer Neptune). 


30. His elder brother Indra baffles the battle axes in the hands of the mighty 
demons, by the force of the thunder-bolts held by his mightier arms, as the big 
male monkeys kill their male offspring. (These passages prove the early 
invention of fire arms by the Aryans, to have been the cause of their victory 
over Daityas or the demi-gods). 


31. Though the missive weapons, (lightnings), which are let fly by the 
lotus-eyed Vishnu be invincible; yet there is no weapon or instrument which 
can foil the force of the thunder. (lit. break the strong thunderbolt). (Vishnu 
the leader of Vishas or the first foreign settlers of the land, overpowered the 
earth-born Daityas by his fire and fire arms, and dispossessed them of their 
soil, and reduced them to slavery. The descendants of the Vishas are the 
Vaishyas, who settled in India long before the Aryans). 


32. This Hari is inured in warfare, in the previous battles fought between 
him and our forefathers; in which they uprooted and flung great rocks at him, 
and waged many dreadful campaigns. 


33. It cannot be expected that he will be afraid of us, who stood victorious 
in those continuous and most dreadful and destructive warfares of yore. 


34. I have thought of one expedient only to oppose the rage of Hari, beside 
which I find no other way for our safety. (lit. remedy). 


35. Let us, therefore, with all possible speed, have recourse to him, with 
full contriteness of our souls and understanding; because that god is the true 
refuge of the pious and the only resort of everybody. 


36. There is no one greater than him in all the three worlds; for I come to 
know, that it is Hari only, who is the sole cause of the creation, sustentation 
and destruction or reproduction of the world. 


37. From this moment, therefore, I will think only of that unborn, 
(increate), Narayana for ever more; and I must rely on that Narayana, who is 
present in all places, and is full in myself and filling all space. 


38. Obeisance to Narayana forms my faith and profession, for my success 
in all undertakings; and may this faith of mine ever abide in my heart, as the 
wind has its place in the midst of empty air. 


39. Hari is to be known as filling all sides of space and vacuum, and every 
part of this earth and all these worlds; my ego is the immeasurable Spirit of 
Hari, and my inborn soul is full of Vishnu. 


40. He that is not full with Vishnu in himself, does not benefit by his 
adoration of Vishnu; but he who worships Vishnu by thinking himself as 
such, finds himself assimilated to his god, and becomes one with him. (Or 
rather he loses himself in his God and perceives nought besides). 


41. He who knows Hari to be the same with Prahlada, and not different 
from him, finds Hari to fill his inward soul with his spirit. (So says the Sruti: 
— Prahlada was the incarnate Hari himself). 


42. The eagle of Hari, (son of Vinata), flies through the infinite space of the 
sky as the presence of Hari fills all infinity, and his golden body-light, is the 
seat of my Hari also. (Here the bird of heaven means the sun, which is said to 
be the seat of Hari). 


43. The claws of this bird, — Kara (or rays), serve for the weapons of 
Vishnu; and the flash of his nails, is the flash of the Vishnu’s weapons. (Here 
Garuda bird of heaven, serves for a personification of the sun, and his claws 
and nails represent the rays of solar light). 


44. These are the four arms of Vishnu and their armlets, which are 
represented by the four gemming pinnacles of mount Mandara which were 
grappled by the hands of Hari, at his churning of the milky ocean with it. 


45. This moonlike figure with the chouri flapper in her hand and rising 
from the depth of the milky ocean, is the goddess of prosperity, (Laksmi), and 
associating consort of Vishnu. 


46. She is the brilliant glory of Hari, which was easily acquired by him, and 
is ever attendant on his person with undiminished lustre, and illuminates the 
three worlds as a radiant medicinal tree, — mahaushadhi. 


47. There is the other companion of Vishnu called Maya or illusion, which 


is ever busy in the creation of worlds upon worlds, and in stretching a magical 
enchantment all about them. 


48. Here is the goddess Victory, (Jayd), an easy earned attendant on 
Vishnu, and shines as a shoot of the Kalpa tree, extending to the three worlds 
as an all-pervading plant. 


49. These two warming and cooling luminaries of the sun and moon, which 
serve to manifest all the worlds to view, are the two eyes situated on the 
forehead of my Vishnu. 


50. This azure sky is the cerulean hue of the body of my Vishnu, which is 
as dark as a mass of watery cloud; and darkens the sphere of heaven with its 
sky-blue radiance. The meaning of the word Vishnu was afterward changed to 
the residing divinity in all things from the root vish. 


51. Here is the whitish conch in the hand of my Hari, which is sonant with 
its fivefold notes, (panchajanya), and is as bright as the vacuum, — the 
receptacle of sound, and as white as the milky ocean of heavens, (the milky 
path). 


52. Here I see the lotus in the hand of Vishnu, representing the lotus of his 
navel, the seat of Brahma, who rose from and sat upon it, as a bee to form his 
hive of the world. 


53. I see the cudgel of my Vishnu’s hand, (the goda), studded with gems 
about it, in the lofty peak of the mountain of Sumeru, beset by its gemming 
stones, and hurling down the demons from its precipice. 


54. I see here the discus, (chakra), of my Hari, in the rising luminary of the 
sun, which fills all sides of the infinite Space, with the radiant beams 
emanating from it. 


55. I see there in the flaming fire, the flashing sword, — nandaka of 
Vishnu, which like an axe hath cut down the gigantic bodies of Daityas like 
trees, while it gave great joy to the gods. 


56. I see also the great bow of Vishnu, (Sdranga), in the variegated 
rainbow of Indra; and also the quiver of his arrows in the Pushkara and Avarta 
clouds, pouring down their rains like piercing arrows from above. 


57. The big belly, (Jathara), of Vishnu, is seen in the vast vacuity of the 
firmament, which contains all the worlds and all the past, present, and future 
creations in its spacious womb. 


58. I see the earth as the footstool of Virdj, and the high sky as the canopy 
on his head; his body is the stupendous fabric of the universe, and his sides 
are the sides of the compass. 


59. I see the great Vishnu visibly manifest to my view, as shining under the 
cerulean vault of heaven, mounted on his eagle of mountain, and holding his 
conch-shell, discus, cudgel, and the lotus in his hands (in the manner 
described above). 


60. I see the wicked and evil-minded demons, flying from me in the manner 
of the fleeting straws, which are blown and borne away after by the breath of 
the winds. (Lit.: — as the heaps of straw or hay tarna). 


61. This sable deity with his hue of the blue sapphire and mantle yellow, 
holding the club and mounted on the eagle and accompanied by Lakshmi; is 
no other than the self-same Imperishable One. (Vishnu latterly called 
(Krishna), is the queller of demons, like Christ in the battle of the gods and 
Titan, and is believed to be the only begotten Son of God). 


62. What adverse Spirit can dare approach this all-devouring flame, without 
being burnt to death, like a flight of moths falling on a vivid fire? 


63. None of these hosts of gods or demi-gods that I see before me, is able 
to withstand the irresistible course of the destination of Vishnu. And all 
attempts to oppose it, will be as vain as for our weak-sighted eyes to shut out 
the light of the sun. 


64. I know the gods Brahma, Indra, Siva and Agni, (Ignis, — the god of 
fire), praise in endless verses and many tongues, the Vishnu as their Lord. 


65. This Lord is ever resplendent with his dignity, and is invincible in his 
might; He is the Lord beyond all doubt, dispute, and duality, and is joined 
with transcendent majesty. 


66. I bow down to that person, which stands as a firm rock amidst the forest 
of the world, and is a defence from all fears and dangers. It is a stupendous 
body having all the worlds situated in its womb, and forming the essence and 
substance of every distinct object of vision. (Here, Vishnu is shown in his 
microcosmic form of Virdj, (Virat murti)). 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
THE SPIRITUAL AND FORMAL WORSHIP OF 
VISHNU. 


Argument. Prahlada’s Worship of Vishnu both in spirit and his Image. 
Witnessed by the gods, as the Beginning of Hero and Idol Worship. 


Vasishtha continued: — After Prahlada had meditated on Vishnu in the 
aforesaid manner, he made an image of him as Narayana himself, and thought 
upon worshipping that enemy of the Asura race. (Here, Vishnu, — the chief 
of Vishas and destroyer of Asuras, is represented as the spirit of Narayana, 
and worshipped in that form). 


2. And that this figure might not be otherwise than the form of Vishnu 
himself, he invoked the Spirit of Vishnu to be settled in this his out-ward 
figure also. (This was done by incantation of Pranpratishtha, or the charm of 
enlivening an idol in thought). 


3. It was seated on the back of the heavenly bird Garuda, arrayed with the 
quadruple attributes (of will, intelligence, action and mercy), and armed with 
the fourfold arms holding the conch-shell, discus, club, and a lotus. (This 
passage shows the fictitious representation of the person of Vishnu, with his 
fourfold arms of these, the two original arms with the cudgel and discus were 
in active use, while the two fictitious and immovable ones, with the conch- 
shell and lotus, were clapped on for mere show). 


4. His two eye-balls flashed, like the orbs of the sun and moon in their 
outstretched sockets; his palms were as red as lotuses, and his bow saranga 
and the sword nandaka hang on his two shoulders and sides. 


5. I will worship this image, said he, with all my adherents and dependents, 
with an abundance of grateful offerings agreeable to my taste. — Gloss. 
Things delectable to one’s taste, are most acceptable to the gods. 


6. I will worship this great god always, with all kinds of offering of 
precious gems and jewels, and all sorts of articles for bodily use and 
enjoyment. 


7. Having thus made up his mind, Prahlada collected an abundance of 
various things, and made offerings of them in his mind, in his worship of 
Madhava, — the lord of Lakshmi. (Ma and Rama are titles of Lakshmi). 


8. He offered rich gems and jewels in plates of many kinds, and presented 
sandal pastes in several pots; he burnt incense and lighted lamps in rows, and 
placed many valuables and ornaments in sacred vessels. 


9. He presented wreaths of Mandara flowers, and chains of lotuses made of 
gold, together with garlands of leaves and flowers of kalpa plants, and 
bouquets and nosegays studded with gems and pearls. 


10. He hung hangings of leaves and leaflets of heavenly arbors, and 
chaplets and trimmings of various kinds of flowers, as vakas and kundas, 
kinkiratas and white, blue, and red lotuses. 


11. There were wreaths of kahlara, Kunda, Kasa and Kinsuka flowers; and 
clusters of Asoka, Madana, Bela and kdnikdra blossoms likewise. 


12. There were florets of the Kadamba, Vakala, nimba, Sindhuvdra and 
Yuthikas also; and likewise heaps of pdribhadra, gugguli and Venduka 
flowers. 


13. There were strings of priyangu, pdtala, pdta and pdtala flowers; and 
also the blossoms of dmra, dmrataka and gavyas; and the bulbs of haritaki 
and vibhitaki myrabolans. 


14. The flowers of Sdla and tamdla trees, were strung together with their 
leaves; and the tender buds of Sahakdras, were fastened together with their 
farinaceous pistils. 


15. There were the ketakas and centipetalous flowers, and the shoots of ela 
cardamums; together with everything beautiful to sight and the tender of one’s 
soul likewise. 


16. Thus did Prahlada worship his lord Hari in the inner apartment of his 
house, with offerings of all the richest things in the world, joined with true 
faith and earnestness of his mind and spirit. 


17. Thus did the monarch of Ddnavas, worship his lord Hari externally in 
his holy temple, furnished with all kind of valuable things on earth. (The 


external worship followed that of his internal worship in faith and spirit. 
These two are distinctly called the mdnasa and bdjhya pujas and observed one 
after the other by every orthodox Hindu, except the Brahmos and ascetics who 
reject the latter formality). 


18. The Ddanava sovereign became the more and more gratified in his spirit, 
in proportion as he adored his god with more and more of his valuable outer 
offerings. 


19. Henceforward did Prahlada continue, to worship his lord god day after 
day, with earnestness of his soul, and the same sort of rich offerings every 
day. 


20. It came to pass that the Daityas, one and all, turned Vaishnavas; after 
the example of their king; and worshipped Hari in their city and temples 
without intermission. 


21. This intelligence reached to heaven and to the abode of the gods, that 
the Daityas having renounced their enmity to Vishnu, have turned his faithful 
believers and worshippers in toto. 


22. The Devas were all astonished to learn, that the Daityas had accepted 
the Vaishnava faith; and even Indra marvelled with the body of Rudras about 
him, how the Daityas came to be so at once. 


23. The astonished Devas then left their celestial abode, and repaired to the 
warlike Vishnu, reposing on his serpent couch in the milky ocean. 


24. They related to him the whole account of the Daityas, and they asked 
him as he sat down, the cause of their conversion, wherewith they were so 
much astonished. 


25. The gods said: — How is it Lord! that the demons who had always 
been averse to thee, have now come to embrace thy faith, which appears to us 
as an act of magic or their hypocrisy. 


26. How different is their present transformation to the Vaishnava faith, 
which is acquired only after many transmigrations of the soul, from their 
former spirit of insurrection, in which they broke down the rocks and 
mountains. 


27. The rumour that a clown has become a learned man, is as gladsome as 
it is doubtful also, as the news of the budding of blossoms out of season. 


28. Nothing is graceful without its proper place, as a rich jewel loses its 


value, when it is set with worthless pebbles. (The show of goodness of the 
vile, is a matter of suspicion). 


29. All animals have their dispositions conforming with their own natures; 
how then can the pure faith of Vishnu, agree with the doggish natures of the 
Daityas? 


30. It does not grieve us so much to be pierced with thorns and needles in 
our bodies, as to see things of opposite natures, to be set in conjunction with 
one another. 


31. Whatever is naturally adapted to its time and place, the same seems to 
suit it then and there; hence the lotus has its grace in water and not upon the 
land. 


32. Where are the vile Daityas, prone to their misdeeds at all times; and 
how far is the Vaishnava faith from them that can never appreciate its merit? 


33. O lord! as we are never glad to learn a lotus-bed to be left to parch in 
the desert soil; so we can never rejoice at the thought, that the race of demons 
will place their faith in Vishnu, — the lord of gods. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 
PRAHLADA’S SUPPLICATION TO HARI. 


Argument. Hari’s Visit to Prahlada, and his Adoration of him. 


Vasishtha said: — The lord of Lakshmi, seeing the gods so clamorous in their 
accusation of the demons, gave his words to them in sounds as sonorous as 
those of the rainy clouds, in response to the loud noise of screaming and 
thirst-stricken peacocks. 


2. The Lord Hari said: — Don’t you marvel ye gods! at Prahlada’s faith in 
me; as it is by virtue of the virtuous acts of his past lives, that pious prince is 
entitled to his final liberation in this his present life. 


3. He shall not have to be born again in the womb of a woman, nor to be 
reproduced in any form on earth; but must remain aloof from regeneration, 
like a fried pea which does not germinate any more. 


4. A virtuous man turning impious, becomes of course the source of evil; 
but an unworthy man becoming meritorious, is doubtless a step towards his 
better being and blessedness. 


5. You good gods that are quite happy in your blessed seats in heaven, must 
not let the good deserts of Prahlada be any cause of your uneasiness. 


6. Vasishtha resumed: — The Lord having thus spoken to the gods, became 
invisible to them, like a feather floating on the surface of waves. 


7. The assemblage of the immortals then repaired to their heavenly abodes 
after taking their leave of the god; as the particles of sea water are borne to the 
sky by the zephyrs, or by the agitation of the Mandara mountain. 


8. The gods were henceforth pacified towards Prahlada; because the mind 
is never suspicious of one who has the credit of his superiors. 


9. Prahlada also continued in the daily adoration of his god, with the 


contriteness of his heart, and in the formulas of his spiritual, oral and bodily 
services. 


10. It was in the course of his divine service in this manner, that he attained 
the felicity proceeding from his right discrimination, self-resignation, and 
other virtues with which he was crowned. 


11. He took no delight in any object of enjoyment, nor felt any pleasure in 
the society of his consorts, all which he shunned as a stag shuns a withered 
tree, and the company of human beings. 


12. He did not walk in the ways of the ungodly, nor spent his time in aught 
but religious discourses. His mind did not dwell on visible objects, as the lotus 
never grows on dry land. 


13. His mind did not delight in pleasures, which were all linked with pain; 
but longed for its liberation, which is as entire of itself and unconnected with 
anything, as a single grain of unperforated pearl. 


14. But his mind being abstracted from his enjoyments, and not yet settled 
in its trance of ultimate rest; had been only waving between the two states, 
like a cradle swinging in both ways. 


15. The god Vishnu, who knew all things by his all-knowing intelligence; 
beheld the unsettled state of Prahlada’s mind, from his seat in the milky 
ocean. 


16. Pleased at Prahladda’s firm belief, he proceeded by the sub-terranean 
route to the place of his worship, and stood confest before him at the holy 
altar. 


17. Seeing his god manifest to his view, the lord of the demons worshipped 
him with two-fold veneration, and made many respectful offerings to his 
lotus-eyed deity more than his usual practice. 


18. He then gladly glorified his god with many swelling orisons, for his 
deigning to appear before him in his house of worship. 


19. Prahlada said: — I adore thee, O my lord Hari! that art unborn and 
undecaying; that art the blessed receptacle of three worlds; that dispellest all 
darkness by the light of thy body; and art the refuge of the helpless and 
friendless. 


20. I adore my Hari in his complexion of blue-lotus leaves, and of the 
colour of the autumnal sky; I worship him whose body is of the hue of the 


dark bhramara bee; and who holds in his arms the lotus, discus, club and the 
conch-shell. 


21. I worship the god that dwells in the lotus-like hearts of his votaries, 
with his appearance of a swarm of sable bees; and holding a conch-shell as 
white as the bud of a lotus or lily, with the earrings ringing in his ears with the 
music of humming bees. 


22. I resort to Hari’s sky-blue shade, shining with the starry light of his 
long stretching nails; his face shining as the full-moon with his smiling 
beams, and his breast waving as the surface of Ganges, with the sparkling 
gems hanging upon it. 


23. I rely on that godling that slept on the leaf of the fig tree (when his 
spirit floated on the surface of the waters); and that contains the universe in 
himself in his stupendous form of Virdj; that is neither born nor grown, but is 
always the whole by himself; and is possessed of endless attributes of his own 
nature. 


24. I take my refuge in Hari, whose bosom is daubed with the red dust of 
the new-blown lotus, and whose left side is adorned by the blushing beauty of 
Lakshmi; whose body is mantled by a coloured red coverlet; and besmeared 
with red sandal paste like liquid gold. 


25. I take my asylum under that Hari who is the destructive frost to the 
lotus-bed of demons; and the rising sun to the opening buds of the lotus-bed 
of the deities; who is the source of the lotus-born Brahma, and receptacle of 
the lotiform seat (cranium) of our understanding. 


26. My hope is in Hari, — the blooming lotus of the bed of the triple world, 
and the only light amidst the darkness of the universe; who is the principle of 
the intellect, — chit, amidst the gross material world and who is the only 
remedy of all the evils and troubles of this transient life. 


27. Vasishtha continued: — Hari the destroyer of demons, who is graced 
on his side by the goddess of prosperity; being lauded with many such 
graceful speeches of the demoniac lord, answered him as lovingly in his blue 
lotus-like form, as when the deep clouds respond to the peacocks’ screams. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
PRAHLADA’S SELF KNOWLEDGE OF 
SPIRITUALISM. 


Argument. Prahlada’s meditations and attainment of spiritual knowledge by 
the blessing of Vishnu. 


The Lord said: — O thou rich jewel on the crown of the Daitya race! Receive 
thy desired boon of me for alleviation of thy worldly afflictions. 


2. Prahlada replied: — What better blessing can I ask of thee, my Lord! 
than to instruct me in what thou thinkest thy best gift, above all other treasures 
of the world, and which is able to requite all our wants in this miserable life. 


3. The Lord answered: — Mayst thou have a sinless boy! and may thy right 
discrimination of things, lead thee to thy rest in God, and the attainment of thy 
Supreme felicity, after dispersion of thy earthly cares, and the errors of this 
world. 


4. Vasishtha rejoined: — Being thus bid by his god, the lord of demons fell 
into a profound meditation, with his nostrils snoring loudly like the gurgling 
waters of the deep. 


5. As the lord Vishnu departed from his sight, the chief of the demons 
made his oblations after him; consisting of handfuls of flowers and rich gems 
and jewels of various kinds. 


6. Then seated in his posture of padmdsana, with his legs folded over one 
another, upon his elevated and elegant seat; and then chaunted his holy hymn 
and reflected within himself. 


7. My deliverer from this sinful world, has bade me to have my 
discrimination, therefore, must I betake myself to discriminate between what 
is true and falsehood. 


8. I must know that I am in this darksome world, and must seek the light of 
my soul as also what is that principle, (Ego), that makes me speak, walk and 
take the pains to earn myself. 


9. I perceive it is nothing of this external world, like any of its verdant trees 
or hills; the external bodies are all of a gross nature, but my ego is quite a 
simple and pure essence. 


10. I am not this insensible body, which is both dull and dumb, and is made 
to move for a moment by means of the vital airs. It is an unreal appearance of 
a transitory existence. 


11. I am not the insensible sound, which is a vacuous substance and 
produced in vacuity. It is perceptible by the ear-hole, and is as evanescent and 
inane as empty air. 


12. Iam neither the insensible organ of touch, or the momentary feeling of 
taction; but find myself to be an inward principle with the faculty of 
intellection, and the capacity of knowing the nature of the soul. 


13. I am not even my taste, which is confined to the relishing of certain 
objects, and to the organ of the tongue; which is a trifling and ever restless 
thing, sticking to and moving in the cavity of the mouth. 


14. I am not my sight, that is employed in seeing the visibles only; it is 
weak and decaying and never lasting in its power, nor capable of viewing the 
invisible Spirit. 


15. Iam not the power of my smelling, which appertains to my nasal organ 
only, and is conversant with odorous substances for a short moment only. 
(Fragrance is a fleeting thing). 


16. I am pure intelligence, and none of the sensations of my five external 
organs of sense; I am neither my mental faculty, which is ever frail and fruit; 
nor is there anything belonging to me or participating of my true essence. I am 
the soul and an indivisible whole. 


17. I am the ego or my intellect, without the objects of intellection, (i.e., the 
thinking principle freed from its thoughts). My ego pervades internally and 
externally over all things, and manifests them to the view. I am the whole 
without its parts, pure without foulness and everlasting. 


18. It is my intellection that manifests to me this pot and that painting, and 
brings all other objects to my knowledge by its pure light; as the sun and a 


lamp show everything to the sight. 


19. Ah! I come to remember the whole truth at present, that I am the 
immutable and all-pervading Spirit, shining in the form of the intellect. 
(Gloss. — The internal and intellectual Soul, is the Spirit of God). 


20. This essence evolves itself into the various faculties of sense; as the 
inward fire unfolds itself into the forms of its flash and flame, and its sparks 
and visible light. 


21. It is this principle which unfolds itself, into the forms of the different 
organs of sense also; as the all-diffusive heat of the hot season, shows itself in 
the shape of mirage in sandy deserts. 


22. It is this element likewise, which constitutes the substance of all 
objects; as it is the light of the lamp which is the cause of the various colours 
of things; as the whiteness or other of a piece of cloth or any other thing. (The 
intrinsic perceptivity of the soul, causes the extrinsic senses and their separate 
organs). 


23. It is the source of the perception of all living and waking beings, and of 
everything else in existence; and as a mirror is the reflector of all outward 
appearances, so is the Soul the reflective organ of all its internal and external 
phenomena. 


24. It is by means of this immutable intellectual light alone, that we 
perceive the heat of the sun, the coldness of the moon, solidity of the rock and 
the fluidity of water. 


25. This one is the prime cause of every object of our continuous 
perceptions in this world; this is the first cause of all things, without having 
any prior cause of its own. (The soul produces the body, and not the body 
brings forth the soul). 


26. It is this that produces our notions of the continuity of objects that are 
spread all around us, and take the name of objects from their objectivity of the 
soul; as a thing is called not from the heat which makes it such. 


27. It is this formless cause, that is the prime cause of all plastic and 
secondary causes, (such as Brahma the creative agent and others). It is from 
this that the world has its production, as coldness is the produce of cold and 
the like. 


28. The gods Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and Indra, who are causes of the 


existence of the world, all owe their origin to this prime cause, who has no 
cause of himself. 


29. I hail that Supreme soul which is imprest in me, and is apart from every 
object of thought of the intellect, and which is self-manifest in all things and 
at all times. 


30. All beings besides, stand in the relation of modes and modalities to this 
Supreme Being; and they immerge as properties in that intellectual Spirit. 


31. Whatever this internal and intelligent Soul wills to do, the same is done 
everywhere; and nothing besides that self-same soul exists in reality 
anywhere. 


32. Whatever is intended to be done by this intellectual power, the same 
receives a form of its own; and whatever is thought to be undone by the 
intellect, the same is dissolved into nought from its substantiality. 


33. These numberless series of worldly objects, (as this pot, these paintings, 
and the like), are as shades cast on the immense mirror of vacuum, (or as air- 
drawn pictures represented on the canvas of empty Space). 


34. All these objects increase and decrease in their figures under the light of 
the soul, like the shadows of things enlarging and diminishing themselves in 
the sun-shine. 


35. This internal Soul is invisible to all beings, except to those whose 
minds are melted down in piety. It is seen by the righteous in the form of the 
clear firmament. 


36. This great cause like a large tree, gives rise to all these visible 
phenomena like its germ and sprouts; and the movements of living beings, are 
as the flitterings of bees about this tree. 


37. It is this that gives rise to the whole creation both in its ideal and real 
and mobile or quiescent forms; as a huge rock gives growth to a large forest 
with its various kinds of big trees and dwarf shrubberies. (To him no high, no 
low, no great, no small, He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all. — 
Pope). 


38. It is not apart from anything, existing in the womb of this triple world; 
but is residing alike in the highest gods, as in the lowest grass below; and 
manifests them all full to our view. 


39. This is one with the ego, and the all-pervading soul; and is situated as 


the moving spirit, and unmoving dullness of the whole. 


40. The universal soul is beyond the distinction, of my, thy, or his 
individual spirit; and is above the limits of time, and place, of number and 
manner, of form or figure or shape or size. 


41. It is one intelligent soul, which by its own intelligence, is the eye and 
witness of all visible things; and is represented as having a thousand eyes and 
hands and as many feet. (Wherewith he sees and grasps everything, and stands 
and moves in every place). 


42. This is that ego of my-self, that wanders about the firmament, in the 
body of the shining sun; and wanders in other forms also, as those of air in the 
current winds. (The first person I is used for supreme Ego). 


43. The sky is the azure body of my Vishnu with its accompaniments of the 
conch-shell, discus, club, and the lotus, in the clouds, all which are tokens of 
prosperity in this world by their blissful rains. (Vishnu is the lord of Lakshmi 
or prosperity, which is another name for a plenteous harvest. Her other name 
Sri the same with Ceres, — the goddess of corn and mother of Prosperine in 
Grecian mythology). 


44. I find myself as identic with this god, while I am sitting in my posture 
of padmdsana and in this state of Samadhi, — hypnotism, and when I have 
attained my perfection in quietism. (which is the form of Vishnu in the serene 


sky). 


45. Iam the same with Siva, — the god with his three eyes, and with his 
eye-balls rolling like bees, on the lotus face of Gauri; and it is I that in the 
form of the god, Brahma, contain the whole creation in me, as a tortoise 
contracts its limbs in itself. (The soul in rapture, seems to contain the 
macrocosm in itself). 


46. I rule over the world in the form of Indra, and as a monk I command the 
monastery which has come down to me. i.e., Iam an Indra, when I reign over 
my domain; and a poor monk, when I dwell in my humble cell. 


47. I, (the Ego), am both the male and female, and I am both the boy and 
girl; I am old as regards my soul, and I am young with regard to my body, 
which is born and ever renewed. 


48. The ego is the grass and all kinds of vegetables on earth; as also the 
moisture wherewith it grows them, like its thoughts in the ground of the 
intellect; in the same manner as herbs are grown in holes and wells by their 


moisture. i.e., The ego or soul is the pith and marrow of all substance. 


49. It is for pleasure that this ego has stretched out the world; like a clever 
boy who makes his dolls of clay in play. (God forms the world for his own 
amusement). 


50. This ego is myself that gives existence to all being, and it is I in whom 
they live and move about; and being at last forsaken by me, the whole 
existence dwindles into nothing. (The ego is the individual as well the 
universal soul). 


51. Whatever image is impressed in the clear mirror or mould of my 
intellect, the same and no other is in real existence, because there is nothing 
that exists beside or apart from myself. 


52. I am the fragrance of flowers, and the hue of their leaves; I am the 
figure of all forms, and the perception of perceptibles. 


53. Whatever movable or immovable thing is visible in this world, I am the 
inmost heart of it, without having any of its desires in my heart. 


54. As the prime element of moisture, is diffused in nature in the form of 
water; so is my spirit overspread in vegetables and all things at large in the 
form of vacuum. (Which is in the inside and outside of everything). 


55. I enter in the form of consciousness, into the interior of everything; and 
extend in the manner of various sensation at my own will. 


56. As butter is contained in milk and moisture is inherent in water; so is 
the power of the intellect spread in all beings, and so the ego is situated in the 
interior of all things. 


57. The world exists in the intellect, at all times of the present, past and 
future ages; and the objects of intelligence, are all inert and devoid of motion; 
like the mineral and vegetable productions of earth. 


58. I am the all-grasping and all-powerful form of Virdj, which fills the 
infinite space, and is free from any diminution or decrease of its shape and 
size. I am this all-pervading and all-productive power, known as Virdj murti 
or macrocosm (in distinction from the suikshma-deha or microcosm). 


59. [have gained my boundless empire over all worlds, without my seeking 
or asking for it; and without subduing it like Indra of old or crushing the gods 
with my arms. (Man is the lord of the world of his own nature, or as the poet 
says: — “I am the Monarch of all I survey, and my right there is none to 


dispute.’’) 


60. O the extensive spirit of God! I bow down to that spirit in my spirit; and 
find myself lost in it, as in the vast ocean of the universal deluge. 


61. I find no limit of this spirit; as long as I am seated in the enjoyment of 
my spiritual bliss; but appear to move about as a minute mollusk, in the 
fathomless expanse of the milky ocean. 


62. This temple of Brahmanda or mundane world, is too small and 
straitened for the huge body of my soul; and it is impossible for me to be 
contained in it, as it is for an elephant to enter into the hole of a needle. 


63. My body stretches beyond the region of Brahma, and my attributes 
extend beyond the categories of the schools, and there is no definite limitation 
given of them to this day. 


64. The attribute of a name and body to the unsupported soul is a 
falsehood, and so is it to compress the unlimited soul within the narrow 
bounds of the body. 


65. To say this is I, and this another, is altogether wrong; and what is this 
body or my want of it, or the state of living or death to me? (Since the soul is 
an immortal and ethereal substance and my true-self and essence). 


66. How foolish and short-witted were my forefathers, who having 
forsaken this spiritual domain, have wandered as mortal beings in this frail 
and miserable world. 


67. How great is this grand sight of the immensity of Brahma; and how 
mean are these creeping mortals, with their high aims and ambition, and all 
their splendours of royalty. (The glory of God, transcends the glory of 
glorious sun). 


68. This pure intellectual sight of mine, which is fraught with endless joy, 
accompanied by ineffable tranquility, surpasses all other sights in the whole 
world. (The rapture of heavenly peace and bliss, has no bounds). 


69. I bow down to the Ego, which is situated in all beings; which is the 
intelligent and intellectual soul, and quite apart from whatever is the object of 
intellection or thought, (i.e., the unthinkable spirit). 


70. I who am the unborn and increate soul, reign triumphant over this 
perishing world; by my attainment to the state of the great universal spirit, 
which is the chief object of gain, — the summum bonum of mortal beings, and 


which I live to enjoy. (This sublimation of the human soul to the state of the 
supreme spirit, and enjoyment of spiritual beatification or heavenly rapture, is 
the main aim and end of Yoga meditation). 


71. I take no delight in my unpleasant earthly dominion, which is full of 
painful greatness; nor like to lose my everlasting realm of good 
understanding, which is free from trouble and full of perpetual delight. 


72. Cursed be the wicked demons that are so sadly ignorant of their souls; 
and resort for the safety of their bodies, to their strongholds of woods and hills 
and ditches, like the insects of those places. 


73. Ignorance of the soul leads to the serving of the dull ignorant body, 
with articles of food and raiment; and it was thus that our ignorant elders 
pampered their bodies for no lasting good. 


74. What good did my father Hiranyakasipu reap, from his prosperity of a 
few years in this world; and what did he acquire worthy of his descent; in the 
line of the great sage Kasyapa? 


75. He who has not tasted the blissfulness of his soul, has enjoyed no true 
blessing, during his long reign of a hundred years in this world. 


76. He who has gained the ambrosial delight of his spiritual bliss, and 
nothing of the temporary blessings of life; has gained something which is 
ever-full in itself, and of which there is no end to the end of the world. 


77. It is the fool and not the wise, who forsakes this infinite joy for the 
temporary delights of this world; and resembles the foolish camel which 
foregoes his fodder of soft leaves, for browzing the prickly thorns of the 
desert. 


78. What man of sense would turn his eyes from so romantic a sight, and 
like to roam in a city burnt down to the ground; and what wise man is there 
that would forsake the sweet juice of sugarcane, in order to taste the bitterness 
of Nimba? 


79. I reckon all my forefathers as very great fools, for their leaving this 
happy prospect, in order to wander in the dangerous paths of their earthly 
dominion. 


80. Ah! how delightful is the view of flowering gardens, and how 
unpleasant is the sight of the burning deserts of sand; how very quiet are these 
intellectual reveries, and how very boisterous are the cravings of our hearts! 


81. There is no happiness to be had in this earth, that would make us wish 
for our sovereignty in it; all happiness consists in the peace of the mind, 
which it concerns us always to seek. 


82. It is the calm, quiet and unaltered state of the mind, that gives us true 
happiness in all conditions of life; and the true realm of things in all places 
and at all times, and under every circumstance in life. 


83. It is the virtue of sunlight to enlighten all objects, and that of moonlight 
to fill us with its ambrosial draughts; but the light of Brahma transcends them 
both, by filling the three worlds with its spiritual glory; which is brighter than 
sun-beams, and cooler than moon-light. 


84. The power of Siva stretches over the fulness of knowledge, and that of 
Vishnu over victory and prosperity, (Jayas-Lakshmi). Fleetness is the 
character of the mental powers, and force is the property of the wind. 


85. Inflammation is the property of fire, and moisture is that of water; 
taciturnity is the quality of devotees for success of devotion, and loquacity is 
the qualification of learning. 


86. It is the nature of the aerials to move about in the air, and of rocks to 
remain fixed on the ground; the nature of water is to set deep and run 
downwards; and that of mountains to stand and rise upwards. 


87. Equanimity is the nature of Saugatas or Buddhists, and carousing is the 
penchant of wine-bibbers; the spring delights in its flowering, and the rainy 
season exults in the roaring of its clouds. 


88. The Yakshas are full of their delusiveness, and the celestials are 
familiar with cold and frost, and those of the torrid zone are inured in its heat. 
(This passage clearly shows the heaven of the Hindus, to have been in the 
northern regions of cold and frost). 


89. Thus are many other beings suited to their respective climes and 
seasons, and are habituated to the very many modes of life and varieties of 
habits; to which they have been accustomed in the past and present times. 


90. It is the one Uniform and Unchanging Intellect, that ordains these 
multiform and changing modifications of powers and things, according to its 
changeable will and velocity. 


91. The same unchanging Intellect presents these hundreds of changing 
scenes to us, as the same and invariable light of the sun, shows a thousand 


varying forms and colour to the sight. 


92. The same Intellect sees at a glance, these great multitudes of objects, 
that fill the infinite space on all sides, in all the three times of the present, past, 
and future. 


93. The self-same pure Intellect knows at once, the various states of all 
things presented in this vast phenomenal world, in all the three times that are 
existent, gone by and are to come hereafter. 


94. This pure Intellect reflects at one and the same time, all things existent 
in the present, past and future times; and is full with the forms of all things 
existing in the infinite space of the universe. 


95. Knowing the events of the three times, and seeing the endless 
phenomena of all worlds present before it, the divine intellect continues full 
and perfect in itself and at all times. 


96. The understanding ever continues the same and_ unaltered, 
notwithstanding the great variety of its perceptions of innumerables of sense 
and thought: such as the different tastes of sweet and sour in honey and nimba 
fruit at the same time. (i.e., The varieties of mental perception and conception, 
make no change in the mind), as the reflexion of various figures makes no 
change in the reflecting glass. 


97. The intellect being in its state of arguteness, by abandonment of mental 
desires, and knowing the natures of all things by reducing their dualities into 
unity: — 


98. It views them alike with an equal eye and at the same time; 
notwithstanding the varieties of objects and their great difference from one 
another. (i.e., All the varieties blend into unity). 


99. By viewing all existence as non-existence, you get rid of your existing 
pains and troubles, and by seeing all existence in the light of nihility, you 
avoid the suffering of existing evils. 


100. The intellect being withdrawn from its view of the events of the three 
tenses, (i.e., the occurrences of the past, present, and future times), and being 
freed from the fetters of its fleeting thoughts, there remains only a calm 
tranquility. 


101. The soul being inexpressible in words, proves to be a negative idea 
only; and there ensues a state of one’s perpetual unconsciousness of his soul 


or self-existence. (This is the state of anesthesia, which is forgetting oneself 
to a stock and stone). 


102. In this state of the soul it is equal to Brahma, which is either nothing at 
all or the All of itself; and its absorption in perfect tranquilness is called its 
liberation, (moksha), or emancipation from all feelings, (bodhas). 


103. The intellect being vitiated by its volition, does not see the soul in a 
clear light, as the hoodwinked eye has naught but a dim and hazy sight of the 
world. 


104. The intellect which is vitiated by the dirt of its desire and dislike, is 
impeded in its heavenly flight, like a bird caught in a snare. (Nor love nor hate 
of aught, is the best state of thought). 


105. They who have fallen into the snare of delusion by their ignorant 
choice of this or that, are as blind birds falling into the net in search of their 


prey. 


106. Entangled in the meshes of desire, and confined in the pit of 
worldliness, our fathers were debarred from this unbarred sight of spiritual 
light and endless delight. 


107. In vain did our forefathers flourish for a few days on the surface of 
this earth; only to be swept away like the fluttering flies and gnats, by a gust 
of wind into the ditch. 


108. If these foolish pursuers after the painful pleasures of the world, had 
known the path of truth they would never fall into the dark pit of unsubstantial 
pursuits. 


109. Foolish folks being subjected to repeated pains and pleasures by their 
various choice of things; follow at last the fate of ephemeral worms, that are 
born to move and die in their native ditches and bogs. (i.e., as they are born of 
earth and dust so do they return to dust and earth again). 


110. He is said to be really alive who lives true to nature, and the mirage of 
whose desires and aversion, is suppressed like the fumes of his fancy, by the 
rising cloud of his knowledge of truth. 


111. The hot and foul fumes of fancy, fly afar from the pure light of reason, 
as the hazy mist of night, is dispersed by the bright beams of moon-light. 


112. I hail that soul which dwells as the inseparable intellect in me; and I 
come at last to know my God, that resides as a rich gem enlightening all the 


worlds in myself. 


113. I have long thought upon and sought after thee, and I have at last 
found thee rising in myself; I have chosen thee from all others; and whatever 
thou art, I hail thee, my Lord! as thou appearest in me. 


114. [hail thee in me, O lord of gods, in thy form of infinity within myself, 
and in the shape of bliss within my enraptured soul; I hail thee, O Supreme 
Spirit! that art superior to and supermost of all. 


115. I bow down to that cloudless light, shining as the disk of the full-moon 
in me; and to that self-same form, which is free from all predicates and 
attributes. It is the self-risen light in myself, and that felicitous self-same soul, 
which I find in myself alter ego. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
MEDITATION ON BRAHMA IN ONE’S SELF. 


Argument. Pantheistic Adoration of the universal soul. 


Prahlada continued: — Om is the proper form of the One, and devoid of all 
defalcation; that Om is this all, that is contained in this world. (The Sruti says: 
— Om is Brahma, and Om is this all, it is the first and last etc.). 


2. It is the intelligence, and devoid of flesh, fat, blood and bones; it abides 
in all things, and is the enlightener of the sun and all other luminous bodies. 


3. It warms the fire and moistens the water; (i.e., gives heat and moisture to 
the fire and water). It gives sensation to the senses, and enjoys all things in the 
manner of a prince. (Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze, etc. — Pope). 


4. It rests without sitting, it goes without walking; it is active in its 
inactivity, it acts all without coming in tact with anything. 


5. It is the past and gone, and also the present and even now; it is both the 
next moment, and remote future also; it is all that is fit and proper, and 
whatever is unfit and improper likewise. (Changed through all, and yet in all 
the same. All Discord, harmony not understood, tends to universal good. — 
Pope). 


6. Undaunted, it produces all productions, and spreads the worlds over one 
another; it continues to turn about the worlds, from the Sphere of Brahma to 
the lower grounds of grass. (So Pope: — Spreads through all extent, spreads 
undivided, operates unspent). 


7. Though unmoving and immutable, yet it is as fleeting and changeable as 
the flying winds; it is inert as the solid rock, and more transparent than the 
subtle ether. “These as they change, are but the varied God.” — Thomson. 


8. It moves the minds of men, as the winds shake the leaves of trees; and it 


directs the organs of sense, as a charioteer manages his horses. 


9. The Intellect sits as the lord of this bodily mansion, which is carried 
about as a chariot by the equestrians of the senses; and sitting at its own ease 
as sole monarch, it enjoys the fruitions of the bodily actions. 


10. It is to be diligently sought after, and meditated upon and lauded at all 
times; because it is by means of this only, that one may have his salvation 
from the pains of his age and death, and the evils of ignorance. 


11. It is easily to be found, and as easy to be familiarised as a friend; it 
dwells as the humble bee, in the recess of the lotus-like heart of every body. 


12. Uncalled and uninvoked, it appears of itself from within the body; and 
at a slight call it appears manifest to view. (So the Sruti: — The soul becomes 
palpable to view). 


13. Constant service of and attendance on this all-opulent Lord, never make 
him proud or haughty, as they do any other rich master to his humble 
attendants. 


14. This Lord is as closely situated in every body, as fragrance and fluidity, 
are inherent in flowers and sesamum seeds; and as flavour is inseparably 
connected with liquid substances. 


15. It is by reason of our unreasonableness, that we are ignorant of the 
Intellect, that is situated in ourselves; while our reasoning power serves to 
manifest it, as a most intimate friend to our sight. 


16. As we come to know this Supreme Lord, that is situated in us by our 
reasoning; we come to feel an ineffable delight in us, as at the sight of a 
beloved and loving friend. 


17. As this dearest friend appears to view, with his benign influence of 
shedding full bliss about us; we come to the sight of such glorious prospects, 
as to forget at once all our earthly enjoyments before them. 


18. All his fetters are broken loose and fall off from him, and all his 
enemies are put to an end; whose mind is not perforated by his cravings, like 
houses dug by the injurious mice. 


19. This one in all (to pan) being seen in us, the whole world is seen in 
Him; and He being heard, everything is heard in Him: He being felt, all things 
are felt in Him; and He being present, the whole world is present before us. 


20. He wakes over the sleeping world, and destroys the darkness of the 
ignorant; He removes the dangers of the distressed, and bestows His blessings 
upon the holy. (So the Sruti: — suptesujdgarti. God never sleeps. — Jones. 
The ever-wakeful eyes of Jove. To wake over the sleeping worlds. — Iliad). 


21. He moves about as the living soul of all, and rejoices as the animal soul 
in all objects of enjoyment; it is He that glows in all visible objects in their 
various hues. (Shines in the sun, and twinkles in the stars; blazes in the fire, 
and blushes in flowers. — Pope). 


22. He sees himself in himself, and is quietly situated in all things; as 
pungency resides in peppers, and sweetness in sugar, etc. 


23. He is situated as intelligence and sensations, in the inward and outward 
parts of living beings; and forms the essence and existence of all objects, in 
general, in the whole universe. 


24. He forms the vacuity of the sky, and the velocity of the winds; He is the 
light of igneous bodies, and the moisture of aqueous substances. 


25. He is the firmness of the earth, and the warmth of the fire; He is the 
coldness of the moon, and the entity of everything in the world. 


26. He is blackness in inky substances, and coldness in the particles of 
snow; and as fragrance resides in flowers, so is he resident in all bodies. 


27. It is his essence which fills all space, as the essence of time fills all 
duration; and it is his omnipotence that is the fountain of all forces, as it is his 
omnipresence that is the support of everything in every place. (This is the 
pervasion, of omnipresence wrongly called as pantheism). 


Note: (This is the doctrine of the indwelling spirit pervading all 
nature. Or as the poet says: — 


A motion or spirit that impels 
All thinking things, all objects of thought, 
And rolls through all things 

— Wordsworth) 


28. As the Lord unfolds everything to light, by the external organ of sight 
and the internal organ of thinking; so the Great God enlightens the gods, (sun, 
moon, Indra and others) by his own light. (The Natural Theism which 
represented the visible heavens and heavenly bodies as gods, maintained also 


the doctrine of the One Invisible God, as shining and supporting them all by 
his presence. — Gloss). 


29. I am that I am, without the attributes (of form or figure or any property) 
in me; and I am as the clear air, unsullied by the particles of flying dust; and 
as the leaves of lotuses, untouched by their supporting and surrounding 
waters. 


30. As a rolling stone gathers no moss, so there is nothing that touches or 
bears any relation to my airy mind; and the pain and pleasure which betake 
the body, cannot affect my form of the inner soul. 


31. The soul like a gourd fruit, is not injured by the shower of rain falling 
on the outer body resembling its hard crust; and the intellect like the flame of 
a lamp, is not to be held fast (or fastened) by a rope. 


32. So this ego of mine which transcends everything, is not to be tied down 
by anything to the earth; nor does it bear any relation with the objects of sense 
or my mental desires, or anything existent or not in existence in this world. 


33. Who has the power to grasp the empty vacuum; or confine the mind? 
You may cut the body to a thousand pieces, but you cannot divide the 
invisible and the indivisible vacuous Spirit rising in me. 


34. As the pot being broken or bored, or removed from its place, there is no 
loss sustained by its containing or contained air; so the body being destroyed, 
there is no damage done to the unconnected soul; and the mind is as false a 
name, as that of a demon or Pisdcha. 


35. The destruction of the gross body, does not injure the immaterial soul; 
and what is the mind, but the perceptive power of my desires and gross 
pleasures and pains. (The organ of the mind is destroyed with the body). 


36. I had such a percipient mind before, but now I have found my rest in 
quiescence. I find it is another thing beside myself, because it perceives and 
partakes of the enjoyments of life, and is exposed to the dangers that betake 
the body. 


37. There is another one in me, (i.e., the soul or intellect), which beholds 
the actions of the other, (i.e., of the mind) as a theatric act; and witnesses the 
exposure of the body to peril, as its last sad and catastrophe. 


38. It is the wicked spirit, that is caught in ignorance; but the pure spirit has 
nothing to suffer; and I feel in myself neither the wish of my continuing in 


worldly enjoyments, nor a desire of forsaking them altogether. (I enjoy my 
life while it lasts). 


Note: Nor love thy life nor hate, but live while thou livest; How long or 
short, permit to heaven. — Dum vivimus, vinamus. 


39. Let what may come to pass on me, and whatever may happen to pass 
away from me; I have neither the expectation of pleasures for me, nor an 
aversion to the suffering of pain. (in my gain or loss of anything, in my 
resignation of myself to God). 


40. Let pleasure or pain betake or forsake me as it may, without my being 
concerned with or taking heed of either; because I know the fluctuating 
desires, to be incessantly rising and setting in the sphere of my mind. 


41. Let these desires depart from me, for I have nothing to do with them, 
nor have they any concern with me. Alas! how have I been all this time, 
misled to these by ignorance, which is my greatest enemy. 


42. It is by favour of Vishnu, and by virtue of my pure Vaishnava faith, 
rising in me of itself, that my ignorance is now wholly dispelled from me, and 
the knowledge of the True One is revealed unto me. 


43. My knowledge of truth has now driven away my egoism, (or 
knowledge of myself), from my mind; as they drive a spirit from its hiding- 
place in the hollow of a tree. 


44. 1 am now purified by admonition (mantra) of divine knowledge to me, 
and the arbour of my body is now set free from egoism, which sat as a demon 
(Yaksha) in it. 


45. It is now become as a sacred arbour, blooming with heavenly flowers; 
and freed from the evils of ignorance, penury, and vain wishes, which infested 
it erewhile. 


46. Loaded with the treasure of sacred knowledge, I find myself sitting here 
as one supremely-rich; and knowing all that is to be known, I see the sights 
that are invisible to others. 


47. I have now got that in which nothing can be wanting, and wherein there 
is no want besides; it is by my good fortune that I am freed from all evils, and 
the venomous serpents of worldly cares. 


48. My chill and frigid ignorance is melted down, by the light of 
knowledge; and the hot mirage of my desires, is now quenched and cooled by 


my quietude: I see the clear sky on all sides without any mist or dust and I rest 
under the cooling umbrage of the tranquility of my soul. 


49. It is by my glorification of God, and my thanksgivings to Vishnu, my 
holy rites and also by my divine knowledge and quietism; that I have obtained 
by grace of my God, a spacious room and elevated position in spirituality. 


50. I have got that god in my spirit, and have seen and known him also in 
his spiritual form. He is beyond my own ego, and I remember him always in 
this manner. 


51. [remember Vishnu as the great Spirit, and eternal Brahma in his nature; 
while my egoism or selfishness is confined as a snake, in the holes of my 
organic frame, which is wholly the land of death. (The animal soul is born to 
die with the mortal body). 


52. It is entangled in the bushes of its pricking desires, resembling the 
prickly karanja ferns; and amidst the tumults of raging passions, and a 
thousand other broils of this world. 


53. It is placed amidst the conflagration of calamities, and is encircled by 
the flames of smart pain at all times; it is subjected to continual ups and 
downs of fortune, and repeated risings and fallings in its journey in this world. 


54. It has its repeated births and deaths, owing to its interminable desires; 
and thus I am always deceived by this great enemy, — my own egoism. 


55. The animal soul is powerless at night, as if it were caught in the 
clutches of a demon in the forest; so I feel it now to be deprived of its power 
and action, while I am in this state of my meditation. (The animal spirit is 
dormant in its states of physical and spiritual trance). 


56. It is by grace of Vishnu, that the light of my understanding is roused; 
and as I see my God by means of this light, I lose the sight of my demoniac 
egoism. (i.e., | become unconscious of my existence at the sight of my Lord). 


57. The sight of the demoniac egoism dwelling in the cavity of my mind, 
disappears from my view in the like manner; as the shadow of darkness flies 
from the light of a lamp, and as the shade of night is dispersed by day light. 


58. As you know not where the flame of the lighted lamp is fled, after it is 
extinguished; so we know not where our lordly egoism is hid, at the sight of 
our God before us. 


59. My rich egoism flies at the approach of reason, as a heavy loaded 


robber, flies before the advance of daylight; and our false egoism vanishes as 
a demon, at the rising of the true Ego of God. 


60. My egoism being gone, I am set at ease like a tree, freed from a 
poisonous snake rankling in its hollow cavity. I am at rest and in my 
insensibleness in this world, when I am awakened to my spiritual light. 


61. I have escaped from the hand of my captor, and gained my permanent 
ascendency over others; I have got my internal coldness sang froid, and have 
allayed the mirage of my thirst after vain glory. 


62. I have bathed in the cold bath of rain water, and am pacified as a rock 
after the cooling of its conflagration; I am cleansed of my egoism, by my 
knowledge of the true meaning of the term. 


63. What is ignorance and what are our pains and affliction? what are our 
evil desires, and what are our diseases and dangers? All these with the ideas 
of heaven and liberation, together with the hope of heaven and the fear of hell, 
are but false conceptions proceeding from our egoism or selfishness (or the 
cravings and loathings of our hearts). 


64. As a picture is drawn on a canvas and not in empty air, so our thoughts 
depend on our selfish principle and upon its want. And as it is the clear linen, 
that receives the yellow colour of saffron; so it is the pure soul that receives 
the image of God. It is egoism which vitiates the soul with the bilious 
passions of the heart, as a dirty cloth vitiates a goodly paint, with its inborn 
taint. 


65. Purity of the inward soul, is like the clearness of the autumnal sky; it is 
devoid of the cloudiness of egoism, and the drizzling drops of desires. (i.e., A 
pure soul is as clear as the unclouded sky). 


66. I bow down to thee, O my soul inmost! that art a stream of bliss to me, 
with pure limpid waters amidst, and without the dirt of egoism about thee. 


67. I hail thee, O thou my soul! that art an ocean of joy to me, uninfested 
by the sharks of sensual appetites, and undisturbed by the sub-marine fire of 
the latent mind. 


68. I prostrate myself before thee, O thou quick soul of mine! that art a 
mountain of delight to me, without the hovering clouds of egoistic passions, 
and the wild fires of gross appetites and desires. 


69. I bow to thee, O thou soul in me! that art the heavenly lake of Manasa 


to me, with the blooming lotuses of delight, and without the billows of cares 
and anxieties. 


70. I greet thee my internal spirit! that floatest in the shape of a swan 
(hansa) in the lake of the mind (manas) of every individual, and residest in 
the cavity of the lotiform cranium, (Brahmdrandhra), with thy outstretched 
wings of consciousness and standing. 


71. All hail to thee, O thou full and perfect spirit! that art the undivided and 
immortal soul, and appearest in thy several parts of the mind and senses; like 
the full-moon containing all its digits in its entire self. 


72. Obeisance to the sun of my intellect! which is always in its ascendency 
and dispels the darkness of my heart; which pervades everywhere, and is yet 
invisible or dimly seen by us. 


73. I bow to my intellectual light, which is an oilless lamp of benign 
effulgence, and burns in full blaze within me and without its wick. It is the 
enlightener of nature, and quite still in its nature. 


74. Whenever my mind is heated by cupid’s fire, I cool it by the coolness of 
my cold and callous intellect coolness; as they temper the red-hot iron with a 
cold and hard hammer. 


75. 1 am gaining my victory over all things, by killing my egoism by the 
Great Ego; and by making my senses and mind to destroy themselves. 


76. I bow to thee, O thou all subduing faith, that dost crush our ignorant 
doubt by thy wisdom; dispellest the unrealities by thy knowledge of the 
reality, and removest our cravings by thy contentedness. 


77.1 subsist solely as the transparent spirit, by killing my mind by the great 
Mind, and removing my egoism by the sole Ego, and by driving the 
unrealities by the true Reality. 


78. [rely my body, (i.e., I depend for my bodily existence), on the moving 
principle of my soul only; without the consciousness of my self-existence, my 
egoism, my mind and all its efforts and actions. 


79. [have obtained at last of its own accord, and by the infinite grace of the 
Lord of all, the highest blessing of cold heartedness and insouciance in 
myself. 


80. Iam now freed from the heat of my feverish passions, by subsidence of 
the demon of my ignorance; from disappearance of the goblin of my egoism. 


81. I know not where the falcon of my false egoism has fled, from the cage 
of my body, by breaking its string of desires to which it was fast bound in its 
feet. 


82. I do not know whither the eagle of my egotism is flown, from its nest in 
the arbor of my body, after blowing away its thick ignorance as dust. 


83. Ah! where is my egoism fled, with its body besmeared with the dust 
and dirt of worldliness, and battered by the rocks of its insatiable desires? It is 
bitten by the deadly dragons of fears and dangers, and pierced in its hearts by 
repeated disappointments and despair. 


84. O! I wonder to think what I had been all this time, when I was bound 
fast by my egoism in the strong chain of my personality. 


85. I think myself a new born being today, and to have become high- 
minded also, by being removed from the thick cloud of egoism, which had 
shrouded me all this time. 


86. I have seen and known, and obtained this treasure of my soul, as it is 
presented to my understanding, by the verbal testimonies of the Sdstras, and 
by the light of inspiration in my hour of meditation, (samddhi). 


87. My mind is set at rest as extinguished fire, by its being released from 
the cares of the world; as also from all other thoughts and desires and the error 
of egoism. I am now set free from my affections and passions, and all delights 
of the world, as also my craving after them. 


88. I have passed over the impassable ocean of dangers and difficulties, and 
the intolerable evils of transmigration; by the disappearance of my internal 
darkness, and sight of the One Great God in my intellect. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 
HYMN TO THE SOUL. 


Argument. Prahlada, getting the light of his internal soul, delights himself 
as one in the company of his sweet-heart. 


Prahlada continued: — I thank thee, O lord and great spirit! that art beyond all 
things, and art found in myself by my good fortune. 


2. I have no other friend, O my Lord, in the three worlds except thee; that 
dost vouchsafe to embrace and look upon me, when I pray unto thee. 


3. It is thou that preservest and destroyest all, and givest all things to 
everybody; and it is thou, that makest us move and work, and praise thy holy 
name. Now art thou found and seen by me, and now thou goest away from 
me. 


4. Thou fillest all being in the world with thy essence; thou art present in all 
places, but where art thou now fled and gone from me? 


5. Great is the distance between us, even as the distance of the places of our 
birth, it is my good fortune of friend! that has brought thee near me today, and 
presented thee to my sight, (so fleeting is spiritual vision). 


6. I hail thee, thou felicitous one! that art my maker and preserver also; I 
thank thee that art the stalk of this fruit of this world, and that art the eternal 
and pure soul of all. 


7. I thank the holder of the lotus and discus, and thee also that bearest the 
crescent half-moon on thy forehead, — great Siva. I thank the lord of gods, — 
Indra, and Brahma also, that is born of the lotus. 


8. It is a verbal usage that makes a distinction betwixt thee and ourselves, 
(i.e., between the Divine and animal souls); but this is a false impression as 
that of the difference between waves and their elemental water. 


9. Thou showest thyself in the shapes of the endless varieties of beings, and 
existence and extinction are the two states of thyself from all eternity. 


10. I thank thee that art the creator and beholder of all, and the manifester 
of innumerable forms. I thank thee that art the whole nature thyself. 


11. [have undergone many tribulations in the long course of past lives, and 
it was by thy will that I became bereft of my strength, and was burnt away at 
last. 


12. I have beheld the luminous worlds, and observed many visible and 
invisible things; but thou art not to be found in them. So I have gained nothing 
(from my observations). 


13. All things composed of earth, stone, and wood, are formations of water, 
(the form of Vishnu), there is nothing here, that is permanent, O god, beside 
thyself. Thou being obtained there is nothing else to desire. 


14. I thank thee lord! that art obtained, seen and known by me this day; and 
that shalt be so preserved by me, as never to be obliterated (from my mind). 


15. Thy bright form which is interwoven by the rays of light, is visible to us 
by inversion of the sight of the pupils of our eyes, into the inmost recesses of 
our heart. 


16. As the feeling of heat and cold is perceived by touch, and as the 
fragrance of the flower is felt in the oil with which it is mixed; so I feel thy 
presence by thy coming in contact with my heart. 


17. As the sound of music enters into the heart through the ears, and makes 
the heart strings to thrill, and the hairs of the body to stand at an end; so is thy 
presence perceived in our hearts also. 


18. As the objects of taste are felt by the tip of the tongue, which conveys 
their relish to the mind; so is thy presence felt by my heart, when thou 
touchest it with thy love. 


19. How can one slight to look and lay hold on his inner soul which shoots 
through every sense of his body; when he takes up a sweet scenting flower, 
perceptible by the sense of smelling only, and finally decorating his outer 
person with it. 


20. How can the Supreme Spirit, which is well known to us by means of 
the teachings of the Vedas, Vedanta, Sidhantas and the Puranas, as also by the 
Logic of schools and the hymns of the Vedas, be any way forgotten by us? 


21. These things which are pleasant to the bodily senses, do not gladden my 
heart, when it is filled by thy translucent presence. 


22. It is by thy effulgent light, that the sun shines so bright; as it is by thy 
benign lustre also, that the moon dispenses her cooling beams. 


23. Thou hast made these bulky rocks, and upheld the heavenly bodies; 
thou hast supported the stable earth, and lifted the spacious firmament. 


24. Fortunately, thou hast become myself, and I have become one with 
thyself, I am identic with thee and thou with me, and there is no difference 
between us. 


25. I thank the great spirit, that is expressed by turns by the words myself 
and thyself; and mine and thine. 


26. I thank the infinite God, that dwells in my unegoistic mind; and I thank 
the formless Lord, that dwells in my tranquil soul. 


27. Thou dwellest, O Lord! in my formless, tranquil, transparent, and 
conscious soul, as thou residest in thy own spirit, which is unbounded by the 
limitations of time and space. 


28. It is by thee that the mind has its action, and the senses have their 
sensations; the body has all its powers, and the vital and respirative breaths 
have their inflations and afflations. 


29. The organs of the body are led by the rope of desire to their several 
actions, and being united with flesh, blood, and bones, are driven like the 
wheels of a car by the charioteer of the mind. 


30. I am the consciousness of my body, and am neither the body itself nor 
my egoism of it; let it, therefore, rise or fall, it is of no advantage or 
disadvantage to me. 


31. I was born in the same time with my ego, (as a personal, corporeal, and 
sensible being); and it was long afterwards that I had the knowledge of my 
soul; I had my insensibility last of all, in the manner of the world approaching 
to its dissolution at the end. 


32. Long have I travelled in the long-some journey of the world; I am 
weary with fatigue and now rest in quiet, like the cooling fire of the last 
conflagration. (i.e., Of the doomsday). 


33. I thank the Lord who is all, (to pan), and yet without all and everything; 


and thee my soul! that art myself likewise. I thank thee above those Sdstras 
and preceptors, that teach the ego and tu, (i.e., the subjective and objective). 


34. I hail the all witnessing power of that providential spirit, that has made 
these ample and endless provisions for others, without touching or enjoying 
them itself. 


35. Thou art the spirit that dwellest in all bodies in the form of the 
fragrance of flowers, and in the manner of breath in bellows; and as the oil 
resides in the sesamum seeds. 


36. How wonderful is this magic scene of thine, that thou appearest in 
everything, and preservest and destroyest it at last, without having any 
personality of thy own. 


37. Thou makest my soul rejoice at one time as a lighted lamp, by 
manifesting all things before it; and thou makest it joyous also, when it is 
extinguished as a lamp, after its enjoyment of the visibles. 


38. This universal frame is situated in an atom of thyself, as the big banian 
tree is contained in the embryo of a grain of its fig. 


39. Thou art seen, O lord, in a thousand forms that glide under our sight; in 
the same manner as the various forms of elephants and horses, cars and other 
things are seen in the passing clouds on the sky. 


40. Thou art both the existence and absence of all things, that are either 
present or lost to our view; yet thou art quite apart from all worldly 
existences, and art aloof from all entities and non-entities in the world. 


41. Forsake, O my soul! the pride and anger of thy mind, and all the 
foulness and wiliness of thy heart; because the high-minded never fall into the 
faults and errors of the common people. 


42. Think over and over on the actions of thy past life, and the long series 
of thy wicked acts; and then with a sigh, blush to think upon what thou hadst 
been before, and cease to do such acts anymore. 


43. The bustle of thy life is past, and thy bad days have gone away; when 
thou wast wrapt in the net of thy tangled thoughts on all sides. 


44. Now thou art a monarch in the city of thy body, and hast the desire of 
thy mind presented before thee; thou art set beyond the reach of pleasure and 
pain, and art as free as the air which nobody can grasp. 


45. As thou hast now subdued the untractable horses of thy bodily organs, 
and the indomitable elephant of thy mind; and as thou hast crushed thy enemy 
of worldly enjoyment, so dost thou now reign as the sole sovereign, over the 
empire of thy body and mind. 


46. Thou art now become as the glorious sun, to shine within and without 
us day by day; and dost traverse the unlimited fields of air, by thy continued 
rising and setting at every place in our meditation of thee. 


47. Thou Lord! art ever asleep, and risest also by thy own power; and then 
thou lookest on the luxuriant world, as a lover looks on his beloved. 


48. These luxuries like honey, are brought from great distances by the bees 
of the bodily organs; and the spirit tastes the sweets, by looking upon them 
through the windows of its eyes. (The spirit enjoys the sweets of offerings, by 
means of its internal senses). 


49. The seat of the intellectual world in the cranium is always dark, and a 
path is made in it by the breathings of inspiration and respiration, 
(prandpdna), which lead the soul to the sight of Brahma. (lit.: to the city of 
Brahma. This is done by the practice of prandydma). 


50. Thou Lord! art the odor of this flower-like body of thine, and thou art 
the nectarious juice of thy moon-like frame, the moisture of this bodily tree, 
and thou art the coolness of its cold humours: phlegm and cough. 


51. Thou art the juice, milk and butter, that support the body, and thou 
being gone, (O soul!), the body is dried up and become as full to feed the fire. 


52. Thou art the flavour of fruits, and the light of all luminous bodies; it is 
thou that perceivest and knowest all things, and givest light to the visual organ 
of sight. 


53. Thou art the vibration of the wind, and the force of our elephantine 
minds; and so art thou the acuteness of the flame of our intelligence. 


54. It is thou that givest us the gift of speech, and dost stop our breath, and 
makest it break forth again on occasions. (Speech, — Vach, — vox, in the 
feminine gender, is made Vacha by affix d according to Bhaguri). 


55. All these various series of worldly productions, bear the same relation 
to thee, as the varieties of jewelleries, (such as the bracelets and wristlets) are 
related to the gold (of which they are made). 


56. Thou art called by the words I, thou, he, efc., and it is thyself that 


callest thyself such as it pleaseth thee. (The impersonal God is represented in 
different persons). 


57. Thou art seen in the appearances of all the productions of nature, as we 
see the forms of men, horses, and elephants in the clouds, when they glide 
softly on the wings of the gentle winds. (But as all these forms are unreal, so 
God has no form in reality). 


58. Thou dost invariably show thyself in all thy creatures on earth, the 
blazing fire presents the figures of horses and elephants in its lambent flames. 
(Neither has God nor fire any form at all). 


59. Thou art the unbroken thread, by which the orbs of worlds are strung 
together as a rosary of pearls; and thou art the field that growest the harvest of 
creation, by the moisture of thy intellect. (The divine spirit stretches through 
all, and contains the pith of creation). 


60. Things that were inexistent and unproduced before creation, have come 
to light from their hidden state of reality by thy agency, as the flavour of meat- 
food, becomes evident by the process of cooking. 


61. The beauties of existences are imperceptible without the soul; as the 
graces of a beauty are not apparent to one devoid of his eyesight. 


62. All substances are nothing whatever without thy inherence in them; as 
the reflection of the face in the mirror (or a picture in painting), is to no 
purpose without the real face or figure of the person. 


63. Without thee the body is a lifeless mass, like a block of wood or stone; 
and it is imperceptible without the soul, as the shadow of a tree in absence of 
the sun. 


64. The succession of pain and pleasure, ceases to be felt by one who feels 
thee within himself; as the shades of darkness, the twinkling of stars, and the 
coldness of frost, cease to exist in the bright sunlight. 


65. It is by a glance of thy eye, that the feelings of pain and pleasure rise in 
the mind; as it is by the beams of the rising sun, that the sky is tinged with its 
variegated hues. 


66. Living beings perish in a moment, at the privation of thy presence; as 
the burning lamp is extinguished to darkness, at the extinction of its light. 
(Light and life are synonymous terms, as death and darkness are homonyms). 


67. As the gloom of darkness is conspicuous at the want of light; but 


coming in contact with light, it vanishes from view. 


68. So the appearances of pain and pleasure, present themselves before the 
mind, during thy absence from it; but they vanish into nothing at the advance 
of thy light into it. 


69. The temporary feelings of pleasure and pain, can find no room in the 
fulness of heavenly felicity (in the entranced mind); just as a minute moment 
of time, is of no account in the abyss of eternity. 


70. The thoughts of pleasure and pain, are as the short-lived fancies of the 
fairy land or castles in air; they appear by turns at thy pleasure, but they 
disappear altogether no sooner thy form is seen in the mind. 


71. It is by thy light in our visual organs, that things appear to sight at the 
moment of our waking, as they are reproduced into being; and it is by thy 
light also poured into our minds, that they are seen in our dream, as if they are 
all asleep in death. 


72. What good can we derive from these false and transient appearances in 
nature? No one can string together the seeming lotuses that are formed by the 
foaming froth of the waves. 


73. No substantial good can accrue to us from transitory mortal things; as 
nobody can string together the transient flashes of lightning into a necklace. 
(This is in refutation of the usefulness of temporary objects maintained by the 
Saugatas). 


74. Should the rationalist take the false ideas of pain and pleasure for sober 
realities; what distinction then can there be between them and the irrational 
realists, (Buddhists). 


75. Should you, like the Nominalist, take everything which bears a name 
for a real entity; I will tell you no more than that, you are too fond to give to 
imaginary things a fictitious name at your own will. (Gloss: — according to 
the ideas and desires of one’s own mind, or giving a name to airy nothing). 


76. But the soul is indivisible and without its desire and egoism, and 
whether it is a real substance or not we know nothing of, yet its agency is 
acknowledged on all hands in our bodily actions. 


77. All joy be thine! that art boundless in thy spiritual body, and ever 
disposed to tranquility; that art beyond the knowledge of the Vedas, and art 
yet the theme of all the Sdstras. 


78. All joy to thee! that art both born and unborn with the body, and art 
decaying undecayed in thy nature; that art the unsubstantial substance of all 
qualities, and art known and unknown to everybody. 


79. I exult now and am calm again, I move and am still afterwards; I am 
victorious and live to win my liberation by thy grace; therefore, I hail thee that 
art myself. 


80. When thou art situated in me, my soul is freed from all troubles and 
feelings and passions; and is placed in perfect rest. There is no more any fear 
of danger or difficulty or of life and death, nor any craving for prosperity, 
when I am absorbed in everlasting bliss with thee. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 
DISORDER AND DISQUIET OF THE ASURA 
REALM. 


Argument. As Prahlada was absorbed in Meditation, his dominions were 
infested by robbers for want of a Ruler, and the reign of terror. 


Vasishtha said: — Prahlada the defeater of inimical hosts, was sitting in the 
said manner in divine meditation, and was absorbed in his entranced rapture, 
and undisturbed anaesthesia or insensibility for a long time. 


2. The soul reposing in its original state of unalterable ecstatis, made his 
body as immovable as a rock in painting or a figure carved on a stone (in bas 
relief). 


3. In this manner a long time passed upon his hybernation, when he was 
sitting in his house in a posture as unshaken as the firm Meru is fixed upon the 
earth. 


4. He was tried to be roused in vain, by the great Asuras of his palace; 
because his deadened mind remained deaf to their calls like a solid rock, and 
was as impassive as a perched grain to the showers of rain. 


5. Thus he remained intent upon his God, with his fixed and firm gaze for 
thousands of years; and continued as unmoved, as the carved sun upon a stone 
(or sundial). 


6. Having thus attained to the state of supreme bliss, the sight of infelicity 
disappeared from his view, as it is unknown to the supremely felicitous being. 
(So the Sruti: — In Him there is all joy and no woe can appear before Him). 


7. During this time the whole circuit of his realm, was overspread by 
anarchy and oppression; as it reigns over the poor fishes. 


8. For after Hiranyakasipu was killed and his son had betaken himself to 


asceticism, there was no body left to rule over the realms of the Asura race. 


9. And as Prahlada was not to be roused from his slumber, by the 
solicitations of the Daitya chiefs, or the cries of his oppressed people: — 


10. They, — the enemies of the gods, were as sorry not to have their 
graceful lord among them, as the bees are aggrieved for want of the blooming 
lotus at night (when it is hid under its leafy branches). 


11. They found him as absorbed in his meditation, as when the world is 
drowned in deep sleep, after departure of the sun below the horizon. 


12. The sorrowful Daityas departed from his presence, and went away 
wherever they liked; they roved about at random, as they do in an ungoverned 
state. 


13. The infernal regions became in time the seat of anarchy and oppression; 
and the good and honest dealings bade adieu to it all at once. 


14. The houses of the weak were robbed by the strong, and the restraints of 
laws were set at naught; the people oppressed one another and robbed the 
women of their robes. 


15. There were crying and wailing of the people on all sides, and the 
houses were pulled down in the city; the houses and gardens were robbed and 
spoiled, and outlawry and rapacity spread all over the land. 


16. The Asuras were in deep sorrow, and their families were starving 
without food or fruits; there were disturbance and riot rising everywhere, and 
the face of the sky was darkened on all sides. 


17. They were derided by the younglings of the gods, and invaded by vile 
robbers and envious animals; the houses were robbed of their properties, and 
were laid waste and void. 


18. The Asura realm became a scene of horror, by lawless fighting for the 
wives and properties of others; and the wailings of those that were robbed of 
their wealth and wives, it made the scene seem as the reign of the dark Kali 
age, when the atrocious marauders are let loose to spread devastation all over 
the earth. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
SCRUTINY INTO THE NATURE OF GOD. 


Argument. Hari’s care for preservation of the order of the world, and his 
advice to Prahlada. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now Hari who slept on his couch of the snake, in his 
watery mansion of the Milky ocean, and whose delight it was to preserve the 
order of all the groups of worlds; — 


2. Looked into the course of the world in his own mind, after he rose from 
his sleep at the end of the rainy season for achieving the objects of the gods. 
(Vishnu rises after the rains on the eleventh day of moon SeutepTaght l). 


3. He surveyed at a glance of his thought the state of the triple world, 
composed of the heaven, the earth and the regions below; and then directed 
his attention to the affairs of the infernal regions of the demons. 


4. He beheld Prahlada sitting there in his intense hypnotic meditation, and 
then looked into the increasing prosperity of Indra’s palace. 


5. Sitting as he was on his serpentine couch in the Milky Ocean, with his 
arms holding the conch-shell, the discus, and the club, and lotus in his four 
hands; — 


6. He thought in his brilliant mind and in his posture of padmdsana, about 
the states of the three worlds, as the fluttering bee inspects into the state of the 
lotus. 


7. He saw Prahlada immerged in his hypnotism, and the infernal regions 
left without a leader; and beheld the world was about to be devoid of the 
Daitya race. 


8. This want of the demons, thought he, was likely to cool the military 
ardour of the Devas; as the want of clouds serves to dry up the waters on 


earth. 


9. Liberation which is obtained by privation of dualism and egoism, brings 
a man to that state of asceticism; as the want of moisture tends to dry up and 
deaden the promising plant. 


10. The Gods being at rest and contented in themselves, there will be no 
need of sacrifices and offerings to please and appease them; and this will 
eventually lead to the extinction of the gods, (for want of their being fed with 
the butter and fat of the sacrifices). 


11. The religious and sacrificial rites, being at an end among mankind, will 
bring on, (owing to their impiety), the destruction of the human race, which 
will cause the desolation of the earth (by wild beasts). 


13. What is the good of my providence, if were I to allow this plenteous 
earth to go to ruin by my neglect? (It would amount to Vishnu’s violation of 
duty to preserve the world). 


14. What can I have to do in this empty void of the world, after the 
extinction of these created beings into nothing, than to charge my active 
nature to a state of cold inactivity, and lose myself into the anaesthesia of 
final liberation or insensibility. 


15. I see no good in the untimely dissolution of the order of the world, and 
would, therefore, have the Daityas live to its end. 


16. It is owing to the struggles of the demons, that the deities are 
worshipped with sacrifices and other religious rites for their preservation of 
the earth; therefore, they are necessary for the continuation of these practices 
in it. 


17. I shall have, therefore, to visit the nether world, and restore it to its right 
order; and appoint the lord of the demons to the observance of his proper 
duties; in the manner of the season of spring returning to fructify the trees. 


18. If I raise any other Daitya to the chieftainship of the demons, and leave 
Prahlada in the act of his meditation; it is sure that he will disturb the Devas, 
instead of bearing obedience to them. Because no demon can get rid of his 
demoniac nature like Prahlada. 


19. Prahlada is to live to old age in his sacred person, and to reside therein 
to the end of the Kalpa age, with this very body of his, (without undergoing 
the casualties of death and transmigration). 


20. So it is determined by Destiny, the divine and overruling goddess; that 
Prahlada will continue to reign to the end of the Kalpa, in this very body of 
his. 


21. I must therefore go, and awaken the Daitya chief from his trance, as the 
roaring cloud rouses the sleepy peacocks, on the tops of hills and banks of 
rivers. 


22. Let that self-ridden (swayam-mukta) and somnolent, (samddhistha), 
prince, reign unconcerned, (amanaskdra), over the Daitya race; as the 
unconscious pearl reflects the colours of its adjacent objects. 


23. By this means both the gods and demi-gods, will be preserved on the 
face of the earth; and their mutual contention for superiority, will furnish 
occasion for the display of my prowess. 


24. Though the creation and destruction of the world, be indifferent to me; 
yet its continuation in the primordial order, is of much concern to others, if 
not to my insusceptible self. 


25. Whatever is alike in its existence and inexistence, is the same also in 
both its gain and loss (to the indifferent soul). Any effort for having anything 
is mere foolishness; since addition and subtraction presuppose one another. 
(Gain is the supplying of want, and want is the privation of gain). 


26. I shall, therefore, hasten to the infernal region, and awaken the Daitya 
prince to the sense of his duty; and then will I resume my calmness, and not 
play about on the stage of the world like the ignorant. (The sapient God is 
silent; but foolish souls are turbulent). 


27. I will proceed to the city of the Asuras amidst their tumultuous 
violence, and rouse the Daitya prince as the sunshine raises the drooping 
lotus; and I shall bring the people to order and union, as the rainy season 
collects the fleeting clouds on the summits of mountains. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
ADMONITIONS OF HARI TO PRAHLADA. 


Argument. Hari enters into the Daitya city, blows his conch-shell, and 
directs Prahlada to reign and rule over his realm. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thinking thus within himself, Hari started from his 
abode in the Milky Ocean with his companions, and moved like the 
immovable Mandara mountain with all its accompaniments. 


2. He entered the city of Prahlada resembling the metropolis of Indra, by a 
subterranean passage lying under the waters of the deep. (This passage, says 
the gloss, leads to the sweta dwipa or white island of Albion, — Britain; but 
literally it means the underground passage of waters). 


3. He found here the prince of the Asuras, sitting under a golden dome in 
his hypnotic trance, like Brahma sitting in his meditative mood in a cavern of 
the Sumeru mountain. (This shows Brahma the progenitor of mankind or of 
the Aryan Brahmanic race, to have been a mountaineer of the Altai or N. polar 
ranges, called Sumeru contra Kumeru, — the S. pole). 


4. There the Daityas being tinged in their bodies, by the bright rays of 
Vishnu’s person, fled far away from him, like a flock of owls from the bright 
beams of the rising sun. (The Daityas are night rovers or nisa charas, and 
cannot maintain their ground at sun rise). 


5. Hari then being accompanied by two or three Daitya chiefs entered the 
apartment of Prahlada, as the bright moon enters the pavilion of the sky at 
eve, in company with two or three stars beside her. (Moon in Sanskrit is the 
male consort of the stars, and called Tard-pati). 


6. There seated on his eagle and fanned with the flapper of Lakshmi, and 
armed with his weapons, and beset by the saints hymning his praise: — 


7. He said, O great soul! rise from thy trance; and then blew his 


panchajanya shell, which resounded to the vault of heaven. 


8. The loud peal of the Conch, blown by the breath of Vishnu, roared at 
once like the clouds of the sky, and the waves of the great deluge with 
redoubled force. 


9. Terrified at the sound, the Daityas fell flat and fainting on the ground; as 
when the flocks of swans and geese, are stunned at the thundering noise of 
clouds. 


10. But the party of Vaishnavas, rejoiced at the sound without the least 
fear; and they flushed with joy like the Kurchi flowers, blooming at the sound 
of the clouds. (Kurchi buds are said to blossom in the rains). 


11. The lord of the Ddnavas, was slowly roused from his sleep; in the 
manner of the kadamba flowers, opening their florets by degrees at the 
intervals of rain. 


12. It was by an act of the excretion of his breathing, that he brought down 
his vital breath, which was confined in the vertical membrane of the cranium; 
in the manner that the stream of Ganges gushes out from the high-hill, and 
mixes and flows with the whole body of waters into the ocean. (So it is with 
our inspiration and respiration, which carry up and down our vital breath, to 
and from the sensory of the brain). 


13. In a moment the vital breath circulated through the whole body of 
Prahlada; as the solar beams spread over the whole world soon after they 
emanate from the solar disk at sun rise. 


14. The vital breath, having then entered into the cells of the nine organs of 
sense; his mind became susceptible of sensations, received through the organs 
of the body like reflexions in a mirror. 


15. The intellect desiring to know the objects, and relying in the reflexions 
of the senses, takes the name of the mind; as the reflexion of the face in the 
mirror, refracts itself again to the visual organ. 


16. The mind having thus opened or developed itself, his eyelids were 
about to open of themselves; like the petals of the blue lotus, opening by 
degrees in the morning. 


17. The breathings then, by conveying the sensations to the body, through 
the veins and arteries, give it the power of motion; as the current breeze 
moves the lotuses. 


18. The same vital breath, strengthened the powers of his mind in a short 
time; as the billows of a river, become more powerful when it is full of water. 


19. At last his eyes being opened, his body shone forth with vivacity, by its 
mental and vital powers; as the lake blushes with blooming lotuses at the 
sun’s rising above the horizon. 


20. At this instant, the lord bade him awake instantly at his word; and he 
rose as the peacock is awakened, at the roar of a cloud. 


21. Finding his eyes shining with lustre, and his mind strong with its past 
remembrance; the lord of the three worlds, spoke to him in the manner, as he 
had formerly addressed the lotus-born Brahma himself. 


22. O holy youth! remember your large (dominions), and bring to your 
mind your youthful form and figure; then think and ponder, why you 
causelessly transform yourself to this torpid state. 


23. You who have no good to desire nor any evil to shun, and look on want 
and plenty in the same light; you must know that what is destined by God, is 
all for your good. 


25. You shall have to live here, in the living liberated state of your mind, 
and in full possession of your dominions, for a Kalpa period; and shall have to 
pass your time with this body of yours, and without any anxiety or earthly 
trouble whatever. 


26. The body being decayed by this time, you shall have still to abide with 
your greatness of soul to the end; till the body being broken down like an 
earthen vessel, the vital life like the contained air of the pot, come to mix with 
the common air of vacuum. 


27. Your body which is liberated in its life time, is to endure in its purity to 
the end of the Kalpa, and will witness generations passing before it without 
any diminution of itself. 


28. The end of the Kalpa or dooms day, is yet too far when the twelve suns 
will shine together; the rocks will melt away, and the world will be burnt 
down to ashes. Why then do you waste away your body even now? 


29. Now the winds are not raging with fury, nor is the world grey with age 
and covered with ashes over it. The marks on the foreheads of the immortals 
are still uneffaced, why then waste your body before its time? 


30. The lightnings of the deluging clouds, do not now flash nor fall down 


like asoka flowers, why then do you vainly waste your precious body so 
prematurely? 


31. The skies do not pour out their showers of rain-water on earth, so as to 
overflood the mountain tops, nor do they burst out in fire and burn them down 
to ashes; why then do you waste away your body in vain? 


32. The old world is not yet dissolved into vapour, nor fused to fumes and 
smoke; neither are the deities all extinct, after leaving Brahma, Vishnu and 
Siva to survive them; why then do you waste yourself in vain? (If they are all 
alive, you should learn to live also). 


33. The earth on all sides is yet so submerged under the water, as to present 
the sight of the high mountains only on it, why then waste you away your 
body in vain (before the last doom and deluge of the earth?). 


34. The sun yet does not dart his fiery rays, with such fury in the sky, as to 
split the mountains with hideous cracks; nor do the diluvian clouds rattle and 
crackle in the midway sky; (to presage the last day, why then in vain waste 
you your body, that is not foreboded to die?). 


35. I wander everywhere on my vehicle of the eagle, and take care of all 
animal beings lest they die before their time, and do not, therefore, like your 
negligence of yourself. 


36. Here are we and there the hills, these are other beings and that is 
yourself; this is the earth and that the sky, all these are separate entities and 
must last of themselves; why then should you neglect your body, and do not 
live like the living? 


37. The man whose mind is deluded by gross ignorance, and one who is the 
mark of afflictions, is verily led to hail his death. (So the Smriti says: — Very 
sick and corpulent men have their release in death). 


38. Death is welcome to him, who is too weak and too poor and grossly 
ignorant; and who is always troubled by such and similar thoughts in his 
mind. (The disturbed mind is death and hell in itself). 


39. Death is welcomed by him, whose mind is enchained in the trap of 
greedy desires and thrills between its hopes and fears; and who is hurried and 
carried about in quest of greed, and is always restless within himself. 


40. He whose heart is parched by the thirst of greed, and whose better 
thoughts are choked by it, as the sprouts of corn are destroyed by worms; is 


the person that welcomes his death at all times. 


41. He who lets the creeping passions of his heart, grow as big as palm 
trees, to overshadow the forest of his mind, and bear the fruits of continued 
pain and pleasure, is the man who hails his death at all times. 


42. He whose mind is festered by the weeds of cares, growing as rank as 
his hair on the body; and who is subject to the incessant evils of life, is the 
man that welcomes death for his relief. 


43. He whose body is burning under the fire of diseases, and whose limbs 
are slackened by age and weakness, is the man to whom death is a remedy, 
and who resorts to its aid for relief. 


44. He who is tormented by his ardent desires and raging anger, as by the 
poison of snake biting, is as a withered tree, and invites instant death for his 
release. 


45. It is the soul’s quitting the body that is called death; and this is 
unknown to the spiritualist, who is quite indifferent about the entity and 
nonentity of the body. 


46. Life is a blessing to him, whose thoughts do not rove beyond the 
confines of himself; and to the wise man also who knows and investigates into 
the true nature of things. 


47. Life is a blessing to him also, who is not given to his egotism, and 
whose understanding is not darkened by untruth, and who preserves his 
evenness in all conditions of life. 


48. His life is a blessing to him, who has the inward satisfaction and 
coolness of his understanding, and is free from passions and enmity; and 
looks on the world as a mere witness, and having his concern with nothing. 


49. He is blest in his life, who has the knowledge of whatever is desirable 
or detestable to him, and lives aloof from both; with all his thoughts and 
feelings confined within himself; (literally, within his own heart and mind). 


50. His life is blest, who views all gross things in the light of nothing, and 
whose heart and mind are absorbed in his silent and conscious soul. (i.e., Who 
witnesses and watches the emotions and motions of his heart and mind). 


51. Blessed is his life, who having his sight represses it from viewing the 
affairs of the world, as if they are entirely unworthy of him. 


52. His life is blessed, who neither rejoices nor grieves at what is desirable 
or disadvantageous to him; but has his contentment in every state of his life 
whether favourable or not. 


53. He who is pure in his life, and keeps company with pure-minded men; 
who spreads the purity of his conduct all about, and shuns the society of the 
impure; is as graceful to behold, as the hoary swan with its snow white wings, 
in the company of the fair fowls of the silvery lake. 


54. Blessed is his life, whose sight and remembrance, and the mention of 
whose name, give delight to all persons. 


55. Know the life of that man, O lord of demons, to be truly happy, whose 
lotus-like appearance is as delightsome to the bee-like eyes of men, as the 
sight of the full moon is delightful to the world. 


CHAPTER XL. 
RESUSCITATION OF PRAHLADA. 


Argument. On the necessity of the observance of duty, both in the secular 
as well as Religious Life. 


The Lord continued: — It is the soundness of the body, which men call life; 
and it is the quitting of the present body for a future one, which they call 
death. (Activity is the life of the body). 


2. You are released from both these states, O high minded youth! and have 
nothing to do with your life or death any more. (Because the living liberated 
are freed from the cares of life, and future transmigrations also). 


3. It is for your acquaintance, that I relate to you the components of life and 
death; by knowledge of which you will not have to live nor die, like other 
living beings on earth (in pain and misery). 


4. Though situated in the body, yet you are as unembodied as the 
disembodied spirit; and though embosomed in vacuity, yet are you as free and 
fleet as the wind, on account of your being unattached to vacuum. 
(Unattachment of the soul to the body and vital spirit, constitutes its freedom). 


5. Your perception of the objects of the touch, proves you to be an 
embodied being; and your soul is said to be the cause of that perception, as the 
open air is said to be the cause of the growth of trees, for its putting no 
hindrance to their height. But neither the soul is cause of perception, nor the 
air of the growth of trees. (It is the mind which is the cause of the one, as 
moisture of the other). 


6. But the perception of outward things, is no test of their materiality to the 
monoistic immaterialist; as the sight of things in a dream, is no proof of their 
substantiality, nor of the corporeality of the percipient soul. (All external 
perceptions, are as those in a dream). 


7. All things are comprehended, in yourself, by the light of your intellect; 
and your knowledge of the only One in all, comprehends everything in it. 
How then can you have a body either to take to yourself or reject it from you? 


8. Whether the season of the spring appears or not, or a hurricane happens 
to blow or subside, it is nothing to the pure soul, which is clear of all 
connection whatever. (The soul is unconnected with all occurrences). 


9. Whether the hills fall headlong to the ground, or the flames of 
destruction devour all things; or the rapid gales rend the skies, it is no matter 
to the soul which rests secure in itself. 


10. Whether the creation exists or not, and whether all things perish or 
grow, it is nothing to the soul which subsists of itself. (The increate soul is 
self-existent and ever-lasting). 


11. The Lord of this body, does not waste by waste of its frame, nor he is 
strengthened by strength of the body; neither does it move by any bodily 
movement, nor sleep when the body and its senses are absorbed in sleep. 


12. Whence does this false thought rise in your mind, that you belong to the 
body, and are an embodied being, and that you come to take, retain, and quit 
this mortal frame at different times? 


13. Forsake the thought, that you will do so and so after doing this and that; 
for they that know the truth, have given up such desires and vain expectations. 
(Since God is the disposer of all events). 


14. All waking and living persons, have something or other to do in this 
world, and have thereby to reap the results of their actions; but he that does 
nothing, does not take the name of an active agent, nor has anything to expect 
(but lives resigned to the will of Providence). 


15. He who is no agent of an action, has nothing to do with its 
consequence; for he who does not sow the grains, does not reap the harvest. 
(For as you sow, so you reap). 


16. Desinence of action and its fruition, brings on a quiescence, which 
when it has become habitual and firm, receives the name of liberation, (which 
is nothing to have or crave, save what God gave of his own will, agreeably to 
the prayer, “Let not mine, but thy will be done”). 


17. All intellectual beings and enlightened men, and those that lead pure 
and holy lives, have all things under their comprehension, wherefore, there is 


nothing for them left to learn anew or reject what they have learnt. (The gods 
and sages are all knowing, and have nothing to know or unknow anymore). 


18. It is for limited understandings and limited powers of the body and 
mind, to grasp or leave out some thing; but to men of unbounded capacities, 
there is nothing to be received or left out. (Fulness can neither be more full, 
nor wanting in any thing). 


19. When a man is set at ease after cessation of his relation of the possessor 
or possession of any external object, and when this sense of his irrelation 
becomes a permanent feeling in him, he is then said to be liberated in his life 
time. (Total unconnection is perfect freedom). 


20. Great men like yourself, being placed in this state of perpetual 
unconcern and rest; conduct themselves in the discharge of their duties, with 
as much ease as in their sleep. (Here is the main precept of the combination of 
internal torpitude with bodily action in the discharge of duties). 


21. When one’s desires are drowned in his reliance on God, he views the 
existing world, — shining in his spiritual light. 


22. He takes no delight in the pleasing objects about him, nor does he 
regret at the afflictions of others; all his pleasure consisting in his own soul (at 
its total indifference). 


23. With his wakeful mind, he meets all the affairs of his concern with his 
spiritual unconcern; as the mirror receives the reflexions of objects, without 
being tainted by them. 


24. In his waking he reposes in himself, and in his sleep he reclines amidst 
the drowsy world; in his actions he turns about as frolicsome boys, and his 
desires lie dormant in his soul. 


25. O thou, great soul, thus continue to enjoy thy supreme bliss, for the 
period of a Kalpa, (a day of Brahma), by relying your mind in the victorious 
Vishnu, and with enjoying the prosperity of thy dominions by exercise of your 
virtues and good qualities. (The ultimate lesson is, to be observant of the 
duties which are paramount on every body, with relinquishment of all 
personal desire for oneself). 


CHAPTER XLI. 
INSTALLATION OF PRAHLADA IN HIS 
REALM. 


Argument. Hari’s Inauguration of Prahlada with blessings, and 
appointment of him to the Government. 


Vasishtha said: — After Hari, the receptacle of the three worlds, and observer 
of everything that passes in them had spoken in the aforesaid manner in his 
lucid speech, shedding the coolness of moon beams: 


2. Prahlada became full-blown in his body, and his eyes shone forth as 
blooming lotuses; he then spoke out with full possession of his mental 
powers. 


3. Prahlada said: — Lord! I was much tired with very many state affairs, 
and in thinking about the weal and woe of my people. I have now found a 
little rest from my labour. 


4. It is by thy grace, my lord! that I am settled in myself, and whether I am 
in my trance or waking state, I enjoy the tranquility of my mind at all times. 


5. I always see thee seated in my heart, with the clear sightedness of my 
mind; and it is by my good luck, that I have thee now in my presence and 
outside of it. 


6. I had been all this time, sitting without any thought in me, and was 
mixed up as air in air, in my mind’s internal vision of thee. 


7. I was not affected by grief or dullness, nor infatuated by my zeal of 
asceticism or a wish of relinquishing my body (that I remained in my torpid 
trance). 


8. The One All being present in the mind, there is no room for any grief in 
it, at the loss of anything besides; nor can any care for the world, or caution of 


the body or life, or any fear of any kind, abide in his presence. 


9. It is simply by pure desire of holiness, rising spontaneously of itself in 
me, that I had been situated in my saint-like and holy state. 


10. Yes my Lord, I am disgusted with this world, and long to resign its 
cares, together with all the mutations of joy and grief, which rise alternate in 
the minds of the unenlightened. 


11. I do not think that our embodied state is subject to misery, and that our 
being freed from the bonds of the body is the cause of our release: it is 
worldliness that is a venomous viper in the bosom, and torments the ignorant 
only and not the sage. (Because it is mind and not the body, that is addicted to 
pleasure, and feels the stings of pain). 


12. It is the ignorant and not the learned, whose minds fluctuate with the 
thoughts, that this is pleasure and the other is pain, and that I have this and am 
in want of another. (The more they have, the more they crave). 


13. The ignorant man thinks himself, to be a person distinct from another, 
and so all living beings devoid of the knowledge of truth, entertain and exult 
in their egoistic thoughts. 


14. The erroneous idea that, such things are acceptable to me, and others 
are not so; serves only to delude the ignorant, and not the wise (who acquiesce 
to whatever occurs to them). 


15. All things being contained by and situated in my all-pervading spirit, 
how can we accept one and reject another thing, as distinct from and 
undesirable to the self-same One? (Shall we desire only good from God, and 
not the evil also? — Job). 


16. The whole universe whether real or unreal, (or composed of its 
substantiality and vacuity), is a manifestation of Omniscience; we know not 
what is desirable or detestable in it to be accepted or rejected by us. (But must 
submit to the wise ordinance of providence). 


17. It is only by discrimination of the natures of the viewer and the view, 
(i.e., of the subjective soul, and the objective world); and by reflecting the 
Supreme Soul in one’s self, that the mind receives its rest and tranquility. 


18. I was freed during my trance, of the consciousness of my being or not 
being, and of whatever is desirable or detestable to any one; and I continue 
also, in the same state of my mind even after I am awakened. 


19. This state being familiar to me, I see everything in the spirit within 
myself; and I act according as it pleaseth thee. (i.e., Not by mine but thy will). 


20. O lotus-eyed Hari! thou art adored in all the three worlds; wherefore it 
behoveth thee to receive my adoration also, offered in the proper form. 


21. Saying so, the lord of Ddnavas, presented his platter of presents, 
(arghya), before the god, as the lord of hills pays his offerings to the full- 
moon. (This hill is the mount of moon rising, which is hailed and welcomed 
by it). 


22. He worshipped Hari first of all, together with his weapons and his 
Vehicle Garuda; and then he adored the bands of the gods and Apsaras that 
accompanied him and the three worlds contained in him. 


23. After he had done worshipping the lord of the worlds, with the worlds 
situated within and without him; the Lord of Laxmi spoke to him saying: — 


24. Rise, O lord of Danavas! and sit upon your throne, until I perform your 
inauguration this very moment. 


25. Hari then blew his pdnchajanya shell summoning the five races, of the 
gods, Siddhas, sadhyas and men and Daityas, to attend at the ceremony. 


26. After this the lotus-eyed god placed him on the throne which he 
deserved, and whereon he caused him to sit as cloud rests on the summit of a 
mountain. 


27. Hari then caused him to make his sacred ablution, with the waters of 
the milky and other oceans; and those of the Ganges and other holy rivers, 
which were presented before him. 


28. All bodies of Brahmans and Rishis, and all groups of Siddhas and 
Vidyadharas; with the Loka-pdlas or regents of the quarters, attended and 
assisted at the ceremony. 


29. Then Hari the immeasurable Spirit, anointed the great Asura in the 
kingdom of the Daityas; and the Maruta winds lauded his praise, as they do 
the hymns of Hari in heaven. 


30. Then blessed by the gods and applauded by Asuras, Prahlada greeted 
them all in his turn; and was thus addressed at last by the slayer of Madhu, — 
the demoniac Satan. 


31. The Lord said: — Do thou reign here as sole monarch, as long as the 


mount Meru stands on the earth, and the sun and moon shine in the sky; and 
be fraught with all praiseworthy virtues of thine own. 


32. Govern thy realm without any interested motive of thy own, and 
without showing any symptom of anger or fear on your part; but preserve 
your moderation and a tolerant spirit in all your affairs. 


33. May you never have any disquiet, in this realm of excellent soil and 
plenteous provisions; nor do you create any disturbance to the gods in heaven, 
or to men on earth below. 


34. Conduct yourself in your proper course at all events, which may occur 
to you at any time or place; and never allow yourself to be led astray, by the 
caprice of your mind or the freaks of fancy. 


35. Keep in mind your spiritual being, and abandon your egoism and selfish 
views altogether; and then by managing your affairs in one even tenor, both in 
your want and prosperity, you will evade all the vicissitudes of fortune. 


36. You have seen both the ways and dealings of this world, and measured 
also the immeasurable depth of spiritual knowledge. You know the state of 
everything in every place, and require no advice of anybody. 


37. As you are now perfectly devoid of your anger, passions and fears, 
there is no more any chance of further broils between the gods and Asuras, 
under your rule over them in future. 


38. No more will the tears of Asura females, wash the decorations on their 
faces; nor will the currents of rivers rise as high as lofty trees, with floods of 
tears from their weeping eyes. 


39. The cessation of hostilities between the gods and demons, will render 
the earth as quiet from this day, as the unruffled ocean after its churning by the 
Mandara mountain. 


40. The wives of the gods and demi-gods, will no more be led away in 
captivity by one another; but will rest fearless under the marital roofs of their 
husbands in future. 


41. Let thy expectations now rise from their dormancy, of many long nights 
of dismal darkness, and be crowned with success and prosperity; and do thou, 
O progeny of Danu! enjoy thy unconquerable royal fortune, as in the company 
of thy charming consort. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
SPIRITUALITY OF PRAHLADA. 


Argument. The merit of hearing the narrative of Vishnu, and the cause of 
Prahlada’s awaking from his trance. 


Vasishtha continued: — The lotus-eyed Hari, having said thus much to 
Prahlada, departed with the whole concourse of the assembled gods, Kinnaras 
and men, from the abode of the Asura. 


2. Then did Prahlada and his associates throw handfuls of flowers on the 
departing god, as he was mounted on the back of the king of birds, (Garuda, 
— the eagle or bird of heaven). 


3. The god crossed the heavenly Ganges and reached at the milky ocean, 
where he took his serpent couch as the black bee sits on the lotus-leaf. 


4. The God Vishnu sat on his serpent seat with as much ease, as Indra sits 
in heaven in the assembly of the gods; and as the lord of the demons, was 
made to sit in the infernal region wholly devoid of all his cares. 


5. I have now related to you, Rama! the whole narrative of Prahlada’s 
coming to his sense, from the state of his insensibility; and this account is as 
charming to the holy hearer, as the cooling moon-beams are refreshing to the 
tired traveller. 


6. The man that ponders in his mind, the manner of Prahlada’s resuscitation 
to life; is regenerated in that felicitous state, from the sinfulness of his former 
condition. 


7. A cursory rehearsal of his narration, wipes off the sins of men; while the 
deep consideration of its spiritual sense, leads one to his eternal salvation. 


8. The ignorant are released from their ignorance, and the deep thinker is 
released from his sins; therefore, do not neglect to ponder well on it, for the 


remission of all your sins. 


9. The man who considers well the manner of Prahlada’s gaining his 
proficiency, gets a remission of all the sins committed by him in his repeated 
previous states of life. 


10. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how the sound of the pdnchajanya conch 
shell, roused the mind of the devout Prahlada from its immersion in holy 
meditation. 


11. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, that there are two states of 
liberation attending on sinless persons, the one is the emancipation of one in 
his embodied state in this life, and the other is after his departure from here. 


12. The embodied liberation means one’s continuance in his living body, 
but with a state of mind freed from its attachment to worldly things, and 
liberated from the desire of fruition and reward of all his meritorious acts. 


13. The disembodied liberation is obtained after the soul is released from 
the body, and is settled in the Supreme Spirit. It is an enfranchisement from 
the recurrence of future life and birth in this mortal world. 


14. The living liberated man is like a fried grain, whose regerminating 
power is parched within itself, and the desire of whose heart is purified from 
every expectation of future reward or regeneration. 


15. He remains in the pure, holy, and magnanimous state of his mind, who 
resigns himself solely to the meditation of the Great soul, and continues as if 
he were asleep in his living and waking states. 


16. Being thus entranced in his inward meditation, he continues in a torpid 
state for a thousand years, and wakes again to his senses, if he is allowed to 
live long ever after that period. 


17. Prahlada remained thus with his holy thoughts suppressed within 
himself, until he was roused from his trance by the shrill sound of the conch- 
shell. 


18. Hari is the soul of all beings, and he who assimilates himself to that god 
in his thought, becomes identified with the supreme soul, which is the cause 
of all. 


19. No sooner the god thought that Prahlada should come to his sense, than 
his sensation came immediately to him at the divine will. 


20. The world has no other cause, but the divine spirit; which with the 
assistance of the causal elements, takes different forms on itself at the time of 
creation; and therefore, it is the spirit of Hari that constitutes the world. 


21. The worship of God in spirit, presents Hari to the spiritual sight; and 
the worship of Hari in his outward form, represents the figure to the soul and 
the inner mind. 


22. Do you, O Rama! put out the visible sights from your view, and look at 
the inmost soul within yourself; being thus accustomed to spiritual meditation, 
you will soon have the sight of your God. 


23. The world presents a scene of the gloomy rainy weather, with showers 
of woes falling on all sides; it is likely to freeze us in ignorance, unless we 
look to the sun of our reason, (or, unless we abide under the sunshine of 
reason). 


24. It is by grace of God that we can avoid the delusions of the world, as 
we may escape from a goblin by means of a spell. 


25. It is at the will of the spirit, that the thick darkness of the mind, is 
dispersed and cleared off in time; the world is a network of delusion, which is 
scattered like a smoke by the breeze of reason. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
REST AND REPOSE OF PRAHLADA. 


Argument. All knowledge is derived by one’s own attention and personal 
exertion, joined with his reliance on the grace of God. 


Rama said: — Sir, your knowledge of all truths, and the light of your holy 
discourses, have gratified me as much as the cooling moon-beams gratify the 
medicinal plants, (whence the moon is called oshadhisa or lord of medicinal 
drugs). 


2. Your gentle and purifying words are as gratifying to my ears, as the 
beautiful and sweet flowers delight the external senses (by their colours and 
odours). (Sweet words are often compared with flowers by Persian and Urdu 
poets: as, guleazrouzeijaved. Elahikar sakhur meriko up phol.) 


3. Sir, if the exertions of men, as you said, be the causes of their success, 
how was it that Prahlada came to be enlightened without his effort or attempt? 
(in obtaining his divine knowledge without his learning or help of a 
preceptor). 


4. Vasishtha replied: — Yes Rama, it was by his manly exertion, that the 
high-minded Prahlada had acquired his divine knowledge; and there was no 
other cause (of his knowing and having whatever he knew and possessed). 


5. The soul of man is the same as the spirit of Narayana, (which means 
abiding in man); and there is no difference between them, as there is none 
between the oil and the sesamum seed; and as the cloth and its whiteness, and 
the flower and its fragrance are not distinct things. (Because the spirit of God 
was breathed into the nostrils of man. Narayana and Purusha both mean the 
spirit dwelling in man). 


6. And Vishnu is the same with his spirit or the soul of man, and the human 
soul is the same with Vishnu (which means the inherent spirit); Vishnu and 


the soul are synonymous terms as the plant and the vegetable. 


7. Prahlada came at first to know the soul by himself (of his own intuition), 
it was afterwards by means of his intellectual power, that he was led to the 
persuasion and made many proselytes after his own example. 


8. It was by his own desert, that Prahlada obtained his boon from Vishnu; 
and it was by the exercise of his own reasoning, that he came to the 
knowledge of the eternal Mind. 


9. Sometimes the soul is awakened of itself by one’s own intuition, and at 
others it is roused by the grace of the personal god Vishnu, owing to one’s 
faith in his person. (As it is said: — “Thy faith will save thee.”) 


10. And though this god may be pleased with his prolonged service and 
devout worship, yet he is unable to confer spiritual knowledge to one devoid 
of his reasoning faculty. (Or to one who has no understanding. Hence gross 
idolators can have no salvation, which is to be had by spiritual knowledge 
only. Blind faith is of no good, without the light of reason). 


11. Hence the primary cause of spiritual light is the intelligence of a man 
and which is gained by exertion of his mental powers only; the secondary 
causes may be the blessing and grace of a deity, but I wish you to prefer the 
former one for your salvation. (So it is knowledge and intrinsic merit which 
exalt a man, and not the mere favour of a patron, is ever able to raise the 
unworthy). 


12. Exert, therefore, your manliness at first, to keep the quintuple organs of 
sense under proper control; and habituate yourself with all diligence to 
cultivate your understanding, and the power of reasoning. 


13. For know whatever gain any one makes at any time, it is owing to his 
own endeavours only that he gains the same, and not by any other means 
whatever. 


14. It is only by dependence on your manly powers, that you can surmount 
the insuperable barriers of your sensual appetites; and then by crossing over 
the ocean of this world, reach to the other shore of supreme felicity. 


15. It requires no exertion or manly effort to see the figure of Vishnu; but 
the mere sight of the image is not sufficient to save you, or else the birds and 
beasts would all be saved by looking at it. 


16. If it were in the power of the spiritual guide also to save his foolish 


followers by his preachings; it would be possible also to the leaders of camels 
and kine, to save their herds in their future lives. (This figure is set in many 
temples, and in stones also). 


17. It is in the power of the mind only to acquire anything good for one’s 
self, and not the favour of Hari or that of Hara, or the influence of money, that 
is able to effect anything. 


18. It is by means of constant practice, accompanied by self-resignation and 
self-controul, that one is enabled to effect anything; and whatever he is unable 
to do by these means, is impossible for him to do by any other in the three 
worlds. 


19. Look to the spirit in the spirit, and adore the spirit in your own soul; 
behold the supreme soul in yourself, and have the universal soul in your own 
soul, and thus remain with it. 


20. Fools flying from attending to the Sdstras, or practising their self- 
devotion and exercise of reason, have adopted to themselves the Vaishnava 
faith as a path leading to their better being (or a means towards the great 
object of final beatitude). 


21. Practice and diligence are said to be steps to self-edification, and rites 
and ceremonies are represented as secondary courses resorted to for want of 
the former! 


22. The senses being refractory what is the good of ceremonial 
observances, and these being under control, it is useless to observe the ritual. 
(In both ways the rituals are useless to men of virtuous and vicious habits; the 
former being in no need, of them and the latter not benefiting by them). 


23. Without rationality and dispassionateness of his spirit, it is hard to have 
Hari (or spiritual felicity); and when there is the cool and calm reasoning of 
the mind, it is as useless to have the idol of Hari, as to place a lotus in the 
hand of the dead and liberated. 


24. When you have the qualities of abstraction and composure in your 
mind, think you have everything in yourself; for these being in your 
possession, you become an adept, or else you are an ass of the forest, — (that 
is good for nothing). 


25. Men are eager to find favour in the sight of the gods (and great men); 
but they do not seek the favour of their hearts and minds (which can give 
them whatever blessing is derived from any other). 


26. Vishnu, the indwelling spirit of the body, is situated in the inmost soul 
of every individual; it is the ignorant fool only that forsake the innermost 
Vishnu, and seek the outer form for its leading to the other (which is more 
closely allied to us than the latter). 


27. The consciousness dwelling in the cavity of the heart, is the true body 
of the everlasting spirit; and the outward form of Vishnu, holding the conch- 
shell, cudgel, lotus, and the discus, is but a false representation of it. (A 
fabrication of the ignorant for the immaterial spirit, in a material form). 


28. He who forsakes the real form, and follows the fictitious one, lets off 
the ambrosia pass from his hand, in pursuit of some promised confectionary. 


29. He who is not settled amidst the charming scenery of his spiritual 
meditation, lets his frantic mind to rove at large, after every object that 
presents itself before him. 


30. He who has not the abstract knowledge of the soul in himself, is under 
the subjection of his infatuated mind; and worships the image bearing the 
conch, discus, club, and lotus in its hands, as the supreme Lord and God. 


31. It is by practice of continued austerity, and a prolonged worship of this 
deity, that the mind of the devotee becomes purified in process of time, and 
gets rid of its turbulent passions at last. 


32. But the daily practice of self-control and abstract meditation, gives the 
mind the same purity, and like the 4mra or mango fruit, it gets its 
accompanying virtues one by one. (The virtues of the mango are its flavour, 
colour etc.). 


33. So the soul is said to get in itself the virtues of peace, contentment and 
the rest, by means of the external adoration of Hari; and it is for this reason 
that the practice of idol worship is prescribed in the Sdstras. (As a preparatory 
step to holiness and spiritual worship). 


34. He who obtains his boon from the all-powerful god, gets it in reward of 
his merit; as a fruit of the tree of his long practice. 


35. It is mental labour, (lit: — painstaking), which is the foundation of 
every improvement, and of all lasting good in life; just as the cultivated soil is 
the cause of the good condition of the harvest. 


36. Even the digging of the ground, and the pulling of the hill (by bodily 
labour), is productive of no good without application of the mind. (Gloss. — 


The digging of the ground alludes to the mining of the earth by the sons of 
Sagara; and the pulling of the hill refers to the churning of the sea with 
Mandara by the gods and demons. Both these hardy works were for the sake 
of obtaining the gems hid under them which required knowledge (of 


geology)). 


37. Men may undergo a thousand transmigrations, and wander about the 
earth in various births and shapes, and yet find no rest composure of their 
minds. 


38. They may worship Brahma, Vishnu and the Rudras forever, and gain 
their favour also, and yet can have no salvation owing to the perturbed state of 
their minds. 


39. Leave off worshipping the visible form or image of Vishnu (or any 
other god), either internally or externally in your mind or before your sight; 
and put an end to your transmigration, by meditating on your consciousness 
alone. 


40. Behold the unsullied form of One infinite God in your conscious self, 
and by forsaking all whatever it is conscious of. Relish the sweet essence of 
the one real entity, and go over the ocean of repeated births in the mortal 
world. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
NARRATIVE OF GADHI AND HIS 
DESTRUCTION. 


Argument. Narrative of Gadhi in illustration of the Adoration of Vishnu. 


Vasishtha said: — Rama; it is the government of the restless mind alone, that 
is able to destroy the delusion, which causes the interminable transmigrations 
in this mortal world. There is no other means to this end. 


2. Hear attentively, O sinless Rama! this story which I am going to relate to 
you, in order to show you the intricacy of understanding the nature of worldly 
delusions. 


3. There is the large district of Kosala on the surface of this land, which is 
full of forests and fruitful trees, forming as groves of Kalpa arbors; and 
abounding with minerals like the Sumeru mountain. 


4. There lived a learned Brahman, known by the name of Gadhi; who was 
intelligent and versed in the Vedas, and remained as an image of virtue. 


5. From his youth he continued with the calmness of his mind, and 
abstracted from and indifferent to worldly affairs; and was of as pure and 
unsullied a soul as the clear sky above. 


6. Then intent on some fixed purpose of his mind, he left the company of 
his friends, and went out to a forest to perform his austere devotion. 


7. He found there a lake filled with full-blown lotuses, and the moon 
shining in the sky with the scattered stars about her; and all shedding their 
lustre like showers of rain. 


8. He went down into the lake, and stood in the midst of the waters up to 
his neck; his body was below water, and his head floated over it as a lotus; 
and he stood upon his devotion, intent with a view to have the sight of Vishnu 


present before him. 


9. He thus passed full eight months, continuing with his body immerged in 
the water of the lake; and his face was shrivelled and wan, like the lotuses of 
his lake for want of sun shine. 


10. When he was emaciated by his austerities, his god Hari appeared before 
him, in the manner of a dark cloud of the rainy weather, appearing over the 
parched earth of the hot season. 


11. The Lord said: — Rise, O Brahman! from amidst the water, and receive 
thy desired blessing of me; because the tree of thy vow, is now pregnant with 
its expected fruit. 


12. The Brahman replied: — I bow to thee, O my lord Vishnu! thou art the 
receptacle of the three worlds, and the reservoir of innumerable starry worlds, 
which rise as lotuses in the lake of thy heart, and whereon thou sittest like the 
black bee (to behold their beauty). 


13. I want to behold my lord, the spiritual delusion which thou hast 
ordained to blind-fold this world, and known as Vishnu Maya. 


14. Vasishtha said: — To this the god replied: — you shall verily behold 
this delusion, and get rid of it afterwards, by virtue of thy devotion. Saying so, 
the god disappeared from his sight as an aerial castle. 


15. Vishnu being gone, the good Brahman got up from his watery bed, in 
the manner of the fair and humid moon, rising from amidst the cool and white 
milky ocean. 


16. He was glad in his soul at the sight of the lord of world, and his heart 
was as full-blown with joy; as the Kumuda (selenian) lotuses unfold at the 
sight of the moon. 


17. He then passed some days in that forest, overjoyed in his mind by the 
sight of Hari, and employed himself in discharge of his Brahmanical duties. 


18. Once on a time as he had been bathing in the lake, overspread with full- 
blown lotuses, he thought upon the words of Vishnu, as the great sages reflect 
in their minds the sense of texts of Vedas. 


19. Then in the act of his discharging his sacerdotal functions in the midst 
of sacred water, he made his mental prayer for the expurgation of his sins. 
(This is the ceremony agha-marshna). 


20. As he was performing this act in the midst of the water, he chanced to 
forget his sacred mantras, (texts), and was drowned in deep water in the 
confusion of his mind. 


21. He thought that his body had fallen down like a mountain tree, in the 
dale below by a blast of wind; and that his dead corpse was taken up and 
mourned over by his friends. 


22. He thought that his vital breath had fled away from his being, and the 
members of his body were as motionless as the shrubs of sugar cane; laid 
down on the ground by a hurricane. 


23. He thought his countenance to have faded away, and grown as pale as 
the withered leaf of a tree; and that his body now turned to a carcass, was 
lying on the ground like a lotus-bud torn from its stalk. 


24. His eye balls were as dull and dim, as the stars of the morning are shorn 
of their beams; and the ground seemed to be as dry to him as in a drought of 
rain water, and filled with flying dust on all sides. 


25. He believed his dead body was beset all about by his kind friends, 
weeping upon it with their sad and sorrowful countenances, and loudly 
lamenting and crying over it like birds upon trees. 


26. He thought of his faithful wife sitting at his feet as a handsome lotus 
flower, and weeping as profusely with a shower of tears from her lotus-like 
eyes, as the rushing of waters at the breaking of an embankment. 


27. His sorrowing mother with her loud wailing and mournful ditties, was 
buzzing like the humming bee; and holding the chin newly over grown with 
whiskers in her tender hand. 


28. His friends were sitting by his side with their dejected looks, and with 
trickling tears dropping down their faces and cheeks; and these washed his 
dead body, as the melting dews on withered leaves, bedew the parent tree. 


29. The members of his body now ceased to befriend him, like strangers 
who decline to become friends for fear of future separation, or turning 
unfriendly ever afterwards in life. 


30. The open lips leaving the teeth bare, seemed to deride at the vanity of 
human life; as the white and bony teethed ascetics and cynics do on fickleness 
of worldly events. 


31. His mouth was as speechless, as that of a devotee in his meditation; and 


the body was as motionless, as it was made of mud and clay; it slept to wake 
no more, like a sage absorbed in his hypnotism. 


32. It remained quiet with its lifted ears, as if to listen to the cries and 
wailings of the mourning friends; in order to judge the degrees of their 
affection and grief for him. 


33. Then the relatives raised their loud lamentations, with the sobbing and 
beating of their breasts, swooning and rising, and shedding floods of tears 
from their leaky eyes. 


34. Afterwards the sorrowful relations, removed the disgusting corpse with 
their bitter cries for its funeral, seeing it no more in future in this passing 
world. 


35. Then they bore the body to the funeral ground with its rotten flesh and 
entrails, and daubed all over with mud and dust, and placed it on the ground, 
strewn over with unnumbered bones and skeletons, and dried and rotten 
carcasses. 


36. Flights of flying vultures shaded the sunbeams on high, and the burning 
piles drove the darkness below; the fearful glare of open mouthed jackals 
flashed on all sides, as they were flames of living fire. 


37. There the ravens were bathed in floods of blood, and the crows dipping 
their wings in it; ravenous birds were tearing the entrails, and the old vultures 
were entrapped in those strings. 


38. The friends of the dead burnt the corpse in the funeral flame and 
reduced to ashes; and the moisture of the body flew in fumes, as the waters of 
the ocean are evaporated by the marine fire. 


39. The burning wood of the funeral pile, consumed the dead body with 
loud cracking noise; and the dry fuel of the pile, flashed in ambient flames 
with curling smoke over them. 


40. The devouring fire gnawed down the bones with crackling noise, and 
filled the atmosphere with the filthy stink and stench. It gorged up all that was 
soft or hard, as the elephant devours the reeds with the moisture contained in 
their cellular vessels. 


CHAPTER XLV. 
GADHI REBORN AS A CHANDALA, AND 
MADE KING OVER THE KIR TRIBE. 


Argument. Gadhi reborn in a Chandali, His Life and Election as King of 
Kir. 


Vasishtha said: — Then Gadhi, standing as he was amidst the water with his 
sorrowful heart, saw many other occurrences in the clearness of his mind. 


2. He saw a village in the vicinity of Bhuta mandala (Butan) full of its 
inhabitants, and that he was reborn there in the womb of a Chandala woman, 
in which he remained with great pain. 


3. Confined in the cavity of the womb, he felt his body pressed by the 
pressure of the intestines, while his senses were sorely annoyed by being 
constrained to abide the stink of the ordure and filth in the intestinal parts of 
the Chandala woman. 


4. After the foetus was matured, he was born in proper time, with its black 
complexion like a dark cloud of the rainy season, and soiled with filth all over 
its body. 


5. It grew up to childhood and then to boyhood in the Chandala’s house, 
and moved about here and there like a pebble thrown up by the current of the 
Yamuna stream. 


6. It reached its twelfth and then its sixteenth year of age, and had its body 
fully developed like a rainy cloud increasing in its size. 


7. Then accompanied by a pack of hounds, the lad roved from one forest to 
another, and continued to hunt after and kill the wild deer, in his occupation of 
a huntsman. 


8. He was then joined with a Candali spouse, as black as the leaf of a 


tamdla plant, and who with her budding breasts, and palms, resembled the 
newly sprouting stalks and leaves of trees. 


9. She was black and swarthy in her whole complexion, except her two 
rows of milk white teeth, and had all her limbs as brisk and supple as the 
tender creepers of the forest. 


10. They sported together in the skirts of the forest in their youthful 
dalliance, and wandered about the flowery meadows, like a couple of 
nigrescent bees. 


11. When tired they took their seats on beds of leaves and creepers, which 
were spread over the plains, like those strewn over the skirts of the Vindhya 
hills, by the driving winds. 


12. They reposed in woodland groves, and slept in the caverns of 
mountains; they sat on heaps of leaflets, and had their abode under 
shrubberies and bowers of creeping plants. 


13. They decorated their heads with kinkirata flowers, and their necks and 
bosoms with blossoms of various kinds. They hung ketaka flowers in their 
earholes, and made necklaces of amra florets. 


14. They rolled on beds of flowers and roved about the foot of the 
mountain; they knew all the arbours where to resort, and were skilled in 
archery and hunting the deer. 


15. They begot many children as the offshoots of their race in the hilly 
region; and they were as rude and rough as the prickly thorns of the khadira 
plant. 


16. After passing their youth in family life, they came gradually to their 
decay and decline; till at last they were overtaken by decrepit old age, which 
was as dry of pleasure as the parched ground of the desert. 


17. Then returning to their native village in the Bhuta or Bhota district, they 
built for themselves a poor hut of leaves and straws, and there lived as recluse 
hermits (passing their lives in holy devotion). 


18. Gadhi found his body worn out with age, and grown as thin and lean as 
a dry leaf, and as a withered tamdla tree growing in a mountain cave, which 
for want of moisture soon dwindles into decrepitude. 


19. He saw his Chandala family increasing in its members, and himself 
becoming cramped in his means and crabbed in his speech in his extreme old 


age. 


20. As Gadhi found himself to be the oldest man alive among the 
Chandalas, and had his comfort in the members of his family in his dotage: — 


21. He came to see at last all his family to be swept away by the cruel hand 
of death, as the rain water carries away the fallen leaves of the forest. 


22. He continued to lament over their loss, with his heart rent with sorrow; 
and his eyes were suffused in tears, like those of a stag deer separated from its 
companions. 


23. Thus passing some days in that forest with his heart overflown with 
grief, he left at last his natal land, as the aquatic fowls quit their native lake, 
when its waters and the lotus plants are dried up. 


24. He travelled through many countries with his sad and sickly heart, 
without finding a spot of rest and repose; and was driven to and fro, as a cloud 
is carried by contrary winds. 


25. On one time he entered the opulent city of the Kirs, and observed the 
birds flying over it, like so many balloons hanging in the air. 


26. There he saw rows of trees on both sides of the road, waving their 
variegated leaves and clusters of flowers like enamelled cloths and gems; and 
the path strewn over with beautiful flowers of various kinds up to the heels. 


27. He then came to the royal road, resembling the milky path of heaven; 
and found it filled by soldiers and citizens, and their women without number. 


28. He saw there the auspicious royal elephant decorated with its gemming 
and embroidered trappings; and appearing as the golden mountain of the gods 
moving on the earth. 


29. He learnt it to be rambling about in search of a new king, to be elected 
in lieu of the last king who was lately dead. The royal elephant was employed 
as a jeweller to select the best gem to be placed on the royal throne. 


30. The Chandala remained to look steadfastly on the elephant with his 
curious eye, and found it to be no other than a hill in motion. 


31. As he was looking on it with amazement, the elephant came to him and 
lifted him with his trunk; then setting him on his head with respect, bore him 
as the mount Meru bears the sun on its top. 


32. Seeing him to be sitting on the animal’s head, the people sounded their 
trumpets; the noise whereof was as loud as that of the resounding ocean, to 
the roaring of the diluvian clouds in the sky. 


33. Then the acclamation of, ‘Victory to the king,’ rose from the assembled 
throng and filled the air around, and seemed as it were the united cry of 
matutinal birds over the waking (or rising) world. 


34. Next rose the loud voices of the panegyrists, which moved in the air 
like the dashing waves of the sea. 


35. Then the matrons joined to anoint him as their king, and moved about 
him like the waves of the sea, surrounding the Mandara mountain after its 
labour of churning. 


36. The respectable ladies adorned him afterwards with many ornaments of 
various gems, as the sea laves the rock on its shore, with the many coloured 
waves under the beams of the rising sun. 


37. Youthful maidens poured cooling ointments on him, as the raining 
clouds pour down their waters on the tops of mountains. 


38. Other women decorated his person with wreaths of fragrant flowers, 
with their tender hands; as the season of spring adorns the forest with variety 
of flowers, with her hands of the tender stalks and branches. 


39. They put a great many paints and pastes upon his person, which 
decorated it, as the rays of the sun, paint the mountain with the many colours 
of its minerals. 


40. His body being decorated with ornaments made of gems and gold, 
attracted all hearts unto him; as the mount Meru is attractive of all hearts, by 
the variegated clouds of evening shining upon it. 


41. He was adorned by beauteous maids, with shoots of creeping plants; 
which gave him the appearance of the Kalpa tree, entwined by its creepers. 


42. Being thus anointed and decorated, he was attended to by all the royal 
family and subjects; as a shady and flowering tree, is resorted to by the 
travellers. 


43. They all assembled and installed him on the throne, as the gods join 
together, to place Indra on the throne, after he is borne on the back of the 
Airavata elephant. 


44. In this manner, was the Chanddla made a king in the city of the Kirs; 
and he was as much overjoyed at his unexpected good fortune, as a raven is 
delighted to find a stout dead deer in the forest. 


45. His feet were rubbed by the lotus-like hands of the Kiri queen, and his 
body daubed with odorous powder of frankincense, which gave it the 
brightening appearance of the evening with the crimson clouds. 


46. He flaunted in the Kir city and in the midst of their women, as a lion 
struts in the company of lionesses in the flowery forest. 


47. He now forgot his former pains and sorrows; and his person was as 
much cooled, as by wearing a necklace of pearls, dropped from the heads of 
elephants killed by lions. And he was as much delighted at the enjoyment of 
the luxuries in company with these good people, as a sun-burnt elephant is 
refreshed, in a lake full of water and forage. 


48. He reigned here for some time in his self-gotten kingdom, having 
extended his power and mandates on all sides; he ruled the state through the 
medium of the ministers, and was himself known by the name of Gavala 
throughout his dominions. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
GADHI’S LOSS OF HIS VISIONARY 
KINGDOM. 


Argument. Continuation of Gadhi’s Vision: — 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus was Gadhi surrounded by his courtiers, and 
attended by his ministers; the chiefs paid their homage to him, and the royal 
umbrella was raised above his head and the chouri flapped about him. 


2. He attained great dignity on seeing his mandates were carried out on 
every side. He was delighted to learn the state affairs, and to be informed that 
his subjects were happy and lived fearless within his dominion. 


3. The pans of the panegyrists, made him forget himself and his former 
state; and the excess of his delight, made him as giddy as if by intoxication. 


4. He reigned for full eight years over the Kiri kingdom, and managed 
himself in an honourable manner all along that time. 


5. He was once sitting at his pleasure and without his regal attire in the 
open air; and was looking at the clear firmament, which was devoid of clouds 
and darkness, and without the light of the sun, moon and stars. 


6. His heart was full with the enjoyment of royal dignity, and did not think 
much of the trinkets and ornaments, which were loaded upon him. 


7. He went abroad at one time in this naked state of his body, and beheld 
the setting sun bending his course below the horizon from his wonted path of 
glory. (The setting sun refers to his present state and his impending fall). 


8. He saw there a band of chandalas of black complexions and big bodies, 
singing like melodious cuckoos the approach of the vernal season. 


9. They were striking the strings of their wired instruments, — lyre, with 


the strokes of their trembling fingers; as the swarm of sweet sounding bees, 
shake the tremulous leaves of trees with their fluttering and buzzing. 


10. There stood an old man among them, who seemed to be the leader of 
the band; and appeared with his grey head and ruby eyes, like the mount Meru 
with his snow covered top and gemming caverns. 


11. He accosted the king saying: — How is it, O Kalanjaka! that you came 
to be here, has the king of this place taken you for his associate on account of 
your skill in music? 


12. Does he take a liking for sweet songsters, as they do for the musical 
kokilas, and does he load upon them his favours, with presents of household 
cloths and seats? 


13. Iam as much glad to see you here today (in this happy condition of 
yours), as men are pleased to see the mango tree, fraught with its fruits and 
flowers in spring. 


14. I am as glad in my heart as the budding lotus at the sight of the rising 
sun, and the selenian or medicinal plants at moon rise; and as great men are 
pleased with all their best gains, so am I pleased at seeing thee here, because 
the highest limit of joys is the sight of a friend. 


15. As the Chandala was addressing the king in the said manner, he 
acquainted him of the manner in which the wheel of time turned to his favour. 
(Here is a misprint of avadhirana for avadhdrana, which would alter the 
meaning and express, that he felt ashamed at the speech). 


16. At this instant, his consorts and servants that were standing at the 
window, overheard their conversation, and were in deep sorrow to learn that 
he was a Chandala by birth. 


17. They were as sick at heart as the lotus-flowers under a shower of frost, 
and as a tract of land under a draught; and the citizens were as cheerless upon 
learning this, as upon seeing the conflagration of a mountain wood. 


18. He hurled his defiance at these words of the old Chandala, as the lion 
lying on the ground, shows his teeth at the sneering of a cat on the top of a 
tree. 


19. He fled in haste into the inner apartment, and among its sorrowful 
inmates, with as much palpitation of his heart, as the reluctant swan enters a 
lake of withering lotuses, in the dry season. 


20. His limbs grew stiff, and his countenance became pale with fear; and 
his knees tottered with inward rage, as the trunks of trees shake with the 
burning fire in their hollows. (The sami or sdin tree is an instance of it. — 
Gloss). 


21. He beheld all persons there sitting in a melancholy mood, with their 
downcast looks and drooping heads; like the bending tops of plants, eaten up 
at the root by mice and rats. 


22. The ministers, the ladies of the harem and all people of the city, 
refrained from touching his person, as they avoid the touch of a dead body 
lying in the house. 


23. The servants ceased to minister unto him, and the ladies with all their 
love and sorrow for him, loathed his company. 


24. They looked upon his cheerless face and dark complexion with its 
departed lustre, as the funeral ground which everyone loathes to look upon. 


25. Though the people sorrowed for his darksome body, now smoking with 
fumes of his grief; yet they durst not approach his person, which appeared to 
burn as a volcano amidst its smoke. 


26. The courtiers left him with the heavings of their hearts, nor were his 
orders obeyed any more, than those of quenching the cool ashes with water. 


27. The people fled from him as from a heinous Rdkshasa, who is the cause 
of evil and danger only. 


28. Thus was he shunned by all, and left lonesome amidst the populous 
city; and became as an unbefriended traveller passing through a foreign 
country, without money or skill to support him. 


29. Though he called and accosted everybody, yet he got no answer from 
anyone; as the hollow sounding reed, is never returned with a reply by any of 
the passers by. 


30. They all said to one another, that the guilt of their long association with 
the Chandala, cannot be expiated by any other penance, than by the act of 
burning themselves alive on the funeral pile in the form of self-immolation. 


31. Being so resolved, the ministers and citizens all joined together, and 
raised for themselves piles with heaps of dry wood. 


32. These being lighted, blazed all about the ground like stars in the sky, 


and the city was filled with loud wailings of the people all around. 


33. The wailing wives were shedding showers of tears with their loud and 
piteous cries; and the weeping people were heaving their heavy groans with 
their choked voices, all about the burning furnaces. 


34. The plaintive cries of the dependents of the self-cremating ministers, 
rose as the swell of whistling winds amidst the forest trees. 


35. The bodies of great Brahmans, that were burnt on the piles, sent forth 
their fatted fumes in the air; which were scattered about by the winds, and 
overcast the landscape as with a portentous mist. 


36. The winds bore aloft and spread far and wide in the open sky, the 
stench of the burning fat and flesh of men; which invited flocks of the flying 
fowls of the air to the feast, and the disk of the sun was hid under the wide 
extending shadow of the winged tribe. 


37. The flame of the burning pile, borne by the winds to the sky, burned as 
a conflagration on high; and the flying sparks of fire scattered in the air, 
appeared as falling meteors blazing in the horizon. 


38. Here the helpless boys were crying for their ornaments being robbed by 
atrocious robbers, owing to their want of guardians; and there the citizens 
were threatened with the loss both of their lives and properties by the dacoits. 


39. On one side the people were seen to lament the loss of their relatives (in 
the destructive fire); on the other were the bands of thieves, lurking and prying 
unobserved about the houses for plunder and booty. 


40. As adverse fate brought on this direful change on the devoted city, its 
horrified inhabitants remained in mute amazement, as on the last doom of 
nature. 


41. Gavala, the Chanddla prince, whose mind was purified and whose 
manners were refined in the society of the great men of the palace, witnessed 
the sad catastrophe of the state, and mourned in himself with a pensive heart. 


42. It is all owing to me, said he, that all this woe has befallen on this state; 
and that time has brought on the untimely dissolution of the doomsday; both 
on this realm and the royal family and its ministerial officers. 


43. What is the good of this miserable life of mine? My death is a blessing 
to me than living in this wretched state. It is better for the mean and base to 
die away, than live to be reviled by others. 


44. Thus resolved, Gavala prepared a pile for himself, and made an offering 
of his body in the burning furnace, like the poor moth dropping on fire, 
without betraying a sigh. 


45. As Gavala cast his body, (nick-named as Gavala), amidst the flame, and 
was pulling his limbs singed by the fire; their violent motion and his painful 
emotion, roused the dreaming Gadhi from his reverie amidst the water. 


46. Valmiki said: — As the sage was saying these things, the day departed 
with the setting sun to its evening devotion; the congregation broke with 
mutual salutations, for the performance of their evening ablutions, and 
assembled again with the rising sun after dispersion of the gloom of night. 


CHAPTER XLVIIL. 
VERIFICATION OF GADHIS VISION. 


Argument. Gadhi learns from a guest the report of the Keri people, and 
goes out to inquire into the fact on the spot. 


Vasishtha resumed: — Gadhi was soon afterwards relieved from the 
perturbation of his mind at the delusions of the world; and he was set at rest 
from his perturbed state, like the disturbed sea after subsidence of its waves. 


2. His mind being freed from its painful thoughts, regained its repose after 
the troublesome dream had passed away, and he resumed his calmness as the 
god Brahma had his rest, after the labour of his creation was over at the end of 
the Kalpa, (the time of his creative will or the duration of creation). 


3. He regained his senses slowly, as a man upon waking from his sleep; and 
as one gains his sobriety after the passing off of his ebriety. 


4. He then said to himself, I am the same Gadhi and in the same function 
(of my sacred ablution in the water). All this is nothing that I had been seeing 
so long, and this I see as clearly as men see things after dispersion of the 
shade of night. 


5. Remembering himself what he was, (i.e., coming to himself), he lifted 
his feet from amidst the water, (i.e., got out of it); as the lotus-bud lifts its 
head above the water, after the frost is over in spring. 


6. He said again, this is the same water, sky and earth (where I stood 
before); but what I was just seeing, is quite astonishing to me. 


7. What am I and what do I see now, and what was I and had been doing all 
this time? With these thoughts he remained a long time with his knitted brows 
and staring eyes. 


8. It was my weakness, said he, that showed me this delusion; and knowing 
it for certain, he came out of the water, as the rising sun appears above the 
horizon. 


9. Then rising on the bank, he said: — Ah! where is that mother and wife 
of mine, who attended on me at the moment of my death. 


10. Or were my parents dead in the ignorant state of my boyhood, like the 
parent plant of a young shoot, cut off by the sword of death? 


11. 1am unmarried and know not the form of a wife, and am as ignorant of 
conjugal love, as a Brahman is stranger to the pernicious taste of forbidden 
liquors. 


12. I am too far from my country and know none of my friends and 
relatives; unto whom I shall return and there to die. 


13. Therefore, all these scenes that I have come to see, are no more than the 
forms of the fairy land pictured in my fancy. 


14. Be it as it may, all this is but delusion and dream, and we are living 
dead among our friends; it is all magic and delusion, and nothing is true or 
real herein. 


15. Our minds are as wild beasts, roaming furiously in the forest of error; 
which presents endless scenes of delusion to living beings at large. 


16. Reflecting on these delusions in his mind, Gadhi passed some days at 
his own house amidst the woods. 


17. Once on a time he happened to entertain a Brahman at his house as his 
guest, who resorted there to take his rest from his travels. 


18. He was highly gratified with feasting upon fruits and syrup of flowers, 
and was as refreshed supplied with sap as the tree which is supplied by the 
bounteous spring, and shoots forth in its foliage and fruitage in time. 


19. They then performed their evening service, and turned their beads, and 
afterwards took to their beds made of tender leaves and grass. 


20. There they began to talk on divine subjects, with which they were 
conversant; and the words fell from the lips, like the sweets of the vernal 
season. 


21. Then Gadhi asked his guest in the course of their conversation, saying: 
— why is it Sir, that you are so thin and lean and appear to lie so very weary. 


22. The guest replied: — Hear me Sir, relate to you the cause both of my 
leanness and weariness, and I will tell you the true facts, and not as a 


travelling teller of tales deals and lies. 


23. There is on the surface of this land, and in the woody tracts of the north, 
the great district of the Kir, (Kirgis?), which is far renowned for its richness. 
(Kir the land of the Gees in Afghanistan). 


24. I lived in the city there; and was honoured by its inhabitants, and the 
gust of my soul and mind were mightily pleased with the variety of dainty 
food that I used to get there. 


25. There it was once related to me by someone in the way of gossip, that a 
chandala had once been the king of that country for the space of eight years. 


26. I inquired of the village people about the truth of this report, and they 
all told me with one voice, that a chandala, had really reigned there for full 
eight years. 


27. But being discovered at last as such, he immolated himself on the 
burning pile; which was followed by the self-immolation of hundreds of 
Brahmans on the funeral pyre. 


28. Hearing this news from their mouths, I departed from that district, 
intending, O Brahman, to do my penance, by making a pilgrimage to Prayaga, 
(Allahabad, on the doab or confluence of the two sacred streams of Ganga and 
Jamuna). 


29. I made my chdndrdyana fast for three days and nights, and had to break 
my fast only this day. It is for this reason, that have become so very thin and 
lean, as you find me at present. 


30. Vasishtha said: — Gadhi on hearing this, made a hundred inquiries of 
his guest about the matter, to which he answered everything in verification of 
the fact. 


31. Gadhi was quite surprised at this narration, and passed the night till 
sunrise in great palpitation of his heart. 


32. Waking in the morning, he made his ablution and discharged his 
matins; then took leave of his guest, and began to reflect in himself with his 
bewildered understanding. 


33. He said to himself, what I saw in my delusion, is ratified as a fact by 
my Brahman guest. I am puzzled to think, whether this be a magic, or a 
fascination of the conjurer Sambara. 


34. What I saw about my death amidst my relatives, was undoubtedly a 
delusion of my mind; but the latter part of my vision (of becoming a 
Chandala), is verified by the Brahman’s observance of the penance 
Chandrayana for his having entered the Chandala city. 


35. I must therefore learn fully the particulars of the Chandala, and proceed 
immediately to the Bhuta country (Bhutan?) with an undaunted mind. 


36. Thus determined, Gadhi rose to visit the distant district, as the sun rises 
over the horizon to visit all the sides of Sumeru, (the Altain chain, at the 
bottom of which the country of the Kirgis is situated). 


37. He travelled onward, and obtained at last the sight of the country he had 
seen in his dream; as intelligent and wayfaring men, reach to their desired 
destinations in distant regions. 


38. Finding everything, however unattainable it may appear at first, to be 
attained by perseverance, Gadhi was resolved to make a test of the truth of his 
delusive dream. 


39. He had proceeded from his home, with the swiftness of a current rivulet 
in the rainy weather; and traversed through many unknown countries, as a 
cloud passes over distant realms on the back of its airy steed. 


40. At last he came to the country of the Bhatas, (Bhoteas), a people 
following their own debased customs; and thought himself to be got amongst 
a savage people, as a camel is confounded to find itself, fallen in a Karanja 
forest, in quest of thorny thistles. (The camels or cramelas are called kantaka 
bhojes, from their browsing the brambles). 


41. There he saw in its vicinity a city, as what he had seen in his delusion; 
and resembling in every respect the habitation of the Gandharva race. 


42. Proceeding onward, he saw at the further end, the locality of the 
chandalas, resembling the hell-pit of the infernal region. (The out-castes are 
always located at the filthy outskirts of towns). 


43. It was as spacious a place as what he had seen in his vision, and beheld 
his own likeness in the dream appearing in the figures of the chandalas, as one 
sees the shape of a Gandharva or ghost, in his dream or delirium. 


44. He saw in that place the habitation of chandalas, as what he had seen 
before in his delusion, and observed with grief and coldness of his mind (the 
deserted abodes of his fellow Chandalas). 


45. He saw his own residence flooded over by rain water grown with 
sprouts of barley and brambles; his house was left roofless, and his bedstead 
was almost indiscernible. 


46. His hut presented the picture of poverty and wretchedness, and its 
compound was a scene of ruin and desolation (as if it was laid waste by the 
hand of oppression and pillage). 


47. Gadhi stood long gazing upon the dry white bones of bulls and cows, 
buffaloes and horses, which lay strewn over the plains round about his hut; 
and which he remembered to be the remains of the beasts of his prey and 
slaughter, (lit: — the bones broken under the teeth and jaws of men and wild 
beasts). 


48. He saw the dry hollow skulls lying on the ground, which had served for 
his eating and drinking vessels before; and which still lay unmoved on the 
spot, and were filled with rain water, (as if to supply him with drink). 


49. He saw strings of the dried entrails of the beasts of his victims, lying 
like parched plants on the plain, and pining with thirst for the rain-water. 


50. Gadhi, who was conscious of himself (as Gadhi), the Brahman looked 
long at his former house and its environs, resembling the dry and dilapidated 
skeleton of a human body, lying unburied on the naked land. 


51. He stood amazed at what he saw, and then withdrew himself to the 
adjacent village; as when a traveller repairs to the habitation of the Aryas, 
from his sojourning in the land of barbarians, (Mlech’chas). 


52. There he asked someone saying, Sir, do you remember anything 
concerning the former state of yonder village, and the lives of its chandala 
inhabitants? 


53. [have heard all good people say, that knowing men are conversant with 
the annals of all places, as they know every spot on a globe in their hand. 


54. If you recollect aught of the good old chandala that lived retired at 
yonder spot, and if you remember his adventures, as everyone does the past 
accidents of his own life: — 


55. If you are acquainted with the particulars thereabouts, then please to 
relate them unto me; for it is said there is great spirit in directing a stranger, 
and in dispelling the doubts of one hanging in suspense. 


56. The village people being one by one importuned in this manner by the 


strange Brahman; they were as much surprised at his odd request, as 
physicians are concerned at the abnormal complaint of a patient. 


57. The villagers said: — It is an undeniable truth, O Brahman! as you say, 
that there lived a chandala of hideous shape by name of Katanjala at that 
place. 


58. He was beset by a large family, consisting of his sons, grandsons, 
friends and servants; and had other relatives and kinsmen besides. His 
children were as many as the fruits of a mango tree. 


59. But cruel fate snatched all his family in course of time, as a 
conflagration burns down a mountain forest with all its fruits and flowers at 
once. 


60. He then deserted his native land and went over to the city of the Kirs, of 
which he became the king; and reigned there for the space of twice four years. 


61. The citizens coming to know his mean birth afterwards, drove him from 
there at last; as they remove a noxious and poisonous tree from the garden. 


62. Gadhi seeing the people immolating themselves on funeral piles entered 
into a burning pyre, which he had prepared for himself; and was thus purified 
with others by the sacred fire pdvaka. 


63. But tell us, O Brahman, why you are so curiously inquisitive about the 
chandala, and as to whether he was any friend of yours, or you had contracted 
any friendship with him. 


64. Being accosted in this manner, Gadhi made many more inquiries of 
them concerning the chandala, and passed a whole month in their several 
houses on his inquiry. 


65. He also told the village people, all that he knew of the chandala in his 
dream; and they heard him attentively relating the whole story from first to 
last. 


66. Gadhi being informed of all the particulars regarding the chandala, both 
from the hearsay of the people as well as from his personal observations; 
returned equally ashamed and astonished to his abode, with the disgraceful 
reflection of his past vileness, which was stamped like the black spot of the 
moon upon the tablet of his mind. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 
ON THE WONDROUS POWER OF ILLUSION. 


Argument. Devotion of Gadhi after his return, and Vishnu’s exhibition of 
the extraordinary power of delusion to him 


Vasishtha continued: — Gadhi was bewildered in his mind, at all that he 
heard and observed about the Chandala and his residence, and felt uneasy to 
learn more about them. 


2. He went back to the place, and observed the abodes that lay scattered 
upon the plain; as when the lotus-born Brahma looks over the ruins, made by 
the great deluge at the end of a Kalpa age. 


3. He said to himself, those bones lying scattered about the ruined huts in 
this forest, look like little imps, (Pisdchas), gathered round the trees standing 
on the burial ground. 


4. These posts and pegs of elephant’s tusks, that are fastened to and upon 
the walls of the ruined houses; look like the craigs of mount Meru, drowned 
under the waters of the Kalpa deluge. 


5. Here the Chandala feasted on his meat food of monkey’s flesh, and 
dressed with the sprouts of young bamboos; and there he caroused on his 
country grog, in company with his drunken friends. 


6. Here he slept in the embrace of his murky spouse, on his bed of the 
lion’s skin; being drunk with the better liquor mixed with the ichor, exuding 
from the frontal proboscis of the elephant. 


7. There was a pack of hounds, tied to the trunk of the withered Bharaeda 
tree, and fed with the rotten flesh of the putrid carcasses. 


8. Here I see three earthen vessels covered with the hides of buffaloes, 
resembling fragments of dark clouds; and which had once contained the 


precious pearls falling from the sculls of slain elephants. (The low and poor 
people, use earthen pots and boiling kettles for boxes and chests). 


9. I see the site of the place which I had seen in my dream, and where the 
Chandala boys played on the dust, with as much glee and gaiety, as the 
cuckoos have in flitting on the tufts of mango leaves. 


10. I see the place I had seen in my vision, where the boys sang responsive 
to the tune of their bamboo pipes; and drank the milk of bitches, and adorned 
themselves with flowers from the funeral grounds. 


11. Here the families of the wedding parties, met together to celebrate their 
marriage festivity; and danced and sang as loudly, as the noise of the dashing 
waves of the sea. 


12. There I find the bamboo cages, still suspended on high; which were laid 
before, for catching the flying birds of the air; in order to be killed for the food 
(of their slayers). 


13. Vasishtha resumed: — Thus Gadhi remained for a long time on the 
spot, observing all what he remembered to have seen in his dream; and was 
lost in wonder, to think on the miraculous disclosure of these things in his 
dream. (Lit.: — heart-strings palpitated with surprise, etc.). 


14. He then departed from that place, and travelled through many countries 
beyond the boundaries of Butan, for a long time. 


15. He passed over many rivers and rocks, and through many deserts and 
forests, until he reached to the snowy mountain, and the habitation of 
humankind beyond its borders. 


16. He then arrived at the city of a great monarch, the towers of which rose 
as hills upon the earth; and there stopped after his long journey, as when 
Narada rests in his heavenly dome, after the fatigue of travelling through the 
numerous worlds. 


17. He beheld in that city all the places answering to the romantic thoughts 
in his mind, and those as he had seen and enjoyed in his dream, and then 
asked the citizens in a respectful manner. 


18. Good Sirs, said he, do you remember anything regarding the Chandala 
king that reigned here for some time, which, if you do, be pleased to relate 
unto me in its proper order. 


19. The citizens replied: — Yes, O Brahman, there reigned here a Chandala 


king for full eight years, and he was elected to its government, by the 
auspicious elephant of the realm. 


20. Being at last discovered to be of so vile a race, he committed his self- 
immolation on the funeral pyre; and it is now a dozen of years, since the 
direful event has taken place. 


21. In this manner the inquisitive Gadhi continued in his inquiry of every 
man he met with, and was satisfied to learn the same information from the 
mouth of everybody there. 


22. He then beheld the king of that city coming with his body guards and 
vehicles, and whom he recognized to be no other than the god Vishnu and his 
attendants as he had seen in his devotion, and were now going out of the city. 


23. He saw the sky shadowed by the cloud of dust raised by the feet of the 
passing procession; and remembered with grief the like state of his pomp 
under his past kingship. 


24. He said to himself, here are the same Kiri damsels with their rosy skins, 
resembling the petals of lotuses; and those with their bodies blazing as liquid 
gold, and their cerulean eyes trembling like blue lotuses. 


25. The waving of the chouri flappers, flashes with the light of bright 
moonbeams; and resembles the falling waters of a cascade, and clusters of 
kdsa flowers. 


26. Beautiful maidens, waving the snow-white fans in their beauteous 
hands, resembled the forest plants with pearly flower on their branches. 


27. The rows of furious elephants, standing on both sides of the land, are 
like thick lines of kalpa trees, growing on ridges of the Sumeru mountains. 


28. These chieftains resembling the gods Yama, Kuvera and Varuna, — the 
lord of waters, are like the regents of the different quarters of the sky, 
accompanying Indra, — the lord of heaven. 


29. These long extending lines of goodly edifices, which are full of a great 
variety of things, and abounding in all sorts of comforts, resemble a grove of 
kalpa trees, conferring all the objects of desire. 


30. In this royal city of the Kirs, and in the manners of its assembled 
people, I see exactly the same customs and usages, as those of the kingdom of 
my past life. 


31. Truly this is but a vision in my dream, and appearing as a reality in my 
waking state; I cannot understand why this delusive magic show is spread out 
before me. 


32. O yes, I am as fast bound by my ignorance, and captivated by my 
reminiscence, as a captive bird in a net, that has lost all power over itself. 


33. O fie! that my silly mind is so deluded by its desires, that it is always 
wont to mistake the shadow for the substance, of people dwelling in their 
aerial castles. 


34. This extraordinary magic, I ween is shown to me by Vishnu, — the 
holder of the discus, of whom I recollect to have asked the favour of showing 
Maya or delusion to me. 


35. I will now betake myself to austere devotion in the cavern of a hill, in 
order to learn the origin and subsistence of delusion, (i.e., how the deceitful 
delusion sprang from the truthful God, and where in it consists). 


36. Having long thought in this manner, Gadhi went out of the city, and 
came to the cavern of a mountain; where he rested after all his travels and 
travail of thought, like a lion tired with his roaming for forage. 


37. He remained there for a whole year, living only on the water of the 
cataract collected in the hollow of his palm; and devoted himself to the 
worship of Vishnu, the holder of the Saringi bow. 


38. Then the lotus eyed god appeared to him in his watery form, which was 
as clear and graceful to sight, as the limpid lake of autumn with the blue 
lotuses full-blown upon it. 


39. With this form, the god approached to the hermit’s cell in the mountain, 
and stood over it in the likeness of a transparent watery cloud, resting on the 
humid atmosphere. 


40. The lord spoke to him saying: — Gadhi, thou hast fully seen the great 
spell of my magic, (maya); and known the network or delusion, which is 
spread by destiny over all the affairs of this world. (i.e., Man is destined, and 
to be deluded to think the false scenes of the world as real ones). 


41. Thou hast now well understood the nature of delusion, which thou didst 
desire in thy heart to know, what is it again that thou wantest to know, by 
these austerities of thine in this mountain cave? 


42. Vasishtha said: — Gadhi, the best of Brahmans, seeing Hari addressing 


him in this manner, honoured him duly with strewing plentiful of flowers at 
his divine feet. 


43. After Gadhi had made his offering of flowers, with due obeisance and 
turning round the deity, he addressed him with his words, sounding as sweet 
as notes of the chdtaka to the blooming lotus. 


44. Gadhi said: — Lord! I have seen the dark delusion, that thou hast 
shown me in her form of gloominess; I pray thee now to show her unto me in 
her fair form, as the sun appears after the gloom of night. 


45. The mind which is vitiated by the dirt of its desires, views a great many 
errors, rising before it like false phantoms and visions in a dream; but how is 
it my lord! that the same visions continue to be seen in the waking state also 
(or as waking dreams likewise)? 


46. It was for a moment only that I thought to have seen some thing as false 
as a dream, when I stood amidst the waters, but how was it, O thou 
enlightener of the mind, that it became manifest to my outward sense and 
sight? 


47. Why was not the delusion of my birth and death as a Chandala, which 
took place long ago, and lately verified by many visible vestiges, confined in 
my memory only, as well as other idle creations of the brain, but became 
palpable to my naked eyes? 


48. The lord replied: — GAadhi! it is the nature of delirium as of one’s 
desires, to present many false appearances to view; and to make one believe 
what he has never seen before, to be present to his external sight, which in 
reality is a vision of his mind only. 


49. There is nothing on the outside of any body as the earth, sea, hills and 
the sky; they are all contained in the mind as the fruits, flowers and leaves of 
trees, are born in the seed and grow from its germ. 


50. Like fruits and flowers growing out of the seed and its sprout, this earth 
and all other things are the productions of the mind alone, and not distinct 
from it in their essences, (i.e., all sensible perceptions are not reflexions of the 
inborn ideas of the mind). 


51. Know it for certain that this earth and all other things, are situated in the 
mind and not outside of it; as the fruit, flowers and leaves are all contained in 
the inside of the seed and not without it. 


52. The sight of things present, and the thoughts of the absent past and 
unseen future, are all but acts of the mind, as the making and unmaking of 
pots, are both of them the doings of the pot maker. 


53. Whatever notions there are in the minds of men from their youth to age, 
are alike to the phantoms of their dream or the deliriums of their ebriety or 
some (mental) disease. 


54. The settled desires of the mind present a thousand appearances before 
its sight, as the rooted plants on earth, abound with fruits and flowers of 
various kinds, on the surface of the ground. 


55. But the plants being rooted out of the ground, there remains no vestige 
of a fruit or flower or leaf upon earth; so the desires being driven out of the 
mind, there is no more any trace of anything left behind them; nor is there any 
probability of future transmigrations, when the reminiscence of the past is 
utterly obliterated from the soul. 


56. It is no wonder for the shifting stage of the mind, to present you the 
single scene of the Chandala, when it has in store, and can with equal ease 
show you an infinity of appearances at its pleasure. (The drama of life exhibits 
but a partial scene at a time). 


57. It was the impression (eidolon) in thy mind, that made thee think 
thyself as the Chandala, in the manner of the many phantoms, that rise before 
the mind in the delirium of a sickly person. 


58. It was the same phrenzy that made thee see the advent of thy Brahman 
guest, and entertain him with board and bed; and all thy conversation with 
him, was no other than the phantasies of thy mind. 


59. Then the thoughts of thy departure from home, and arrival at the district 
of the Bhootas, thy sight of the Bhotias and their villages and habitations, 
were but aberrations of thy mind. 


60. Next thy sight of the ruins of the former abode of Katanjala, and the 
account that thou didst get of him from the mouths of the people, were all the 
fumes of thy fancy. 


61. Afterwards, thy visit to the city of the Kirs, and the tale told thee of the 
Chandala’s reign by the people, were the excogitations of thy own mind. 


62. Thus, all that thou didst hear and see, was the network of thy 
imagination, and what thou dost believe as true is as false as a phantom of thy 


brain. 


63. The mind infatuated by its hopes and desires sees everything before it, 
how far soever it may be removed from it; as one dreams of objects as present 
before him, which would take a whole year for him to reach at. 


64. There was neither the guest nor the city, nor were there the Bhotias or 
the Kiris that thou didst see in reality. It was all a day dream, that thou didst 
see with thy mind’s eye. 


65. The truth is, that on thy way to the country of the Bhotias at one time, 
thou didst halt in the cave of this mountain, as a stag rests himself in a forest, 
after his long wandering. 


66. There, being tired with the fatigue of thy travel, thou didst fall into a 
sound sleep; and dreamt of the Bhotia city and the Chandala, in thy reverie 
without seeing anything in reality. 


67. It was there and in the same state of thy mind that thou sawest the city 
of the Kirs; and it was the delusion of thy mind that showed thee those things 
at the time of thy devotion in the water. 


68. In this manner, thou dost see many other things, wherever thou goest at 
any time; as a high flier sees his vagaries on all sides about him. (All worldly 
sights, are but vagaries of imagination). 


69. Rise, therefore, and remain unshaken in the discharge of thy duties, 
without being misled by the vagaries of thy mind; because it is practice of 
one’s profession that leads him to success, and not the ideals or his mind. (i.e., 
Mind thyself what thou art, and not what thou dost fancy to be). 


70. Vasishtha said: — So saying, the lotus-naveled Hari, who is 
worshipped by the saints and sages in all places, went to his abode in the sea, 
where he was received by the hands of the gods and holy sages, who led him 
to his residence. (Vishnu is called lotus-naveled Us]eT4: on account of 
Brahma’s birth from it, who is thence named the lotus-born Taaat l). 


CHAPTER XLIX. 
GADHI’S GAINING OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE. 


Argument. Gadhi gains his knowledge and Liberation from Hari in his 
Life-time. 


Vasishtha continued: — Vishnu being gone, Gadhi began to wander again 
about the Bhota country, as a cloud continues to move about in the air. 


2. Having collected many informations about himself in the life of the 
chandala, he betook himself again to the worship of Vishnu in the cave of a 
mountain. 


3. In course of a short time, Hari appeared to him again; as it is his nature 
to be pleased with a little devotion, made with sincerity of heart. 


4. The god spoke to Gadhi with as much complaisance, as the watery cloud 
addresses the peacock; and asked him what he wanted again by his repeated 
devotion. 


5. Gadhi replied: — Lord! I have again wandered about the countries of the 
Bhotas and Kirs for these past six months, and found no discrepancy in the 
accounts they gave of me lately from the former ones. 


6. Thou hast told me, Lord! all this to be mere delusion, (which prove to be 
positive facts by the testimony of everybody). I know the words of the great 
serve to dissipate and not increase the delusion (as it is done by thy words). 


7. The Lord said: — It often happens that many things are of simultaneous 
occurrence at the one and same time; as the kdkatdliya sanyoga or the 
synchronous flying of the crow and the falling of the fruit upon him. Thus it 
was that the idea of the Chandala was of contemporaneous growth in the 
minds of all the Bhotas and Kirs as of thyself; as there are many men that are 
prepossessed with the same opinion with others, however wrong it may be. 


8. It was by cause of this, that they corresponded with thy thoughts, and 
related thy story as thou didst reflect it thyself; because a cogitation or 
reflection of something cannot be otherwise at the same time (but it must 
appear to everybody alike). 


9. It is true that a Chandala had erected a house at the border of the village, 
which thou didst see to be now reduced to ruins; but it was an erroneous 
conception of thine, to think thyself the very man, and to have built the very 
house. (It was the mistake of thy personality for another, as it often overtakes 
the minds of many men). 


10. Sometimes the same mistake lays hold on many minds, as the multitude 
is seen to be led astray, by the simultaneous current of the same opinions in 
many ways. 


11. In this manner, many men see at once the same dream, as the giddy 
heads of drunken men, fall equally into the same kind of dizziness at the same 
time, of seeing the earth and skies turning and rolling round them. 


12. Many boys are seen at once to join in the same sport, and a whole herd 
of stags is observed to meet together in the same verdant field. 


13. Many men are seen simultaneously to pursue the same employment, for 
the purpose of gaining the like object of their pursuit (as it is seen in the flight 
and fighting of an army for their safety or victory). 


14. It is commonly said, that time is the giver (or producer) and obstructer 
of the objects of human pursuits as of all other events; but time is as quiescent 
as the supreme spirit, and it is the desire and exertion of people, that are the 
causes of their desired effects. 


15. Time is a formless void, and is identic with the nature and form of the 
increate great Lord God himself. It is neither the giver nor taker of anything to 
or from any one at any time. 


16. Time according to its common reckoning by years, kalpas and yuga- 
ages, is classed among the categories of substance; but time far from being a 
substance, is the source of all substances. 


17. Men of deluded understanding are subject to the errors, arising from the 
like cause of their fallacy; and it was owing to this false conception, that the 
Bhota and Kiri people, fell into the very same error. (Like cause means, the 
same kind of bias or prejudice, etc.). 


18. Therefore, employ thyself to do thy duty, and try to know thy true-self; 
get rid of the error of thy personality (as so and so), and move about as freely 
as I do by myself (as a free aerial spirit). 


19. Saying this, the lord Vishnu disappeared from his sight; and Gadhi 
remained in his cave, with great perplexity of his mind. 


20. He passed some months on the same hill, and then resumed his 
devotion to Vishnu with redoubled fervency. 


21. He saw his god appearing again to his view, when he bowed down 
before him, and addressed him as follows: — 


22. Gadhi said: — O Lord! I am quite bewildered with the thought of my 
Chandalship, and my reflection on the delusions of this world. 


23. Do thou deign to extricate me from my errors, and employ me to the 
only act of adoring the Holy one. 


24. The lord said: — This world, O Brahman! is a delusion, like the 
enchantment of the conjurer Sambara; all things here, are the wondrous 
productions of imagination, and proceed from forgetfulness of the self. 


25. It was your error that made you see many things, in your sleeping and 
waking dreams. 


26. The Kirs were led also to see the same things like thyself, and to 
mistake those falsities as true, owing to the same error laying hold of all of 
you at the same time. (As the tricks of a juggler are thought to be true by the 
observers). 


27. Now hear me tell you the truth as it was for your own good; and 
whereby your error will fade away, like a creeping plant in the chilling month 
of November. 


28. The Chandala Katanjaka, whom thou thinkest to be thyself, was a man 
really existent in the same locality before. 


29. Who being bereaved of his family there, went out from that place to 
wander about in foreign parts, when he became king of the Kiris, and 
afterwards immerged himself in the fire. 


30. This state of Katanjaka entered into thy mind, when thou hadst been 
standing amidst the water in thy devotion; and the thoughts of the whole 
career of the Chandala, had altogether engrossed thy mind. 


31. Things which are seen or thought of once, can hardly escape from the 
memory; and it sometimes happens that the mind comes to see many things in 
its imagination, which it has never seen before its eyes. 


32. In the manner of a man’s vision of a kingdom in his dream, and like the 
delirium caused by the vitiated humours of the body, the mind sees many day 
dreams and deliriums in its waking and healthy states also. 


33. The past conduct of Katanja presented itself to your mind, as the past 
and future events of the world are present before the mental vision of an 
oracle. (Lit.: — a seer of the three times). 


34. That this is I, and these things and those friends are mine, is the mistake 
of those that are devoid of their self-knowledge; (as thou didst think that 
Katanja to be thyself, and his house, goods and relatives to be thine also). 


35. But that, ‘I am all in all,’ is the belief of the truly wise, which prevents 
them from falling into such mistakes, and keeps them from the wrong notions 
of individualities and particularities, from their belief in the generality of all 
persons and things. 


36. This general and cecumenical view of all things, preserves people from 
the mistaken notions of pleasure and pain; and makes the drowning wretch as 
buoyant, as the floating gourd or bottle tied to a sinking net. 


37. But thou art entangled in the snare of thy desire, and art lost to thy good 
sense; nor canst thou be at thy perfect ease, as long as thou dost suffer under 
the symptoms of thy sickness. 


38. It is because of thy imperfect knowledge, that thou art incapable to 
ward off the errors of thy mind; just as it is impossible for a man to protect 
himself from the rain, without his endeavours to raise a shed or shelter for 
himself. 


39. Thou art easily susceptible of every impression of thy untutored mind, 
as a small tree is easily over-reached by a tall person. 


40. The heart is the nave or axis of the wheel of delusion; if thou canst stop 
the motion of this central power, there is nothing to disturb thee any more. 
(self-regret, says the gloss, serves to stop the motion of the heart). 


41. Now rise and repair to the sacred bower on this mountain, and there 
perform your austerities for full ten years with a steady mind; so that thou 
mayst attain to thy perfect knowledge at the end of this period. 


42. So saying, the lotus-eyed god disappeared from that place, as a flimsy 
cloud or candle-light or the billow of Jamuna, is put out by a slight gust of the 
wind. 


43. Gadhi then gradually gained his dispassionateness, by means of his 
discrimination; as the trees fade away for want of moisture, at the end of 
autumn. 


44. Now getting rid of the vagaries of his mind, Gadhi remained to reflect 
upon and blamed himself, for his fostering the false thoughts of the Chandala 
and the like. 


45. He then with his heart melting in pity and sorrow for himself, repaired 
to the Rishya-mukha mount, for the purpose of making his penitence; and he 
sat there in the manner of a rainy cloud, stopping on the top of a mountain. 


46. He relinquished all his desires, and performed his austere devotion (as 
it was his duty); and at last, he attained the knowledge of his self, after the 
expiration of the tenth year of his penitence. 


47. Having obtained his knowledge of himself like the great-souled 
Brahma, and getting rid of his fears and sorrows in this world of retribution, 
he wandered about with the joy of a living liberated being, and with perfect 
tranquility of his mind, resembling the serene lustre of the full-moon, 
revolving in the sphere of the sky. 


CHAPTER L. 
INTENTIONS OF RAMA. 


Argument. On subjection of the mind and greatness of knowledge; and 
stoutness of the heart as the cause of all evil. 


Vasishtha continued: — Know Rama, this delusion to be as extensive in its 
form, as it is inexplicable in its nature; it is fraught with ignorance; it is a 
spiritual illusion and no sensible deception. 


2. Look on the one hand at the erroneous dream of the Brahman for a 
couple of hours, and his transformation into the state of Chandala which 
lasted for many years. 


3. Observe how the false conception of the Brahman, appeared as present 
to his sensible perception; and see how the false thought appeared as true to 
him, and his true knowledge of him-self vanishing at last into untruth. 


4. I say, therefore, this illusion, to be utterly inexplicable in its nature; and 
how it leads the unguarded mind, to a great many errors and difficulties and 
dangers at last. 


5. Rama asked: — How Sir, can we put a stop to the wheel of delusion, 
which by its rapid rotation, is constantly grinding every part of our body? 
(Figuratively used for every good quality of the mind. — Gloss). 


6. Vasishtha said: — Know Rama, this revolving world is the wheel of 
delusion, and the human heart is the nave or axis of this great wheel; which by 
its continual rotation produces all this delusion within its circle. 


7. If you can by means of your manly exertion, put a stop to the motion of 
your heart, as it were by fixing a peg to the loop-hole of the wheel, you stop 
the rotation of the circle of delusion at once. 


8. Again, the mind is the nave of the wheel of ignorance, and if you can 


stop its motion, by binding it fast by the rope of your good sense, you escape 
the danger of falling into the vortiginous rotation of errors. 


9. Rama, you are well skilled in the art of fighting by hurling the discus, 
and cannot be ignorant of preventing its motion by stopping it at the central 
hole. 


10. Therefore, O Rama! be diligent to stop the nave of your mind; and you 
will be enabled thereby to preserve yourself, both from the revolution of the 
world and vicissitudes of time. 


11. The soul that rejects this counsel, is exposed to interminable misery; 
while by keeping it always before the sight of the mind, it avoids all 
difficulties in this world. 


12. There is no other medicine for anybody, to heal the disease of his 
worldliness, save by restraining the mind to its own pivot. 


13. Forsake, therefore, O Rama! your acts of holy pilgrimage, and 
observance of austerity and charity (which are of no avail to the peace of the 
soul); but keep the mind under your control, for attainment of your supreme 
felicity. 


14. The world is situated in the mind, as the air is confined in a pot; but the 
mind being restricted to itself, the world is lost to it; as the pot just broken, 
lets out the air to mix in endless vacuity. 


15. You who are forever confined in the imaginary world of your mind, like 
a gnat confined in the hollow of a pot, will get your release only by breaking 
out of this confinement, like the gnat flying into the open air. 


16. The way to get rid of the delusions of the mind, is to fix your attention 
only to the present moment; and not to employ your thoughts about the past 
and future events. (This will keep your attention close to yourself). 


17. You will then arrive to the state of that holy unmindfulness called non- 
chalance, when you cease to pursue at once any of the objects of your desire 
or imagination. 


18. The mind is obscured so long, as it has the mist of its desires and 
fancies flying over it; as the sky is overcast as long as the watery clouds 
overspread upon it. 


19. As long as the intelligent soul is joined with the faculty of the mind, so 
long it is subject to its gross desires and thickening train of its fancies; as the 


sky is filled with bright moon-beams as long as the moon shines in it. (.e., As 
there is no moon-light without the moon, so there is no fancy without the 
mind, nor is there any mind which is devoid of its fancies). 


20. When the intelligent soul is known without the medium of the mind, 
(i.e., when the soul is seen face to face), then the existence of the world, is 
rooted out from the mind, like trees burnt down to their roots. 


21. Intelligence unappertaining to the mind, is called perspicacity, (pratyak 
chetana), which is of a nature unconnected with intellectuality, and freed from 
the foulness of the fumes of fancy. (i.e., quite clear of all mental thought). 


22. That is verily the state of truth and of true felicity. It is the true state of 
spirituality, and a manner of omniscience; having all-sightedness of its own, 
and seeing all things in itself. It is quite unconnected with any mental 
operation, and is enlightened by the light of the spirit. 


23. Whenever there is the action of the mind, it is invariably accompanied 
with the train of desires and the sense of pleasure and pain; and the feelings 
and passions are its concomitants, as the ravens are accompaniments of the 
burning ground. (The mind is the sensorium of feelings). 


24. The minds of the intelligent are not without their action, but they are 
aloof of those feelings, by their knowledge of the vanity of earthly things. 
And though these feelings are contained like plants in the seed vessel of their 
mind; yet they are not allowed to germinate in its sterile soil. 


25. They (the wise), have come to know the unsubstantiality and 
uncertainty of all worldly things and events, both by their knowledge of the 
natures of things; and by means of their acquaintance with the Sdstras; as also 
by their association with holy men, and their habitual observance of the 
practices of a pious and saintly life. 


26. They have forcibly withdrawn their minds from ignorance, by their 
determined exertions to gain the true knowledge of things; and have 
strenuously applied them to the study of Sdstras, and the good conduct of 
righteous people. 


27. But it is the purity of the soul only, that has the sight of the Supreme 
spirit; as it is the brilliancy of the gem itself, that makes it discernable amidst 
the waters of the deep, and enables it to be redeemed from darkness. (i.e., 
Human soul being a reflexion of the Supreme, lends its light to the vision of 
the other). 


28. As the soul naturally desires to get rid of things, which it has come to 
know to be attended with pain to it; so the soul is the sole cause of knowing 
the Supreme, (by its discarding the knowledge of the gross objects, which 
interposes between it and the Divine, and obstructs the view of the latter). 


29. Be therefore freed from your thoughts of all other things, both in your 
waking and sleeping states, and when you talk to or think of anybody, give or 
receive anything to or from another. Rely and reflect on your consciousness 
alone, and watch constantly its secret admonitions and intuitions. 


30. Whether when you are born or going to die, or do anything or live in 
this world, be steadily attentive to your conscious self, and you will perceive 
the clear light of the soul (and have your clairvoyance). 


31. Leave off thinking that this is I and that is another, because all are alike 
before the Lord of all; and give up wishing this for thyself and that for others, 
for all things belong to God. Rely solely on the one, and that is thy internal 
consciousness alone. 


32. Be of one mind in your present and future states of life, and continue to 
investigate into its various phases in your own consciousness. (i.e., Know 
yourself in all the varying circumstances of your life). 


33. In all the changes of your life from boyhood to youth and old age, and 
amidst all its changing scenes of prosperity and adversity, as also in the states 
of your waking, dreaming and sound sleep, remain faithful to your 
consciousness. (i.e., Never lose the knowledge of your self-identity (as the 
one and unchanging soul)). 


34. Melt down your mind as a metal, and purify it of its dross of the 
knowledge or impression of external things; break off the snare of your 
desires and depend on your consciousness of yourself. 


35. Get rid of the disease of your desire, of whatever is marked as good or 
bad for you; and turn your sight from all, which may appear as favourable or 
unfavourable to you; and rely on your consciousness of pure intelligence. 
(This is having perfect mastery of yourself). 


36. Leave untouched whatever is tangible to the touch, and obtainable to 
you by your agency or instrumentality; remain unchanged and unsupported by 
anything in the world, and depend only on your own consciousness (as the 
intangible spirit). 


37. Think yourself as sleeping when you are awake, and remain as calm 


and quiet as you are insensible of anything; think yourself as all and alone, 
and as instinct with the Supreme Spirit. 


38. Think yourself free from the changing and unchanging states of life, 
(i.e., from the states of life and death and of waking and sleep); and though 
engaged in business, think yourself as disengaged from all concerns. 


39. Forsake the feelings of your egoism and non-egoism, (as this is mine 
and that is others); and be undivided from the rest of the world, by thinking 
yourself as the macrocosm of the cosmos, and support yourself on the 
adamantine rock of your consciousness, by remaining unshaken at all events. 


40. Continue to cut off the meshes of the net of your internal desires, by the 
agency of your intellect and its helpmate of patience; and be of the profession 
of belonging to no profession; (of any particular faith or creed or calling). 


41. The sweet taste of trusting in the true faith of consciousness, converts 
even the poison of false faiths to ambrosia; (i.e., belief in soul is the soul of all 
creeds). 


42. It is then only, that the great error of taking the false world for true, 
prevails over the mind, when it forgets to remember the pure and undivided 
self-consciousness (and takes the outward forms for true). 


43. Again, the progress of the great error of the substantiality of the world, 
is then put to an end, when the mind relies its trust, in the immaculate and 
undivided consciousness or intelligence. 


44. One who has passed over the great gulf of his desires, and known the 
true nature of his soul, has his consciousness shining within himself, with the 
full blaze of the luminous sun. 


45. One who knows the nature of his soul, and is settled in the 
transcendental bliss of knowing the peerless One, finds the most nectarious 
food as a poison to him. (i.e., The taste of spiritual bliss, is sweeter far than 
that of the daintiest food). 


46. We revere those men, who have known the nature of the soul, and have 
reached to their spiritual state; and know the rest bearing the name of men, as 
no better than asses in human shape. 


47. Behold the devotees going from hill to hill, and roving like big-bodied 
elephants for the performance of their devotions; but they are far below the 
spiritualist, who sits as high above them as on the top of the mountain. 


48. The heavenward sight of consciousness, reaching beyond the limits of 
all regions to the unseen and invisible God, derives no help from the light of 
the sun and moon (which can never reach so far, as the highest empyrean). 


49. The lights of the luminaries fade away like candle lights, before the 
sight of consciousness; which sees the great lights of the sun and moon and 
all, within the compass of its knowledge. 


50. He who has known the truth of God, stands highest above the rest of 
men, by reason of his self-sacrifice, and the greatness of his soul, by means of 
his practice of Yoga; and is distinguished from others by the brightness of his 
person. (The eternal light shines in the body also). 


51. Like Him whose effulgence shines forth unto us, in the lustre of the sun, 
moon, stars, gems and fire, the pre-eminent among men shine among 
mankind, in their knowledge of what is knowable, and worthy to be known. 
(The sapient shine with their knowledge, as luminous bodies before us). 


52. Those that are ignorant of truth (or the true natures of things), are 
known to be viler than the asses, and other brute creatures that live upon the 
land; and are meaner than the mean insects that dwell in the holes beneath the 
earth. (Knowledge of truth ennobles man-kind, above their fellow-creatures). 


53. So long is an embodied being said to be a devil of darkness, as he is 
ignorant of spiritual knowledge, but no sooner is he acquainted with his soul, 
and united with his self in his intellection, than he is recognized as a spiritual 
being. 


54. The unspiritual man is tossed about on earth as a carcass, and is 
consumed with the fuel of his cares, as a dead body is burnt away by the 
flames of its funeral fire; but the spiritualist knowing the nature of his soul, is 
only sensible of his immortality. 


55. Spiritualism flies afar from the man whose heart is hardened in this 
world; just as the glory of sunshine is lost under the shadow of the thickening 
clouds in the sky. 


56. Therefore, the mind is to be gradually curbed and contracted in itself, 
by a dislike of all earthly enjoyments; and the knower of his self should try by 
long practice of abstinence, to desiccate his spirit of its moisture, to the 
dryness of a faded leaf. 


57. The mind is thickened and fattened by consolidating itself with those of 
others; and staining it with the affections, of wife and those of offspring, 


relations and friends. 


58. The passions and feelings also are often the causes of the solidity and 
stolidity of the mind; and these are its egotism and selfishness, gaiety and 
impurity of thoughts, and its changing tempers and affections. But most of all 
it is the sense of meity that this is mine, that nourishes it to gross density. (The 
mind is puffed up with the increase of possessions). 


59. The mind is swollen on coming to prosperity, even under the deadly 
pains of old age and infirmity; as also under the poisonous pangs of penury 
and miserliness. (Stinginess is a painful pleasure). 


60. The mind grows lusty in its expectation of some good in prospect, even 
under the afflictions of disease and danger. It grows stout with enduring what 
is intolerable, and doing what ought not to be done. 


61. The heart too becomes stout with its affection for others, and also with 
its desire and gain of riches and jewels; it becomes lusty with its craving after 
women, and in having whatever is pleasant to it for the moment. 


62. The heart, like a snake, is big swollen with feeding on false hopes as 
air; and by breathing the empty air of passing delights and pleasures. It is 
pampered by drinking the liquor of fleeting hope, and moves about in the 
course of its endless expectations. 


63. The heart is staunch in its enjoyment of pleasures, however injurious 
they are in their nature; and though situated inside the body, yet it is subject to 
pine in disease and uneasiness, under a variety of pains and changes. 


64. There grows in the heart of the body, as in the hollow of a tree, a 
multitude of thoughts like a clump of orchids; and these bearing the budding 
blossoms of hope and desire, hung down with the fruits and flowers of death 
and disease. 


65. Delay not to lop off the huge trunk of the poisonous tree of avarice, 
which has risen as high as a hill in the cavity of thy heart, with the sharp saw 
of thy reason; nor defer to put off the big branch of thy hope, and prune its 
leaves of desires, without the least delay. 


66. The elephantine heart sits with its infuriate eyes, in the solitary recess 
of the body; and is equally fond of its ease as of its carnal gratification; it 
longs to look at the lotus bed of the learned, as also to meet a field of 
sugarcanes composed of fools and dunces. 


67. Rama! you should, like a lion, the monarch of the forest, destroy your 
elephantine heart which is seated amidst the wilderness of your body, by the 
sharp saws of your understanding; and break the protruding tusks of its 
passions, in the same manner as they break down all big bodies. 


68. Drive away the crow-like ravenous heart, from within the nest of your 
bosom. It is fond of frequenting filthy places, as the ravens hover over funeral 
grounds, and crows squat in dirty spots, and fatten their bodies by feeding on 
the flesh of all rotten carcasses. It is cunning in its craft and too cruel in its 
acts. It uses the lips like the bills of the crow only to hurt others, and is one 
eyed as the crow, looking only to its own selfish interest; it is black all over its 
body for its black purposes and deeds. 


69. Drive afar your raven-like heart, sitting heavy on the tree of your soul, 
intent on its wicked purposes, and grating the ear with its jarring sound. It 
flutters on all sides at the scent of putrid bodies, to pollute its nest with foul 
putrescence of evil intents. 


70. Again, there is the pernicious hideous demon, — avarice, roving at 
large like a goblin, or lurking in ambush in the dark cavity of the heart, as in a 
dreary desert. It assumes a hundred forms, and appears in a hundred shapes, 
(in repeated births), pursuing their wonted courses in darkness (without any 
knowledge of themselves and their right course). 


71. Unless and until you drive away this wicked goblin of your heart, from 
the abode of your intelligent soul, (ie., the body), by means of your 
discrimination and dispassionateness, and your power of mantras and tantras, 
you cannot expect to be successful (siddha) in your endeavours. (For 
perfection fafg Siddhi). 


72. Moreover there is the serpentine mind, hid under the slough of the 
body, which with its poisonous thoughts, frothing at the mouth as the 
destructive venom of mankind, is continually breathing in and out as a pair of 
bellows, and inhaling and exhaling the air as a snake, for the destruction of all 
other persons. 


73. You must subdue, O Rama, this great serpent of the mind, lying hid ina 
cell of the cellular simal tree of your body, by some mantra formula, 
pronounced by the Garuda of your intelligence; and thus be free from all fear 
and danger for ever. 


74. Repress, O Rama! thy vulture-like heart, that bears an ominous figure 
by its insatiate greediness for dead bodies; it flies about on all sides and being 


annoyed by the hungry crows and kites, it rests in desolate cemeteries. (The 
greedy mind dwells on the ruin of others). 


75. It ransacks all quarters in quest of its meat of living and dead bodies, 
and lifts its neck to watch for its prey, when it is sitting silently with patience. 
The vulturous heart flies afar from its resting tree of the body, and requires to 
be restrained with diligence from its flight. 


76. Again, the apish mind is wandering through the woods on all sides, and 
passing fastly beyond the limits of its natal horizon in search of fruits; it 
outruns the bounds of its native land and country, and thus being bound to 
nowhere, he derides at the multitude, that are bound to their homely toil, and 
confined in their native clime and soil. 


77. The big monkey of the mind that sports on the tree of the body, with its 
eyes and nose as the flowers of the tree, and having the arms for its boughs, 
and the fingers for its leaves, ought to be checked for one’s success in any 
thing. 


78. The illusion of the mind rises like a cloud with the mists of error, for 
laying waste the good harvest of spiritual knowledge. It flashes forth 
lightnings from its mouth to burn down everything and not to give light on the 
way; its showers are injurious to ripened crops, and it opens the door of desire 
(to plunge the boat of the body in the whirlpool of the world). 


79. Forsake to seek the objects of your desire, which are situated in the airy 
region of your mind; and exert your energy to drive off the cloud of your 
mind, in order to obtain the great object of your aim. 


80. The mind is as a long rope, that binds mankind to their incessant acts. It 
is impossible to break or burn its knots in any other way except by means of 
one’s self knowledge. Its bond of transmigration is painful to all, until they 
obtain their final emancipation. 


81. Break boldly, O Rama! by the instrumentality of your inappetency the 
bondage of your mind, that binds fast in infinite number of bodies to the chain 
of their transmigration; and enjoy your freedom without any fear for 
evermore. 


82. Know avarice as a venomous snake, which destroys its votaries by the 
poison of its breath, and never yields to the good counsel of any body. It is 
this serpent that has ruined mankind, by its deceit and by laying in wait for its 
prey, it emaciates the body to a stick. 


83. Avarice which is hid in the body, and lurks unseen in its cells, is as a 
dark cobra or hydra in its form; it is to be burnt to death by the fire of 
lukewarmness, for your safety and security from all evil. 


84. Now put your heart to rest by the intelligence of your mind, and gird 
yourself with the armour of purity for your defence; forsake your fickle- 
mindedness forever, and remain as a tree uninfested by the apes of passion. 


85. Purify both your body and mind with the sanctity of your soul, and be 
dauntless and quiet by the aid of your intelligence and calm composure of 
your intellect. Think yourself as lighter and meaner than a straw, and thus 
enjoy the sweets of this world by going across it to the state of beatitude in 
this life. 


CHAPTER LI. 
DESIRE OF UDDALAKA. 


Argument, Uddalaka’s struggle for Liberation, amidst all his worldly 
attachments. 


Vasishtha said: — Rely no confidence, O Rama! in the course of the mind, 
which is sometimes continuous and sometimes momentary, now even and flat 
and then sharp and acute, and often as treacherous as the edge of a razor. 


2. As it occurs in the course of a long time, that the germ of intelligence 
comes to sprout forth in the field of the mind; so do you, O Rama! who are a 
moralist, grow it by sprinkling the cold water of reason over its tender blades. 


3. As long as the body of the plant does not fade away in course of time, 
nor roll upon the ground as the decayed and dead body of man; so long should 
you hold it up upon the prop of reason; (i.e., cultivate your knowledge in your 
youth). 


4. Knowing the truth of my sayings, and pondering on the deep sense of 
these sayings of mine, you will get a delight in your inmost soul, as the 
serpent killing peacock is ravished at the deep roaring of raining clouds. 


5. Do you, like the sage Uddalaka, shake off your knowledge of quintuple 
materiality as the cause of all creation, and accustom yourself to think deeper, 
and on the prime cause of causes by your patient inquiry and reasoning. 


6. Rama requested: — Tell me Sir, in what way the sagely Uddalaka got rid 
of his thoughts of the quintessential creation, and penetrated deeper into the 
original cause of all, by the force and process of his reasoning. 


7. Vasishtha replied: — Learn Rama, how the sage Uddalaka of old, rose 
higher from his investigation of quintuple matter to his inquiry into their 
cause, and the manner in which that transcendent light dawned upon his mind. 


8. It was in some spacious corner of the old mansion of this world, and on 
the northwest side of this land, a spot of rugged hills and overtopping it as a 
shed. 


9. Among these stood the high hill of Gandhamadana with a table-land on 
it, which was full of camphor arbours, that shed the odours of their flowers 
and pistils continually on the ground. 


10. This spot was frequented by birds of variegated hues, and filled with 
plants of various kinds. Its banks were beset by wild beasts, and fraught with 
flowers shining smilingly over the woodland scene. 


11. There were the bright swelling gems in some part of it, and the 
blooming and full-blown lotuses on another; some parts of it were veiled by 
tufts of snow, and crystal streams gliding as glassy mirrors on others. 


12. Here on the elevated top a big cliff of this hill, which was studded with 
sarala trees, and strewn over with flowers up to the heels, and shaded by the 
cooling umbrage of lofty trees: — 


13. There lived the silent sage by name of Uddalaka, a youth of a great 
mind, and with high sense of his honour. He had not yet attained his maturity, 
ere he betook himself to the course of his rigorous austerity. 


14. On the first development of his intellect, he had the light of reason 
dawning upon his mind; and he was awakened to noble aims and 
expectations, instead of arriving at the state of rest and quietude. 


15. As he went on in this manner in his course of austerities, religious 
studies and observance of his holy rites and duties, the genius of right reason 
appeared before him, as the new year presents itself before the face of the 
world. 


16. He then began to cogitate in himself in the following manner, sitting 
aside as he was in his solitude, weary with thoughts and terrified at the ever- 
changing state of the world. 


17. What is that best of gains, said he, which being once obtained, there is 
nothing more to be expected to lead us to our rest, and which being once had, 
we have no more to do with our transmigrations in this world? 


18. When shall I find my permanent rest in that state of holy and 
transcendent thoughtlessness, and remain above all the rest, as a cloud rests 
over the top of the Sumeru mountain, or as the polar star stands above the pole 


without changing its pace. 


19. When will my tumultuous desires of worldly aggrandizement, merge in 
peaceful tranquillity; as the loose, loud and boisterous waves and billows 
subside in the sea? 


20. When will the placid and unstirred composure of my mind, smile in 
secret within myself, to reflect on the wishes of mankind, that they will do this 
thing after they have done the other, which leads them interminably in the 
circuit of their misery. 


21. When will my mind be loosened from its noose of desire, and when 
shall I remain unattached to all, as a dew drop on the lotus-leaf? (It is called 
anasanga sango or intangible connection). 


22. When shall I get over the boisterous sea of my fickle desires, by means 
of the raft of my good understanding? 


23. When shall I laugh to scorn, the foolish actions of worldly people, as 
the silly play of children? 


24. When will my mind get rid of its desire and dislike and cease to swing 
to and fro in the cradle of its option and caprice; and return to its steadiness, 
as a madman is calmed after the fit of his delirium has passed away? 


25. When shall I receive my spiritual and luminous body, and deride the 
course of the world; and have my internal satisfaction within myself, like the 
all-knowing and all-sufficient spirit of Virdj? 


26. With internal equanimity and serenity of the soul, and indifference to 
external objects, when shall I obtain my calm quietness, like the sea after its 
release from churning? 


27. When shall I behold the fixed scene of the world before me, as it is 
visible in my dream, and keep myself aloof from the same? (as no part of it). 


28. When shall I view the inner and outer worlds, in the light of a fixed 
picture in the sight of my imagination; and when shall I meditate on the whole 
in the light of an intellectual system? 


29. Ah! when shall I have the calmness of my mind and soul, and become a 
perfectly intellectual being myself; when shall I have that supernatural light in 
me, which enlightens the internal eye of those that are born blind? 


30. When will the sunshine of my meditation, show unto me the pure light 


of my intellect, whereby I may see the objects at a distance, as I perceive the 
parts of time in myself. 


31. When shall I be freed from my exertion and inertness, towards the 
objects of my desire and dislike; and when shall I get my self-satisfaction in 
my state of self-illumination. 


32. When will this long and dark night of my ignorance come to its end? It 
is infested by my faults fluttering as the boding birds of night, and infected 
with frost withering the lotus of my heart, (hrid-padma). 


33. When shall I become like a cold clod of stone, in the cavern of a 
mountain, and have the calm coolness of my mind by an invariable samadhi, 
— comatosity. 


34. When will the elephant of my pride, which is ever giddy with its 
greatness, become a prey to the lion of right understanding. 


35. When will the little birds of the forest, build their nest of grass in the 
braids of hair upon my head; when I remain fixed in my unalterable 
meditation, in my state of silence and torpidity. 


36. And when will the birds of the air rest fearlessly on my bosom, as they 
do on the tops of fixed rocks, upon finding me sitting transfixed in my 
meditation, and as immovable as a rock. 


37. Ah! when shall I pass over this lake of the world, wherein my desires 
and passions, are as the weeds and thorny brambles, and obstructing my 
passage to its borders of felicity. 


38. Immerged in these and the like reflections, the twice-born Uddalaka sat 
in his meditation amidst the forest. 


39. But as his apish fickle-mindedness turned towards sensible objects in 
different ways, he did not obtain the state of habitation which could render 
him happy. 


40. Sometimes his apish mind turned away from leaning to external 
objects, and pursued with eagerness the realities of the internal world or 
intellectual verities (known as sdtwikas). 


41. At others, his fickle mind departed from the intangible things of the 
inner or intellectual world, and returned with fondness to outer objects, which 
are mixed with poison. 


42. He often beheld the sunlight of spirituality rising within himself, and as 
often turned away his mind from that golden prospect, to the sight of gross 
objects. 


43. Leaving the soul in the gloom of internal darkness, the licentious mind 
flies as fast as a bird, to the objects of sense abroad. 


44. Thus turning by turns from the inner to the outer world, and then from 
this to that again; his mind found its rest in the intermediate space, lying 
between the light of the one and darkness of the other. (i.e., in the twilight of 
indifference to both). 


45. Being thus perplexed in his mind, the meditative Brahman remained in 
his exalted cavern, like a lofty tree shaken to and fro by the beating tempest. 


46. He continued in his meditation as a man of fixed attention, at the time 
of an impending danger; and his body shook to and fro, as it was moved 
forward and backward by the tiny waves splashing on the bank. 


47. Thus unsettled in his mind, the sage sauntered about the hill; as the god 
of day makes his daily round about the polar mountain in his lonely course. 


48. Wandering in this manner, he once observed a cavern, which was 
beyond the reach of all living beings; and was as quiet and still, as the 
liberated state of an anchorite. 


49. It was not disturbed by the winds, nor frequented by birds and beasts; it 
was unseen by the gods and Gandharvas, and was as lightsome as the bright 
concave of heaven. 


50. It was covered with heaps of flowers, and was spread over with a 
coverlet of green and tender grass; and being overlaid by a layer of 
moonstones, it seemed to have its floor of emerald. 


51. It afforded a cool and congenial shade, emblazoned by the mild light of 
the bright gems in its bosom; and appeared to be the secret haunt of woodland 
goddesses, that chanced to sport therein. 


52. The light of the gems that spread over the ground, was neither too hot 
nor too cold; but resembled the golden rays of the rising sun in autumn. 


53. This cave appeared as a new bride decked with flowers, and holding a 
wreathed garland in her hand; with her countenance fading under the light of 
the gemming lamps, and fanned by the soft whistling of winds. 


54. It was as the abode of tranquility, and the resting place of the lord of 
creation; it was charming by the variety of its blooming blossoms, and was as 
soft and mild as the cell of the lotus (which is the abode of the lotus-born 
Brahma). 


CHAPTER LIL. 
RATIOCINATION OF UDDALAKA: — 


Argument. Uddalaka’s Remonstration with himself, amidst the reveries of 
his meditation. 


Vasishtha resumed: — The saintly Uddalaka then entered in that grotto of 
Gandhamadana mountain, as the sauntering bee enters into the lotus-cell, in 
the course of its romantic peregrination. 


2. It was for the purpose of his intense meditation, that he entered the cave 
and sat therein; as when the lotus-born creator, had retired to and rested in his 
seclusion, after termination of his work of creation. 


3. There he made a seat for himself, by spreading the unfaded leaves of 
trees on the floor; as when the god Indra spreads his carpet of the manifold 
layers of clouds. 


4. He then spread over it his carpet of deerskin, as the bedding of stars is 
laid over the strata of the blue clouds of heaven. 


5. He sat upon it in his meditative mood, with the watchfulness of his mind; 
as when an empty and light cloud alights on the top of the Rishyasringa 
mountain. (i.e., His mind was as fleet, as a fleeting cloud). 


6. He sat firmly in the posture of padmdsana like Buddha, with his face 
turned upwards; his two legs and feet covered his private parts, and his palms 
and fingers counted the beads of Brahma. 


7. He restrained the fleet deer of his mind, from the desires to which it ran 
by fits and starts; and then he reflected in the following manner, for having the 
unaltered steadiness of his mind. 


8. O my senseless mind! said he, why is it, that thou art occupied in thy 
worldly acts to no purpose; when the sensible never engage themselves to 


what proves to be their bane afterwards. 


9. He who pursues after pleasure by forsaking his peaceful tranquility, is as 
one who quits his grove of manddra flowers, and enters a forest of poisonous 
plants. (Thoughts of pleasure poisons the mind). 


10. Thou mayst hide thyself in some cave of the earth, and find a place in 
the highest abode of Brahma, then yet thou canst not have thy quiet there, 
without the quietism of thy spirit. 


11. Cease to seek thy objects of thy desire, which are beset by difficulties, 
and are productive of thy woe and anxiety; fly from these to lay hold on thy 
chief good, which thou shalt find in thy solitary retirement only. 


12. These sundry objects of thy fancy or liking, which are so temporary in 
their nature; are all for thy misery, and of no real good at any time, (either 
when they are sought for, or enjoyed or lost to thee). 


13. Why followest thou like a fool, the hollow sound of some fancied good, 
which has no substantial in it? It is as the great glee of frogs, at the high 
sounding of clouds that promise them nothing. (Hence the phrase, “megha 
mandukika,” that is, the frogs croaking in vain at the roaring of clouds; 
answering the English phrases, “fishing in the air and milking the ram, or 
pursuing a shadow etc.”). 


14. Thou hast been roving all this time with thy froggish heart, in the blind 
pursuit after thy profit and pleasure; but tell me what great boon has booted 
thee; in all thy ramblings about the earth. 


15. Why dost thou not fix thy mind to that quietism, which promises to give 
thee something as thy self-sufficiency; and wherein thou mayst find thy rest as 
the state of thy liberation in thy life-time. 


16. O my foolish heart! why art thou roused at the sound of some good 
which reaches unto thy ears, and being led by thy deluded mind, in the 
direction of that sound; thou fallest a victim to it, as the deer is entrapped in 
the snare, by being beguiled by the hunter’s horn. 


17. Beware, O foolish man! to allow the carnal appetite to take possession 
of thy breast, and lead thee to thy destruction, as the male elephant is caught 
in the pit, by being beguiled by the artful koomki to fall into it. (The female 
elephant is called koomki in elephant-catching). 


18. Do not be misled by thy appetite of taste, to cram the bitter gall for 


sweet; or bite the fatal bait that is laid, to hook the foolish fish to its 
destruction. 


19. Nor let thy fondness for bright and beautiful objects, bewitch thee to 
thy ruin; as the appearance of a bright light or burning fire, invites the silly 
moth to its consumption. 


20. Let not thy ardour for sweet odor, tempt thee to thy ruin; nor entice thee 
like the poor bees to the flavour of the liquor, exuding from the frontal 
proboscis of the elephant, only to be crushed by its trunk. 


21. See how the deer, the bee, the moth, the elephant and the fish, are each 
of them destroyed by their addiction to the gratification of a single sense; and 
consider the great danger to which the foolish man, is exposed by his desire of 
satisfying all his refractory senses and organs. 


22. O my heart! it is thou thyself, that dost stretch the snare of thy desires 
for thy own entanglement; as the silk worm weaves its own cell, (cocoon), by 
its saliva, for its own imprisonment. 


23. Be cleansed of all thy impure desires, and become as pure and clear as 
the autumnal cloud (after it has poured out its water in the rains); and when 
thou art fully purged and are buoyed up as a cloud, you are then free from all 
bondage. 


24. Knowing the course of the world to be pregnant with the rise and fall of 
mankind, and to be productive of the pangs of disease and death at the end, 
you are still addicted to it for your destruction only. 


25. But why do I thus upbraid or admonish my heart in vain; it is only by 
reasoning with the mind that men are enabled to govern their hearts. (i.e., to 
repress all their feelings and passions). 


26. But as long as gross ignorance continues to reign over the mind, so long 
is the heart kept in its state of dullness; as the nether earth is covered with mist 
and frost, as long as the upper skies are shrouded by the raining clouds. 


27. But no sooner is the mind cleared of its ignorance, than the heart also 
becomes lighter (and cleared of its feeling); as the disappearance of the rainy 
clouds disperses the frost covering the nether earth. 


28. As the heart becomes lighter and purer by means of the mind’s act of 
reasoning, so I ween its desires to grow weaker and thinner, like the light and 
fleeting clouds of autumn. 


29. Admonition to the unrighteous proves as fruitless as the blowing of 
winds against the falling rain. (i.e., Counsel to the wicked is as vain, as a blast 
of wind to drive the pouring rain). 


30. I shall, therefore, try to rid myself of this false and vacant ignorance; as 
it is the admonition of the Sdstras, to get rid of ignorance by all means. 


31. I find myself to be the inextinguishable lamp of intellect, and without 
my egoism or any desire in myself; and have no relation with the false 
ignorance, which is the root of egoism. 


32. That this is I and that is another, is the false suggestion of our delusive 
ignorance; which, like an epidemic disease, presents us with such fallacies for 
our destruction. 


33. It is impossible for the slender and finite mind to comprehend the 
nature of the infinite soul; as it is not possible for an elephant to be contained 
in a nut shell. (Lit.: in the crust of a bilva or bel fruit). 


34. I cannot follow the dictate of my heart, which is a wide and deep cave, 
containing the desires causing all our misery. 


35. What is this delusive ignorance, which, like the error of injudicious 
lads, creates the blunder of viewing the self-existent one, in the different lights 
of I, thou, he and other personalities. 


36. I analysed my body at each atom from the head to foot, but failed to 
find what we call the, “I,” in any part of it, and what makes my personality. (It 
is the body, mind and soul taken together, that makes a person). 


37. That which is the, “I am,” fills the whole universe, and is the only one 
in all the three worlds; it is the unknowable consciousness, omnipresent and 
yet apart from all. 


38. Its magnitude is not to be known, nor has it any appellation of its own; 
it is neither the one nor the other, nor an immensity nor minuteness (but is 
greater than the greatest, and minuter than the minutest). 


39. It is unknowable by the light of the Vedas, and its ignorance which is 
the cause of misery is to be destroyed by the light of reason. 


40. This is the flesh of my body and this its blood! these are the bones and 
this the whole body; these are my breaths, but where is that I or ego situated? 


41. Its pulsation is the effect of the vital breath or wind, and its sensation is 


the action of the heart; there are also decay and death concomitant of the 
body; but where is its “TI” situated in it? 


42. The flesh is one thing and the blood another, and the bones are different 
from them; but tell me, my heart, where is the “TI” said to exist? 


43. These are the organs of smelling and this the tongue; this is skin and 
these my ears; these are the eyes and this the touch, — twac; but what is that 
called the soul and where is it situated? 


44. I am none of the elements of the body, nor the mind nor its desire; but 
the pure intellectual soul, and a manifestation of the divine intellect. 


45. That I am everywhere, and yet nothing whatever that is anywhere, is 
the only knowledge of the true reality that we can have, and there is no other 
way to it. (i.e., of coming to know the same.) 


46. I have been long deceived by my deceitful ignorance, and am misled 
from the right path, as the young of a beast is carried away by a fierce tiger to 
the woods. 


47. It is now by my good fortune that I have come to detect this thievish 
ignorance; nor shall I trust any more this robber of truth. 


48. Iam above the reach of affliction, and have no concern with misery, nor 
has it anything to do with me. This union of mine with these is as temporary, 
as that of a cloud with a mountain. 


49. Being subject to my egoism, I say I speak, I know, I stay, I go, etc.; but 
on looking at the soul, I lose my egoism in the universal soul. 


50. I verily believe my eyes, and other parts of my body, to belong to 
myself; but if they be as something beside myself, then let them remain or 
perish with the body, with which I have no concern. 


51. Fie for shame! What is this word I, and who was its first inventor? This 
is no other than a slip slop and a namby pamby of some demoniac child of 
earth. (i.e., it is an earth-born word and unknown in heaven). 


52. O! for this great length of time, that I have been groveling in this dusty 
den, and roving at large like a stray deer on a sterile rock without any grass or 
verdure. 


53. If we let our eyes to dry into the true nature of things, we are at a loss to 
find the true meaning of the word I, which is the cause of all our woe on earth. 


(i.e., ignorance of ourselves is the cause of our woe, and the obliteration of 
our personalities obviates all our miseries). 


54. If you want to feel your in being by the sense of touch, then tell me how 
you find what you call “I’, beside its being a ghost of your own imagination. 


55. You set your I on your tongue, and utter it as an object of that organ, 
while you really relish no taste whatever of that empty word, which you so 
often give utterance to. 


56. You often hear that word ringing in your ears, though you feel it to be 
an empty sound as air, and cannot account whence this rootless word had its 
rise. 


57. Our sense of smelling, which brings the fragrance of objects to the 
inner soul, conveys no scent of this word into our brain. 


58. It is as the mirage, and a false idea of something we know not what; 
and what can it be otherwise than an error, of which we have no idea or sense 
whatever? 


59. I see my will also is not always the cause of my actions, because I find 
my eyes and the other organs of sense are employed in their respective 
functions, without the direction of my volition. 


60. But the difference between our bodily and willful acts is this, that the 
actions of the body done without the will of the mind are unattended with 
feeling of pain or pleasure unto us. (Therefore, let all thy actions be 
spontaneous and indifferent in their nature, if thou shalt be free from pain or 
pleasure). 


61. Hence let thy organs of sense perform their several actions, without 
your will of the same; and you will by this means evade all the pleasure and 
pain (of your success and disappointment). 


62. It is in vain that you blend your will with your actions, (which are done 
of themselves by means of the body and mind); while the act of your will is 
attended with a grief similar to that of children, upon the breaking of the dolls 
of their handy work in play. (i.e., boys make toys in play, but cry at last to see 
them broken). 


63. Your desires and their productions are the facsimiles of your minds, 
and not different from them; just as the waves are composed of the same water 
from which they rise. Such is the case with the acts of will. 


64. It is your own will that guides your hand to construct a prison for your 
confinement; as the silly silkworm is confined in the pod of its own making. 


65. It is owing to your desires that you are exposed to the perils of death 
and disease, as it is the dim-sightedness of the traveller over the mountainous 
spots that hurls him headlong into the deep cavern below. 


66. It is your desire only, that is the chief cause of your being attached to 
one another in one place; as the thread passing through the holes of pearls, ties 
them together in a long string round the neck. (Every desire is a connecting 
link between man and man). 


67. What is this desire, but the creation of your false imagination, for 
whatever you think to be good for yourself; (though it may not be so in 
reality); and no sooner you cease to take a fancy for anything, than your desire 
for it is cut off as by a knife. 


68. This desire, — the creature of your imagination, — is the cause of all 
your errors and your ruin also; as the breath of air is the cause both of the 
burning and extinction of lamps and lightning the fiery furnaces. 


69. Now, therefore, O my heart! that art the source and spring of thy 
senses, do thou join with all thy sensibility, to look into the nature of thy 
unreality, and feel in thyself the state of thy utter annihilation, — nirvana at 
the end. 


70. Give up after all thy sense of egoism with thy desire of worldliness, 
which are interminable endemics to thee in this life. Put on the amulet of the 
abandonment of thy desires and earthliness, and resign thyself to thy God to 
be free from all fears on earth. 


CHAPTER LIII. 
THE RATIONAL RAPTURE OF UDDALAKA. 


Argument. Description of the Soul unsullied by its desires and egoism, and 
the Difference subsisting between the body and mind. 


Uddalaka continued: — The intellect is an unthinkable substance; it extends 
to the limits of endless space, and is minuter than the minutest atom. It is quite 
aloof of all things, and inaccessible to the reach of desires, etc. 


2. It is inaccessible by the mind, understanding, egoism and the gross 
senses; but our empty desires are as wide extended as the shadowy forms of 
big and formidable demons. 


3. From all my reasonings and repeated cogitations, I perceive an 
intelligence within myself, and I feel to be the stainless Intellect. 


4. This body of mine which is of this world, and is the depository of my 
false and evil thoughts, may last or be lost without any gain or loss to me, 
since I am the untainted intellect. 


5. The Intellect is free from birth and death, because there is nothing 
perishable in the nature of the all-pervasive intellect; what then means the 
death of a living being, and how and by whom can it be put to death? 


6. What means the life and death of the intellect, which is the soul and life 
of all existence; what else can we expect of the intellect, when it is extended 
through and gives life to all? 


7. Life and death belong to the optative and imaginative powers of the 
mind, and do not appertain to the pure soul; (which is never perturbed by 
volition or imagination). 


8. That which has the sense of its egoism has also the knowledge of its 
existence and inexistence, (and that is the mind); but the soul which is devoid 


of its egoism can have no sense of its birth or death (since it is always existent 
of itself). 


9. Egoism is a fallacy and production of ignorance, and the mind is no 
other than an appearance as the water in a mirage; the visible objects are all 
gross bodies; what then is that thing to which the term ego is applied? 


10. The body is composed of flesh and blood, and the mind is considered as 
a nullity of itself; the heart and the members are all dull objects, what then is 
it that contains the ego? 


11. The organs of sense are all employed in their respective functions for 
supporting the body; and all external bodies remain as mere bodies; what then 
is it to which you apply the term ego? 


12. The properties of things continue as properties, and the substances 
always remain as substances; the entity of Brahma is quite calm and quiet, 
what then is the ego among them? 


13. There is only one Being which is all pervading and subsisting in all 
bodies; it exists at all times and is immensity in itself. It is only the Supreme 
Spirit that is the intelligent soul of all. 


14. Now tell me which of these is the ego, what is it and what its form; 
what is its genus and what are its attributes; what is its appearance and of 
what ingredients it is composed? What am I and what shall I take it to be, and 
what reject as not itself? 


15. Hence there is nothing here, which may be called the ego either as an 
entity or non-entity; and there is nothing anywhere, to which the ego may bear 
any relation or any resemblance whatever. 


16. Therefore, egoism being a perfect non-entity, it has no relation to 
anything at all; and this irrelation of it with all things being proved, its fiction 
as a duality (beside the unity of God), goes to nothing whatever. 


17. Thus everything in the world being full of the spirit of God, I am no 
other than that reality, and it is in vain that I think myself as otherwise, and 
sorrow for it. 


18. All things being situated in one pure and omnipresent spirit; whence is 
it that the meaningless word ego could take its rise? 


19. So there is no reality of any object whatever, except that of the supreme 
and all-pervading spirit of God; it is therefore useless for us to inquire about 


our relation with anything which has no reality in itself. 


20. The senses are connected with the organs of sense, and the mind is 
conversant with the mental operations; but the intellect is unconnected with 
the body, and bears no relation with anybody in any manner. 


21. As there is no relation between stones and iron nails, so the body, the 
senses, the mind and the intellect bear no relation with one another, though 
they are found to reside together in the same person. 


22. The great error of the unreal ego having once obtained its footing 
among mankind, it has put the world to an uproar with the expressions of 
mine and thine, as that this is mine and that is thine, and that other is another’s 
and the like. 


23. It is want of the light of reason that has given rise to the meaningless 
and marvellous expression of egoism; which is made to vanish under the light 
of reason, as ice is dissolved under heat of solar light. 


24. That there is nothing in existence, except the spirit of God is my firm 
belief, and this makes me believe the whole universe as a manifestation of the 
great Brahma himself. 


25. The error of egoism presents itself before us in as vivid and variety of 
colours as the various hues which tinge the face of the sky; it is better to 
obliterate it at once from the mind, than retain any trace of it behind (as I am 
this child, youth, old man, efc.). 


26. I have altogether got rid of the error of my egoism, and now recline 
with my tranquil soul in the universal spirit of God, as the autumnal cloud 
rests in the infinite vacuum of the sky. 


27. Our accompaniment with the idea of egoism is productive only of our 
misconduct and misery, by producing the great variety of our acts of 
selfishness. 


28. Egoism hath taken a deep root in the moist soil of our hearts, and 
sprouts forth in the field of our bodies with the germs of innumerable evils. 


29. Here is death closely following the course of life, and there is a new life 
hereafter awaiting upon our death; now there is a state of being distinct from 
its privation or not being, and again there is reverse of it in our transmigration, 
to our great annoyance only. 


30. This I have gained, and this I will gain, are the thoughts that constantly 


employ the minds of men; and the desire of a new gain is incessantly kindled 
in the minds of the senseless, as the ceaseless flame of the sun-stone is 
increased in summer heat. 


31. That this I want and this must have are thoughts ever attendant on 
egoism; and the dull-headed pursue dull material objects with as much ardour, 
as the heavy clouds hasten to halt on high-headed hills. 


32. Decay of egoism withers away the tree of worldliness, which then 
ceases to germinate in the manner of a plant on sterile rocks. (Or as seeds cast 
on sandy sounds). 


33. Your desires are as black serpents creeping in the hole of your heart, 
but skulking their heads at the sight of the snake-eater Garuda of reason. 


34. The unreal world gives rise to the error of appearing as real; as the 
unreal I and thou, (or ego and non-ego), seem to be realities, though they are 
caused by mere pulsations of the unreal mind. 


35. This world rises at first without a cause and to no cause, how then call it 
a reality which is sprung from and to no cause at all. (The visible world is 
produced by, and continues with our error which, is no cause in reality). 


36. As a pot made of earth long before, continues in the same state at all 
times, so the body which has long ago come to existence, still continues and 
will continue the same. (The body being made of earth, remains in and returns 
to the earth again). 


37. The beginning and end of billows is mere water and moisture, and the 
intermediate part only presents a figure to view; so the beginning and end of 
bodies is mere earth and water, and the intermediate state is one of bustle and 
commotion. 


38. It is the ignorant only that trust in this temporary and fluctuating state of 
the body; which, like the billow, is hastening to subside, in its original liquid 
and quiet state. 


39. What reliance is there in any body, which makes a figure in the middle, 
and is an unreality both in its prior and latter states. 


40. So the heart also is as quiet as the intellect, both at first and in the end; 
and remains immerged in itself, both when it exists in the body or not. What 
then if it heaves for a little while in the midst? (i.e., the palpitation of the heart 
between its prior and latter states of inaction). 


41. As it comes to pass in our dreams, and in our deluded sights of 
marvellous things, and as it happens in the giddiness of ebriety, and in our 
journeying in boats: — 


42. And as it turns out in cases of our vitiated humours, and delusion of 
senses, and also in cases of extreme joy and grief, and under some defect of 
the mind or body: — 


43. That some objects come to sight, and others disappear from it, and that 
some appear to be smaller or larger than they are and others to be moving, so 
do all these objects of our vision, appear and disappear from our sight in the 
course of time. 


44. O my heart! all thy conduct is of the same nature, at the different times, 
of thy joy and grief, that it makes the long of short and the short of long; as 
the short space of a single night, becomes as tedious to separated lovers as an 
age; and an age of joyous affluence as short as a moment. 


45. Or it is my long habit of thinking that makes the untruth appear as truth 
to me; and like the mirage of the desert, our mirage of life, presents its 
falsehoods as realities unto us. 


46. All things that we see in the phenomenal world are unrealities in their 
nature; and as the mind comes to know the nothingness of things, it feels in 
itself its nothingness also. 


47. As the mind becomes impressed with certainty of the unsubstantiality 
of external objects, its desire of worldly enjoyments fade away, like the fading 
verdure of autumn. 


48. When the mind comes to see the pure soul by means of its intellectual 
light, it gets itself ridden of its temporal exertions; and being thereby freed 
from its passions and affections, it rests with its calm composure in itself. 


49. And the heart attains its perfect purity, when, by compressing its 
members of sensational organs, it casts itself into the flame of the supreme 
soul, where all its dross is burnt away. 


50. As the hero boldly faces his death, with the thought of his ascending to 
heaven, by fighting bravely in battle, so the mind conquers all impediments by 
casting off all its worldly desires and attachments. 


51. The mind is the enemy of the body, and so is the latter an enemy of the 
former (because the growth of the one puts down the vigour of the other); but 


they both die away without the half of each other, and for want of desire 
which supports them both. 


52. Owing to their mutual hostilities, and their passions and affections 
towards each other, it is better to eradicate and destroy both of them for our 
attainment of supreme bliss. (As the control of the body and mind leads to 
temporal happiness, so the utter extinction of both, is the means to spiritual 
bliss). 


53. The existence of either of these, (i.e., of the body or mind) after death is 
as incapable of heavenly felicity, as it is for an aerial fairy to fare on earth. 
(i.e., neither the body nor mind survives one’s death, as it is believed by 
many; and even if it does, its gross nature would not permit it to enjoy the 
pure spiritual felicity of heaven). 


54. When these things, (the body and mind), that are naturally repugnant 
and opposed to one another, meet together in any place or person, there is a 
continued clashing of their mutual mischiefs, like the crashing of conflicting 
arms. 


55. The base man that has a liking for this world of conflicts is like one left 
to burn in a conflagration of showering flames. 


56. The mind stout with its avaricious desires loads the body with labour, 
and feeds upon its precious life, as a ghost-Yaksha preys upon the body of a 
boy. 


57. The body being harassed and oppressed with toil, attempts to stop and 
stay the mind; as an impious son intends to kill his father, when he finds him 
to stand an open foe to his life. (It is lawful to kill an enemy of one’s life for 
self-defence). Watt frarfgrara | 


58. There is no one who of his nature is a foe or friend to another; but 
becomes a friend to one that is friendly to him, and a foe to him that deals 
inimically unto him. 


Tamarac sniad Heararey: | 
aes LITSTAT II 


59. The body being put to pain attempts to kill the mind; and the mind is 
ever intent to make the body the receptacle of its afflictions. (The intimate 
connection of the body and mind causes them to participate in one another’s 
pains). 


60. What good then can possibly accrue to us from the union of the body 
and mind, which are repugnant to one another, and which of their own nature 
can never be reconciled together. 


61. The mind being weakened, the body has no pain to undergo; wherefore 
the body is always striving to weaken the mind. 


62. The body, whether it is alive or dead, is subjected to all sorts of evils by 
its hostile mind, unless it is brought under the subjection of reason. (i.e., The 
unreasonable mind is an enemy of the body). 


63. When both the body and mind become stout and strong, they join 
together to break all bonds, as the lake and rainwater join together to overflow 
on the banks. 


64. Though both of them are troublesome to us in their different natures, 
yet their union to one end is beneficial to us, as the co-operation of fire and 
water is for the purpose of cooking. 


65. When the weak mind is wasted and worn out, the body also becomes 
weakened and languid; but the mind being full, the body is flushed like a 
flourishing arbor, shooting forth with verdure. 


66. The body pines away with its weakened desires, and at the weakness of 
the mind; but the mind never grows weak at the weakness of the body; 
therefore, the mind requires to be curbed and weakened by all means. 


67. I must, therefore, cut down the weed wood of my mind, with the trees 
of my desires and the plants of my thirstiness; and, having reclaimed thereby a 
large tract of land, rove about at my pleasure. 


68. After my egoism is lost, and the net of my desires is removed, my mind 
will regain its calm and clearness, like the sky after dispersion of the clouds at 
the end of the rainy weather. 


69. It is of no matter to me whether this body of mine, which is a congeries 
of my humours, and a great enemy of mine, should waste away or last, after 
the dissolution of my mind. 


70. That for which this body of mine craves its enjoyments is not mine, nor 
do I belong to it; what is the good, therefore, of bodily pleasure to me? (When 
I have to leave this body and that pleasure also forever). 


71. It is certain that I am not myself the body, nor is the body mine in any 
way; just as a corpse with all its parts entire, is no body at all. (The personality 


of man, belongs to his mind and not to his person). 


72. Therefore, I am something beside this body of mine, and that is 
everlasting and never setting in its glory; it is by means of this that I have that 
light in me, whereby I perceive the luminous sun in the sky. 


73. 1 am neither ignorant of myself, nor subject to misery, nor am I the dull 
unintelligent body, which is subject to misery. My body may last or not, I am 
beyond all bodily accidents. 


74. Where there is the soul or self, there is neither the mind, nor senses nor 
desire of any kind; as the vile Pamaras never reside in the contiguity of 
princes. (Mahibhretas mean mountains also). 


75. | have attained to that state in which I have surpassed all things; and it 
is the state of my soliety, my extinction, my indivisibility, and my want of 
desires. 


76. Iam now loosened from the bonds of my mind, body and the senses, as 
the oil which is extracted from the seeds of sesamum, and separated from the 
sediments. 


77. I walk about freely in this state of my transcendentalism, and my mind 
which is disjoined from the bonds of the body considers its members as its 
dependent instruments and accompaniments. 


78. I find myself to be now situated in a state of transparency and 
buoyancy, of self-contentment and intelligence, and of true reality; I feel my 
full joy and calmness, and preserve my reservedness in speech. 


79. I find my fulness and magnanimity, my comeliness and evenness of 
temper; I see the unity of all things, and feel my fearlessness and want of 
duality, choice and option. 


80. I find these qualities to be ever attendant on me. They are constant and 
faithful, easy and graceful and always propitious to me; and my unshaken 
attachment to them has made them as heartily beloved consorts to me. 


81. I find myself as all and in all, at all times and in every manner; and yet I 
am devoid of all desire for or dislike to any one, and am equally unconcerned 
with whatever is pleasant or unpleasant, agreeable or disagreeable to me. 


82. Removed from the cloud of error and melancholy, and released from 
dubitation and duplicity in my thoughts, I peregrinate myself as a flimsy 
cloud, in the cooling atmosphere of the autumnal sky. 


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 


CHAPTER LIV. 
Quiescence of Uddalaka. 


Argument. Uddalaka meditates on the form of Vishnu, and his quietus in 
and coalescence with it. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thinking himself to be raised to this state of his 
transcendency, the saint sat in his posture of padmdsana with his half-shut 
eye-lids, and began to meditate in his translucent mind. 


2. He then thought that the syllable Om, is the true emblem of Brahma; and 
he rises to the highest state, who utters this monosyllabic word. 


3. Then he uttered the word with an elevated voice and high note, which 
rang with a resonance like the ringing of a bell. 


4. The utterance of his Omkdra, shook the seat of his intellect in the 
cranium, and reached to the seat of the pure soul, in the topmost part of his 
head. 


5. The pranava or Omkara, consisting of three and half matrds or instants, 
fills the whole body with the breath of inspiration; by having its first part or 
the letter a, uttered with an acute accent, (Udatta). 


6. He let out the rechaka or the exhaling breath, whereby the internal air 
was extracted from the whole body; and it became as empty as the sea, after it 
was sucked up by Agastya. 


7. His vital breath was filled with the sap of the intellect, and rested in the 
outer air by leaving his body; as when a bird leaves its snug nest; and then 
mounts to and floats in the open air. 


8. The burning fire of his heart, burnt away his whole body; and left it as 
dry as a forest, scorched by the hot wind of a conflagration. 


9. As he was in this state at the first step of his practice of Yoga, by the 
pranava or utterance of this syllable Om, he did not attend to the hatha Yoga 
at all, on account of its arduousness at first. 


10. He then attended to the other parts of the mystic syllable, and remained 
unshaken by suppression of his breath by the kumbhaka breathing. 


11. His vital breaths were not suffered to pass out of his body, nor were 
they allowed to circulate up and down in it; but were shut up in the nostrils, 
like the water pent up in the drain. 


12. The fire burning before burnt body, was blown out in a moment like the 
flash of lightning; and he left his whole frame consumed to ashes, and lying 
cold and grey on the naked ground. 


13. Here the white bones of his body, seemed to be sleeping unmoved on 
the naked shore; and lying in quiet rest on the bed of greyish ashes, appearing 
as the powder of camphor strewn on the ground. 


14. These ashes and bones were borne aloft by the winds, and were heaped 
at last on his body; which looked like the person of Siva besmeared with 
ashes, and wearing the string of bones about it. 


15. Afterwards the high winds of the air, flying to the face of the upper sky, 
bore aloft and scattered about those ashes and bones, resembling an autumnal 
mist all about the air. 


16. The saint attained to this state, in the second or middle stage of his 
pranava Yoga; and it was by his kumbhaka breathing, and not by hatha Yoga, 
(which is difficult to practise), that he effected it. 


17. He then came to the third stage, of his pranava Yoga, by means of the 
puraka or inhaling breathing, which confers a quiet rest to the Yogi, and is 
called puraka for its fulfilment of his object. 


18. In the process of this practice, the vital breath is carried through the 
intellect to the region of vacuum; where it is cooled by the coldness of its 
climate. 


19. From the region of vacuum, the breathing ascended to that of the lunar 
sphere; and there it became as cold as when the rising smoke, turns to the 
watery cloud in the upper sky. 


20. Then the breath rested in the orb of the full moon, as in the ocean of 
ambrosial waters, and there became as cool, as in the meritorious samddhi 
meditation. 


21. The respiring breaths were then exhaled as cooling showers of rain; and 
were brightened by the moon-beams to the form of fine wires of gold. 


22. The same fell as a dew drop on the remaining ashes, as the stream of 


the heavenly Ganga fell on the crest of Siva; and this resuscitated the burnt 
body to its former form. 


23. It then became as bright as the orb of the moon, and the body was 
bedecked with the four arms of Vishnu. It glistened like the pdrijdta tree on 
the sea shore, after it was churned out by the Mandara mountain. 


24. The body of Uddalaka, stood confest as that of Narayana to view; and 
his bright eyes and lotus-like face, shone with a celestial light. 


25. The vital breaths filled his body with a humid juice, as when the lake is 
filled with sweet water, and the trees are supplied with moisture by the breath 
of spring. 


26. The internal airs filled the lungs, and the cavity of the heart; as when 
the waters of the sea, run towards and roll into the whirlpool. 


27. His body was afterwards restored to and regained its natural state; as 
when the earth regains its prior and purer state, after it is washed by the waters 
of rain. 


28. He then sat in his posture of padmdsana, and kept his body fixed and 
firm in its straight and erect position. The five organs of his sense, were bound 
as fast, as the feet of an elephant with strong chains. 


29. He strove to practise an unshaken hybernation, (samddhi), and wanted 
to make himself appear as translucent, as the clear autumnal sky and air. 


30. He restrained his breath (by means of his prdndydma or contraction of 
breathing), and the fleet stag of his respiration from its flight to all sides; and 
he restricted his heart from its inclinations, and fixed it fast as by a rope to the 
post of his bosom. 


31. He stopped his heart forcibly, from its running madly to the pits of its 
affection; as they stop the course of over-flowing waters, by means of 
embankments. 


32. His eyes were half hid under his closing eye-lids, and his pupils 
remained as fixed and unmoved, as the contracted petal of the lotus, against 
the buzzing bees, fluttering about and seeking to suck their honey. 


33. He employed himself to Rdja Yoga, at first, by remaining silent with a 
graceful countenance. 


34. He abstracted his senses from their objects, as they separate the oil from 
the sesamum seeds; and he contracted the organs of sense within himself, as 
the tortoise contracts his limbs under his hard covering. 


35. With his steady mind, he cast off the external sensations afar from him; 
as a rich and brilliant gem, casts off its outer coating and rubbish, and then 
scatters its rays to a distance. 


36. He compressed his external sensations, without coming in contact with 
them within himself; as the trees contract their juice in the cold season within 
their rind. 


37. He stopped the circulation of his respiration, to the nine openings of his 
body, and their passing through the mouth and anus; and by means of his 
kumbhaka inspiration, he compressed the winds in the internal cells of his 
body. 


38. He held his neck erect like the peak of mount Meru, in order to receive 
the light of the soul; which irradiated in the form of flowers, before the vision 
of his mind. 


39. He confined his subdued mind in the cavity of his heart, as they 
imprison the big elephant in a cavern of the Vindhya mountain; when they 
have brought him under their subjection by some artifice. 


40. When his soul had gained its clearness, resembling the serenity of the 
autumnal sky; it forsook its unsteadiness like the calm ocean, when it is full 
and unagitated by the winds. 


41. The mist of doubts, which sometimes gathered in his breast, and 
obscured the light of his reason and truth; now fled from before him, like a 
flight of gnats driven by the wind. 


42. As yet the crowds of doubt, rose repeatedly in his breast, and of their 
own accord; he dispersed them boldly by the sword of his reason, as a hero 
drives the enemy before him. 


43. Upon the dispersion of the thick mists of doubts, and all worldly desires 
from his mind; he beheld the bright sun of reason rising in his breast, from 
amidst the parting gloom of ignorance. 


44. He dispelled this darkness, by the sun-beams of his full intelligence; 
which rose in his mind as a blast of wind, and dispersed the clouds of his 
doubts in the skies. 


45. After dispersion of this darkness, he saw a beautiful collection of light, 
shining upon him like the morning twilight, and alighting upon his lotus bed, 
after dispersion of the shade of night. (This was his sdéttwikabhdva or state of 
purity). 


46. But this clear light of his soul, was soon after removed by the raja or 


worldliness of his mind; which devoured it as the young elephant feeds upon 
the red lotuses of the land, (sthala padma), and as Vetdla goblins lick up the 
drops of blood. 


47. After the loss of this heavenly light, his mind turned flighty from the 
giddiness of his passions (or tama guna); and he became as drowsy as the 
sleeping lotuses at night, and as tipsy as a drunken sot over his cups. 


48. But his reason soon returned to him, and made him shake off his 
sleepiness, as the winds disperse the clouds, and as the snake inhales the air; 
and as the elephant devours the lotus bush, and the sunlight dispels the 
darkness of night. 


49. After removal of his drowsiness, his mind beheld the broad expanse of 
the blue firmament, filled with fancied forms of animals, and flights of 
peacocks and other birds. 


50. When, as the rain water washes off the blackness of tamdla leaves, and 
as a gust of wind drives away the morning mist, and as the light of a lamp 
disperses the darkness, so returned to him his spiritual light, and removed the 
blue vacuum, of his mind, by filling it with its benign radiance. 


51. The idea of an empty vacuity, (vacuum), being replaced by that of his 
self-consciousness, his idea of the mind was also absorbed in it; as the 
drunken frenzy of a man is drowned in his sleep. 


52. His great soul, then rubbed out the impressions of error from his 
vitiated mind; as the luminous sun drives from the world, the shades of 
darkness which had overspread it at night. 


53. In this manner his misty mind, being freed from its shades of light and 
darkness, and from the dross of its drowziness and error; obtained its rest in 
that state of samadhi or trance, which no language can describe. 


54. In this state of calm and quiet repose, his limbs dropped down as in the 
drowziness of sleep; and their powers were absorbed in the channel of his 
self-consciousness, as a flood recoils to its basin, when it is bound by an 
embankment. 


55. It was then by means of his constant inquiry, that he advanced to the 
state of his intellectuality, from that of his consciousness of himself; as the 
gold that is moulded to the form of a jewel, is reduced afterwards to the pure 
metal only. 


56. Then leaving his intellectuality, he thought himself as the intellect of 
his intellect; and then became of another form and figure, as when the clay is 


converted to a pot. 


57. Then leaving his nature of a thinkable being (or objectivity), he became 
the subjective thinking intellect itself; and next to that, as identic with the pure 
universal intellect; just as the waves of the sea, resolve their globules into the 
common air. (It is by the process of generalization, that particulars are made 
to blend in one ultimate universal). 


58. Losing the sight of particulars, he saw the Great One as the container of 
all; and then he became as one with the sole vacuous intellect. 


59. He found his felicity in this extra phenomenal state of the noumenon; 
which like the ocean, is the reservoir of all moistures. 


60. He passed out of the confines of his body and then went to a certain 
spot, where leaving his ordinary form, he became as a sea of joy (in the 
transport of his ecstacy). 


61. His intellect swam over that sea of joy like a floating swan, and 
remained there for many years with as serene a lustre, as the moon shines in 
her fulness in the clear firmament. 


62. It remained as still as a lamp in the breathless air, and as the shadow of 
a picture in painting; it was as calm as the clear lake without its waves, and as 
the sea after a storm, and as immovable as a cloud after it has poured out its 
waters. 


63. As Uddalaka had been sitting in this full blaze of light, he beheld the 
aerial Siddhas and a group of gods (advancing towards him). 


64. The groups of Siddhas that were eager to confer the ranks of the Sun 
and Indra upon him, assembled around him with groups of Gandharvas and 
Apsaras, from all sides of heaven. 


65. But the saint took no notice of them, nor gave them their due honour; 
but remained in deep thought, and in the continuance of his steady meditation. 


66. Without paying any regard to the assemblage of the Siddhas, he 
remained still in that blissful abode of his bliss; as the sun remains in the 
solstices, or in the northern hemisphere for half of the year. 


67. While he continued in the enjoyment of his blessed state of living 
liberation, the gods Hari, Hara and Brahma waited at his door, together with 
bodies of Siddhas, Sddhyas and other deities beside them. 


68. He now remained in his state of indifference, which lies between the 
two opposites of sorrow and joy; and neither of which is of long continuance, 


except the middle state of insouciance which endureth forever. 


69. When the mind is situated in its state of neutrality, and whether it is for 
a moment or a thousand years; it has no more any relish for pleasure, by 
seeing its future joys of the next world, as already begun in this. 


70. When holy men have gained that blissful state in this life, they look no 
more on the outer world; but turn aside from it, as men avoid a thorny bush of 
brambles. (Lit., catechu plants). 


71. The saints that attained to this state of transcendental bliss, do not stoop 
to look upon the visible world; and as one who is seated in the heavenly car of 
Chitraratha, never alights on the thorny bush of the Khadira (catechumemosa). 


72. They take no account of the visible world, who enjoy this felicity of the 
invisible in them; as the self-sufficient rich man, takes into no account the 
condition of the miserable poor. 


73. The wise heart that has found its rest in that blissful state, does either 
keep itself from the thoughts of this world, or shrink from it with disgust and 
hatred. 


74. Uddalaka thus remained in his holy seat for six months, after which he 
awoke from his trance; and removed from there to another place, as the sun 
gets out of the mists of frost in the vernal season. 


75. He beheld before him, the assemblage of the bright beings of 
enlightened minds; and who with their countenances shining as the lightsome 
moon, hailed the hermit with high veneration. 


76. They were fanned with chouries flapping about them, like swarms of 
bees besmeared with white powders of manddra flowers; and sitting on their 
heavenly cars, decorated with flags waving in the sky. 


77. There were the great saints like ourselves sitting in them, decorated 
with ringlets of the sacred grass in their fingers, and accompanied by 
Vidyadharas and Gandharvas, with their damsels ministering unto them. 


78. They addressed the great-souled and saintly Uddalaka with saying: — 
“Deign, O venerable Sir, to look upon us, that have been waiting here upon 
you with our greetings.” 


79. “Vouchsafe to mount on one of these heavenly cars, and repair to our 
celestial abode; because heaven is the last abode, where you shall have the full 
gratification of your desires after this life.” 


80. “There remain to enjoy your desired pleasures, until the end of this 


Kalpa age; because it is pure heavenly bliss which is the inheritance of saints, 
and the main aim and object of ascetic austerities on earth.” 


81. “Behold here the damsels of Vidyadharas, are waiting for you with fans 
and wreaths of flowers in their hands; and they have been hailing and inviting 
you to them, as the young elephantess, entices the big elephant towards her.” 


82. “It is the desire of fruition only, which is the main object of riches and 
meritorious acts; and the greatest of our enjoyments is the company of fairy 
damsels; as the flowers and fruits are the desired products of the vernal 
season.” 


83. The hermit heard his heavenly guests, speaking in this manner; and 
then honoured them as he ought, without being moved by aught they said unto 
him. 


84. He neither complemented them with his courtesy, nor changed the tenor 
of his even and inexcitable mind; but bidding them depart in peace, he betook 
himself to his wonted devotion. 


85. The Siddhas honoured him for his devotedness to his pursuit, and his 
abjuring the desire of carnal gratifications. They then departed to their elysian 
abode from there, after tarrying there in vain for some days, to entice the 
hermit to their Parnassian fields. 


86. Afterwards the saint continued to wander about at pleasure, in his 
character of a living liberated Yogi; and frequented the hermitages of the 
ascetics, at the skirts of the woods and forests. 


87. He roved about freely over the mountains of Meru, Mandara, and 
Kaylasa, and on the table lands of the Vindhyan and Himalayan ranges; and 
then travelled through woods and forests, groves and deserts, to distant islands 
on all sides. 


88. At last, the saintly Uddalaka chose his abode in a cavern, lying at the 
foot of a mountain; and there dedicated the remainder of his life, to devotion 
and meditation in his seclusion. 


89. It was then in the course of a day, and then of a month, and sometimes 
after the lapse of a year or years, that he rose once from his meditation. 


90. After his Yoga was over, he came out and mixed with the world; and 
though he was sometimes engaged in the affairs of life, yet he was quite 
reserved in his conduct, and abstracted in his mind. 


91. Being practiced to mental abstraction, he became one with the divine 
mind; and shone resplendent in all places, like the broad day light in view. 


92. He was habituated to ponder on the community of the mind, till he 
became one with the universal Mind; which spreads alike throughout the 
universe, and neither rises nor sets anywhere like the solar light. 


93. He gained the state of perfect tranquility, and his even mindedness in 
all places, which released him from the snare of doubts, and of the pain of 
repeated births and deaths. His mind became as clear and quiet as the 
autumnal sky, and his body shone as the sun at every place. 


FORMULE OF THE PRANAVA YOGA. 


CHAPTER LV. 
Transcendentalism of Uddalaka. 


Argument. Meditation on the Universality of the soul and Intellect. 


Rama said: — Venerable Sir! you are the sun of the day of spiritual 
knowledge, and the burning fire of the night of my doubts; and you who are 
the cooling moon to the heat of my ignorance, will deign to explain to me, 
what is meant by, — community of existence, (that you said just now). 


2. Vasishtha answered: — When the thinking principle or mind is wasted 
and weakened, and appears to be extinct and null; the intellect which remains 
in common in all beings, is called the common intelligence, (or Nous) of all. 


3. And this intellect when it is devoid of its intellection and is absorbed in 
itself, and becomes as transparent as it is nothing of itself; it is then called the 
common, (or Samanga) intellect. 


4. And likewise, when it ignores the knowledge of all its internal and 
external objects, it remains as the common intellect and unconscious of any 
personality. 


5. When all visible objects are considered to have a common existence, and 
to be of the same nature with one’s self, it is designated the common intellect. 
(Or compression of the whole in one, like the contraction of the limbs of a 
tortoise). 


6. When the phenomena’s are all engulphed of themselves, in the one 
common spirit; and there remains nothing as different from it, it is then called 
the one common entity. 


7. This common view of all things as one and the same, is called 
transcendentalism; and it becomes alike both to embodied and disembodied 
beings in both worlds. It places the liberated being above the fourth stage of 
consummation. 


8. It is the enlightened soul which is exalted by ecstacy, (Samddhi), that can 


have this common view of all as one; and not the ignorant (who cannot make 
this highest generalization). 


9. This common view of all existence, is entertained by all great and 
liberated beings; as it is the same moisture and air, that is spread through the 
whole earth and vacuum. 


10. Sages like ourselves, as Narada and others, and the gods Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva, have this common view of all things in existence. 


11. The saintly Uddalaka, entertained this view of the community of all 
beings and things; and having thereby attained to that state of perfection, 
which is free from fear or fall; he lived as long as he liked to live in this 
earthly sphere. 


12. After lapse of a long time, he thought of enjoying the bliss of 
disembodied or spiritual liberation in the next world, by quitting his frail 
mortal frame on earth. 


13. With this intention, he went into the cave of a mountain, and there 
made a seat for himself, with the dried leaves of trees; and then sat upon it in 
his posture of padmdsana, with his eyes half closed under his eyelids. 


14. He shut up the opening of the nine organs of sense, and then having 
compressed their properties of touch and the like, in the one single sense of 
perception, he confined them all within it in his intellect. 


15. He compressed the vital airs in his body, and kept his head erect on his 
neck; and then by fixing the tip of his tongue to the roof of his palate, he sat 
with his blooming countenance turned upwards to heaven. 


16. He did not allow his breath, to pass up or down or out of or inside his 
body, or fly into the air; nor let his mind and sight to be fixed on any object; 
but compressed them all in himself with his teeth joined together (in his 
struggle for compression). 


17. There was a total stop of the breathing of his vital airs, and his 
countenance was composed and clear; his body was erect with the 
consciousness of his intellect, and his hairs stood on their ends like thorns. 


18. His habitual consciousness of intellection, taught him the community of 
the intellect; and it was by his constant communion with the intellect, that he 
perceived a flood of internal bliss stirring in himself. 


19. This feeling of his internal bliss, resulting from his consciousness of 
intellectual community; led him to think himself as identic with the entity of 
the infinite soul, and supporting the universal whole. 


20. He remained with an even composure, in his state of transcendent 
quietness; and enjoyed an even rapture in himself, with a placid countenance. 


21. Being unruffled by the transport of his spiritual bliss, and attaining the 
state of divine holiness; he remained for a long time in his abstract meditation, 
by abstracting his mind, from all thoughts and errors of the world. — 


22. His great body remained as fixed as an image in painting, and shone as 
bright as the autumnal sky, illumined by the beams of the full moon. 


23. In course of some days, his soul gradually forgot its mortal state, and it 
found its rest in his pure spiritual bliss; as the moisture of trees is deposited in 
the rays of the sun, at the end of autumn (in the cold season). 


24. Being devoid of all desires, doubts and levity of his mind; and freed 
from all foul and of pleasurable inclinations of his body; he attained to that 
supreme bliss on the loss of his former joys, before which the prosperity of 
Indra appeared as a straw, floating on the vast expanse of the ocean. 


25. The Brahman then attained to that state of his summum bonum which is 
unmeasurable, and pervades through all space of the measureless vacuum; and 
which fills the universe and is felt by the enraptured Yogi alone. It is what is 
called the supreme and infinite bliss, having neither its beginning nor end, and 
being a reality, without any property assignable to itself. 


26. While the Brahman attained to this first state of his consummation, and 
had the clearness of his understanding, during the first six months of his 
devotion; his body became emaciated by the sun-beams, and the winds of 
heaven whistled over his dry frame, with the sound of lute strings. 


27. After a long time had elapsed in this manner, the daughter of the 
mountain king, — Parvati, came to that spot, accompanied by the Matris, and 
shining like flames of fire with the grey locks of hair on their heads, as if to 
confer the boon of his austere devotion. 


28. Among them was the goddess Chamunda, who is adored by the gods. 
She took up the living skeleton of the Brahman, and placed it on her crown, 
which added a new lustre to her frame at night. 


29. Thus was the disgusting and dead like body of Uddalaka, set and placed 
over the many ornaments on the body of the goddess; and it was only for her 
valuing it as more precious than all other jewels, on account of its intrinsic 
merit of spiritual knowledge. 


30. Whoever plants this plant of the life and conduct, (i.e., the biography), 
of Uddalaka in the garden of his heart, will find it always flourishing with the 


flowers of knowledge and the fruit of divine bliss within himself. And whoso 
walks under the shadow of this growing arbor, he is never to be subject to 
death, but will reap the fruit of his higher progress in the path of liberation. 


CHAPTER LVI. 
Investigation into Meditation and Contemplation. 


Argument. That a man in secular life, is not barred from spiritual 
contemplation. Nor is the spiritualist debarred from engaging in secular 
duties. 


Vasishtha continued: — Proceed in this manner to know the universal soul in 
your own soul, and thereby obtain your rest in that holy state. 


2. You must consider all things by the light of the Sdstras, and dive into 
their true meaning; you will also benefit yourselves by the lectures of your 
preceptor, and by pondering on them in your own mind; as also by your 
constant practice of ignoring the visibles, until you come to know the invisible 
One. 


3. It is by means of your habitual dispassionateness, your acquaintance with 
the Sdstras and their meanings, and your hearing the lectures of the spiritual 
teachers; as well as your own conviction that you can gain the holy state, (for 
it is your confidence only), whereby you can come to it. 


4. It is also by your enlightened understanding too, when it is acute and 
unbiased, that you can attain to that everlasting state of felicity, without the 
medium of anything else. 


5. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, that art acquainted with the past and future; 
whether one who is employed in the affairs of life, and at the same time is 
enlightened and situated in his quietude; — 


6. And another who remains in his solitary devotion, apart from worldly 
connections; which of these two has greater merit; (i.e., whether the social or 
solitary devotee). 


7. Vasishtha replied: — He who views the association of properties and 
qualities of things (which constitute all bodies in general), as quite distinct 
from the soul, enjoys a cool tranquility within himself, which is designated by 
the name of Samadhi. 


8. He who is certain that the visibles bear relation to his mind only, and 
have no connection with his soul; and remains calm and cool in himself, may 
be either engaged in business, or sit quietly in his meditation. 


9. Both of these are happy souls, as long as they enjoy a cool calmness 
within themselves; because it is this internal coolness of the soul only, which 
is the result of great and austere devotion. 


10. When a man in his habit of quietude, feels the fickleness of his mind, 
his habitude then, turns to the reeling of a giddy or mad man. 


11. When the sprawling mad man is devoid of desires in his mind; his 
foolish frolic is then said to resemble the rapturous emotions, and 
gesticulations of Buddhist mendicants. 


12. The worldly man who is enlightened in his mind, and the enlightened 
sage who is sitting in his hermitage; are both of them alike in their spiritual 
coolness, and have undoubtedly reached the state of their blessedness. 


13. The man who is unrelated with the actions which he does, but bears a 
mind which is free from desires, such as the mind of a man engrossed with 
other thoughts; he is sensible of what he hears and sees, with his organs only, 
without being affected by them. 


14. A man becomes the agent of an act, even without his doing it actually, 
who is fully intent upon the action; as the unmoving man thinks himself to be 
moving about, and falling down in a ditch (startles even at the thought, as if it 
were in actuality). 


15. Know the inaction of the mind, to be the best state of anaesthesia; and 
soliety or singleness, as the best means to your insouciance. 


16. It is the activity and inactivity of the mind, which are said to be the sole 
causes, of the restlessness and quietness of men, as also of their fixed 
meditation and want of its fixity: therefore, destroy the germs of thy rising 
desires. 


17. Want of desire is called the neutrality of the mind, and it is this that 
constitutes its steadiness and meditation; this gives soliety to the soul, and 
contributes to its everlasting tranquility. 


18. The diminishing of desires leads the man to the highest station of 
inappetency and innocence, (i.e., from the fourth to the seventh pithika). 


19. The thick gathering desires, serve to fill the mind with the vanity of its 
agency, which is the cause of all its woes; (because it wakens them, only to 
labour under their throes); therefore, try to weaken your desires at all times. 


20. When the mind is tranquil, after it is freed from its fears, griefs and 
desires; and the soul is set at its rest and quiet, in want of its passions; it is 
then called the state of its samddhi or non-chalance. 


21. Relinquish the thoughts of all things from thy mind, and live wherever 
thou livest, whether on a mount or in a forest, as calmly as thou dost at thy 
home. 


22. The houses of house-holders of well governed minds, and of those who 
are devoid of the sense of their egoism, are as solitary forests to them, 
(without any stir or disturbance to annoy them). 


23. Dwelling in one’s own house or in a forest, is taken in one and the same 
light by cool-minded men, as they view all visible objects, in the light of an 
empty vacuum only. 


24. Men of pacified minds, view the bright and beautiful buildings of cities, 
in the same indifferent light, as they behold the woods in the forest. 


25. It is the nature of ungoverned minds, to view even the solitary woods, 
to be as full of people as large towns and cities; (i.e., they have no peace of 
mind anywhere). 


26. The restless mind falls asleep, after it gets rid of its labour; but the quiet 
mind has its quietus afterwards, (its nirvdna extinction); (i.e., the one sleeps 
and rises again, but the other one is wholly extinct). Therefore, do as you like: 
— (either sleep to rise again, or sleep to wake no more). 


27. Whether one gets rid of worldly things or not, it is his sight of the 
infinite spirit, that makes him meek and quiet. (The worldly and the recluse 
are equally holy, with their divine knowledge only). 


28. He whose mind is expanded by his like indifference, to both the objects 
of his desire and disgust also; and to whom all things are alike insignificant 
everywhere, he is called the staid and stoic, and the cool and meek. 


29. He who sees the world in God in his inmost soul, and never as without 
the Divine Spirit; and whose mind sees everything in waking as in his sleep, is 
verily the lord of mankind. 


30. As the market people, whether coming in or going out, are strangers to 
and unrelated with one another; so the wise man looks upon the concourse of 
men with unconcern, and thinks his own town a wilderness. 


31. The mind which is fixed to its inward vision, and is inattentive to 
external objects; thinks the populous city as a wilderness before it, both when 
it is awake or asleep, and active or inactive. 


32. Those who are attentive to the inward mind, sees the outer world as a 
vacuous space to him; and the populous world appears as a desert desolate to 
him, owing to its unworthiness of his attention. 


33. The world is all cool and calm to the cold hearted, as the system of the 
body is quiet cool to one without his fit of fever-heat. 


34. Those that are parched with their internal thirst, find the world as a 
burning conflagration to them; because everybody sees the same without him, 
as he sees within himself. 


35. The external world with all its earthly, watery and airy bodies, and with 
all its rocks, rivers and quarters, is the counterpart of the inner mind, and is 
situated without it, as it is contained within itself. 


36. The big banian tree and the little barley plants, are exact ectypes of 
their anti-types in the eternal mind; and they are exhibited out of it, as they are 
within it, like the fragrance of flowers diffused in the air. 


37. There is nothing situated in the inside or the outside of this world, but 
they are the casts and copies, as displayed by their patterns in the great mind 
of God. 


38. The external world is a display of the essence, contained in the 
universal soul; and appears without it from within its concealment, like the 
smell of camphor coming out of its casket. 


39. It is the divine soul, which manifests itself in the form of the ego and 
the world also, (the subjective and the objective); and all what we see 
externally or think internally, either in and out of us is unreal, except the real 
images which are imprinted in the soul. 


40. The soul which is conscious of its innate images, sees the same in their 
intellectual appearances within the mind, and in their external manifestations 
in the visible creation. 


41. He who has his internal and external tranquility, and enjoys his peace of 
mind, and views the world inseparable from the soul, enjoys his quiet samddhi 
everywhere; but he who perceives their difference, and differentiates his 
egoism from all others (that is, who sees his distinction from other beings), he 
is ever subject to be tossed about, as by the rolling waves of the sea. 


42. The soul that is infested by the maladies of this world, sees the earth, 
sky, air and water, together with the hills and all things in them, burning 
before it as in the conflagration, of the last day of dissolution, (pralaya). 


43. He who performs his work with his organs of action, and has his soul 


fixed in its internal meditation; and is not moved by any joy or grief, is called 
the dispassionate Yogi. 


44. He who beholds the all-pervading soul in his own self, and by 
remaining unruffled in his mind, doth never grieve at nor thinks about 
anything, is styled the unimpassioned Yogi. 


45. Who looks calmly into the course of the world, as it has passed or is 
present before him, and sits still smiling at its vicissitudes, that man is named 
the unpassionate Yogi. 


46. Because these changing phenomena do not appertain to unchanging 
spirit of God, nor do they participate with my own egoism; (i.e., they are no 
parts, of God or myself); they but resemble the glittering atoms of gold in the 
bright sun-shine which do not exist in the sky. 


47. He who has no sense of egoism or tuism in himself, nor the distinction 
of things in his mind, as of the sensible and insensible ones; is the one that 
truly exists, and not the other who thinks otherwise. (So says the Sruti: — The 
one alike in all is the All, and not the other, who is unlike every thing). 


48. He who conducts all his affairs with ease, by his remaining as the 
intangible and translucent air about him, and who remains as insensible of his 
joy and sorrow, as a block of wood or stone, is the man that is called the 
sedate and quiet. 


49. He who of his own nature and not through fear, looks on all beings as 
himself, and accounts the goods of others as worthless stones, is the man that 
sees them in their true light. 


50. No object whether great or small, is slighted as a trifle by the polished 
or foolish; they value all things, but do not perceive in their hearts, the Reality 
that abides in them like the wise. (Fools look into the forms of things, but the 
wise look in their in being). 


51. One possessed of such indifference and equality of his mind, attains to 
his highest perfection; and is quite unconcerned with regard to his rise and 
fall, and about his life and death. 


52. He is quite unconcerned with anything, whether he is situated amidst 
the luxuries at his home, and the superfluities of the world, or when he is 
bereft of all his possessions and enjoyments, and is exposed in a dreary and 
deep solitude; 


53. Whether indulging in voluptuousness or bacchanal revelry, or 
remaining retired from society and observing his taciturnity (it is all equal to 


him, if he is but indifferent about them). 


54. Whether he anoints his body with sandal paste or agalo chum, or 
besmears it with powdered camphor; or whether he rubs his person with 
ashes, or casts himself into the flames, (it is all the same to him, with his non- 
chalance of them). 


55. Whether drowned in sinfulness, or marked by his meritoriousness; 
whether he dies this day or lives for a Kalpa-age, (it is all the same to the 
indifferent). 


56. The man of indifference is nothing in himself, and therefore his doings 
are no acts of his own. He is not polluted by impurity, as the pure gold is not 
sullied by dirt or dust. 


57. It is the wrong application of the words consciousness, — samvit, and 
soul, (purusha), to I and thou, (or the subjective and objective), which has led 
the ignorant to the blunder (of duality), as the silvery shell of cockles, 
misleads men to the error of silver. 


58. The knowledge of the extinction of all existence (in the Supreme 
Spirit), is the only cure for this blunder of one’s entity, and the only means to 
the peace of his mind. 


59. The error of egoism and tuism of the conscious soul, which is the 
source of its vain desires, causes the variety of the weal and woe of mankind 
in their repeated births. (Selfishness grows our desires, and these again 
produce our woes). 


60. As the removal of the fallacy of the snake in the rope, gives peace to 
the mind of there being no snake therein; so the subsidence of egoism in the 
soul, brings peace and tranquility to the mind. 


61. He that is conscious of his inward soul, and unconscious of all he does, 
eats, drinks; and of his going to others, and offering his sacrifice; is free from 
the results of his acts; and it is the same to him, whether he does them or not. 


62. He who slides from outward nature, and abides in his inward soul; is 
released from all external actions, and the good and evil resulting therefrom. 


63. No wish stirs in such unruffled soul, in the same manner as no germ 
sprouts forth from the bosom of a stone; and such desires as ever rise in it, are 
as the waves of the sea, rising and falling in the same element. 


64. All this is Himself, and He is the whole of this universe, without any 
partition or duality in Him. He is one with the holy and Supreme soul, and the 
only entity called the Idest, tatsat. (He is no unreality, but as real as the true 


Reality). 


CHAPTER LVII. 
Negation of Dualism. 


Argument. One Supreme Intellect pervades the whole, and is one with 
itself. 


Vasishtha continued: — The intellect residing in the soul, is felt by all, like 
the poignancy inherent in pepper; and it is this, whereby we have the 
intellection of the ego and non-ego, and of the distinctions of the undivided 
dimension of infinite duration and space. 


2. The soul is as the Universal ocean of salt, and the intellect is the 
saltishness inherent in it; it is this which gives us the knowledge of the ego 
and non-ego, and appears in the forms of infinite space and time, (which are 
no other than its attributes). 


3. The intellect of which we have the knowledge as inherent in the soul 
itself; is as the sweetness of the sugarcane of the soul, and spreads itself in the 
different forms of the ego and the non-ego of worldly objects. 


4. The intellect which is known as the hardness inhering in the stonelike 
soul, diffuses itself in the shapes of the compact ego and the unsolid non-ego 
of the world. 


5. The knowledge that we have of the solidity of our rock-like soul, the 
same solidifies itself in the forms of I and thou, and the diversities of the 
world all about us. 


6. The soul which like the great body of water, presents its fluidity in the 
form of the intellect; the same assumes the forms of the whirlpools of the ego, 
and the varieties of non-ego in the world. 


7. The great arbor of the soul, stretches itself in the exuberant branches of 
the intellect; producing the fruits of ego and the various forms of non-ego in 
the world. 


8. The intellect which is but a gap in the great vacuum of the soul, produces 


the ideas of I and thou and of the universe besides. 


9. The intellect is as vain as vanity itself in the vacuity of the soul; and 
gives rise to the ideas of ego and tu, and of the world besides. 


10. The intellect situated within the environs of the soul, has its egoism and 
non-egoism situated without it. (i.e., The soul contains the intellect, which 
deals with ideas lying beyond it). 


11. When the intellect is known, to be of the same essence with that of the 
soul; then the difference of the ego and non-ego, proves to be but acts of 
intellection and no reality. 


12. It is the reflexion of the inward soul A-cdTHT which is understood to be 
the ego Hé, the mind fet and anima or animated soul fa. (The two souls are 
respectively called the nafs natigue and the nafs Jesmia in sufism, the former 
is Meram and Shaffat, — luminous and transparent, and the latter nafs amera 
Jesmani, — or bodily senses, and quate uhshi, — or outrageous passions). 


13. When the luminous and moon like soul, entertains and enjoys the 
ambrosial beams of the intellect within itself; it then forgets its egoism, which 
rises no more in its bright sphere. 


14. When the sweetness of the intellect, is felt within the molasses of the 
soul; it is relished by the mind with a zest, which makes it forget its egoism in 
itself. 


15. When the bright gem of the soul, shines with the radiance of the 
intellect in itself; it finds its egoism to be lost altogether, under the brightness 
of its intellectual light. 


16. The soul perceives nothing in itself, for the total want of the 
perceptibles in it; nor does it taste anything in itself, for want of anything 
gustable therein. (The objective is altogether lost in it). 


17. It thinks of nothing in itself, for want of the thinkables therein; nor does 
it know of aught in itself, for want of the knowables there. (The soul being 
absorbed in itself, is unconscious both of the subjective as well as objective). 


18. The soul remains blank of all impressions of the subjective and 
objective, and also of the infinite plenum in itself; it remains in the form of a 
firm and solid rock by itself. 


19. It is by way of common speech or verbiage, we use the words I and 
thou, and of the objective world, though they are nothing whatever in reality. 


20. There is no seat nor agent of thought, nor fallacy of the world in the 


soul (all which are acts of the mind only); while the soul remains as a mute 
and pellucid cloud, in one sphere of the autumnal sky. 


21. As the waters by cause of their fluidity, take the forms of vortices in the 
sea; so the intelligent soul assumes its errors of I and thou in its undivided 
self; owing to its delusion (mdyd) of the knower and known (or the subjective 
and objective). 


22. As fluidity is inherent in water, and motion in air, so is egoism innate in 
the subjective knower, and objectively connate with the known world. (This is 
said of the intelligent or animated soul, and not of the supreme soul, which is 
both the subject and object in itself). 


23. The more doth the knowledge of a man, increase in its verity, the 
clearer does the knowing man come to find, that his very knowledge of the 
known objects, is the display of Divine Omniscience itself. But should he 
come to know his egoism or subjectivity, owing to his vitality and activity; 
and conceive the Idison or objectivity of all others (beside himself); in this 
case the learned or knowing man is no better than an Egoist, and knowing the 
Living God or Jiva Brahma only. 


NOTE: Perfection of knowledge, is the Omniscience of God, and 
leads the knower, to the belief of his Omnipresence. But imperfect 
knowledge, leads to the belief of the Ego and the Jiva or Living God, 
as distinct from the quiescent Brahma. 


24. In as much as the intelligent soul, (jiva), derives its pleasure from its 
knowledge of objects; in like manner is it identified with the knowledge, of its 
sameness with or difference from that object. (i.e., It is according to the 
thought or belief of the thinker, that he is identified or differentiated from the 
object thought of). 


25. Living, knowing and the knowledge of things, are properties of the 
animated or concrete soul, — the jiva; but there is no difference of these in the 
discrete, or Universal and intellectual soul (which is one in all). 


26. As there is no difference between the intelligent and the living soul, 
(jiva), so there is no diversity between the intelligent soul and Siva, (Ziv or 
Jove), the Lord of animated nature who is the undivided whole. 


27. Know the all quiescent, and the unborn One, who is without beginning, 
middle and end; who is self-manifest and felicity itself; and who is 
inconceivable and beyond all assignable property or quality. He is all 
quiescent, and all verbal and ocular indications of him are entirely false. Yet 
for the sake of our comprehension, he is represented as the Holy one, on or 


om. 


CHAPTER LVIII. 
Legend of Suraghu; and Admonition of Mandavya. 


Argument. Self-dejectedness of Suraghu; and Mandavya’s Admonitions to 
him. 


Vasishtha said: — Hear me relate to you Rama, an old legend, in illustration 
of this subject; and it is the account of the Kirata Chief Suraghu, which is 
marvelous in its nature. 


2. There is a tract of land in the regions on the north, which was hoary as a 
heap of camphor with its snowfalls, and which seemed to smile as the clear 
night, under the moon-beams of the bright fortnight. 


3. It was situated on the summit of Himalaya, and called the peak of 
Kaildsa; it was free from mountainous elephants, and was the chief of all other 
peaks (owing to its being the seat of Siva). 


4. It was as milk-white, as the bed of Vishnu in the milky ocean, and as 
bright as the empyrean of Indra in heaven; it was as fair as the seat of Brahma, 
in the pericarp of the lotus; and as snow-white as the snowy peak of Kedara, 
the favourite seat of Siva. 


5. It was owing to the waving of the Rudraksha trees over it, and the parade 
of the Apsara fairies about it, as also by the pencils of rays of its various 
gems, that it appeared as the undulating sea (of milk or curd). 


6. The playful Pramathas, and other classes of demi-gods, (ganadevatas), 
frolicked here as gaily as blossoms of Asoka plants, when tossed about by the 
feet of their wanton damsels. (It is said that the Asoka jonesia flowers 
blossom, better, when they are kicked by and trodden under the feet of 
females). See Sir W. Jones’ Indian plants. 


7. Here the god Siva wanders about, and sees the water falls proceeding 
from and receding into the caves of the mountain, by dilution of the moon- 
stones contained in them (the thick ice and snows here, are taken for moon- 
stones). 


8. There was a spot of ground here enclosed by trees, and by plants and 
creepers and shrubs of various kinds; and which is intersected by lakes, hills 
and rivers, and interspersed by herds of deer and does of various species. 


9. There dwelt a race of the Kiratas called Himajatas at this spot, who were 
as numerous as the ants living at the foot by a big banian tree. 


10. They lived like owls in the shades and hollows of the trees, and 
subsisted upon the fruits and flowers and herbage of the nearest forests, and 
by felling and selling the Rudraksha woods of the Kailasa mountain. 


11. They had a chief among them, who was as noble-minded as he was 
brave to baffle his enemies; he was as the arm of the goddess of victory, and 
stretched it for the protection of his people. 


12. He had the name of Suraghu, and was mighty in quelling his brave and 
dreadful enemies; he was powerful as the sun, and as strong as the god of 
wind in his figure. 


13. He surpassed the lord of the Guhyakas, — Kuvera, in the extent of his 
kingdom, his dignity and riches; he was greater than the guru of the lord of 
gods in his wisdom, and excelled the preceptor of the Asuras in learning. 


14. He discharged his kingly duties, by giving rewards and punishments of 
the deserts of his men as they appeared to him; and was as firm in the acquittal 
of these duties, as the sun in making the day and his daily course. 


15. He considered in himself the pain and pleasure, that his punishments 
and rewards caused his people; and to which they were like birds caught in 
nets from their freedom of flight. 


16. “Why do I perforce pierce the hearts of my people,” he said, as they 
bruise the sesamum seeds for oil; it is plain that all persons are susceptible of 
pain and affliction like myself? 


17. Yes, they are all capable of pain, and therefore, I will cease to inflict 
them anymore; but give them riches and please all persons. 


18. But if I refrain to punish the tormentors of the good, they are sure to be 
extirpated by the wicked, as the bed of the channel is dried up for want of 
rain. 


19. Oh! the painful dilemma in which I am placed, wherein my punishment 
and mercy to men are both grievous to me, or pleasing and unpleasing to me 
by turns. 


20. Being in this manner much troubled in his mind, his thoughts disturbed 


his spirit like the waters in the whirlpools. 


21. It happened at one time, the sage Mandavya met him at his house, as 
the divine sage Narada, (the Mercury or messenger of gods), meets Indra in 
his celestial abode, in his journey through the regions of the sky. 


22. The king honoured him with reverence, and then asked that great sage 
to remove his doubt, as they cut down a poisonous tree in the garden, with the 
stroke of the axe at its roots. 


23. Suraghu said: — I am supremely blest, O sage, at this call of thine at 
mine, which has made me as joyous as the visit of the spring on the surface of 
the earth, and gives a fresh bloom to the fading forest. 


24. Thy visit, O sage! has really made me more blest than the blessed, and 
gives my heart to bloom, as the rising sun opens the closed petals of the lotus. 


25. Thou oh lord! art acquainted with all truths and art quite at rest in thy 
spirit; deign, therefore, to remove this doubt from my mind, as the sun 
displaces the darkness of night by his orient beams. 


26. A doubt festering in the heart is said to be the greatest pain of man, and 
this pain is healed only in the society of the good and wise. 


27. The thoughts of my rewards and punishments to my dependents, have 
been incessantly tormenting my heart, as the scratches inflicted by the nails of 
a lion, are always afflicting to the bruised body of the elephant. 


28. Deign, therefore, O sage, to remove this pain of mine, and cause the 
sunshine of peace and equanimity to brighten the gloom of my mind. 


29. Mandavya replied: — It is, O prince, by means of one’s self-exertion, 
self-dependence and self-help that the doubts of the mind, are melted down 
like snows under the sunshine. 


30. It is by self-discrimination also, that all mental anguish is quickly put to 
an end; as the thick mists and clouds are dispersed in autumn. 


31. It must be in one’s own mind, that he should consider the nature and 
powers of his internal and external organs, and the faculties of his body and 
mind. 


32. Consider in thy mind (such things as these); as what am I, what and 
whence are all these things; and what means this our life, and what is this 
death that waits upon it? These inquiries will surely set thee to eminence. 


33. As you come to know your true nature by your introspection into the 
state of your mind, you will remain unchanged by your joys and griefs, as a 


firm rock (stands against the force of winds and waves, to shake or move it). 


34. And as the mind is freed from its habitual fickleness and feverish heat, 
it regains its former tranquility; as the rolling wave returns to the state of the 
still water from which it rose. 


35. And as the mind remains in the impassability of living liberated men, 
(Jivan-mukta), all its imageries are wiped off from it; as its impressions or 
reminiscences of past lives, are lost and effaced upon its regeneration (in each 
succeeding manwantara). 


36. The unimpassioned are honoured as the most fortunate among mankind 
on earth; and the man knowing this truth and remaining with his self- 
contentment is regarded as venerable father by everybody. 


37. When you come to see the greatness of your soul by the light of reason, 
you will find yourself to be of greater magnitude, than the extent of the sky 
and ocean put together; and the rational comprehensiveness of the mind, bears 
more meaning in it, than the irrational comprehension of the spheres. 


38. When you attain to such greatness, your mind will no more dive into 
worldly affairs; as the big elephant will not be engulfed in the hole made by 
the bullock’s hoof. 


39. But the base and debased mind, will plunge itself in mean and vile 
matters of the world; as the contemptible gnat is drowned in a drop of water in 
a little hole. 


40. Little minds are led by their greediness, to dive in to dirty affairs, like 
insects moving about in the dirt; and their miserliness makes them covet all 
outward things (without seeking their inward good). 


41. But great minds avoid to take notice of outward things, in order that 
they may behold the pure light of supreme soul shining in themselves. 


42. The ore is cleared and washed, until pure gold is obtained from it; and 
so long is spiritual knowledge to be cultivated by men, until spiritual light fills 
their souls. 


43. See always all things of all sorts with an ecumenical view in all places; 
and with an utter indifference to the varieties of their outward forms and 
figures; behold all with the eye of thy soul fixed to one universal soul 
pervading the whole. 


44. Until thou art freed from thy view of all particular specialities, thou 
canst have no sight of the universal spirit, it is after the disappearance of all 
particularities, that there remains the catholicity of the transcendental spirit. 


45. Until thou gettest rid of all individualities, it is impossible for thee to 
come to the knowledge of universality; and much more so, to comprehend the 
all-comprehending soul of all. 


46. When one endeavours to know the supreme soul, with all his heart and 
soul, and sacrifices all other objects to that end; it is then only possible for 
him, to know the Divine soul in its fulness, and not otherwise. 


47. Therefore, forsake to seek aught for thy own soul; and it is only by thy 
leaving all other things, that thou comest to the sight of the best of things. 


48. All these visible objects which appear to be linked together, by the 
concatenation of causes and their effects, are the creation of the mind; which 
combines them together, as the string doth a necklace of pearls. That which 
remains after expunging the mind and its created bodies, is the sole soul, and 
this is that soul Divine; — the paramdtmd. 


CHAPTER LIX. 
Tranquility of Suraghu. 


Argument. The loss and oblivion of all things and thoughts, leading to the 
security and Tranquility of spirit. 


Vasishtha continued: — O progeny of Raghu! after the sage Mandavya had 
advised the Kirata king in the said manner, he retired to his solitary abode, 
suited for holy saints and sages. 


2. After the sage had gone, the prince also retired to a lonely place; and 
there began to reflect on the nature of his soul, and the manner of his existence 
(in this world and the next). 


3. He said: — I am not in this mountain (nor in any visible thing), nor are 
they mine (or any part of myself); I am not the cosmos, nor is this world 
myself. (I am no hill, nor do the hills appertain to my soul; I am not of this 
earth, nor is the earth any part of mine unearthly spirit, — Gloss). So says the 
Sufi poets: — nd azarsham, etc. 


4. This habitation of the Kiratas, does not belong to me nor do I belong to 
it; it is the consent of the people that has made me the ruler of the place. 


5. Without this election I am nobody here, nor is this place anything to me; 
though this city and this place are to last forever. 


6. The city so magnificent with its highflying flags, its groves and gardens 
and groups of my servants, and the long train of horse, elephants and soldiers, 
is, alas! nothing to myself. 


7. All this was nothing to me before my election, and will not be mine after 
my disposal; and all these possessions, enjoyments, and consorts, do neither 
appertain to me nor I to them. 


8. Thus this Government with all its force and officers in the city, is naught 
to me, nor am I aught to it in reality, except mere adscititious compliments to 
one another. 


9. I think myself to be this body of mine, composed of my legs, hands, and 
feet, and believe myself to be placed in the midst of these; (i.e., in the heart.) 


10. But I perceive my body to be composed of flesh and bones; and not 
constituting my rational self; which like the lotus flower rises amidst the 
waters, without bearing any relation with that element. 


11. I find the flesh of my body, to be dull and gross matter which do not 
make my soul; and I find too my rational part to be not this gross flesh at all. 
So do I find my bones likewise to be insensible substances, and consequently 
forming no part of my sentient soul. 


12. Iam none of the organs of action, nor do these organs compose myself. 
All organic bodies are composed of gross matter, and do not consequently 
constitute the animated soul. 


13. I am not the nourishment, which nourishes the body and not the soul 
which makes myself; nor am I any organs of sense, which perceives the 
material impressions, and have no sensibility without the intellect. 


14. I am not the mind which is a passive agent, and minds whatever is felt 
by it. It is called the understanding, (buddhi), from its standing under all its 
external and internal perceptions and conceptions, (bodha), and is the root of 
all worldly evils caused by its egoistic feelings. 


15. Thus I am neither the mind nor understanding, nor the internal senses 
nor the external organs of action. I am not the inward subtle body, nor its 
outward material and self locomotive form, but am something besides all of 
these which I want to know. 


16. I see at last my intelligent living soul, reflecting on the intelligibles, 
thence called its intelligence. But this intelligent principle being roused (to its 
action of thinking) by others, (the intelligibles), does not come under the 
category (paddartha) of the soul, — dtmd (which is independent, and self- 
consciousness only). 


17. Thus I renounce the knowable (living soul), and do not acknowledge 
the intelligible intelligence as myself. It is at the end of all the immutable and 
pure Intellect, which remains to be owned as myself. 


18. Ah! it is wonderful at last, that I have come to know the soul after so 
long a time, and find it to be myself the infinite soul, and the Supreme Spirit 
which has no end. 


19. As Indra and the gods reside and are resolved in Brahma, so the spirit 
of God pervades through all material bodies, as the string of the necklace, 


passes through the poles of all the pearls of which it is composed. (This all 
pervasive soul is known as sutrdtmd, one of the ten hypostases of the 
Divinity). 

20. The power of the soul known as intellect, is pure and unsullied in its 
nature; it is devoid of the dirt of thinkable objects, and fills the infinite space 
with its immense and stupendous figure. (The omniscience of God 
comprehends the whole universe in itself, and pervades all through it as the 
subtle air). 


21. The intellect is devoid of all attributes, and pervades all existences in its 
subtle form; stretches itself from the highest empyrean of heaven to the lowest 
deep, and is the reservoir of all power. 


22. It is replete with all beauty, and is the light that enlightens all objects 
unto us; it is the connecting chain to which all the worlds are linked together 
like pearls in the necklace. 


23. It is formless but capable of all forms and mutations; being connected 
with all matters, and conversant with all subjects at all times. (The intellect 
embraces all subjects and its subjective knowledge comprehends all objects). 
It has no particular name nor form, but is taken as varied into different forms, 
according to the operations of the intellect. 


24. It assumes fourteen forms in its cognition of so many sorts of beings 
contained in the two wombs of the world; it is varied in all these forms, in 
order to take cognizance of all things composing the whole body of the 
natural world. (The intellect comprises the fourteen sciences of Sanskrit 
literature over which it bears its command. Another gloss means by it the 
fourteen worlds, which are under the cognizance and dominion of the 
intellect). 


25. The course of human happiness and misery, is a false representation of 
the understanding; and the varieties of representations in the mind, are mere 
operations of the soul and its attribute of the Intellect. (Here the mental 
sciences are meant to be subordinate to the intellectual, and that again under 
the psychological). 


26. Thus this soul of mine is the same with the All-pervading spirit; and 
this understanding in me, is no other than that All-knowing intellect. It is the 
same mind, that represents these imaginary images in the sensory of my mind, 
and causes the error of my kingship in me. 


27. It is by good grace of the Intellect, that the mind is seated in the vehicle 
of the body; and ranges with joy amidst the sports and diversions of the 


diversified scenes of this world. 


28. But this mind and this body and all diversities are nothing in reality; 
they are all destroyed by the cruel hand of death, and not a vestige of them 
remains behind. (But the soul and its intellect are indestructible). 


29. This world is a stage, stretched out by the mind, its chief actor, and the 
soul sits silent as a spectator of this scene, under the light of the intellect. 


30. Alas, I find these painful thoughts of mine for the punishment, 
retribution and well-being of my people, to be all for nothing; since whatever 
is done for the body, perishes with the body also. 


31. O, that Iam awakened to truth at present, and released from the mirage 
of my false views long before; I have come to see what is worth seeing, and 
have found all that is worthy to be had. 


32. All these visibles which are seen to be wide spread throughout this 
universe, are no more than false phantoms, presented or produced by the 
vibrations of the intellect; and do not last for long. 


33. What is the good then of these my punishments and rewards to my 
people, which produce their pain and pleasure for a short time, and do not lead 
to the lasting welfare of their souls. 


34. What mean these pains and pleasures to us, when they both proceed 
from ourselves, and are alike in the sight of God? I had been all along 
ignorant of this truth, which has fortunately now dawned upon me. 


35. What shall I now do under the influence of this light; shall I now be 
sorry or joyous for it; what have I now to look at and do, as to whether I shall 
now remain in this place or go away from here? 


36. I behold this wondrous sphere of the intellect, now shining upon me in 
its full splendour; and I hail thee, O holy light! which I see blazing before me, 
but of which I can predicate nothing. 


37. Ah! that I am now so awakened and enlightened and come to know the 
whole truth in me; I hail, therefore, myself now instinct with infinity and 
Omniscience. 


38. Being freed from the paintings of my mind, and cleared from the dross 
of the sensible objects, and also released from the errors of this world, I rest 
myself in the lap of my tranquil soul as in a state of sound sleep, and in utter 
oblivion of all my internal and external impressions. 


CHAPTER LX. 
Extinction of Suraghu. 


Argument. Seclusion of Suraghu until his last moment, and his liberation in 
his lifetime. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus the lord of Hemajata, attained the state of his 
perfect felicity; and it was by means of his ratiocination, that he found his 
liberation in Brahma like the Son of Gadhi. 


2. He was no longer employed in the discharge of his painful daily rituals, 
which are attended with repeated misery to their practicers; but remained like 
the unchanging sun, amidst the rotation of ever-changing days and nights. 


3. He remained thence forward without any care or anxiety; and continued 
as firm and unmoved, amidst the righteous and wrongful acts of his subjects, 
as a rock stands in the midst of the boisterous waves, playing about and 
dashing against it. 


4. He was not susceptible of gladness or anger, at the conduct of others in 
the discharge of their daily duties; but remained as grave as the deep ocean, 
under the heaving waves of his clamourous people. 


5. He subdued his mental actions and passions as a man does in his sound 
sleep; and shone with an unshaken lustre, as the flame of a lamp in the still air. 


6. He was neither unkind nor ever kind to anybody, nor of was he envious 
or inimical to anyone. He was neither too wise or unwise, nor was he a seeker 
nor despiser of fortune. 


7. He looked upon all with an even eye and in an equal light. He conducted 
himself with unwaving steadiness, and was as cool and gentle in his mind, as 
the calm ocean and the gentle moonlight. 


8. Knowing all things in the world to be but workings of the mind, he 
remained quiet in every state of pleasure and pain, with the soundness of his 
understanding. 


9. His mind was enlightened, and his entranced soul enjoyed its anaesthesia 
in every state of his life; and was full in itself both when he sat and slept, as 
also when he moved about or did anything. 


10. He continued for a full century to reign over his realm with his mind 
unattached to state affairs; and with his unimpaired body and intellect. 


11. He at last quitted his habitation of the frail body of his own accord; as 
the dew drops itself down, by being impregnated with the sun beams. 


12. His soul then fled on the wings of his intelligence, to the primary and 
final cause of causes; as the current of the stream runs to the main ocean, by 
breaking down its bounds of the banks on its way. 


13. The intelligent soul being freed from its remorse (of leaving the body), 
and released from the conditions of its transmigration, became one with the 
immaculate spirit; and was then absorbed in the Supreme One; as the air 
contained in a pot, mixes with the all-encompassing firmament after the pot is 
broken. 


CHAPTER LXI. 
Meeting of Suraghu and Parigha. 


Argument. The praiseworthy deeds of good Princes. 


Vasishtha said: — O lotus-eyed Raghava! do you likewise act in the manner 
as Suraghu, and rely yourself in the sole existence of the Supreme one, for 
cleansing your iniquities, and for your getting rid of all sorrow in this world. 


2. The mind will no longer pant or sorrow, when it comes to have this 
ecumenical sight in itself; as a child is no more afraid of dark, when it gets the 
light of a lamp in the room. 


3. The discriminating mind of Suraghu found its rest in perfect tranquility; 
as a fool finds his security by laying hold of a big bundle of straws. 


4. Having this holy sight in your view, and by your preaching this light to 
others, do you continue to enjoy this uniform insouciance (Samddhi) in 
yourself, and shine forth as a bright gem before the world. 


5. Rama said: — Tell me, O chief of sages, what is this uniform 
insouciance, and set my mind at rest, which is now fluttering like the plumes 
of a peacock discomposed by the winds. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — Attend, therefore, O Rama! to the marvelous story 
of that enlightened and sagely prince Suraghu, and how he conducted himself 
by subsisting on the leaves of trees. 


7. I will relate to you also the communication which went on between two 
princes, both of whom were equally enlightened in their souls, and situated in 
the same sort of uniform quietism. 


8. There was a mighty king of the Plahvas, (Persians), known by the name 
of Parigha, who was a victor of his enemies, and also the support of his realm, 
as the axle is the support of a carriage. 


9. He was joined in true friendship with Suraghu, and was as closely allied 
to him as the god of love with the vernal spring. 


10. It happened at one time, that a great drought occurred in the land of 
Suraghu, and it was attended by a famine, resembling the final desolation of 
the earth, brought on by the sins of men. 


11. It destroyed a great number of his people, who were exhausted by 
hunger and debility; as a conflagration destroys the unnumbered living 
animals of the forest. 


12. Seeing this great disaster of his people, Parigha was overwhelmed in 
grief; and he left his capital in despair, as a traveller leaves a city burnt down 
to the ground. 


13. He was so sorely soul-sick at his inability to remove this unavertible 
calamity of his subjects, that he went to a forest to devote himself to devotion 
like Jiva the chief of devote. (Jiva is another name of Buddha, who betook 
himself to the forest on seeing the woes of human kind). 


14. He entered a deep wood unseen by and unknown to his people, and 
there passed his time in his disgust with the world, and afar and away from 
mankind. 


15. He employed himself in his austere devotion in the cavern of a 
mountain, and remained sober-minded, with his subsistence upon dry and 
withered leaves of trees. 


16. It was by his subsisting on dry leaves for a long time, as fire devours 
them always, that he obtained the surname of the leaf-eater among the 
assembled devotees on that spot. 


17. It was thenceforward that the good and royal sage passed under his title 
of the leaf-eater among the holy sages in all parts of Jambudvipa, (Asia). 


18. Having thus conducted himself with his most rigid austerities for many 
years, he attained the divine knowledge by his long practice of self- 
purification, and by grace of the supreme soul. 


19. He obtained his self-liberation by his avoidance of enmity and the 
passions and affections of anger, pity and other feelings and desires; and by 
his attainment of mental calmness and an enlightened understanding. 


20. He wandered ad libitum all about the temple of the triple world 
(composed of earth, heaven and the nether regions); and mixed in the 
company of the Siddhas and Sddhyas, as the bees mix with the company of 
swans about the lotus beds. 


21. His peregrination led him at one time, to visit the city of Hema-jata, 
which was built with gemming stones, and shone as brightly as a peak of the 


mount Meru (which is represented to be composed of gold and resplendent 
stones). 


22. Here he met with his old friend the king of that city, and saluted each 
other with mutual fondness. They were both delivered from the darkness of 
ignorance, and were perfect in their knowledge of the knowable. 


23. They accosted mutually with saying, “O! It is by virtue of our good 
fortune that we come to meet one another.” 


24. They embraced each other in their arms and with joyous countenances, 
and then sat on the one and same seat, as when the sun and moon are in 
conjunction. 


25. Parigha said: — My heart rejoices to see you with full satisfaction; and 
my mind receives a coolness as if it immerged in the cooling orb of the moon. 


26. Unfeigned friendship, like true love, shoots forth in a hundred branches 
in our separation from each other; as a tree growing by the side of a pool, 
stretches its boughs all around, until it is washed away with its roots by the 
current. 


27. The remembrance of the confidential talks, merry sports and idle plays 
of our early days awakes in me, O my good friend! those innocent joys afresh 
in me. 


28. I know well, O sinless friend, that the divine knowledge which I have 
gained by my long and painful devotion and by the grace of God, is already 
known to you from the preachings of the sapient sage, Mandavya, to you. 


29. But let me ask, are you not placed beyond the reach of sorrow, and set 
in your rest and tranquility; and are you situated in the supreme cause of all, 
and as firmly as if you were seated upon the unshaken rock of Meru? 


30. Do you ever feel that auspicious self-gratifying grace in your soul, 
which purifies the fountain of your mind, as the autumnal sky clears the 
springs of water on earth? 


31. Do you, O ruler of your people, perform all your acts, with a 
complacent air and steady mind, as you were discharging your duties for the 
good of mankind? 


32. Do the people in your realm live in safety, to enjoy their prosperity and 
competence, and are they all free from disease, danger, and anxieties of life? 


33. Is this land plentiful in its harvests, and are the trees here bending down 
with their fruitage; and do the people here enjoy the fruit of their labour and 


the objects of their desire? 


34. Is your good fame spread about in all quarters, like the clear and 
cooling beams of the full moon; and does it cover the face of this land, like a 
sheet of snowfall on the ground? 


35. Is the space of all quarters of the sky, filled with the renown of your 
virtues, as to leave no gap in it; and as the roots and stalks of lotus bushes 
overspread the tank, and choke and check the course of its waters? 


36. Do the young minds and virgins of your villages, street and walk about 
pleasantly over the plains and fields here abouts; and do they loudly laud forth 
your heart cheering applause (or their merry songs)? 


37. Does all welfare attend on you, with respect to your prosperity, wealth 
and possessions and the produce of your fields; and do your family, children 
and dependents fare well in this city? 


38. Do you enjoy your health free from all disease and complaint; and reap 
the reward of your meritorious acts done for this life and the next (such as 
sacrifices made for future rewards). 


39. Are you indifferent in your mind with regard to temporary enjoyments, 
which appear pleasant for a moment, but prove to be our deadly enemies at 
last. 


40. O! it is after a very long separation, that we come to meet again; it is 
my good fortune that rejoins me to you, as the spring revisits the dales with 
verdure. 


41. There are no such joys here, nor such woes even in this world; which 
do not happen to the lot of the living in their union with, and separation from 
one another. 


42. We are quite altered in our circumstances, during our long separation; 
and yet how we happened to meet each other in the same unchanged state of 
our minds, by a wonderful accident of destiny. 


43. Suraghu replied: — Yes, Sir, the course of destiny is as crooked as that 
of a serpent; nor is there any man that can penetrate into the depth of the 
mysterious nature of destiny. 


44. There is nothing impossible to destiny, which has after the lapse of so 
long a time, has reunited us in one place, from the vast distance of the two 
countries asunder. 


45. O great Sir! we are all in good health and prosperity in this place, and 


have been supremely blest by your graciousness unto us. 


46. Behold us purified and cleansed of our sins, by your holy presence 
among us; and the arbor of our merits has borne the fruit of our peace and 
satisfaction at your sight. 


47. O royal sage! we enjoy all prosperity in this our native city; and your 
presence here this day, has made it shoot forth, in a hundred off-shoots of joy 
and happiness. 


48. O noble minded Sir! your appearance and speech, have sprinkled this 
place with sweet nectarine drops, joy and holiness; because the company of 
the virtuous, is reckoned to equal the supreme felicity of man. 


CHAPTER LXII. 
On the Nature of Quietism and Quietus. 


Argument. A discussion about Active and Inactive Devotion and 
Godliness. 


Vasishtha related: — The prince Parigha then resumed his confidential 
speech, expressive of the affection he formerly bore to Suraghu and added: — 


2. Parigha said: — Whatever acts of goodness are done by men of well 
governed minds, in this earth of strife, they all redound to their happiness; but 
the evil deeds of ungoverned minds are not so, but lead to their misery. 


3. Do you rely, Sir, in that state of perfect rest which is free from desire; 
and do you rest in that state of supineness, — samddhi, which is styled 
transcendental Coma or trance, (paramopsama)? 


4. Suraghu replied: — Tell me Sir, what you mean by the abandonment of 
all desires; and what is meant by that perfect lethargy, which they call as 
transcendental coma or trance. 


5. Tell me, O high minded Sir, how can that man be called unentranced, 
who is enrapt in his supreme intelligence (or knowledge of the supreme), and 
at the same time is attendant to his worldly concerns. 


6. Men of enlightened understandings, however, they are employed in the 
observance of their usual worldly affairs, are yet said to be enraptured with 
their knowledge of the soliety of the supreme soul. 


7. But how can one be said to be beatified, whose mind is unsubdued and 
whose nature is indomitable; although he may keep his position in the posture 
of padmdsana with his folded palms. 


8. The knowledge of truth which burns away all worldly desires as straws, 
is termed the true catalepsy, (samddhi) of the soul; rather than the 
sedentariness and taciturnity observed by secluded devotees. 


9. The knowledge which is attended with continued rest and self-content, 


and gives an insight into the nature of things, is called the paragoge, 
(paraprajnd), and repose, (samddhi), of the soul by the wise. (Paragogies or 
palpable knowledge, is opposed to anagogies or hidden knowledge). 


10. Immobility of the mind by pride and enmity, is known by the term 
samddhi or quietness to the wise; when the mind is as unmoved as the fixed 
rock against the howling winds of the passions. (i.e., The mind which is 
unshaken and unmoved by passions and desires). 


11. The mind is also said to have its stillness, samddhi, when it is devoid of 
anxious thoughts and cares, and is acquainted with the natures of its wished 
for objects; and yet freed from its choice of and aversion to the objects of its 
liking or dislike. This is also said to be the fulness or perfection of the mind. 


12. Again, the mind of the magnanimous is said to stand in its stillness of 
samddhi or quietism, ever since it is joined with its understanding, and acts 
conjointly with the same. 


13. But this pause of samddhi being stretched too far to a dead lock, is 
liable to break down by itself; as the fibre of a lotus-stalk upon its being 
drawn too long by the hand of a boy. Dead and dormant quiescence is the 
opposite extreme of sensible quietism. 


14. As the sun does not cease from giving his light to the other hemisphere, 
after he sets from dispensing the day over this part, so doth our intelligence 
continue to glow, even after it has run its course in this life. (So there is no 
dead stop called the entire pause, — purna samadhi, or utter extinction of the 
soul at any time). 


15. As the course of a stream is never at a stop, notwithstanding the 
incessant gliding of its currents; so the course of our thoughts hath no 
suspension from its knowing of further truths. (The mind is ever progressive 
in its acquisition of knowledge, which proves the impossibility of its 
cessation). 


16. As the ever continuous duration, never loses the sight of the fleeting 
moments of time; so the sempiternal soul is never in abeyance, to mark the 
flitting thoughts of its mind. 


17. As the ever current time, never forgets to run its wonted course, so the 
intelligent understanding is never remiss, to scan the nature of the mysterious 
Intellect, which guides its course. 


18. The thoughts of an intelligent being, run in as quick a succession; as the 
continued rotation of the parts of time; and this is when the mind wanders at 
random, and is not settled in the sole object of its meditation. 


19. As the lifeless soul has no perception of any external object, so the soul 
unconscious of itself, has no knowledge of the course of time; as in the state 
of sleep, delirium and insensibility. 


20. As there is no skilful man, without some skill or other in the world, so 
there is no intelligent being, without the knowledge of his soul and self- 
consciousness here. 


21. I find myself to be enlightened and wakeful, and pure and holy at all 
times; and that my mind is tranquil, and my soul at its rest on all occasions. 


22. I find nothing to intercept the sweet repose of my soul, which has found 
its anchorage in my uninterrupted communion with the holy spirit. 


23. Hence my mind is never without its quiescence at any time, nor is it 
unquiet at any moment, its being solely resigned to spiritual meditation. 


24. I see the all-pervading and everlasting soul, in everything and in every 
manner; and know not whether it be the rest or unrest on my soul, which has 
found both its quiet and employment, in its perpetual meditation of the Divine 
Spirit. 

25. Great men of quiescent spirits, continue always in an even and uniform 
tone and tenor of their minds with themselves; therefore, the difference 
betwixt the rest and restlessness of the soul, is a mere verbal distinction, and 
bear no shade of difference and in their signification. 


CHAPTER LXHUI. 
The Conclusion of the Above. 


Argument. The Best means of self-contented happiness. 


Parigha said: — Prince, I find you to be truly wise and enlightened in your 
beatitude; and dost shine as the full moon with your inward coolness. 


2. I see in you the fulness of sweet delight, and the shadow of prosperity 
resting upon you; and you appear as graceful as the water lily, with your 
pleasing and cooling countenance. 


3. The clearness, extent, the fullness, and depth of your understanding, give 
you the appearance of the deep, clear and extensive ocean, when it ceases to 
be perturbed by the loud winds and waves. 


4. The pure and full delight of your inward soul, which is free from the 
cloud of egotism, gives it the grace of the clear expanse of the autumnal sky. 


5. I see you composed in your mind in all places, and find you contented at 
all times; you are moreover devoid of passions, and all these combine to add 
to you an unutterable grace. 


6. You have got over the bounds, of knowing whatever is good and evil in 
this world; and your great understanding, has made you acquainted with 
everything in its entirety. 


7. Your mind is cheered with the knowledge of all existence and non- 
existence, and your body is freed from the evil of repeated birth and death, — 
the common lot of all beings. 


8. You have gleaned the truth from whatever is untrue, and are as satiate 
with your true knowledge, as the gods were satisfied with drinking the water 
of immortality which they churned out of the brackish water of the ocean. 


9. Suraghu replied: — There is nothing in this world, O royal sage! which 
we may choose as inestimable to us; for all that shines and glitters here, are 
nothing in reality and have no intrinsic value. 


10. In this manner there being nothing desirable here to us, there is nothing 
disgusting to us neither; because the want of a thing intimates the want of its 
contrary also. 


11. The idea of the meanness of the most part of worldly things, and that of 
the greatness of others on particular occasions, are both weakened and 
obliterated from my mind. (i.e., The best thing that is of service at some time, 
and the very best thing that is useless at others, are all indifferent to the wise). 


12. It is time and place that give importance to the object, and lower the 
best ones in our estimation; therefore, it behooves the intelligent, neither to be 
lavish in the praise or dispraise of one or the other. 


13. It is according to our estimation of another, that we praise or dispraise 
the same; and we esteem whatever is desirable to us; but they are the most 
intelligent, that give their preference to what is the best, and of the greatest 
good is to us. 


14. But the world abounding in its woods and seas, and mountains and 
living animals, presents us nothing that is to be desired for our lasting and 
substantial good. 


15. What is there that we should desire, when there is nothing worth 
desiring in this world; save bodies composed of flesh and bones, and wood 
and stones, all of which are worthless and frail. 


16. As we cease to desire, so we get rid of our fawning and hatred also; as 
the setting of the sun is attended with the loss of both light and heat. 


17. It is useless verbiage to expatiate on the subject; it is enough to know 
this truth for our happiness here, i.e., to have our desires under subjection, and 
an evenness of our minds under all conditions, attended with inward placidity 
and universal regard for all. 


CHAPTER LXIV. 
Sermon on Self-Knowledge. 


Argument. The way to guard the mind from faults, and deliver the soul 
from misery. 


Vasishtha resumed: — After Suraghu and Parigha had ended their discussion 
on the errors of this world, they honoured one another with due respect, and 
retired gladly to their respective duties of the day. 


2. Now, Rama, as you have heard the whole of this instructive dialogue 
between them, do you try to profit thereby by a mature consideration of the 
same. 


3. It is by reasoning with the learned, that the wits are sharpened with 
intelligence; and the egotism of men melts down in their minds, like the 
raining of a thick black cloud in the sky. 


4. It spreads a clear and calm composure over the mind, as the revisit of 
cloudless Autumn does, over the spacious firmament to the delight of 
mankind, and by its diffusion of bounteous plenty on earth. 


5. After the region of the intellect is cleared of its darkness, the light of the 
supreme soul which is the object of meditation and our sole refuge, becomes 
visible in it. 

6. The man that is always spiritual and insighted within himself, who is 
always delighted with his intellectual investigations, has his mind always free 
from sorrow and regret. 


7. Though the spiritual man is engaged in worldly affairs, and is subject to 
passions and affections; yet he is unstained by them in his heart, as the lotus 
bud is unsullied by the water under which it is submerged. 


8. The silent sage that is all-knowing, holy, and calm and quiet in himself, 
is never disturbed by his ungoverned mind; but remains as firm as the 
dauntless lion, against the rage of the unruly elephant. 


9. The heart of the wise man is never affected by the mean pleasures of the 
world; but it stands as the lofty arbor of paradise, above the encircling bushes 
of thorny brambles and poisonous plants. 


10. As the religious recluse who is disgusted with the world, has no care for 
his life, nor fear of death; so the man whose mind is fraught with full 
knowledge, is never elated nor depressed by his good or bad fortune. 


11. The man that knows the erroneousness of the mind and the panorama of 
the world in the soul, is never soiled by the stain of sin, as the clear sky is 
nowhere daubed by any dirt or dust. 


12. It is the knowledge of one’s ignorance, that is the best safe guard 
against his falling into greater ignorance, and it is the only remedy for his 
malady of ignorance, as the light of the lamp is the only remedial of nocturnal 
gloom. 


13. The knowledge of our ignorance is the best healer of ignorance, as the 
knowledge of one’s dreaming removes his trust in the objects of his dream. (A 
dream known as a dream to the dreamer, cannot lead him to delusion). 


14. A wise man engaged in business, with his mind disengaged from it, and 
fixed on one object, is not obstructed by it in his view of spiritual light; as the 
eye-sight of fishes, is not hindered by the surrounding water. 


15. As the light of intellectual day appears over the horizon of the mind, the 
darkness of the night of ignorance is put to flight; and then the mind enjoys its 
supreme bliss of knowledge, as in the full blaze of day. 


16. After the sleep of ignorance is over, the mind is awakened by its 
intelligence, to the bright beams of the rising sun of knowledge; and then the 
mind is ever awake to reason, which no dullness can overpower. 


17. A man is said to live so long, as he sees the moon of his soul, and the 
moon beams of his intellect, shining in the sphere of his mind; and he is said 
to have lived only for those few days, that he has discharged his duties with 
joy. 

18. A man passing over the pool of his ignorance, and betaking himself to 
the contemplation of his soul, enjoys a coolness within him, as the cooling 
moon enjoys by the cold nectarious juice contained in her orb. 


19. There are our true friends, and those are the best Sdstras; and those 
days are well spent, which have passed with them, (the Sdstras), in discourse 
on dispassionateness, and when we felt the rise of the intellect within us. 


20. How lamentable is their case, who are born to perish like ferns in their 


native forests; and who are immerged in their sinfulness, by their neglect to 
look into their souls. 


21. Our lives are interwoven with a hundred threads of hopes and fears, and 
we are as greedy as bulls of their fodder of straws. We are at last over taken 
by old age and decrepitude, and are carried away with sorrow and sighs. 


22. The dull-headed are made to bear like heavy laden bullocks, great loads 
of distress on their backs in their native soil. 


23. They are bitten and disturbed by the gnats of their passions, and are 
made to plough the ground under the halter of their avarice; they are shut in 
the cribs of their masters, and are bound by the bonds of their kindred. 


24. Thus we are harassed in the supportance of our wives and children, and 
weakened by age and infirmity, and like beasts of burden we have to wade in 
dirt and mire, and to be dragged to long journeys, and be broken under heavy 
loads, without halting a while under the toil and fatigue. 


25. Bending under our heavy loads, we are tired with our long journeys 
across the deserts, where we are burnt under the burning sunbeams, without 
having a cool shade to shelter our heads for a while. 


26. We are big bodied like bulls with poor souls in us; we are oppressed at 
every limb, and labour under our destiny by being tied as the ringing bell 
about the necks of bullocks; and the scourge of our sins lashing us on both 
sides. 


27. We toil like bulls labouring under the poles of the carts which they 
draw along; and traverse through dreary deserts, without laying down our 
bodies to rest for a moment. 


28. We are always prone to and plunged in our own evils, and move on like 
heavy laden bullocks with trolling and groaning all the way long. 


29. Rama! try your best to redeem by all means, this bullock of your living 
soul, from the pool of this world; and take the best measures, to restore it to its 
form of pristine purity. 


30. The animal soul that is released from the ocean of this world, and 
becomes purified in its mind by the light of truth, is no more liable to roll in 
the mud, like some beasts after they are cleansed. 


31. It is in the society of high-minded men, that the living soul receives the 
instruction for its salvation in this ocean of the world; just as a passenger 
easily gets a boat from the ferry-man to go across a river. 


32. That country is a desert where there are not learned and good people, 
resembling the verdant trees of the land. The wise must not dwell in the land, 
where the trees yield neither fruits nor afford cooling shades. 


33. Good men are as the flowering Champa trees of the land; their cooling 
words resemble the shady leaves of the tree, and their gentle smiles its 
blooming flowers. Let men, therefore, resort to the umbrage of such 
champaka bowers. 


34. For want of such men, the world is a desert, burning under the 
darkening heat of ignorance, where no wise man should allow himself to rest 
in peace and quiet. 


35. It is the self that is the true friend to one’s self, therefore, support 
thyself upon thy self only; nor obscure the brightness of thy soul, under thy 
darkness of the bodily pride, to bury thy life in the slough of ignorance. 


36. Let the learned ponder in themselves, “what is this body, and how came 
it to existence, what is its origin and to what is it reduced?” Thus let the wise 
consider with diligence, the miseries to which this body is subject. 


37. Neither riches nor friends, nor learning nor relatives, serve to redeem 
the drowning soul. It must be one’s own mind to buy its own redemption, by 
resigning itself to its source and cause. 


38. The mind is the constant companion and true friend to the soul; and, 
therefore, it is by consultation with the mind, that one should seek to redeem 
himself. 


39. It is by a constant habit of dispassionateness and self-deliberation, that 
one can ford the ocean of this world, riding on the raft of true knowledge (or 
the knowledge of truth). 


40. It is pitiable to see the inward torments of the evil minded, that neglect 
to release their souls from all worldly vexations. 


41. Release the elephant of your living soul, — jiva, from the fetters of its 
egoism, its bonds of avarice and the ebriety of its mind; and deliver it from the 
muddy pit of its birth place, and retire to your solitude. 


42. It is by these means, O Rama, that the soul has its salvation; therefore, 
cast away your ignorance, and wipe off your egoism. 


43. This is the best way that leaves the soul to its purity, that makes you 
disentangle yourself from the snare of your mind, and disengage your soul 
from the trap of egoism. 


44. It is by this means, that the lord of gods, the supreme soul is beheld by 
us; and the corporeal body is regarded as a clod of earth, or a block of wood, 
and not better than these. 


45. The sunlight of the intellect comes to view, after dispersion of the cloud 
of egoism by which it is obscured; and it is after this that you attain the state 
of supreme felicity. 


46. As the light of the day is seen, after withdrawal of the dark veil of 
night; so you come to see the light of the soul, after removal of the curtain of 
your egoism. 


47. That felicitous state of the soul, which remains after dispersion of the 
darkness of egoism; the same is the state of divine fullness, and is to be 
adored with all diligence. 


48. This state of the vast ocean-like and perfect fulness of soul, which no 
words can express nor any eye can behold, is beyond all comparison, and 
every colour of human attribution. 


49. It is but a particle of the pure intellectual light, which gains its stability 
in the devout spirit, and is then comparable with naught beside the light of the 
Divinity, which shines before the internal sight of the holy. 


50. Though it is beyond all comparison, yet it is beheld by us to be in the 
state of our sound sleep, — susupta, (hypnotism), it is the state of immensity, 
and is as extended as the vast extent of the firmament. 


51. After extinction of egoism and the mental powers, and subsidence of all 
the feelings in oneself, there arises a transcendent ecstasy in the soul, which is 
styled the form of the divine or perfect joy and_ blissfulness, 
(paripuirnamdnandam). 


52. This blissfulness is attainable only by Yoga meditation, and in the 
hypnotism of sound sleep. It is not utterable by speech, O Rama, but to be 
perceived only in the heart. 


53. The totality of the Divinity is perceived only by the percipience of the 
mind, and by no categorial distinction of the divine essence; without this 
intuitive percipience, we can have no conception of the soul. 


54. The knowledge of the soul, comprehends in itself the whole totality and 
infinity together; and resides in the invariable steadiness of the mind. It is by 
the shutting out the internal and external from the senses and the mind, that 
the lord of lords, the divine soul appears to our intelligence. 


55. Hence follows the extinction of our desire of sensible objects, and 


hence we derive the light of our supreme felicity; that we have an even- 
minded composure in all circumstances; which leads the souls of the 
magnanimous, to revert to that inscrutable identity (which has no 
convertibility in it). 


CHAPTER LXV. 
Story of Bhasa and Vilasa. 


Argument. Account the Lives and Actions of Bhasa and Vildsa or the 
Sahya pupils. 


Vasishtha continued: — As long as one does not come to perceive his soul, by 
breaking down his mind of his own accord; and so long, lotus-eyed Rama, one 
does not get rid of his egoism and meism, (i.e., selfishness). 


2. There is no end of his worldly misery, as there is no setting of the 
painted sun; and his adversity becomes as extended, as the vast ocean itself. 


3. His misfortunes are as interminable, as the succession of the waves in the 
sea; and the appearance of the world is as gloomy to him, as the face of the 
sky, covered by the dark clouds of the rainy season. 


4. Here will I recite an old story, containing a discourse between two 
friends, Bhasa and Vilasa, in some region of the Sahya mountain. 


5. Now this is a mountain mightier than the three worlds in his superior 
strength. In his height he surmounted the sky, and in his extent he got the 
better of the ground, and with his foot he reached the infernal region. 


6. It was fraught with various flowers, and furnished with innumerable 
water falls; its precious stones were watched over by the Guhya mountaineers, 
and named as Sahya or moderate being situated in the temperate zone; yet it 
was intolerable as a tropic mountain (by the intense heat on its top). 


7. Its girdle of sun-stones, seemed to studded with pearls, by the sloping 
beams of the sun falling upon them; and its base with its pavement of gold, 
looked as the gold island (of Lanka). 


8. Here a hill was full of flowers, and there another filled with minerals; 
there were lakes with flowering water plants on one side, and gemming stones 
lying on another. 


9. Here the cascades were hurling and gurgling in foaming froths, and there 


the old bamboos were blowing through their hollow pipes; on one side the 
winds were howling in the mountain caves, and on another the bees were 
buzzing on the clustering flowers. 


10. The Apsaras were singing in concert on the mountain tops, and the wild 
beasts were growling in the forests; there the birds were chirping in the 
groves, and the clouds were roaring on the peaks of mountains, while the 
birds of the air crying and flying about the sky. 


11. The vidyddharas rested in the mountain grottos, and the black bees 
were humming on the lotus beds; the border lands resounded with the chorus 
of Keratas, and the woodlands were resonant with the melodies of singing 
birds. 


12. It appeared as the abode of the triple world, having the seats of the gods 
on its top, the residence of men at its foot, and the holes of snakes under its 
bottom. 


13. There were the Siddhas dwelling in its caverns, and precious metals 
lying hid in its bosom; its sandal woods were the resort of snakes, and its 
peaks were the haunts of lions. 


14. It was crowned with wreaths of flowers hanging on high over its head; 
and its body was besmeared with the dust and pollen of flowers; it was fanned 
by the fragrant breeze of flowers, and was all flowery with the fallen flowers. 


15. It was daubed with the grey dust of its metallic ores, and stood on its 
footstool of precious stones; it was often resorted to by heavenly damsels, 
frequenting its bowers to cull the Mandadra flowers. 


16. Its peaks were veiled by the blue mantle of clouds, and decorated with 
the gems hidden under them; they appeared as beauties beaming with the 
golden beams of the sun, and rising to meet their loving gods in heaven. 


17. There was a table-land on the northern edge of that mountain, which 
was overhung by trees loaded with bunches of fruits, and also a gemming 
lake, formed by the waters of cataracts falling from high. 


18. The ground was strewn over with florets scattered by the waving stalks 
of amra trees; and its borders were decorated with the blossoming kolkara and 
punnaga plants, shining as cerulean lotuses about a lake. 


19. The sun beams were shut out by the embowering alcoves of creepers, 
and the ground sparkled with its gems like the floor of heaven; the Jambu 
fruits distilled their juice like the cooling moon beams, and all these made this 
spot as delightful as the moon light sky. 


20. It was as delightful as the heaven of Brahma and the celestial seat of 
Siva; and here the sage Atri held his hermitage which blotted away the 
austerities of Siddhas. 


21. In this hermitage there dwelt two hermits, both of whom were as wise 
and knowing as Vrihaspati and Sukra, — the preceptors of gods and demi- 
gods. 


22. They were both as of one flesh and soul, and brought forth in time two 
boys, like two buds of lotuses growing in the same bed, and having their 
bodies as pure as the limpid lake from which they sprang. 


23. They were named Bhasa and Vildsa, who grew up in time like two 
orchids, upon the branching arms of their parents. 


24. They had one soul and mind in two bodies, which were united to one 
another as those of two loving brothers, and intimate friends. They remained 
in mutual union like the oil and seeds of sesamum, and as the flower and its 
fragrance. 


25. The fond parents were much more mutually attached in their hearts and 
minds, owing to their joint care and affection for their lads, and seemed as 
they were the one and same person in two different bodies. 


26. The two boys of graceful forms, remained also pleased with one 
another in the same hermitage; and moved about as two bees, over the same 
bed of lotuses in the same lake. 


27. They attained their youth after passing their boyhood and shone forth in 
a short time, as the two luminaries of the sun and moon rising together. 


28. The aged parents then left their infirm bodies, and went to heaven like a 
pair of birds quitting their broken nest. (Nest is in sanskrit nidas, Latin nidus. 
Plato compares the departing soul, to the flight of a bird from its nest.) 


29. The demise of the parents made the youths as dejected as the drooping 
lotus in a dried-up channel; and the vigour of their bodies now gave way to 
their want of energy. 


30. They discharged the funeral rites, and remained long in their mourning; 
under the sad accidents of life, which are unavertible even by the good and 
great. 


31. After performance of the obsequies, they were so overpowered by their 
grief and sorrow, that they continued to wail over their memory with piteous 
cries and tears. They sat silent and inactive as pictures in a painting, with their 
melancholy countenances and hearts heavy with sobs and sighs. 


CHAPTER LXVI. 
The Transitoriness of Life and Evanescence of 
World by Things. 


Argument. Speech of Bhasa, on the vain sorrows and griefs of 
unenlightened Minds. 


Vasishtha continued: — The two sorrowful hermits continued in the 
observance of their rigorous austerities, until their bodies where emaciated as 
two withered trees in the forest. 


2. They passed their time with cool apathy in their minds in the solitary 
forest; and were as helpless as stray stags separated from each other, and 
wandering afar from their home and possessions. 


3. They passed their days and nights, and months and years in this manner; 
until both of them were worn out by age, like two withered trees in a valley 
(having nobody to take notice of them). 


4. Not attaining to true knowledge, their austerities served only to shatter 
their frames, and reduce their strength; till at last they happened to meet one 
another, and betook to their conversation in the following manner. 


5. Vilasa said: — O Bhasa, that art the best fruit of the tree of my life, that 
hast thy seat in the recess of my heart, and art a sea of ambrosia to me, I 
welcome thee, O my best friend in this world. 


6. Tell me my good friend, how and where you passed so long a time, after 
your separation from me; and whether your austerities have been successful to 
be rewarded with their fruit. 


7. Tell me whether thy mind is freed from anxieties, and whether thou art 
in possession of thy self; (.e., self-possessed by knowledge of thy soul). Say, 
hast thou obtained the reward of thy learning, and hast thou after all, got thy 
peace and quiet. 


8. Being thus addressed and asked by Vildsa, whose mind was troubled 


amidst the vexations of this world; Bhasa who had attained to consummate 
knowledge, replied to him as respectfully as a friend doth to his dearest friend. 


9. Bhasa replied: — O good friend! you are fortunately and happily met 
here this day; but how can we expect to have our peace and rest so long as we 
have to remain in this world of strife and vale of misery. 


10. How can I have my rest so long, as the turbulent passions are not 
subdued in my breast; and until I can know the knowable (the unknown one 
that is only worth knowing); and till I can get across this sea of the world. 


11. How can we have our quiet, as long as our desires and hopes and fears 
continue to infest in our minds; and until we can weed them out, like thorns 
and brambles of bushes, with the spade of our reason. 


12. Until we can gain true knowledge, and have the evenness of our minds; 
and until we can have a full knowledge of things, we can have no rest in us. 


13. Without the knowledge of the soul and acquisition of true knowledge, 
which is the greatest remedy against all diseases of the mind, it is impossible 
to escape from the pestilence of the world. 


14. The poisonous plant of worldliness, sprouts forth in our childhood; it 
shoots out in its leaves in our youth, it flowers in our old age, and never 
fructifies before our death. (We live to long after the fruit best never to earn 
it). 

15. The body decays as a withered tree, and our relatives flutter as bees 


over it; old age overtakes us with its blossoming grey hairs, and produces the 
fruit of death. 


16. We have to reap the bitter fruits of our actions of bygone times, which 
are laid up in store, and fructify in their seasons; and thus, years upon years 
glide upon us, in the same monotonous rotation of business, and the sad tenor 
of our minds. 


17. This tall body of ours, rising as a thief on the ground, has all its inner 
cells and caves, filled with the thorns of our cravings; it is the abode of the 
serpentine train of our actions, emitting the poison of continuous woe in our 
repeated transmigrations in new bodies. 


18. See how our days and nights are rolling on in their circuit of continued 
misery and misfortune, which are misconstrued by men for transient joy and 
good fortune. 


19. See how our lives are spent in useless pursuits after objects of our vain 
wishes; and how we misspend our time with trifles, that are of no good to us. 


20. The furious elephant of the ungoverned mind, breaks loose from its 
fetters of good sense; and then joining with the elephants of wild desire, 
ranges at large without rest or sleep. 


21. The bawling tongue sets on screaming, as a vulture in the hollow of the 
tree of the human body; and fosters itself by feeding on the gems of thought, 
(chintadmani), lying hidden in it. (The talkative fool is no thoughtful man). 


22. The slackened limbs of the old and withered body, drop down like the 
dry leaves of trees; and there is nothing to prop up the drooping spirit, from its 
decay and decline day by day. 


23. The brightness of the body flies away in old age, and the mind dejected 
at the disregard of everybody, becomes as pale and withered, as the lotus 
flower fades away under the frost. 


24. As the channel of the body dries up in old age, and the water of youth is 
drained out of it; so the swan of life flies away far from it, and there is nothing 
to retard its flight. 


25. The old and time worn tree of the aged body, is overpowered by the 
force of the blasts of time; which blast its leaves and flowers (like human 
hopes) below, and then buries them all underneath the ground. (So says the 
Persian poet: Ai basa haus ke baz mand4d, oai basa arzu ke khdak shuda). 


26. As the serpent of desire lies dormant in the heart, (for want of 
overtaking its prey in old age), it is content like the croaking frog, to hold its 
complaints in the mouth; and the mind like a monster, hides itself in the pool 
of dark despondence. 


27. Our desires with their various wishes, are as the variegated flags of 
temples, furling and fluttering in all directions, till they are hurled down by 
the hurricane of old age. 


28. The world is a long-linked chain, lying in the depth of eternity; wherein 
the rat of death is always busy in gnawing down the knot of life at the root. 


29. The stream of life glides muddily on, with the foam and froth of cares 
and anxieties; there are the whirlpools of repeated transmigrations, and the 
waves of youthful levities, which are as boisterous as they are dangerous. 


30. The stream of our actions on earth, flows on interminably, with the 
billows of our worldly duties, and the various arts of life, all leading to the 
abyss of perdition. 


31. The current of our friends and relations, and the concourse of people, 
glide on incessantly to the deep and boundless ocean of eternity; from whose 


bourne nobody ever returns to life. 


32. The body is a valuable instrument, for the discharge of our worldly 
duties; but it is soon lost under the mud of this ocean of the world, and 
nobody knows where it is buried in its repeated births. 


33. The mind is bound to the wheel of its anxieties, and put to the rack for 
its misdeeds; it revolves all along as a straw, in the eddy of this ocean of the 
world. 


34. The mind dances and floats, over the waves of the endless duties of life; 
it has not a moment’s respite from its thoughts, but continues to oscillate with 
the action of the body, and rise and fall according to the course of events. 


35. The mind, like a bewildered bird, flutters between its various thoughts, 
of what it has done, what it is doing and what it is about to do; and is thus 
caught in the trap of its own fancies for evermore. 


36. The thoughts that this one is my friend, and the other one is my foe, are 
our greatest enemies in this world; and these tear my heart strings like the 
rough wind, that tears the tender lotus leaves and fibres. (It is wrong to take 
one for a friend or foe whom we do not know, and with whom we have no 
concern). 


37. The mind is overwhelmed in the whirlpool of its cares; it is sometimes 
hurled down to the bottom, and at others floating upon and loosened from it 
like a living fish caught by an angling hook. 


38. The belief of the external body for the internal self, is the cause of all 
our woe herein; and so the taking of others as our own is equally for our 
misery. 


39. All mankind placed between their weal and woe in life, are swept away 
to age and death; as the leaves of trees growing on high hills, are scattered by 
the high winds of heaven. 


CHAPTER LXVII. 
Abandonment of Intrinsic Relations. 


Argument. Refutation of the Intimate Relation of the Body and Soul. This 
relation is the Bondage and its abandonment the Release of the soul. 


Vasishtha continued: — Having thus accosted and welcomed each other, the 
two brothers applied themselves to the acquisition of divine knowledge; and 
gained thereby their liberation in the living state (of Jivan mukta). 


2. I will now tell, O strong armed Rama! that there is no salvation for the 
enslaved mind, without true knowledge of Divinity. 


3. Know, O Rama, of polished understanding! that this world of endless 
woes, is as easily traversed by the intelligent, as the wide ocean is crossed 
over by the bird of Jove, though it is impossible for any other bird to do so. 


4. The great soul is without and lies beyond the body; it is situated in its 
own intellect, and looks on the body from a distance, as a beholder beholds a 
concourse of people (without him). 


5. The body being pulled down by decay and disease, does not affect us any 
more, than the coach being broken, there is no injury done to the rider. 


6. The mind also when it is depressed and dejected, does not affect the 
understanding, as the moving waves which ruffle the surface of the sea, do not 
perturb the waters of the deep. 


7. What relation do the swans bear to the waters of the lake, and what 
relativity is there between the pebbles and stones of the sea and its waters; so 
the blocks of wood borne by the current are no way related to the waters of 
the stream; and in the like manner, no object of sense has any relation with the 
supreme soul. 


8. Tell me, O fortunate Rama! what correlation is there between a rock and 
the sea? The rock verily puts no obstruction to the internal current of the sea; 
so none of these worlds can stop the course of the Divine Mind, (as there is 


nothing which can bind the subtle and immeasurable sky). 


9. What relation do the lotuses bear upon the waters of a stream, than that 
of their being contained in the bosom of their containing waters; so are all 
solid bodies related as contents with the all containing Divine soul. 


10. As the concussion of a log with a body of waters, is attended with the 
effusion of watery particles around; so the contact of the body and soul, is 
productive of the various affections of the mind. 


11. As the contiguity of a bordering tree, produces its shadow in the waters 
below; so the proximity of all objects to the soul, reflects their images in the 
mind. 


12. As the reflexions of things in a mirror or watery glass, and in the 
swelling waves of the sea, are neither real nor unreal; so the reflexions in the 
soul, are neither substantial nor unsubstantial, (but adscititious and extrinsic 
only). 


13. As the breaking of a tree or rock by the howling winds, does not affect 
the wind at all; so the union or separation of the elemental substance, and 
component parts of a body, makes no alteration in the soul. 


14. As the falling of a tree in the water, produces a vibratory sound in it; so 
the contact of the body and soul, produces a vibration in the intellectual 
organs (the recipients of all impressions). 


15. But these impressions have no relation either with the pure and simple 
soul, nor with the gross body, (neither of which is concerned with them). All 
these are but the delusions of our erroneous knowledge, at the absence of 
which we have the transparent intellect only. 


16. As one has no notion of the manner of connection between the wood 
and the water (which nourishes it); so nobody has any knowledge, how the 
body is united with the soul. 


17. As the world appears a reality to the non-intelligent, so it appears a 
substantial entity, to those who are ignorant of truth. 


18. They that are devoid of their internal percipience of moisture in wood 
and stone, resemble the worldly-minded materialist, having the knowledge of 
external objects only. 


19. As those devoid of their intuitive knowledge, find no difference in the 
wood and water; so they believe the body and the soul to be the same thing, 
and do not know their irrelation and unconnection with one another. 


20. As the relation of wood and water, is imperceptible to them that have 
no intellection; so are they unacquainted with the irrelation between the soul 
and body, owing to their want of intuition. 


21. The soul is purely conscious of itself in all places, and without any 
objective knowledge of anything at all; nor is it liable to the erroneous 
knowledge of a duality also. 


22. The bliss of the soul is converted to misery, by its false apprehension of 
unrealities; as when one comes in sight of an apparition, by his false 
imagination of a ghost. 


23. Things quite irrelevant become relevant by our internal conviction of 
their relevancy; as our sight and apprehension of thieves in our dreams, and 
the appearance of a demoniac spectre in a block of wood. 


24. As the relation between the wood and water is altogether unreal; so the 
correlation between the soul and body, is wholly false and unsubstantial. 


25. As the water is not troubled, without the falling of the tree into it; so the 
soul is not disturbed, without its thoughts of the body; and the soul freed from 
its connection with the body, is free from all the maladies and miseries, which 
the flesh is heir to. 


26. The misconception of the body as the soul, makes the soul subject to all 
the imperfections and infirmities of the body; as the limpid water of the lake is 
soiled by the leaves and twigs that are seen to float upon it. 


27. Absence of the intrinsic relation of external things with the internal 
soul, liberates it from all the casualties in the course of things; but the 
presence of extraneous associations, makes the internal soul as turbid water, 
by reason of the mess of the leaves and foul things and fruit and flowers 
continually falling upon it. 


28. The soul freed from its innate knowledge of the objective is wholly 
absolved from misery; while the knowledge of its connection with the body, 
senses and the mind, is the mainspring of all its woes. 


29. The internal connection of the externals, is the seed of all the evils of 
men in this world, and brings forth all the pain and sorrow and errors of 
mankind. 


30. The man that is internally connected with the externals, sinks deep 
under the load of his connexions in the depth of this earth, but he who is aloof 
from his internal relations, floats above the surface of this sea, and rises aloft 
in air as an aerial being. 


31. The mind with its internal bearings, is as an arbor with the hundred 
ramifications; but the mind with its wants of internal relations, is said to have 
faded and grown extinct. 


32. The mind unattached to the world is as a pure crystal, without any 
shade of colour in it; but the mind that is attached to the world, is as a 
prismatic glass with all the colours of the rainbow. 


33. The unattached and untinged mind is said to be set at liberty, though it 
is set at work in the world; but the mind which though it is attached to the 
world, is said to be unattached, if it is thoughtless of it, though it is practiced 
to austerities. 


34. The mind attached to the world, is said to be bound to it; but that which 
is detached from it, is said to be set free from it. It is the internal attachment 
and detachment of the mind, that are the causes of its bondage and liberation. 


35. The unworldly minded persons, are not tied down to the earth by their 
worldly actions; it remains aloof from all its actions, as a floating vessel 
remains aloft of the sweet and salt waters of the lake beneath it. (The spiritual 
man is above his bodily actions). 


36. It is the tendency of the mind, that makes a man master of an action, 
which he has not actually done; as the delusion of the mind in dreaming, 
makes one feel the pleasure and pain of his pleasing and unpleasing dreams. 
(It is the mind and mental action, that differentiate the rational man from the 
body and bodily actions of an irrational beast, brute or bird). 


37. The activity of the mind gives activity to the body also, as the action of 
the mind in dreaming, gives motion to the inert body of the sleeping man, (as 
in somnambulism and the somniloquy). 


38. Inactivity of the mind, causes the inaction of the body; and though it 
should act by its physical force, yet the insane mind is not sensible of the 
action (nor is an idiot or madman responsible for his deeds). 


39. Man gets the retribution of his actions done with his mind; and not of 
those that pass beyond his knowledge. The inert body is never the cause of an 
action, nor the mind is ever joined with the living body, as an automaton or 
self-moving machine, or like a clock or watch, the spring of whose action lies 
in itself. But the body requires the action of the mind, to put that animal force 
into motion. 


40. The mind unattending to an action of the body, is never considered as 
its agent, (as it is never said to be the agent of breathing, which is a 
spontaneous action of the living body). No reward of any action ever accrues 


to one, that is not engaged in the doing of that action. 


41. The man not intentionally employed in the sacrifice of a horse or 
slaughter of a Brahman, neither reaps the good of the one, nor incurs the guilt 
of the other; and so the minds of distracted lovers are never aware of the 
results of their own deeds. (The killing of a Brahman with the idea of his 
being an aggressor, does not amount to Brahmicide; and so the acts of the 
lovelorn Indrahalyé and Vikramorvasi, are taken into no account). 


42. One free from his intrinsic relation (or interest) with anything, is most 
agreeable to all by his elevated demeanour; and whether he acts and neglects 
his part, he remains indifferent and neutral to both. (It is the deliberate choice, 
and not the unheeded action that constitutes the deed). 


43. No agency is attached to the man whose action is involuntary, and 
whose mind is released from its internal attachment to anything. 


It is the unconcerned indifference of the mind, that is attended with its 
composure; while its careful concern for anything whatsoever, is fraught with 
its vexation only. 


44. Therefore, avoid your internal concern for anything, that thou knowest 
to be but externally related to thee; and release thyself from the mortification 
of the loss to all external relations. 


45. The mind being cleared of the foulness of its internal relation with the 
externals, acquires the pellucidness of the cloudless firmament; and after 
clearance of all dirt and dross from within, the mind becomes one with the 
soul; like a bright gem shining with double effulgence with the lustre of a 
luminary, or like a blue streamlet, receiving the cerulean hue of the azure sky. 


CHAPTER LXVIII. 
Inquiry into the Nature of Internal and External 
Relations. 


Argument. The Relativity of the body or mind, either externally or 
internally with any object, is the cause of its woe and misery. 


Rama said: — Tell me, Sir, what are those connexions which become the 
bondages of men, and how are they to be avoided; as also what is that 
congeniality that leads to their emancipation here. 


2. Vasishtha answered: — The division of Unity into the duality of the 
body and soul, (whose body nature is, and God the Soul), and the rejection of 
the latter part, — the soul, (under the idea of its being assimilated to body), 
produce the misbelief in the body only, and is called the association of 
bondage; (i.e., binding the soul to the body, and subjecting it thereby to 
repeated transmigrations in various embodied forms, from which it can never 
fly away to its ethereal element). 


3. Again the consideration of the infinite soul as a finite being, and confined 
in the limited confines of the body, (under the impression of its being seated 
in the heart, and becoming extinct with it), leads to the bondage of the soul (to 
sensual gratifications). 


4. But the conviction, “that this whole cosmos is the self-same soul, and, 
therefore, we have nothing to choose or reject in it beside the very soul,” is 
termed the unrelated condition of the mind, which is settled in the supreme- 
self only, and this state is known under the title of living liberation, 
jivanmukti, (which has its connexion with naught, but with one’s self only, 
which is the universal soul of all). 


5. The unattached and self-liberated man thus speaks in himself that: — 
“Neither do I exist nor are these others in existence; let aught of good or evil, 
pleasure or pain befall unto me, but I am not to be changed in any condition of 
life.” 


6. He is said to be the unattracted or undistracted and self-devoted (stoic); 
who neither fosters his desires, nor hankers after things, nor continues in his 
actions at all times of his life. 


7. The self-devoted man, whose mind is not subject to the feelings of joy 
and sorrow, and is indifferent to worldly matters, (whether good or bad), is 
verily said to be liberated in his lifetime. 


8. He whose mind is not solicitous about the results of his actions, but takes 
them lightly as they come to pass upon him, such a man is said to be listless 
and lukewarm in his mind (that sets no worth on any worldly thing). 


9. All our efforts impelled by various motives, are avoided by our 
indifference to those pursuits; and this unconcernedness about worldly 
matters, is productive of our greatest good (in this world and in the next). 


10. It is by reason of our concern with many things, that we load 
innumerable distresses upon ourselves; and all worldly cares serve only to 
multiply the growing ills of life, like the branching thorny bushes in the caves. 


11. It is the effect of worldly attachment, which drives silly men to labour 
under their heavy burdens; as the dastardly donkeys are dragged by their nose- 
strings, to trudge and drudge under their loads, in their long and lonesome 
journeys. (It is on the part of the earthly minded, to toil and moil in the earth, 
from whence they rose, and whither they must return). 


12. It is one’s attachment to his home and country, that makes him stand 
like an immovable tree on the spot; and endure all the rigours of heat and 
cold, of winds and rains, without shrinking (or thinking to change his place 
for a happier region). 


13. See the reptiles confined in the caves of earth, with their weak bodies 
and tortuous movements; to be the instances of earthly attachment, and 
passing their time in pain and agony, and in a state of continual helplessness. 


14. See the poor birds resting on the tops of trees, and whining their while 
with cries of their empty stomachs, and constant fear (of hunters), as instances 
of worldly attachment (which prevents them from flying away). 


15. Observe the timorous fawn of the lawn, grazing on the tender blades of 
grass, and dreading the darts of the huntsman, to serve as another instance of 
earthly leaning. 


16. The transformation of men to worms and insects in their repeated 
transmigrations; and the congregation of all these animals of all kinds in all 
places, are but instances of their earthly fondness (ever to abide in it, and bide 


all its miseries). 


17. The multitudes of animal beings that you see to rise and fall like the 
waves of the sea, are all the effects of their worldly attachment. 


18. The self-moving man becomes immovable, and turns to the state of 
fixed trees and plants; and thus grows and dies by turns, in consequence of his 
worldly propensities. 


19. The grass, the shrubs and the creepers, which grow on earth from the 
moisture of the earth; are all products of the cause of their addictedness to the 
world. 


20. These endless trains of beings, that are borne away in this running 
stream of the world, and are buffeting in their ever-increasing difficulties, are 
all the sports of their earthly inclinations. 


21. Worldly affections are of two kinds, — the praiseworthy and the 
fruitless ones; those of the wise and learned men, belong to the former kind; 
but the tendencies of the ignorant, are of the latter or unfruitful kind. 


22. Any tendency to this world, which springs from the base bodily and 
mental affections, and does not proceed from or bears its relation with 
spiritual motives and purposes, are said to be quite fruitless (of any good 
result). 


23. But that tendency, which has its origin in spiritual knowledge, and in 
true and right discrimination, and bears no relation to anything that is of this 
world, but leads to one’s future and spiritual welfare, is the truly laudable one 
(because the desire to rise higher tends to make one a higher being). 


24. The god holding the emblems of the conch-shell, his discus and the 
club, had various inclinations of this better kind, whereby he became the 
support of the three worlds, (the god Vishnu). 


25. It is by means of this good tendency, that the glorious sun makes his 
daily course in the unsupported path of heaven for ever more. 


26. The god Brahma, that now shines in his fiery form, had for a whole 
Kalpa age, to foster his project of creation; and it was owing to this laudable 
purpose of his, that he became the creator of the world. (The world was not 
made in a day, but took many ages for its formation). 


27. It was because of this kind of praiseworthy purpose, that the god Siva 
acquired his bipartite body of the androgyne, graced by the female form of 
Uma, linked with his as its other half. (In Siva-Isha, we have the androgynous 
form of Adam-Ish or man, and in Uma that of Eve or woman, linked together 


before their separation. God made woman out of man and from a rib of his on 
the left side). 


28. The Siddhas and other heavenly and aerial beings, and the regents of 
the skies, that move in their spiritual spheres of intelligence, have all attained 
their high positions by means of their laudable tendencies. 


29. They bear their bodies of heavenly growth, (i.e., of a celestial nature); 
and have set themselves beyond the reach of disease, decay and death, by 
means of their praiseworthy inclinations. 


30. The fruitless desire, expects to derive pleasure from unworthy objects, 
and causes the mind to pounce like a vulture on a bit of flesh (that will not fill 
its gizzard). 


31. It is the force of habit, that makes the winds to blow in their wonted 
course, and causes the five elements to continue in their usual states, in 
support of the order of nature. 


32. This Sansakti constitutes the constitution of the system of nature; which 
is composed of the heavens, earth and infernal regions; peopled by gods, men, 
demons, efc., who are like gnats fluttering about the fruit of the mundane fig 
tree. 


33. Here are seen numberless orders of beings, to be born and rise and fall 
and die away; like the ceaseless waves of the sea, rising for falling. 


34. The results of worldly leanings rise and fall by turns, until they 
disappear all at once. They are as bitter as the drops of waterfalls are to taste. 


35. It is mere worldliness, which makes these crowds of men devour one 
another like sharks and fishes; and they are so infatuated by their ignorance, 
that they have been flying about like stray leaves of trees in the air. 


36. It is this which makes men rove about, like revolving stars in their 
courses in the sky; and flutter about as flights of gnats upon fig trees; or to lie 
low like the whirling waters of eddies underneath the ground. 


37. Men are tossed as the play balls of boys, by the hands of fate and death; 
and are worn out like these toys by their incessant rise and fall and rolling 
upon the ground; yet these worrying wanderings, do not abate the force of 
their habitual motion, as the repeated waste and wane of the ever-changing 
moon, makes no change in the blackish spot marked upon her disk. 


38. The mind is hardened by seeing the miseries of the repeated revolutions 
of ages, resembling the rotations of fragments of wood in whirlpools; and yet 
the gods will not deign to heal the stiff boil of the mind, by any operation in 


their power. 


39. Behold, O Rama! this wonderful frame of the universe to be the 
production of the desire of the divine Mind only. (ie., The divine will of 
creation, is the cause of this world, as the human wish of seeing it, presents its 
view to his sight). 


40. It is the pleasure of association that presents this view of the triple 
world in the empty sphere of the mind; for know the wondrous world to be a 
creation of the mind only, and nothing in reality. (The pleasure of association, 
means the pleasure of memory or reminiscence). 


41. The avarice of worldly men eats up their bodies, as the flame of fire 
feeds upon dry fuel. (i.e., In order to feed the body, we become the food of 
our toils). 


42. Yet the bodies of worldly-minded men, are as countless as the sands of 
the sea; and these again are as unnumbered as the atoms of earth which 
nobody can count. 


43. It may be possible to count the hoary foams of Ganga, and the pearly 
froths of sea waves; it is likewise possible to measure the height of mount 
Meru, from its foot to the top and its peaks; but not so to number the desires in 
the minds of worldly-minded men. 


44. These rows of inner apartments, which are built for the abode of the 
worldly-minded, are as the lines of Kala Sutra and the spires of hell-fire. 


45. Know these worldly men to be as dry fuel, heaped up to light the piles 
of hell-fire. 


46. Know all things in this world, to be full of pain and misery; and are 
stored up not for enjoyment but torments of the worldly minded. 


47. The minds of all worldly men are the receptacles of all woe and misery; 
as the great sea is the recess of the outpourings of all rivers. 


48. The mind which is attached to the world, and the body which is bent 
down under its toilsome loads, are both of them the fields for the exercise of 
Ignorance, which elevates and depresses them by turns. 


49. Want of attachment to worldly enjoyments, is productive of ease and 
prosperity; and it expands the capacity of the mind, as the rains increase the 
extent of rivers. 


50. Inward attachment of the mind to worldly objects, is the burning flame 
of the outer body; but want of this internal attachment, is the healing balm of 


the whole frame. 


51. Inward attachment burns the outward body, as the hidden poisonous 
plant infects the creepers, which recline on it for their support. 


52. The mind which is unattached to everything in all places, is like the 
lofty sky aloof from all things; and by having no desire in it, it is always clear 
and bright, and enjoys its felicity forever. 


53. As the light of knowledge rises before the sight of the mind, the 
darkness of ignorance which veiled all objects, wastes away of itself and is 
put to flight. The man who is devoid of all sorts of worldly attachments, and 
lives in communion with his own mind, is truly liberated in his life. 


CHAPTER LXIX. 
Freedom from Attachment — the Road to 
Tranquillity. 


Argument. Abstraction of the mind from the external, and its Application to 
Intellectual objects. 


Vasishtha continued: — Though remaining in all company, and doing all the 
duties of life, and although employed in all the acts, yet the wise man watches 
the movements of his mind. 


2. It is not to be engaged in cares of this world, nor employed in thoughts 
or things relating to this life; It is not to be fixed in the sky above or the earth 
below; nor let to wander about over the objects on all sides. 


3. It must not roam over the extensive field of outward enjoyments, nor 
dwell on the objects and actions of the senses. It must not look internally, nor 
be fixed to the breathing, the palate and crown of the head. (Which are certain 
modes of Yoga practice). 


4. It must not be attached to the eye brows, the tip of the nose, the mouth or 
the pupil of the eye; nor should it look into the light or darkness, or into the 
cavity of the heart. 


5. It must not think of its waking or dreaming states, nor those of its sound 
sleep or internal clearness of sight; nor should it take any colour as white, red, 
black, or yellow for the object of its thought or sight. 


6. It must not be fixed on any moving or unmoving substance, nor set in the 
beginning, middle or end of any object. It must not take a distant or adjacent 
object either before or inside itself. 


7. It must not reflect on any tangible or audible object, nor on the states of 
felicity and insensibility. It must not think of the fleetness or fastness nor the 
measurement of time, by the measure and number of its thoughts. 


8. Let it rest on the intellect only, with a slight intelligence of itself; and 


taste of no joy, except that of its self-delight. 


9. Being in this state of mind, and devoid of all attachment to anything, the 
living man becomes as a dead body, when he is at liberty to pursue his 
worldly callings or not. 


10. The living being that is attached to the thought of itself, is said to be 
doing and acting though it refrains from doing anything; and it is then as free 
from the consequence of acts, as the sky is free from the shade of the clouds 
that hang below it. 


11. Or it may forsake its intelligential part, (i.e., forget its intelligence), and 
become one with the mass of the Intellect itself. The living soul thus becomes 
calm and quiet in itself, and shines with as serene a light as a bright gem in the 
mine or quarry. 


12. The soul being thus extinct in itself, is said to rise in the sphere of the 
Intellect; and the animal soul continuing in its acts with an unwilling mind, is 
not subjected to the results of the actions in its embodied state. 


CHAPTER LXX. 
Perfect Bliss of Living Liberation. 


Argument. Living Liberation and its constituents or Jivan mukti. 


Vasishtha continued: — Men whose souls are expanded and contented with 
the delight of their habitual unattachment to worldliness, have set themselves 
above the reach of internal sorrow and fear, notwithstanding their engagement 
in worldly affairs. 


2. And though overtaken by inward sorrow, (owing to some temporal loss), 
yet their countenances are unchanged owing to the uninterrupted train of their 
meditation; and the fulness of their hearts with holy delight, is manifest in the 
moonlike lustre of their faces. 


3. He whose mind is freed from the feverishness of the world, by his 
reliance in the intellect, and remaining apart from the objects of intellection, 
throws a lustre over his associates, as the clearing kata fruit, purifies the water 
wherein it is put. 


4. The wise man, though he may be moving about in busy affairs, is yet 
ever quiet in the abstraction of his soul from them. He may be assailed by 
outward sorrow, yet his inward soul shines as an image of the sun. 


5. Men of great souls, who are awakened and enlightened by knowledge, 
and raised high above the rest of mankind, are wavering on their outside as a 
peacock’s feather, (i.e., as a weather cock); but inwardly they are as firm as 
mountainous rocks. 


6. The mind being subjected to the soul, is no more susceptible of the 
feelings of pain and pleasure, than as a piece of painted glass, to receive the 
shadow of any other colour, (or an opaque stone to reflect any colour). 


7. The man of elevated mind, who has known the nature of superior and 
inferior souls, (i.e., the divine and human spirits), is not affected by the sight 
of the visibles, any more than the lotus leaf, by the hue of its encompassing 
waters. 


8. It is impossible to evade the impressions of the outer world, until and 
unless the mind is strengthened in itself. It becomes strong by its knowledge 
of the Supreme Spirit, removing the foulness of its fancied objects, and by 
meditation and enjoyment of the light of the soul, even when the mind is not 
in its meditative mood. 


9. It is by means of Spiritual communion and internal rapture, that the mind 
loses its attachments; and it is only by knowledge of the soul and in no other 
way, that our worldly associations wear out of themselves. 


10. The waking soul may deem itself to be in sound sleep, by its sleeping 
over (or insensibility of) the outer world; as it may likewise deem itself to be 
ever awake and never asleep, by its sight of the unfading light of the soul; and 
by preservation of its equanimity and equality in all circumstances, and its 
want of duality and differentiation of the objects of its love and hatred. 


11. Being ripe in its practice of Yoga meditation, it sees in itself the pure 
light of the sun; until at last it finds its own and the supreme soul, shining as 
the sun and moon in conjunction. 


12. The mind losing its mental powers, and remaining vacant as in the case 
of distraction or dementedness; is said to be in its waking sleepiness, when its 
faculty in imagination is at an utter stop. 


13. The man having attained to this state, susupta hypnotism, may live to 
discharge the duties of his life; but he will not be liable to be dragged about by 
the rope of his weal or woe, to one side or the other. 


14. Whatever actions are done by the waking man, in his hypnotic state in 
this world, they do not recur to him with their good or evil results, any more 
than a dancing puppet, to have the sense of any pleasure or pain in it. (The 
want of egoism in a man as in a doll, is the cause of his impassivity in either 
state) (of waking or sleep). 


15. The mind possesses the pains-giving power, of giving us the perception 
of our pain and pleasure, and the sense of our want and bitter sorrow; but 
when the mind is assimilated with the soul, how can it have the power of 
annoying us anymore? 


16. The man in the hypnotic state of his mind, does his works as insensibly 
as he did them in his sleep; and by reason of no exertion on his part, for his 
doing them from his former and habitual practice. The living soul that is 
insensible of its actions, is said to rest in his state of living liberation. 


17. Do you rely in this state of hypnotism, and either perform or refrain 
from your actions as you may like; for our actions are no more than what arise 


of our nature, and pass for the results of the deeds of our past lives, and are 
enacted by ordinances of eternal laws. 


18. The wise man is neither pleased with the acts of charity or penury; he is 
delighted with his knowledge of the soul, and lives content with whatever 
may fall to his lot. 


19. All that you do with your mind, by remaining as still as in your sleep, is 
reckoned as no doing of yours; and though doing nothing with your body, you 
are the doer thereof if you do it with your mind. Do, therefore, your acts with 
your body or mind as you may like. 


20. As the baby lying in the cradle, moves its limbs to no other purpose 
than its mere pleasure; so Rama, do your duties for pleasure’s sake (as a 
labour of love), and not for reward. 


21. Whoever has his mind fixed in his intellect, and not in any object of 
intellection, and remains dormant in his waking state, is said to be master of 
his soul, and all he does is reckoned as no deed of his doing. 


22. The wise man, (Gno or Gnostic), who obtains the state of hypnotism, 
— Susupta, and has his mind free from desires, gets a calm coolness within 
himself, which is equal to the cooling moisture of the humid moon. 


23. The man of great valour, remains coolly dormant in himself, and is as 
full as the orb of the moon in the fulness of her digits; and has the evenness of 
his mind, like the steadiness of a hill at all times and seasons. 


24. The man of the sedate soul, is pliable in his outer conduct, though he is 
inflexible in his mind. He resembles a mountain, which waves its trees with 
the breeze, without shaking or being shook by it. 


25. The hypnotism of the mind purifies the body of all its impurity; and it is 
the same whether such a person perishes sooner or later, or lasts forever as a 
rock. (Because its purity is its strong shield, against the power and torments of 
life and death). 


26. This state of hypnotism, being acquired by constant practice of Yoga, 
gets its maturity and perfections in process of time; when it is called the turiya 
or fourth stage of the adept, by the learned in divine knowledge. 


27. He becomes the most exalted gnostic, whose mind is cleared of all its 
impurity; and whose inward soul is full of joy, with its mental powers all quiet 
and at rest. 


28. In this state, the gnostic is in full rapture, and quite giddy with inward 
delight. He looks upon the whole creation as an exhibition of play and 


pageantry. 


29. After the man who has attained his fourth stage, when he is freed from 
sorrow and fear, and has passed beyond the errors and troubles of this world, 
he has no fear of falling from this state. 


30. The man of sedate understanding, who has attained this holy state, 
laughs to scorn and spurn at the whirling orb of the earth; as one sitting on a 
high hill, derides at the objects lying below it. 


31. After one has obtained his everlasting position, in this firmly fixed 
fourth state of blissfulness, he becomes joyless for want of a higher state of 
felicity to desire. 


32. The Yogi having past his fourth stage, reaches to a state of ineffable joy, 
which has no part nor degree in it, and is absolute liberation in itself. 


33. The man of great soul, is released from the snare of the 
metempsychoses of his soul, and of his repeated birth and death, and is freed 
from the darkness of his pride and egoism; he is transformed to an essence of 
supreme ecstasy and pure flavour, and becomes as a mass of sea salt, amidst 
the waters of the deep. 


CHAPTER LXXI. 
A Discourse on the Body, Mind and Soul. 


Argument. Consideration of the Soul in its Various lights, and its Irrelation 
with the body. 


Vasishtha continued: — The consideration of the fourth stage, is attended 
with the knowledge of monoity or oneness of all; and this is the province of 
the living liberated man according to the dicta of the veda. (Consideration or 
paradmarsha is defined as a logical antecedent or knowledge of a general 
principle, combined with the knowledge that the case in question is one to 
which it is applicable; as the smoke of the hill is attended by fire, is a logical 
antecedent. In plain words it means, that the Turiya Yoga, presupposes the 
knowledge of unity or onliness of the one self-existent Kaivalya or monism). 


2. Rising above this to the turyality or hyperquartan state, in which one sees 
nothing but an inane vacuity. This is the state of disembodied spirits, that are 
lost in infinity, and of whom the Sdstras can say nothing. (i.e., The embodied 
or living soul has knowledge of its personality, up to the fourth stage of its 
elevation; but the disembodied or departed soul, that is liberated after death, 
and becomes (Videha mukta), grows as impersonal as the undistinguishable 
vacuum). 


3. This state of quiet rest, lies afar from the farthest object; and is attained 
by those who are liberated of their bodies; just as the aerial path is found only 
by aerial beings. (The spheres of spirits are unknown to embodied beings). 


4. After a man has forgotten the existence of the world for some time in his 
state of sound sleep, he gains the fourth state of turiya, which is full of felicity 
and rapture. 


5. The manner in which the spiritualists have come to know the 
superquartan state, should also be followed by you, O Rama, in order to 
understand that unparalleled state of felicity which attends upon it. 


6. Remain, O Rama, in your state of hypnotism, — Susupta, and continue 


in your course of worldly duties even in that state; so as your mind, like the 
moon in painting, may not be subject to its waning phases, nor be seized by 
any alarm (like the threatening eclipses of the moon). 


7. Do not think that the waste or stability of your body, can affect the state 
of your intellect; because the body bears no relation with the mind, and is but 
an erroneous conception of the brain. 


8. Although the body is nothing, yet it must not be destroyed by any means; 
because you gain nothing by destroying it, nor lose anything by its firmness; 
but remain in the continuance of your duties, and leave the body to go on in 
its own wonted course. 


9. You have known the truth, — that God presides over the world; you 
have understood the Divine nature in all its three-fold states; you have 
attained your true state of spirituality, and are freed from your worldly 
SOITOWS. 


10. You have got rid of your liking and disliking what you desire or 
despise, and are graced with the cooling light of your reason; you have got out 
of the dark cloud of prejudice, and have become as graceful as the autumnal 
sky with the lustre of the full moon (of your intellect) shining over it. 


11. Your mind has got its self-possession, and does not lower itself to 
meaner things; it has become as perfect as those that are accomplished in their 
devotion, (namely in the observance of Yoga and its austerities), so that you 
would not deign to stoop to earth from that higher sphere. 


12. This is the region of the pure and uniform intellect, having no bounds to 
it, nor are there the false landmarks of, “I, and thou, this and that, mine and 
thine,” and such like errors. 


13. This Divine Intellect is attributed with the imaginary title of Atmd, 
(atmos or self) for general use; or else there is no occasion of the distinction 
of names and forms, with that being who is quite distinct from all. 


14. As the sea is a vast body of water, with its waves of the same element, 
and no way different from it; so is all this plenum composed of the pure soul, 
and this earth and water are no other than itself. 


15. As you see nothing in the ocean, except the vast body of water; so you 
find nothing in the sphere of the universe, except the one universal soul. 


16. Say, O ye intelligent man, what is it to which you apply the terms 
yourself, itself, and the like; what is it that you call yourself and to belong to 
you, and what is that other which is not yourself, nor belongs to you. 


17. There being no duality beside the only soul, there can be no material 
body at all; nor is there any relation between this and that, than there is 
between the light of the sun and the gloom of night. 


18. Supposing the existence of a duality, yet I will tell you, O Rama, that 
the existence of material bodies, bears no relation with the spiritual soul. 


19. As light and shade and darkness and sunshine, bear no relation to one 
another, so the embodied soul has no connection with the body (in which it is 
thought to reside). 


20. As the two contraries, — cold and hot can never combine together, so 
the body and soul can never join with one another. 


21. As the two opposites can have no relation between them, so is it with 
the body and soul, the one being dull matter, and the other an intelligent 
principle. 


22. The dictum of the connection of the body with the pure intellect of the 
soul is as improbable as the subsistence of a sea in a conflagration, (i.e., the 
impossibility of the meeting of water and wild fire). 


23. The sight of truth, removes every false appearance; as the knowledge of 
light in the sandy desert, displaces the mirage of the ocean in the sun-beams. 


24. The intellectual soul is immortal and undecaying, and perfectly pure 
and shining by itself; while the body is perishable and impure, and cannot, 
therefore, be related with the spirit. 


25. The body is moved by the vital breath, and is fattened by solid 
aliments; and cannot therefore be related with the self-moving soul, which is 
without its increase or decrease. 


26. The duality of the body, (or matter), being acknowledged, does not 
prove its relation with the soul; and the dualism of material bodies being 
disproved, the theory of its relativity, falls at once to the ground. 


27. Knowing thus the essence of the soul, you must rely on its subjective 
in-being within yourself; and then you will be free both from your bondage 
and liberation, in all places and at all times. 


28. Believe all nature to be quiet and full of its quiescent soul; and let this 
be your firm belief, in whatever you see within and without yourself. 


29. The thoughts that I am happy or miserable, or wise or ignorant, proceed 
from our false (or comparative view of things); and you will always remain 
miserable, as long as you continue to believe in the substantiality of outward 


things. 


30. As there lies the wide difference, between a rock and a heap of hay; and 
between a silk-pod and a stone; the same applies in the comparison of the pure 
soul and the gross body. 


31. As light and darkness bear no relation nor comparison between 
themselves, such is the case also, O Rama! between the body and soul, which 
are quite different from one another. 


32. As we never hear of the union of cold and hot even in story, nor of the 
junction of light and darkness in any place; such is the want of union between 
the soul and body, which are never joined together. 


33. All bodies are moved by the air, and the human body moves to and fro 
by its breath; it is sonant by means of its breath, and the machinery of its wind 


pipes. 
34. The human body utters its articulate sounds, combined with the letters 


of the alphabet; and by means of its internal breathings. Its mechanism is the 
same as that of sounding bambu pipe. 


35. So it is the internal air, which moves the pupils, the eyelids; it is the 
same air that gives motion to the limbs of the body; but it is the intellect 
which moves the soul, and gives movement to its consciousness. 


36. The soul is present in all places, whether in heaven above or in the 
worlds beneath; and its image is seen in the mind as its mirror. 


37. You will have some notion of the soul in your mind by thinking that it 
flies like a bird from the cage of its body, and wanders about at random, being 
led by its desires and fancies. 


38. As the knowledge of the flower is accompanied with that of its odour; 
so the knowledge of the soul is inseparable from that of the mind, (which is as 
it were, the odour of the soul). 


39. As the all-pervading sky, is partly seen in a mirror; so the omnipresent 
soul, is partially seen in the mirror of the mind. 


40. As water seeks the lowest level for its reservoir; so it is the mind, which 
the soul makes the receptacle of its knowledge. (i.e., The soul receives and 
deposits all its knowledge from and in the mind). 


41. The knowledge of the reality or unreality of the world, which is 
reflected upon the internal organ of the mind; is all the working of the 
conscious soul, as light is the production of solar rays. 


42. This internal organ (of the mind), is regarded as the actual cause of all 
(under the title of Hiranyagarbha); while the soul which is the prime cause of 
causes, is regarded as no cause at all, owing to its transcendent nature (and 
this called the supreme Brahma; (or the soul), that remains intact from all 
causality). 


43. Men of great minds, have given the appellation of fallacy, 
misjudgement, and ignorance to this internal or causal mind; which is the 
source of the creation of worlds. (But all of these, are mere fabrications of the 
imaginative mind). 


44. It is error and want of full investigation; that make us mistake the mind 
for a distinct entity; it is the seed of all our ignorance, which casts us in 
darkness from the sunlight of reason. 


45. It is by means of the true knowledge of the soul, Rama! that the mind 
becomes a nihility, as the darkness becomes a zero before the light of the 
lamp. 


46. It is ignorance (of true knowledge), that mistakes the mind for the cause 
of creation, and recognizes it under its various denominations; such as of jiva 
(zeus) or the living soul, the internal organ, the mind, the thinking principle, 
and the thought (as they are stated in the Utpatti prakarana of this work). 


47. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, why are so many different appellations, 
heaped upon the only one thing of the mind, and deliver me from the 
confusion, which is caused by them in my mind. 


48. Vasishtha answered: — All these are but the various modes of the 
single substance of the soul, whose intellect displays these modalities; as the 
same substance of water, displays itself into the variety of its waves. 


49. The soul is a fluctuating principle, which inheres in all its 
modifications; as the fluidity of water, is inherent in the undulatory waves of 
the sea. 


50. The supreme soul is sometimes without its vibration, and remains 
stationary in all immovable things; as the water which presents its fluidity in 
the loose billows, shows also its inelasticity in the liquids which are at rest (as 
in water pots and bottles). 


51. Hence the stones and other immovable substances, remain at rest with 
their inherent spirit; but men and all animated nature, are as the foaming 
froths of the distilled liquor of the universal soul. 


52. The almighty power resides in all bodies, with the inertia of his spirit; 


which is known as the insensibility, dullness, or ignorance of inert bodies. 


53. The infinite soul being involved in that ignorance, takes the name of the 
living or animal soul; which is confined as an elephant, in the prison house of 
the delusion of this world. 


54. It is called jiva or living from its animation, and also as the ego from its 
egoism; it is termed the understanding from its power of discernment, and as 
the mind from its will or volition. 


55. It is called dull nature from its natural dullness, and also as body from 
its being embodied with many elementary principles; it is inert in its natural 
state, and sensible also from the essence of the soul imbrued in it. 


56. The spiritual substance which lies between the inert and active 
principles, is called the mind; and it passes under various designations, 
according to its different faculties and functions. 


57. This is the quiddity of the animating soul jiva, as given in the 
Brihadaranyaka and other upanishads; and there are many other definitions of 
it to be found, in the other works of Vedanta. 


58. But the unvedantic paralogists, have invented many other words over 
and above these, to designate the animal soul; and have thereby misled the 
ignorant to false beliefs, tending to their bewilderment only. 


59. Know thus, O long armed Rama! this animating soul to be the cause of 
creation, and not the dull and dumb body, which has not the power of moving 
itself, without being moved by some spiritual force. 


60. It happens many times, that the destruction (or ablation) of either the 
container or contained, causes the annihilation of both; so it is the case with 
the receptacle of the body and its content the soul, that the removal of the one 
leads to the dissolution of both. (But this means their decomposition and not 
their destruction, as neither of these is destroyed at once). 


61. The moisture of a leaf when dried, is neither wasted nor lost in air; but 
subducted from it to reside in the rays of the all-sucking sun. 


62. So the body being wasted, there is no waste of the embodied soul; 
which is borne to live in banishment from its former abode, and reside in the 
region of empty air or in the reservoir of the universal spirit. 


63. He who falls into the error of thinking himself as lost at the loss of his 
body, is like a baby, which is snatched away by a fairy from the breast of its 
mother. 


64. He who is thought to have his utter extinction, is said to rise again (by 
the resurrection of his soul); it is the abeyance of the mind which is called 
utter extinction and liberation of the soul. 


65. A person being dead, is said to be lost, — nashta; but this is entirely 
false and untrue; as one who being long absent from his country returns to it 
again; so the dead man revisits the earth, in his repeated transmigrations. 


66. Here men are borne away like straws and sticks by the current of death, 
to the vast ocean of eternity; and having disappeared as fruits from their 
nature, soil and season, appear in others and in other scenes. 


67. Living beings bounden to their desires, are led from one body to 
another in endless succession; as monkeys quit the decayed trees of the forest, 
in search of others elsewhere. 


68. They leave them again when they are worn out, and repair to others at 
distant times and climes. 


69. Living beings are hourly seen to be moving about, and led away by 
their insatiate desires from place to place; as restless infants are rocked and 
carried by their cunning nurses. 


70. Bound by the rope of desire, to the decayed trees of their infirm bodies, 
men are seen to drag their lives of labour, in search of their livings in this 
valley of misery. 


71. Men, though grown old and decrepit and loaded with misery, and 
though they are shattered in their bodies at the last stage of their life, are still 
dragged about by the inborn desires of their hearts, to be cast into hell pits, 
(both while alive and after their death). 


72. Valmiki said: — As the sage had said thus far, the sun sank down and 
bade the day to observe its evening rites. The assembly broke with mutual 
salutations, and all of them proceeded to their evening ablutions, until they 
met again after dispersion of the gloom of night, by the rising rays of the 
orient sun. 


CHAPTER LXXII. 
A Lecture on the Nature of Liberation. 


Argument. The subjection of the material body to sorrow and misery. 


Vasishtha continued: — You are not born with the birth of your body, nor are 
you dead with its death. You are the immaculate spirit in your soul, and your 
body is nobody to you. 


2. The analogy of the plum on a plate, and of vacuum in the pot, which is 
adduced to prove the loss of the one upon loss of the other, is a false paralogy; 
since neither the plum nor the vacuum is lost, by the breaking of the plate or 
pot. (So the soul is not lost at the dissolution of its containing body). 


3. Whoever having a body, thinks that he will perish with his perishable 
frame and is sorry for it, is verily blinded in his mind and is to be pitied for his 
mental blindness. (So said the Grecian philosopher, “it is no wonder that the 
mortal should die, and the fragile would be broken.”’) 


4. As there is no sympathy between the reins of a horse, and the riding 
chariot; so there is no relation between the organs of the body and the 
intellect. (This is in refutation of the argument, that the motion of a part 
affects the whole, as the shaking of the leaves and branches of a tree shaketh 
the trunk also; whereas the motion of body, makes no effect on the intellect). 


5. As there is no mutual relationship, between the mud and clear water of a 
tank; so, O Raghava! there is no correlation between the members of the body 
and the soul. 


6. As the traveller retains no love nor sorrow for the path he has passed 
over, and the journey he has made already; so the soul bears no affection nor 
disaffection, towards the body with which it sojourned and which it has left 
behind. (Though some departed ghosts, are said to hover over their dead 
bodies). 


7. As the imaginary ghost and fairy strike fear and love in some persons, so 
the ideal world inspires pleasure and pain in the mind of the idealist. 


8. It is the assemblage of the five elementary bodies, that has framed all 
these different forms of beings in the world; as it is the same wood, whereof 
various images are carved and made. 


9. As you see nothing but the woody substance in all timbers, so you find 
nothing except the assemblage of the five elements in all tangible bodies, (all 
of which are subject to change and dissolution.) 


10. Why, therefore, O Rama! should you rejoice or regret at anything, 
seeing that the quintuple elements are wont to have their own course, in 
joining and disjoining themselves in the formation and dissolution of bodies? 


11. Why should one be so fond of female forms, and the forms of all other 
beautiful things on earth? seeing that men run after them like flies, and then 
falling in fire only to consume themselves. (i.e., All goodly forms in the 
world, being for the delusion of men, we should avoid to look upon them). 


12. Good features and goodly shapes and figures, are delightsome to the 
ignorant; but to the wise they present their real figures of the combination of 
the five elements and no more. 


13. Two statues hewn from the same stone, and two figures carved of the 
self-same wood, bear no affection to one another, however they may be placed 
near to each other; so it is the case with the body and mind. (This sloka is also 
applied to the want of fraternal affection between brothers born of the same 
parents). 


14. As dolls made of clay and placed together in a basket, form no 
friendship by their long association with one another; so the understanding, 
the organs of sense, the soul and mind, though so closely united in the same 
body, bear no relation with one another. 


15. The marble statues, though so fair and closely kept in a mansion house, 
contract no acquaintance nor friendship with one another; so the organs of 
sense, the life, the soul and mind, though they are so sensible ones, and reside 
in the same body, have yet no alliance with one another. 


16. As things growing apart from one another, come to be joined together 
for an instant by some accident, like the reeds and rushes borne by the waves 
of the sea; so are all beings, as men and their bodily senses and mind and the 
soul, brought to meet together for a time only, in order to be separated 
forever. 


17. As reeds and rushes are joined in heaps, and again separated from one 
another by the current of the river; so the course of time joins the elements, 
the mind and soul in gross bodies, for their separation only. 


18. The soul in the form of the mind, unites the component parts of the 
body together; as the sea in the form of its eddies, rolls the reeds and rushes 
with its whirling waters up and down. 


19. The soul being awakened to its knowledge of itself, relinquishes its 
knowledge of objects, and becomes purely subjective in itself; as the water by 
its own motion, throws away its dirt and becomes as pure as crystal. 


20. The soul being released of its objective knowledge of the world, looks 
upon its own body, as celestial deities look upon this speck of earth below the 
region of air; (i.e., without concern). 


21. Seeing the elemental particles quite unconnected with the soul, it 
becomes disembodied as a pure spirit, and then shines forth in full brightness, 
like the blazing sun at mid-day. 


22. It then comes to itself by itself, as it were without any check or bounds 
set to it; and being then set free from the giddiness of the objective, it sees 
itself subjectively in its own consciousness, (as an immeasurable and 
boundless space). 


23. It is the soul which agitates the world, rising of its own essence; as the 
agitation of the particles of water, raises the waves raging all over the wide 
extent of the sea. (The soul is the source and spring of the motion of all 
bodies). 


24. Thus the dispassionate and sinless men of great understanding, who 
have obtained their self-liberation in this life, move about as freely, as the 
waves in the great ocean of the all-comprehending soul. 


25. As the waves move freely in the sea, and pour the gems and pearls 
which they bear over distant shores; so the best of men rove everywhere free 
of all desire, but enriching mankind with the treasure of their knowledge. 


26. As the sea is not soiled by the floating woods it carries from the shore, 
nor the face of the sky by the flying dust of the earth; so men of great minds 
and souls, are not perverted by their conduct with the world. (Or, worldly 
conduct). 


27. Those that are masters of themselves, are not moved to love or hatred in 
their behaviour with their comers or goers, or with those that are steady or 
fickle in their friendship, and with such as are vicious and ignorant. 


28. Because they know that whatever passes in the mind relating to worldly 
matters, are all its vagaries and reveries of thought which are but airy nothing. 


29. The knowledge of one’s self and of other things belonging to the past, 


present and future times, and the relation of the visibles with the sense of 
vision, are all the workings of the mind. 


30. The visibles depending upon sight only, may be false from the fallacy 
or deception of our vision; and our vision of them likening an apparition in 
darkness, it is in vain that we are glad or sorry at their sight or disappearance. 


31. What is unreal is always unreal (and can never be a reality); and what is 
real is ever the same (and can never be an unreality); but that which is real and 
unreal at the same or different times, must be a false appearance, and not 
deserving our rejoicing or sorrowing at their presence or absence. 


32. Refrain from a partial, (i.e., superficial or one-sided) view of things, 
and employ yourself to the full (or comprehensive) knowledge of objects; and 
know that the learned man of vast knowledge, never falls into the erroneous 
conceptions of things. 


33. I have fully expounded the relation of the visibles and their vision, and 
shown the spiritual pleasure which is derivable from the contemplation of the 
abstract relation subsisting between them. 


34. The abstract meditation of things is said to be a divine attribute (or 
Platonism of the mind); and our consciousness of the relations of vision and 
visibles, afford the highest delight to the soul. 


35. The consideration of the relation of the visibles and vision, affords the 
physical delight of knowing the material world to the ignorant; and it gives 
also the spiritual joy of liberation to the wise (by their contemplation of the 
vanity of all worldly things). 


36. Hence the attachment of our mind to the visibles, is called its bondage; 
and its detachment from them, is said to be its freedom; the former is pleasant 
to the sensuous body, and the latter is delightsome to the conscious soul. 


37. The mind having the notions of the relations of things before it, and 
freed from the thoughts of its loss and gain in this world, is said to enjoy its 
freedom. 


38. Abstaining from the sight of the visibles, constitutes the hypnotic vision 
of the soul, which is enlarged and illumined by its inward vision within itself. 


39. Release from the bondage of the visibles, and restraining the mind to its 
inward workings, constitute its turiya or fourth stage of perfection, which is 
also termed its liberation. 


40. The knowledge of the relations of the visibles in the conscious soul, 
neither makes it stout or lean, nor more manifest nor obscure in its nature. 


41. It is neither intelligent nor inert, nor a being nor not being; it is neither 
the ego nor non-ego, nor an unit nor many in one. 


42. It is not near nor even far from us, nor is it an entity nor non-entity 
either; it is neither within nor without our reach; it is in all yet not the all and 


nothing at all. 7 cu a dated | 


43. It is none of the categories nor no category, nor is it the quintuple 
elements nor composed of any one of them; it is not the well known mind, 
which is reckoned as the sixth organ of sense. 


44. That which is beyond all things, is nothing at all of this world; but it is 
something as it is known and seen in the hearts of the wise. 


45. All the world is full of the soul, and there is nothing which is without 
and beyond it. It is in all that is solid or soft or liquid, and in all motions 
which proceed from it. 


46. The soul is all in all things, which are composed of the five elements of 
earth, water, air, fire and vacuum; and there is nothing, O Rama! that has its 
existence without the essence of the soul. 


47. This single soul is diffused in all the worlds and throughout all the parts 
of space and time, there is no fragment of anything without the soul; 
therefore, keep thy mind fixed in the universal soul, if thou wilt have a great 
soul in thee. 


CHAPTER LXXIII. 
Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul. 


Argument. Two kinds of Ego, the one commendable and another 
Reprehensible Egoism; the abandonment of which is tantamount to 
Liberation. 


Vasishtha continued: — It is by reasoning in this manner, and renouncing the 
knowledge of duality, that the gnostic comes to know the nature of his soul; as 
the gods know the Divine nature which is the gem of their meditation, — 
Chintdmani. 


2. Now hear about this surpassing sight, which is the soul or in-being of all 
visible beings; and by sight of which you will have the keen sightedness of the 
gods, to get into the sight of the Divinity. 


3. Think yourself as the light of sun, and vacuum with all its ten sides and 
the upper and lower regions of space; and that your soul is the soul of gods 
and demi-gods, and the light of all luminous bodies. 


4. Know yourself as darkness and the clouds, the earth and seas; and the air 
and fire and dust of the earth, and as the whole world, to be combined in thee. 


5. That you are everywhere in all the three worlds together with the soul 
abiding in them; and that you are no other than the unity itself; nor is there 
any duality of anybody, apart from the unity which pervades the whole. 


6. Being certain of this truth, you will see the innumerable worlds situated 
in thy internal soul; and by this means you will escape from being subjected 
to, or overcome by the joys and sorrows of life. 


7. Say, O lotus-eyed Rama! how can you call one as connected with or 
separate from you, when you know the whole world together with yourself, to 
be contained in the all-containing universal soul. 


8. Say, do the wise live beside that being, that they should give way to joy 
or grief, which are the two phases of the universal soul? (The unwise who 


think themselves other than the one, may be affected by such changes). 


9. There are two kinds of egoisms growing out of the knowledge of truth, 
and both of these are good and pure in their natures, and productive of 
spirituality and liberation of men. 


10. The one is the ego of the form of a minute particle, transcending all 
things in its minuteness; and the other is the ego of one’s self. The first is that 
the one ego is all, and the second is the knowledge, that my or thy ego is the 
same one. 


11. There is a third sort of egoism amounting to the non-ego, which takes 
the body for the ego, and thus becomes subject to misery, and finds no rest in 
this life nor in the next. 


12. Now leaving all these three kinds of subjective, objective and non- 
egoisms; he who holds fast the fourth sort, — non-ego, sees the sole intellect 
beyond these three. 


13. This essence being above all and beyond the reach of all existence, is 
still the manifesting soul of the unreal world. 


14. Look into it in thy notion of it, and thou shall find thyself assimilated to 
it; and then get rid of all thy desires and ties of thy heart herein, and become 
full of divine knowledge. 


15. The soul is neither known by any logical inference, nor from the light 
the revelations of the vedas; it is always best and most fully known to be 
present with us by our notion of it. 


16. All the sensations and vibrations that we have in our bodies, and all the 
thoughts we are conscious of in our minds, are all affections of the sovereign 
soul, which is beyond our vision and the visibles. (Invisible yet best seen in all 
its works and workings in us). 


17. This Lord is no real substance, nor an unreal non-entity; He is not a 
minutiae nor a vast massiveness neither; He is not in the midst of these 
dimensions, nor is he this or that, but is always as he is. (I am that I am; says 
the Revelation). 


18. It is improper to tell him such and such, or that he is otherwise than this 
or that; know him, therefore, as the inexpressible and undefinable one. 


19. To say this is the soul and not the soul, is only a verbal difference of 
what no words can express or differentiate; it is the omnipresent power to 
which the soul is attributed. 


20. It is present in all places, and comprehends the three times of the past, 
present and future in itself; and is yet invisible and incomprehensible to us, 
owing to its extreme rarity and immensity. 


21. The soul residing in the infinity of substances, reflects itself as the 
living soul in animated bodies, as the sun-light reflects its rays in a prismatic 
glass. 


22. It is owing to the animating power of the soul, that we have some 
notion of the soul, (which no inanimate being can ever have). The soul, 
though pervading all things, is most manifest in living bodies, as the air which 
surrounds all bodies everywhere, circulates only in the open ethereal space. 


23. The intellectual soul is all pervading and ubiquious, and never 
stationary in any place (as in the ideal heaven or empyrian of some sects); the 
spirit of the Lord is co-extensive with the vast range of his creation. 


24. But the animating soul of living beings does not breathe in minerals but 
in animals only; as the light enlightens the eye only, and the dust flies with the 
winds. 


25. When the animating principle resides in the soul, it bursts forth with all 
its desires; as people pursue their callings when the sun has risen above the 
horizon. (i.e., All desires are concomitant with the living soul and not with 
lifeless beings, as all actions are attendant upon the waking world, and not 
upon the sleeping). 


26. But as it is nothing to the sun, if people should cease from their 
activities, when he is shining above their heads; so it is nothing to the 
intellect, whether men be without their desires and actions, while it resides in 
the soul. 


27. If the soul is existent by the inherence of the Lord (Intellect) in it, it 
suffers no loss by the absence of the frail body from it. (There is a Divinity 
that acts within us, and is deathless at the death of the body). 


28. The soul is not born nor does it die, it neither receiveth nor desireth 
anything; it is not restrained nor liberated; but it is the soul of all at all times. 


29. The soul is awakened by its enlightenment, or else the soul is supposed 
in what is no soul for our misery only; as the supposition of a snake in a rope, 
leads to our error and fear. 


30. Being without its beginning, it is never born, and being unborn it is 
never destroyed; it seeks nothing save itself for lack of anything besides. 


31. The soul being unbounded by time and space, is never confined in any 


place; and being always unconfined, it requires no liberation. 


32. Such, O Rama! are the qualities of the souls of all persons; and yet the 
ignorant deplore for its loss from their want of reason. 


33. Look thoroughly, O Rama! into the course of all things in the world; 
and do not lament for anything like senseless men. 


34. Abandon the thoughts of both your imaginary confinement and 
liberation; and behave yourself as wise men like a dumb self-moving 
machine. 


35. Liberation is a thing neither confined in this earth or in heaven above or 
pdtdla below; but resides in the hearts of the wise, in their pure souls and 
enlightened understandings. 


36. The tenuity of the mind, by its expurgation from gross desires, is said to 
be its liberation by them that know the truth, and look into the workings of 
their souls. 


37. As long as the pure light of the intellect does not shine forth in the 
sphere of the mind, so long does it long for liberation as its chief good. 
Liberation or freedom from all feelings, is less meritorious than the 
knowledge of all things. Here the sage gives preference to knowledge, 
(jndna), above liberation, (moksha). 


38. After the mind has got the fulness of its intellectual powers, and the 
intellect has been fully enlightened; it would not care for all the tenfold 
blessings of liberation, and far less desire its salvation also. 


39. Cease, O Rama, to think about the distinctions of the bondage and 
liberation of the soul; and believe its essence to be exempted from both. 


40. So be freed from your thoughts of the duality (of worldly bondage and 
liberty), and remain steadfast to your duty of ruling the earth to its utmost 
limit of the sea, dug by the sons of Sagara, (now called Sagara or the Bay of 
Bengal). 


CHAPTER LXXIV. 
Lecture on Apathy or Stoicism. 


Argument. Error is the cause of the misconception of the World, and Right 
Reason is the means of deliverance from it. 


Vasishtha continued: — It is a pleasure to look at the outer world, and painful 
to turn the sight to the inner soul; as it is pleasant to see the delightful 
prospects abroad, and bitterness of the heart to be without them. (All men 
court pleasure, but fly from pain). 


2. It is by the fascination of these delightsome objects, that we are 
subjected to all our errors and blunders; as the taste of spirituous liquors, fills 
the brain with giddiness. 


3. It is this intoxication, that drives the knowledge of sober truth from our 
minds, and introduces the delirium of the phenomenal world in its stead; as 
the heat of the sun (like the heat of the brain), produces the false mirage in the 
desert. 


4. It is then that the deep ocean of the soul boils in its various aspects of the 
mind, understanding, egoism, sensation and volition; as the sea when moved 
by the hot winds, bursts in the forms of foaming froths, waves and surges. 


5. The duality of the mind and its egoism, is only a verbal distinction and 
not distinct in reality; for egoism is but a thought, chitta, and the thought is no 
other than the mind or manas. 


6. As it is in vain to conceive the snow apart from its whiteness, so it is 
false to suppose the mind as distinct from egoism (because the ego is a 
conception of the mind only). 


7. There is no difference of the ego from the mind, as the destruction of the 
one is attended with the loss of the other also; just as the removal of the cloth, 
is accompanied with the absence of its colour also. (Egoism is said to be the 
son of the mind, and the one dies without the other). 


8. Avoid both your desire of liberation, as also your eagerness for worldly 
bondage; but strive to enfeeble your mind by lessening its egoism, by the two 
means of your indifference to and discrimination of worldly objects. (i.e., 
Neither seek the world nor hate it, but remain as an indifferent spectator of 
everything). 


9. The thought of getting liberation, growing big in the mind, disturbs its 
peace and rest, and injures the body also (by a rigid observance of the 
austerities necessary for liberation). 


10. The soul being either apart from all things, or intimately connected with 
all, can neither have its liberation nor bondage also (when it is already so 
separate from, as well as united with everything in the world). 


11. When the air circulates in the body, by its natural property of motion, it 
gives movement to the members of the body, and moves the voluble tongue, 
like the flitting leaf of a tree. 


12. As the restless wind, gives motion to the leaves and twigs of trees; so 
the vital airs add their force to the movement of the members of the body. 


13. But the soul which pervades the whole, never moveth like the wind, nor 
is it moved as any part of the body; it does not move of itself, but remains 
unshaken as a rock at the motion of the winds, and like the Lord of all, it is 
unmoved by the breeze. 


14. The soul shows by its reflexion, all things that are hid in it; as the lamp 
discovers by its light, whatever lay concealed in the darkness of the room. 


15. It being so, (but a counterfeit copy), why should you fall into the 
painful error of conceiving like the ignorant and senseless men, that these 
members of your body and these things belong to you? 


16. Thus infatuated by ignorance, men think the frail body as lasting, and 
attribute knowledge and agency of action to it (which in reality belong to the 
soul). 


17. It is gross error only, that makes us believe the body as an automaton, 
or self-acting machine of its motions, actions and passions; and it is our 
sanguine wishes only, that present so many false views before us, as the solar 
heat, raises the mirage of water in the sandy desert. 


18. It is this ignorance of truth, which makes the mind to pant after the 
pleasures of sense; and drags it along like a thirsty doe, to perish in the 
aqueous mirage of the parching shore. 


19. But untruth being detected from truth, it flies from the mind, as a 


chandéla woman when once known she comes to be as such, flies afar from 
the society of Brahmans. 


20. So when error comes to be found out, it can no more beguile the mind 
than the mirage, (when it is discovered as such), fails to attract the thirsty to it. 


21. Rama! as truth is known and rooted in the mind, the seeds of earthly 
desires are uprooted from it, as thick darkness is dispelled by the light of a 
lamp. 


22. As the mind arrives to certain truths, by the light of the Sdstras and 
reason; so its errors fastly fade away like icicles, melting under the heat of the 
solar rays. 


23. The certainty of the moral truth, that, ‘it is useless to foster and fatten 
this frail frame of the body,’ is as powerful to break down the trammels of 
worldly desires, as the robust lion is capable to break down the iron grate of 
his prison. 


24. The mind of man being freed from the bonds of its desires, becomes as 
brilliant as the moonlight night, with the pure beams of disinterested delight. 


25. The contented mind gets a coolness like that of a heated rock, after it is 
washed by a shower of rain; and it finds a satisfaction equal to that of a 
pauper, by his getting the riches of a king and his whole kingdom. 


26. The countenance of the contented man, shines as clear as the face of the 
autumnal sky; and his soul overflows with delight, like the deluvial waters of 
the deep. 


27. The contented man is as silent as the mute cloud after the rain; and his 
soul remains as composed with its consciousness, as the profound sea is 
tranquil with its fulness. 


28. He has his patience and steadiness like those of a rock, and he glistens 
as quietly in himself, as the glowing fire glitters after its fuel is burnt out. 


29. He is extinct in himself as the extinguished lamp; and has his inward 
satisfaction as one who has feasted on ambrosia. 


30. He shines with his inward light like a lantern with its lighted lamp; and 
as fire with its internal lustre, which can never be put out. 


31. He sees his soul, as identic with the universal and all-pervading soul; 
which is the lord and master of all, and which abides in all forms in its 
formless state. 


32. He smiles at everything, by his setting himself above and beyond all 


mortal and frail things; his days glide away sweetly and softly with him; and 
he laughs at those men, whose fickle minds are made the marks of cupid’s 
arrows. 


33. His holy mind is isolated from the society of men, and from all their 
amusements; and rests secluded from all company and concern, with the 
fulness of its spiritual bliss within itself. 


34. It gets clear of the turbid and turbulent ocean of this world, and is quite 
cleared of the dirt of worldly desires; it is loosened from the fetters of its 
error, and set free from the fear of dualism. 


35. The man being thus released, attains the highest state of humanity, and 
rests in that supreme felicity, which is desired by all and found by few, and 
from which nobody returns to revisit the earth. 


36. This height of human ambition being arrived at, there is nothing else to 
wish for; and this great gratification being once gained, there is no other joy 
which can delight us more. 


37. The self-contented man, neither gives to nor receives anything from 
anybody; he neither praises nor dispraises any one, nor does he rejoice or 
grieve at anything, nor is he ever elated nor depressed at any occurrence. 


38. He is said to be liberated in his life-time, for his taking no title on 
himself, and withholding from all business; as also for his being free from 
desires (which bind a man fast to this earth). 


39. Abstain from wishing anything in your heart, and hold your tongue in 
tacit silence; and remain as dumb as a cloud after it has poured down all its 
waters. 


40. Even the embrace of a fairy fails to afford such delight to the body, as 
the cooling beams of contentment gladdens the mind. 


41. Though decked with the disk of the moon, dangling as a breast plate 
from the neck, one does not derive such coolness, as he feels in himself from 
the frigidity of contentment, — sang froid. 


42. The florid arboret decorated with the blooming florets of the vernal 
season, is not so refreshing to sight, as the smiling countenance of one, 
fraught with the magnanimity of his soul, and want of cupidity in his mind. 


43. Neither the frost of the snowy mountain, nor the coldness of a string of 
pearls, not even the gelidness of the plantain or sandal paste, or the refreshing 
beams of the lightsome moon, can afford that internal coolness, as the want of 
appetency produces in the mind. 


44. Contentedness or inappetency of everything, is more charming than the 
pleasurableness of royal dignity and heavenly felicity, and the pleasantness of 
moonlight and vernal delights. It is more charming than the enchanting graces 
of a beauty, (which ravish the senses and not the soul). 


45. Inappetence is the source of that complete self-sufficiency, to which the 
riches of the three worlds can make no addition. (Lit. It cares not a straw (or a 
fig) for all the prosperity of the world). 


46. Self-complacency strikes the axe at the root of the thorny difficulties of 
the world; and decorates its possessor with blessings like the blossoms of a 
flowery tree. 


47. The man decorated with inappetency (or self-sufficiency), has all in 
himself though possessed of nothing. He spurns the deep earth as a cave, and 
the big mountain as the trifling trunk of a tree. He looks on all the sides of air 
as mere caskets, and regards the worlds as straws. 


48. The best of men that are devoid of desire, laughs to scorn at the busy 
affairs of the world, and at men taking from one and giving to another, or 
storing or squandering their riches. 


49. That man is beyond all comparison, who allows no desire to take root 
in his heart, and does not care a fig or a straw for the world. 


50. Wherewith is that man to be compared, whose mind is never employed 
in the thoughts of craving something and avoiding another, and who is ever 
master of himself? 


51. O ye wise and intelligent men! rely on the want of cravings of your 
heart, which is your greatest good fortune, by setting you to the bliss of safety 
and security, and beyond the reach of the dangers and difficulties of the world. 


52. Rama! you have nothing to desire in this world, nor are you led away 
by worldly desires, like one who is borne in a car, and thinks that his side- 
views are receding back from him. 


53. O intelligent Rama! why do you fall into the error of ignorant men, by 
taking this thing to be yours and that as another’s by the delusion of your 
mind? (For all things are the Lord God’s for ever more, and mortal men are 
but the poor pensioners of a day). 


54. The whole world is the self-same spirit, and all its variety is in perfect 
uniformity with the supreme soul; the learned know that the world is eternally 
the same and unvaried in itself, and do not grieve at the apparent changes of 
things and vicissitudes of times. 


55. Seeing all things in their true light, to be a manifestation of the divine 
essence; all intelligent men place their dependance in Him, (as the support and 
substance of all), and do not desire for anything else. 


56. Rely, therefore, on that invariable state of things, which is free from the 
conditions of existence and inexistence and of beginning and end, (and this is 
the everlasting essence of God which fills the whole). 


57. This illusive enchantment of the world flies afar before the indifference 
of strong-minded men; as the timid fawn flies off at the sight of the ferocious 
lion. 


58. Men of subdued passions and sedate minds, regard the graces of fairy 
forms, to be no more than the loveliness of wild creepers, or the fading beauty 
of dilapidated statues of stone. 


59. No pleasures gladden their hearts nor dangers depress their spirits; no 
outward good or bad can make any effect on their minds, which are as 
inflexible as the firm rocks against the violence of winds. 


60. The mind of the magnanimous sage, is as impregnable as a rock, which 
baffles the blandishments of youthful damsels, and breaks the darts of love to 
pieces, and falling down as pulverised atoms of dust and ashes. 


61. One knowing his self, is not carried away by his fondness or aversion 
of any person or thing; because the heart which has no vibration in it, is 
insensible of all feelings. 


62. The dispassionate man who looks on all things with an equal eye, is as 
insensible as a stone of the charms of blooming maids; and is as averse to 
pernicious pleasures as a traveller is to the sandy desert. 


63. All things necessary for life, are obtained with little labour of those, 
who are indifferently minded about their gain; and the wise get the free gifts 
of nature, with as much ease as the eye sight gets the solar light. (Nature’s 
bounties of air and light and of water and vegetable food, which are essential 
to life, are denied to nobody). 


64. The gifts of nature, which are alloted by fortune to the share of every 
one, are relished by the wise without their rejoicing or murmur. 


65. Neither rejoicing nor bewilderment, can overtake the mind of the way- 
farer, who well knows his way (and is aware of the states of its stages); but he 
stands firm as the Mandara mountain, amidst the turbulent waves of the sea. 


66. He looks indifferently on the pains and pleasures of the world, with his 
usual patience, taciturnity and want of anxiety; and relies his trust in that 


spirit, which resides in the interior of everybody. 


67. Though beset by anxious cares, he remains without the anxiety of his 
mind; and stands steadfast with his confidence in the supreme soul, like 
Brahma in his hurry of the creation of the world. 


68. Though overtaken by the accidents of the times, places, and 
circumstances of life, yet he is not overpowered by the influence of their pain 
or pleasure; but stands erect as the sturdy oak against the influence of the 
seasons. 


69. The wise may fail in the action of their bodily organs, and falter in their 
speech also; but their strong and unconcerned minds never fail in their 
operations, nor despond under the pressure of outward circumstances. 


70. The gold becomes impure by its inward alloy, and not by its outward 
soil; so a man becomes unholy by the impurity of heart and foulness of his 
mind, and not on account of the dust or dirt on his body. 


71. The learned understand the wise man apart from his body; because the 
maimed body does not take away anything from the wisdom of a man. 


72. The pure and luminous soul being once known, is never to be lost sight 
of, as a friend being once known, is never thought to be a foe. 


73. The fallacy of the snake in the rope, being once-removed, it is no more 
looked upon as a snake; as the river receiving its torrents from the water-fall 
of a hill in the rainy season, retains no more its current after the rains have 
passed. 


74. Gold though purified by fire, does not retain its purity forever; for it 
becomes dirty by being thrown into the mud and mire. 


75. After the heart string has been broken, it can never be joined anymore; 
as the first that has fallen down from its stalk, can be stuck to it no more. 


76. As no analysis can distinguish the gem from the ore, when they are 
both broken to pieces; so there is no reasoning to show the soul which is lost 
with body. 


77. Who that knows what error is, will be so great a fool as to fall to it 
again? As none that has known a body of men to be the pariah chandalas, will 
ever like to mix in their company. 


78. As the mistake of milk in water, passes away upon examination of the 
liquid; so the error of worldly desires, vanishes upon knowledge of their 
vanity. 


79. Even learned Brahmans may fall into the error of drinking some liquor 
for pure water; until they come to detect their mistake of the same. (So the 
wise are deluded to error, by their mistake of the same). 


80. Those who are acquainted with truth, took upon fairy forms and 
features in no better light than as paintings and pictures with respect to their 
outward bodies. 


81. The sable locks and crimson lips of the fairy, are portrayed as in black 
and red in a picture; so there is no difference of the figure in its living form or 
in painting. 


82. The idea of sweetness which is accompanied with that of molasses, is 
not to be separated in the mind even by its separation from the body; in the 
same manner the idea of bliss is inseparably accompanied with that of the 
soul, which is indestructible by the destruction of the body. 


83. Spiritual felicity may be enjoyed in this corporeal body, in the same 
manner, as one enjoys the pleasure of imagination, while he is occupied with 
his bodily functions. 


84. Thus a man who is steadfast in his spiritual meditation, and intent upon 
the supreme soul, is not to be turned away from it by the power of the gods, or 
by the jealousy of Indra (for the preservation of his dignity, from its being 
superceded by an austere devotee). 


85. As there is no lover of a licentious woman, that can turn her heart from 
the dearest object of her love; so there is nothing in the world that can alienate 
the fickle mind, from its love of spiritual joy. 


86. There is no such joy in the whole world, which is able to divert the 
mind of the magnanimous philosopher, from its reliance on the delight of 
intellectual light. 


87. As a domiciled woman who is subject to all domestic toils and 
privations, and is constantly employed in her household drudgeries, and 
subjected to maltreatment under the subjection of her husband and father-in- 
law: — 


88. Has still the comfort of thinking on her sweet heart, and dissipate her 
sorrows with the thought of her favourite lover; such is the mystic love of 
Spiritualists (as that of Persian Mystic poets). 


89. So the man who is bound to the cares of worldly affairs, has the 
consolation of his soul and spiritual bliss, by freeing his mind from ignorance, 
and conducting himself in the right way, by his comprehensive view of all 


things. (The worldly man may have the blessing of spiritualism). 


90. He does not break under his bodily torture, nor does he wail with his 
bleeding heart and weeping eyes; he is not burnt by the flame of his 
martyrdom, nor does he die when perishing under the scourge of the stake and 
stock of persecution. (As the crucifixion of Mandavy did not alter the tenor of 
his mind. — Gloss. Nor the unity of Mansur belief was changed by the 
cruciating pains of the cross. So says Hafiz. — Kashad magshe Ana-al Haq 
bar Zamin Khun; cho Mansur ar Kuni bar daram imshab). 


91. The mind is free from the pain and pleasure which befall to the lot of 
humanity, and is unmoved amidst all the mishaps of fortune. The devotee 
rejoices in the region of his spiritual bliss, whether he remains in his 
hermitage in the forest, or wanders about in deserts, or ranges wide over 
mountains. 


CHAPTER LXXV 
On Mancipation and Emancipation. 


Argument. Instances of the Enfranchisement of many great Examplars in 
Active Life among gods and men. 


Vasishtha continued: — See, Janaka the king employed in the government of 
his realm, and yet liberated in his lifetime from his bondage in the world; by 
means of his mental release from all its cares and anxieties. 


2. Remember your grandsire Dilipa, who though deeply engaged in his 
state affairs, had yet enjoyed his long and peaceful reign, owing to the 
dispassionateness of his disposition; (which is tantamount to self-liberation). 


3. Think of Buddha who ruled over his people, freed from all his passions 
and affections; and bring to your mind, how Manu ruled over in peace, his 
realm and who was as an exemplar of liberation in his lifetime. 


4. Remember how the monarch Mandhata, had obtained the blessed state of 
his affranchisement; though he was incessantly engaged in various warfares 
and state affairs. 


5. Think of Bali, who while he was confined in the infernal region, 
conducted himself in his virtuous course, and became liberated in his lifetime, 
by his unbounded bounty and want of attachment to the world. 


6. Namuchi, the lord of Ddnavas, who carried continued wars and 
contentions against the gods, was notwithstanding cool and quiet in his mind 
(which bespoke his freedom from earthly broils and bondage). 


7. Vritra the Asura, who fell in his battle with the god Indra, was however, 
of a great and calmly quiet mind, as long as he fought with him. (Vritra the 
Assyrian, called Vihithru in Zend, was killed by Indra the Aryan). 


8. Prahlada the prince of the Daityas, dwelling in the demoniac world 
underneath the ground, dispensed his dispensations to them with an unruffled 
and gladsome mind; (and this want of perturbation, is tantamount to the 


deliverance of the mind from the fetters of earthly broils). 


9. Sambara the demon, who was a sorcerer in warfare, was as cool blooded 
as water in his heart; whereby he was delivered from the sorcery of the world, 
as a fleet deer flying from the dart. (Here is a play upon the word Sambara, 
which is repeated four times without their different meanings being given in 
the gloss). 


10. The demon Kusala also, whose mind was not fettered to the world, 
waged an unprofitable war against Vishnu; from whom he obtained his 
spiritual knowledge, and his deliverance from this temporary scene. 


11. Look at fire how free and uncompressed it is, while it answers for the 
mouth of gods, and serves to intromit for them the oblations that are offered to 
it, and perform the endless works of fusion for them. (The evanescent fire is 
said to be the mouth of the gods, because the primeval Aryans represented as 
gods, had long learnt to take boiled food cooked on fire, before the raw flesh 
eaters of the Turanian tribes. The yajniya oblations stand for all sorts of daily 
consecrated food of the panchayajnas. The endless works of fire allude to the 
vulcanian arts first, discovered by the Aryans). 


12. See the gods drinking the juice of Soma plants, and presiding over the 
endless functions of the world; are ever as free as air, (neither to be seen nor 
touched by anybody). 


13. Jupiter, the leader of the gods, and Moon the pursuer of his wife 
Rohini, have been continually performing their revolutions without changing 
their places in heaven; and so the other planets also. 


14. Sukra-(Venus) the learned preceptor of the Asura demons, shines in the 
same manner in the heavenly sphere, and runs in his unvaried course, of 
protecting the interests of the Asuras. 


15. See also the winds to be flying freely at all times, and through all the 
worlds, with their charge of enlivening and giving motion to all bodies. 


16. See Brahma continuing in the same unchangeable state of his mind, and 
giving life and velocity to all beings, which have been thereby continually 
moving about in the world. 


17. The lord Hari, though ever liberated from every bond, has been 
continually employed in his contests and combats with the Asuras as if in 
sport. 


18. The three-eyed god Siva, though ever freed from all concerns, is joined 
in one body with his dearer half, the beauteous Gauri, in the manner of a lover 


enamoured of his beloved one. 


19. The fair Hara thou ever free, is bound to the embrace of his fairy Gauri, 
and was as a crescent of the fair moon, or as a lace of pure pearls about her 
neck. 


20. The heroic Skanda who was of vast understanding, and like a sea of the 
gems of his learning, and perfectly free (as the sole lord of the world), made 
war with Taraka (Darius?) of his free will. (This passage plainly shows them 
to be Alexander and Darius of history). 


21. Mark how Bhringf the attendant of Siva, was absorbed in his 
meditation, and thinking himself to be freed from the burden of his body, 
made a free offering of his blood and flesh to his goddess Gauri. 


22. The sage Narada, who was of a liberated nature from his very birth, and 
resigned the world and all its concerns altogether, was still engaged in many 
affairs with his cool understanding. 


23. The honourable Viswamitra who is now present here, is liberated in his 
life-time, and yet he does not slight to preside at sacrifices, solemnized 
according to the ritual of the sacred veda. 


24. The infernal snake bears the earth on its head, and the sun makes the 
day by turns; the god of death is ever employed in his act of destruction, and 
still they are all free agents of their acts. 


25. There are many others among the Yakkas, Suras and Asuras of the 
world, who are all liberated in their life time, and still employed in their 
respective employments. 


26. What numbers of them are employed in worldly affairs, and how many 
more are engaged in different courses of life; and still, they are cold blooded 
and cool headed within themselves, and as still and quiet as cold stones 
without. 


27. Some attaining the acme of their understanding, have retired to 
solitude, to pass their lives in abstract meditation; and among these are the 
venerable Bhrigu and Bharadvaja, Sukra and Viswamitra, (who were not less 
serviceable to mankind by many of their acts and works). 


28. Many among mankind were rulers of their realms, and held the exalted 
canopy and chouri and other ensigns of royalty on their heads, and were not 
less distinguished for the piety and spirituality at the same time. Among these, 
the conduct of the royal personages Janaka, Saryali and Mandhatrf, stand 
preeminent above the rest. 


29. Some among the living-liberated, are situated in the planetary spheres, 
and are thence adored by their devotees for their blessings on the world. Of 
these Jupiter and Venus, the Sun and Moon, are the deities of gods, demons 
and human kind. 


30. Some among the deities, are seated in their heavenly vehicles, and 
continually ministering to the wants of all created beings, as the regents of 
fire, air, water, and death and Tumbura and Narada. 


31. Some situated in the secluded regions of Patala, are equally 
distinguished both for their holiness and piety; such as Vali, Subotra, Andha, 
Prahlada and others. 


32. Among beasts of the field and fowls of the air, and inferior animals, you 
will find many intelligent beings, as the bird Garuda, (Jove’s eagle), and the 
monkey Hanumana, (the god Pan), Jambubdana, etc.; and among the demi- 
gods there are some that are sapient, and others as muddle headed as beasts. 


33. Thus it is possible for the universal soul that resides everywhere, and is 
at all times the same, to show itself in any form in any being according to its 
will (since it is all in all). 


34. It is the multifarious law of His eternal decree, and the manifold display 
of His infinite power, that invests all things with multiform shapes and diverse 
capacities, as they appear to us. 


35. This law of divine decree is the lord of all, and embodies in itself the 
creative, preservative and destructive powers under the titles of Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva. These names are indicative of the intelligent faculties of the 
universal soul. 


36. It is not impossible for the supreme soul to reside in all bodies in any 
manners it likes; it presides sometimes in the manner of the grains of pure 
gold, amidst worthless sands and dust; and at others as the mixture of some 
base metal in pure gold. 


37. Seeing some good connected with or resulting from evil, our 
inclinations would lead us even to the evil (in expectation of reaping the 
good); were it not for fear of the sinfulness of the act and its consequent 
punishment, that we are deterred from doing it. (.e., Human nature is addicted 
to vice, but fear of sin and its punishment, leads us to virtue. Had there been 
no such thing, we would all become vicious). 


38. We see sometimes something substantial arising from the unsubstantial, 
as we arrive to the substantial good of divine presence, by means of the 
unsubstantial meditation of his negative attributes; that he is neither this nor 


that nor such and such; (neti-neti-iti sruti). 


39. What never existed before, comes to existence at some time or place 
unknown to us; as the horns of a hare which are never to be seen in nature, are 
shown to us in magic play, and by the black art of sorcery. 


40. Those which are seen to exist firm and solid as adamant, become null 
and void and disperse in air; as the sun and moon, the earth and mountains, 
and the god-like people of the antedeluvian world. 


41. Seeing these changes in the state of things, you must give up, O mighty 
armed Rama! your joy and grief on any occasion, and preserve the equanimity 
of your mind at all times. 


42. The unreal (material existence) seems as real, and the sober reality (of 
spiritual essence), appears as a non-entity in nature; resign, therefore, your 
reliance in this deceitful world, and preserve the equanimity of your mind 
under all circumstances. 


43. It is true that you gain nothing by your resignation of the world; and it 
is equally true on the other hand, that you lose nothing by your getting rid of 
its unrealities by yourself. 


44. But it is true, O Rama! that you gain a certain good by your getting rid 
of this world; and it is your riddance from the manifold evils and mischances, 
which are unavoidable concommittants with this life. 


45. Again you obtain the certain gain of your salvation, by your resignation 
of the world, which you can never earn by your attachment to it. Therefore, 
strive for your liberation by purging your mind from its attachments to the 
world. 


46. He who wishes for his prosperity, must take the pains to have an insight 
of his soul; because a single glimpse of the soul, is sure to cut off all the pains 
and pangs of the world from their root. 


47. There are many dispassionate and disconnected men, even in the 
present age, who are liberated in their lifetime, like the sacrificial king Janaka 
and others. 


48. So you too are liberated for life, for your having an unpassionate and 
unprejudiced mind, and may manage to conduct yourself with your tolerant 
spirit, like the patient earth, stone and moveless metals. 


49. There are two kinds of liberation for living beings, viz.: — one in their 
present life and body, and the other after separation of life from the body, both 
of which admit of some varieties as you will bear afterwards. 


50. First of all, the peace of mind, from its unconcernedness with 
everything is termed its liberation; and it is possible to be had by the sinless 
man either in this life or in the next. 


51. Lessening of affections is fraught with the bliss of soliety, (Kaivalya), 
and it is possible to become impassible both in the embodied as will as 
disembodied states of life. 


52. He who lives in perfect apathy and without his affection for anybody, is 
called the living liberated man; but the life which is bound by its affections is 
said to be in bondage, or else it is free as air. 


53. It is possible to obtain liberation by means of diligent inquiry and 
reasoning; or else it is as difficult to come to it as it is hard for a lame man to 
leap over a hole, though as small as the footmark of a cow-goshpada. 


54. For know, O Rama of great soul, that the soul should not be cast into 
misery by your neglect of it, or by subjecting it through ignorance to its 
affection for others. (i.e., Be master of yourself and not bound to others). 


55. He who relies on his patience, and employs his mind, and cogitates 
upon the supreme soul in his own soul for the attainment of his 
consummation, finds the deep abyss of the world, as a small chink in his vast 
comprehension. 


56. The high station to which Buddha had attained by his patience, and 
from which the Arhata prince fell to scepticism by his impatience; and that 
summum bonum which is reached at by great minds, is the fruit of the tree of 
diligent inquiry, which like the Kalpa arbor, yields all what is desired of it. 


CHAPTER LXXVI. 
The World Compared with the Ocean. 


Argument. The world likened to the ocean, and the women to its waves. 
The means of passing over it, and the delight when it is got over. 


Vasishtha continued: — These worlds which have sprung from Brahma the 
creator, are upheld by ignorance, and become extinct before right reason. (i.e., 
Their materiality melts away before the light of true philosophy). 


2. The worlds are vortices of water, and whirlpools in the ocean of Brahma. 
They are as numerous as the particles of light, and as innumerable as the 
motes that fly in the sunbeams. 


3. It is the imperfect knowledge of the world that is the cause of its 
existence, (or makes it appear as an entity); but full knowledge of it makes it 
vanish into nothing. (These are the two opposite systems of materialism and 
immaterialism). 


4. The world is a dreadful ocean unbounded and unfordable; and there is no 
means of getting over it, save by the raft of right investigation and diligent 
scrutiny. 


5. This ocean is full with the water of ignorance, and its vast basin is filled 
with fatal whirlpools and overwhelming waves of discord and dangers. 


6. Here goodness and good actions float on the surface, as its froth and 
foams; but they hide the deadly latent heat of hellfire underneath. Here roll the 
incessant billows of avarice, and there snores the huge whale, and the great 
leviathan of the mind. 


7. It is the reservoir of the endless channels and rivulets of life, running as 
its streams and currents; and it is the depository of innumerable treasures of 
brilliant gems hidden under its depth. It is infested by the serpents of diseases, 
and the horrid sharks of the senses. 


8. See Rama, the playful women, resembling the tremulous billows of this 


ocean; and are able to attract and pierce the hearts of the wise, with the hooks 
and horns of their looks. 


9. Their lips are as red as rubies, and their eyes are as black as blue lotuses; 
their teeth are as the unblown blossoms of fruits and flowers, and their sweet 
smiles are as the hoary froth of the sea. 


10. The curled locks of their hairs are as the crisped creepers of blue 
lotuses, and their twisted eyebrows are as the slanting of little billows; their 
backsides are as protruded islets, and their throats and necks are lined over 
like conch-shells. 


11. Their foreheads are as plates of gold, and their graces as the sharks of 
the sea; their loose glances are as the splashing waves, and their complexions 
are gold coloured like the sands on the sea shore. 


12. Such is this ocean-like world, with its tremendous surges and rolling 
waves; and it is the part of manhood to buffet it over by manly exertions, in 
order to save one’s self from sinking under them. 


13. Fie for that man! who having good sense for his vessel, and reason for 
his helmsman, does not conduct himself across the wide expanse of this 
worldly ocean. 


14. He is reckoned the most valiant man, who measures the immeasurable 
expanse of this ocean (by his knowledge of the Infinite soul, which 
comprehends the whole within itself). 


15. Considering well about this world with the learned, and looking into all 
its hazards with the eye of the mind, he who relies his trust in the Lord, 
becomes blest forever. 


16. You are truly blest, O Rama! that are employed from your early youth 
to scrutinize about this world. 


17. Men who consider the world, and take it in the same light of a 
dangerous ocean as you do, are not likely to be drowned in it, when they steer 
their bark in it after due consideration. 


18. The enjoyments of the world are to be duly considered, ere one dares to 
come to the enjoyment of them; and like the ambrosia, before they feed on 
any other fare, (like Garuda, — the head of the fowls of the air). 


19. He who considers beforehand the employment he should engage in, and 
the enjoyments he ought to share in this world, fares well in his present and 
future life; or else he falls to danger like the inconsiderate man. 


20. The judicious and preadmonished man, prospers in his fame and 
fortune, and rises in his power and understanding in his life, as the trees come 
to flower and fructify in spring. 


21. Rama! you will shine with the elegance of the bright and cooling 
moonbeams, and with the beauty of perpetual prosperity, if you will but begin 
your worldly career with full knowledge, of all that is to be known respecting 
the world beforehand. 


CHAPTER LXXVII. 
On Living Liberation. 


Argument. On Liberation from Earthly Bondage, and Salvation of the Soul 
during one’s Lifetime. 


Rama rejoined: — O sage! nobody is satiate with all thou sayest, but must 
learn more and more from you; therefore, say in short the substance of the 
present subject, which is as grand as it is wondrous to hear. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — I have already given you many interpretations of 
living liberation, and here are some more for your satisfaction and close 
attention. 


3. With their visual organs they view this world, as a hazy maze in their 
state of sound sleep; and they consider it as an unreality in their spiritual light, 
when their minds are fixed in the Supreme soul only. 


4. He who has got his disengagement, has his mind as still as in sleep; and 
he that sees the soul, is ravished with joy at the sight. 


5. He takes nothing that is within his reach, nor retains what is within his 
grasp; but keeps his mind looking within himself as having everything there. 
(The liberated and self-contented man having nothing in his hand, has all in 
his inward soul). 


6. He sees the bustle of the tumultuous with the eye of his mind, and smiles 
in himself at the hurry and flurry of the world, (like the laughing philosopher 
of old). 


7. He does not live in future expectation, nor does he rely in his present 
possession; he does not live on the pleasure of his past memory, but lives 
listless of all (in perfect insouciance). 


8. Sleeping he is awake, in his vision of heavenly light, and waking he is 
plunged in the deep sleep of his mental reveries; he does all his works with his 
external body; but he does nothing with his inward mind (which is fixed in his 


God). 


9. In his mind he has relinquished the thoughts of all things, and renounced 
his care also for anything; he does his outward actions, and remains as even as 
if he has done nothing. (The spiritualist is neither concerned with nor affected 
by his external acts). 


10. He pursues the course of duties of his caste and family, as they have 
descended to him from the custom of his forefathers. 


11. He does all that is required and expected of him with a willing mind, 
and without the error of believing himself as their actor. (He does them as a 
machine, and without the false persuasion of his agency of them). 


12. He remains insouciant, of all that he does by rote and habit, and neither 
longs for, nor loathes nor rejoices nor grieves at anything. 


13. He takes no notice of the amity or enmity of others to him, and is 
devoted to them that are devoted to him; but cunning with such as deal in 
craftiness with him. 


14. He deals as a boy with boys, and as a veteran with old people; he is 
youthful in the society of young men, and is grave in the company of the aged 
and wise. He is not without sympathy with the woes of others, (but rejoices at 
their happiness). 


15. He opens his mouth in edifying speeches, and never betrays his penury 
in any way; he is always sedate in his mind, and ever of a cheerful 
complexion. 


16. He is wise and deep, yet open and sweet (in his conversation; and is full 
with the fulness of his knowledge, as the full moon with all her digits); he is 
ever free from pain and misery. 


17. He is magnanimous in his disposition, and as sweet as a sea of delight; 
he is cool and cooling the pains of others, and as refreshing as the full 
moonbeams to mankind. 


18. He has meritorious deeds for his object, nor is any action or worldly 
good of any purpose to him; neither does he gain anything by his 
abandonment of pleasures or riches or friends, nor by their disappearance 
from him. 


19. Neither action nor inaction, nor labour nor ease; neither bondage or 
release, or heaven or hell, can add to or take away anything from his inner 
contentment. 


20. He sees everything and everywhere in the same uniform light, nor is his 
mind afraid of bondage or eager for its release. (Such inflexible passivity was 
the highest virtue of the stoics). 


21. He whose doubts are wholly removed by the light of his knowledge, 
has his mind towering upwards as the fearless phoenix of the sky. 


22. He whose mind is freed from error, and is settled in its equanimity, doth 
neither rise nor fall like any heavenly body, but remains unaltered as the high 
heaven itself. 


23. He does his outward actions, by the mere movement of the outer 
members of his body, and without the application of his mind to them; as a 
baby sleeping in a cradle, has the spontaneous play of his limbs, without any 
purpose of his mind. (This shows the possibility of bodily actions 
independently of the mind). 


24. So the drunken and delirious man, doth many acts in his state of 
dementedness; and as he never does them with the application or attention of 
his mind, he retains no trace of them in his remembrance. 


25. And as children lay hold of or reject everything, without knowing 
whether it is good or bad for them; so do men do their actions or refrain from 
them, without their deliberate choice or aversion of them. (This proves the 
causality of the mind). 


26. So a man doing his duty by habit or compulsion, is not sensible of any 
pain or pleasure that he derives from it (because his mind was quite 
unconcerned with the act). 


27. An act done by the outer body without its intention in the inner mind, is 
reckoned as no act of the actor, nor does it entail upon him its good or bad 
result. (An involuntary act is not taken into account). 


28. He neither shrinks from misery, nor does he hail his good fortune; he is 
neither elated at his success, nor depressed by his failure. 


29. He is not dismayed at seeing the sun growing cool, and the moon 
shining warmly over his head; he is not disconcerted by the flame of fire 
bending downwards, nor at the course of waters rising upwards. (He is not 
terrified by the prodigies of nature). 


30. He is not affrighted nor astonished at any wonderful occurrence in 
nature; because he knows all the phenomena of nature, to be the wondrous 
appearances of the omnipotent and all-intelligent soul. 


31. He expresses no need nor want of his, nor is in need of other’s favour 


or kindness; nor has he recourse to wiliness or cunning; he undertakes no 
shameful act as begging and the like, nor betrays his shamelessness by doing 
an unworthy action. 


32. He is never mean-spirited nor haughty in his spirit, he is neither elated 
nor depressed in his mind, nor is he sad or sorry or joyous at any time. (The 
word dindtma is used for the meek in spirit in Dr. Mill’s version of the 
“Sermon on the mount’). 


33. No passions rise in his pure heart, which is as clear as the autumnal sky; 
and as the clear firmament which gives no growth to thorns or thistles. 


34. Seeing the incessant births and deaths of living beings in the course of 
this world, who is it whom you may call to be ever happy or unhappy? (Since 
happiness and sorrow succeed one another by turns). 


35. Froth as the foaming bubble bursts in the water, so our lives flash to fly 
out into eternity; whom, therefore, do you call to be happy anywhere, and 
what is that state of continued pleasure or pain? 


36. In this world of endless entrances and exits, what being is there that 
lasts or is lost forever; it is our sight that produces the view, as our failing 
sight takes it out of view, (as every spectre of optical delusion). (The text 
drishti srishti kara narah is very expressive; and means, “man is the maker of 
the world by his sight of it”). 


37. The sights of these worlds are no more than the transitory view of 
spectacles in our nightly dreams; which are unforeseen appearances of 
momentary duration, and sudden disappearance. 


38. What cause can there be of joy or sorrow in this wretched world, which 
is a scene of incessant advents and departures? 


39. It is the loss of some good, that is attended with sorrow to the sufferer; 
but what sorrow can assail the self-liberated man, who sees nothing as 
positive good in the ever-changing state of things herein? 


40. Of what avail is prosperity or the enjoyment of any pleasure to one, 
when it is succeeded by adversity and pain the next moment, which embitters 
life by its baneful effects. 


41. It is riddance from the states of pleasure and pain, of choice and dislike, 
of the desirable and displeasing, and of prosperity and adversity, that 
contributes to the true felicity of man. 


42. After your abandonment of pleasing and unpleasing objects, and 
relinquishment of your desire for enjoyments, you get a cold inappetence, 


which will melt your mind like frost. 


43. The mind being weakened, its desires will be wasted also; as the 
sesamum seeds being burnt, will leave no oil behind. (The mind being 
repressed, will put a check to all its passions and feelings). 


44. By thinking existence as non-existent, the great souled man gets rid of 
all his desires, and sets himself aloof as in the air; and with his joyous spirits 
that know no change, the wise man sits and sleeps and lives always content 
with himself. 


CHAPTER LXXVIII. 
Manner of Conducting the Yoga Hypnotism. 


Argument. The Action of the Mind is creative of the Error of the World, 
and Yoga is the suppression of that Action. 


Vasishtha continued: — As the rotation of a firebrand, describes a circle of 
sparkling fires; so the revolving of the mind, depicts the apparent 
circumference to the sky, as the real circle of the universe. 


2. In like manner, the rolling of waters makes curves in the sea, appearing 
something other than water; so the revolution of the mind forms many ideal 
worlds, seeming to be bodies beside itself. 


3. And as you come to see strings of pearls in the sky, by the twinklings of 
your eyes fixed in it; so these false worlds present themselves to your view, by 
the pulsation of your mind. 


4. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, whereby the mind has its vibration and how it 
is repressed, that I may thence learn how to govern the same. 


5. Vasishtha answered: — Know Rama, as whiteness is concomitant with 
snow, and oil is associated with sesamum seeds; and fragrance is attendant 
upon flowers and the flame is coexistent with fire. 


6. So Rama, the mind is accompanied by its fluctuations hand in hand, and 
they are virtually the one and the everything, though passing under different 
names by fiction. 


7. Of the two categories of the mind and its pulsation, if either of these 
comes to be extinct, the other also has its extinction, as the properties of a 
thing being lost, their subject likewise ceases to exist; and there is no doubt of 
this. 


8. There are two ways of extinguishing the mind, the Yoga or hypnotism 
and spiritual knowledge; of these, the Yoga is the suppression of mental 
powers, and knowledge is the thorough investigation of all things. 


9. Rama asked: — How is it possible Sir, to suppress the vital airs, and to 
attain thereby to that state of tranquility, which is fraught with endless 
felicity? 


10. Vasishtha replied: — There is a circulating air breathing through the 
lungs and arteries of the body, as the water flows through the veins and pores 
of the earth, and which is called the vital breath or life. 


11. It is the fluctuation of this air, that impels and gives force to the internal 
organs of the body, and which is designated by the various names of prdna, 
apdna, etc., according to their positions and motions (all of which are but 
varieties of the vital breath). 


12. As fragrance resides in flowers and whiteness in the frost, so is motion 
the flavour of the mind, and is one and the same with its receptacle, — the 
mind. 


13. Now the vibration of this vital breath, excites the perception of certain 
desires and feelings in the heart; and the cognitive principle of these 
perceptions is called the mind. 


14. The vibration of vital air gives pulsation to the heart strings, causing 
their cognition in the mind; in the same manner as the motion of the waters, 
gives rise to the waves rolling and beating on the shore. 


15. The heart is said to be the afflation of the vital breath by the learned in 
the Vedas, and this being suppressed quiets the mind also. (The mind, says the 
Sruti, is moved by the vital air, etc.). 


16. The action of the mind being stopped, the perception of the existence of 
the world becomes extinct (as we have no perception of it in our sound sleep, 
when the mind is inactive). It is like the extinction of worldly affairs at sunset. 


17. Rama asked: — How is it possible to stop the course of the winds, 
perpetually circulating through the cells of the body, like the unnumbered 
birds flying in the air to their nests. (The passage of the nostrils is the open air, 
and the cells in the body are as their nests). 


18. Vasishtha replied: — It is possible by study of the Sdstras and 
association with the good and wise, by habitual dispassionateness, by the 
practice of Yoga, and by removal of reliance in every transaction of the world. 


19. Meditation of the desired object, and keeping in view that single object, 
and firm reliance on one particular object, are the best means of suppressing 
the vital breath. 


20. Next, it is by suppression of breath in the acts of inspiration and 


respiration, puraka and rechaka, in such manner as it may be unattended with 
pain, together with fixed meditation, it is possible to suppress the vital air 
(which gives longevity to the practitioner). 


21. The utterance of the syllable om, and pondering upon the significations 
of that word, and dormancy of the perceptive senses, are means of the 
suppression of breath. 


22. The practice of rechaka or respiring out, serves to purge out the 
crudities of the body, and by leaving the nostrils untouched, the vital breath is 
suppressed altogether. 


23. The practice of puraka or breathing in, tends to fill the inside as the 
clouds fill the sky; and then the breathing being stopped, its vibrations are 
stopped also. 


24. Then the practice of kumbhaka or sufflation of the breath, the air is shut 
up in a closed vessel and this serves to stop the course of breathing. (Long 
explanations of these practices are given in the gloss forming subjects of 
anemography). 


25. Afterwards the tongue being carried to the orifice of the palate, and the 
tip being attached to the guttural bulb or nodule, will prevent the vibration of 
the breathing. 


26. Again the mind getting rid of the flights of fancy, and becoming as 
vacant as empty air, prevents the course of breathing by its fixed meditation of 
itself (as in the state of Samadhi or trance). 


27. Again as the vital breath ranges within the space of twelve inches about 
the tip of the nose, this region should be closely watched by the eyesight, in 
order to prevent the egress and ingress of breath. 


28. Moreover the practice of stretching the tongue to the distance of twelve 
inches above the palate, and sticking the tip of it to the cavity called 
Brahmarandhra, serves to make one unconscious of himself, and stop his 
breathing. (These processes are explained in great length in the gloss for the 
practice of Yoga cult, resembling the mesmerism of modern spiritualists, for 
causing the comatosity of the practitioner). 


29. The eyesight being lifted upwards and fixed in the cavity between the 
eyebrows, exhibits the light of the intellect, and stops the vibrations of breath. 
(This is called the Khechari mudra and practised by all intelligent men). 


30. No soon does the spiritual light dawn over the soul, and the mind is 
steadfastly fixed to it, without any intermixture of dualism, (i.e., worldly 


thoughts), there is an utter stop of breathing. 


31. The livelong practice of seeing a simple vacuity within one’s self, and 
freeing the mind from all its thoughts and desired objects, serves to stop the 
fluctuation of breath. (This is supported by the Patanjali Yoga Sdstra). 


32. Rama rejoined: — Sir, what is this thing which they call the human 
heart, which receives the reflexions of all things as a large reflector or mirror? 


33. Vasishtha replied: — Hear my good Rama; the hearts of all animals in 
this world, are of two kinds, namely: —the superior and inferior, and learn 
their difference. 


34. That which has a certain dimension, and is placed as a piece of flesh 
inside the breast, is called an inferior heart, and forms a part of the body. 


35. The other is of the nature of consciousness, and is called the superior 
mind; because it is both in the inside and outside of the body, and yet it is 
situated in no part of it. 


36. That is the superior part, wherein all this world is situated, which is the 
great reflector of all things, and receptacle of all goods; (so says the Sruti: — 
“the earth and sky and all things reside in it.’’) 


37. The consciousness of all living creatures, is also called their heart; 
though it is no part of the animal body, nor is a dull inert substance as a 
pebble or stone. 


38. Now this conscious or sensitive heart, being purified of its internal 
desires, and joined perforce with the chitta or thinking mind, the vibrations of 
vital breath are put to a stand. 


39. These as well as many other methods, which have been adopted by 
others, and dictated by the mouths of many sages, equally serve to suppress 
the breathing, (both for the fixity of attention and prolongation of life). 


40. These methods which are adapted to the process of Yoga meditation (or 
concentration of the mind); are to be slowly adopted by continued practice, 
for the redemption of the good from this world; or else their hasty adoption of 
it may prove detrimental to life. 


41. As it is long practice that perfects a man to the rank of a cenobite and 
anchorite, so the gradual suppression of respiration, is attended with equal 
success; as repression of desires, is accompanied by many happy results. 


42. It is by continued practice, that the breath is compressed within the 
confines of twelve inches about the cavities of the brows, nostrils and palate, 


as the cataract is confined within the limit of the pit. 


43. It is repeated practice also, that the tip of the tongue should be brought 
to a contact with the gullet of the throat, through which the breath doth pass 
both in and out. 


44. These are the various modes which by their constant practice, lead to 
Samadhi or hypnotism, when the mind has its fullest tranquility, and its union 
with the Supreme soul. 


45. It is by practice of these methods, that a man is freed from sorrow, and 
is filled with internal rapture, and becomes enrapt in the supreme soul. 


46. The vibrations of the vital air, being suppressed by continued practice, 
the mind gets a tranquility, which is akin to its extinction. 


47. Human life is wrapt in desires, and liberation, (moksha), is the release 
of the mind from these; and breathing is the operation of life, and its 
suppression is the path to its extinction or nirvdna. 


48. The vibration of breath is the action of the mind, producing the error of 
the existence of the world; and this being brought under subjection, dispels 
this error. 


49. The knowledge of duality being removed, shows the existence of the 
unity only; which no words can express, except by attributes that are ascribed 
to it. 


50. In whom and from whom is all, and who is all in every place; yet who 
is not this world, nor there abides such a world as this in him, nor has the 
world come out from him; (i.e., the world abides in its ideal and not material 
form in the spirit). 


51. Owing to its perishableness and its situation in time and space, and 
limitation by them, this material world cannot be a part of identic with that 
immaterial spirit, which has no attribute nor its likeness. 


52. It is the moisture of all vegetables and the flavour of all eatables; it is 
the light of lights and the source of all desires rising in the heart, like 
moonbeams proceeding from the lunar disk. 


53. It is the Kalpa tree yielding all earthly fruitions as its fruits, which are 
incessantly borne aloft only to fall down with their juicy flavour of various 
tastes. 


54. The high-minded man that depends on that boundless spirit, and rests 
secure in its bosom, is verily called the wise and liberated in his life-time. 


55. He is the best of men, whose mind is freed from all desires and 
cravings; and who has found his rest from the thoughts of his fancied good 
and evil. He remains listless amidst all the cares and concerns of this life. 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 
Description of spiritual Knowledge. 


Argument. The second method of suppressing the Mind by spiritual 
knowledge, being the Theory of self-liberation. 


Rama said: — Sir, as you have related to me the methods of suspending the 
mind to a dead lock, by means of Yoga practices; I hope you will kindly tell 
me now, the manner in which it is brought to stand still, by means of perfect 
knowledge. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — By perfect knowledge is meant the firm belief of a 
man in the existence of one self-manifest or Supreme Soul, that is without its 
beginning and end. This is what the wise mean by the term, “full or perfect 
knowledge.” 


3. Its fulness consists in viewing all these visible forms as these pots and 
these pictures ghatapata, and all these hundreds cries of beings, to be manifest 
in the fullness of that spirit and not distinct from it. 


4. It is imperfect knowledge that causes our birth and pain, and perfect 
knowledge that liberates us from these; as it is our defective sight, which 
shows us the snake in the rope, while our complete view of it removes the 
error. 


5. The knowledge which is free from imagination, and its belief of the 
objective, and relies only on its conscious subjectivity, leads only to the 
liberation of men, which nothing else can do. 


6. The knowledge of the purely subjective, is identic with that of the 
supreme spirit; but this pureness being intermingled with the impure objective 
matter, is termed avidyd or ignorance. 


7. Consciousness itself is the thing it is conscious of (or in other words, 
knowledge is identic with the known; i.e., the subjective is the same with the 
objective), and there is no difference between them. The soul knows only 
itself as there is no other beside itself. (Its parichinote is its subjective 


knowledge, and sanchinote the objective and effect of avidyd or ignorance). 


8. “Seeing the soul alone in its true light in all the three worlds,” is 
equivalent to the expression, “all this world is the soul itself,” in the Sruti, and 
the knowledge of this truth constitutes the perfection of man. 


9. The whole being the soul, why talk of an entity or a nullity; and what 
meaning can there be in bondage or liberation (which appertain to the same 
soul?) 


10. The mind is no other than its perceptions, which are manifested by God 
himself; and the whole being an infinite vacuum, there is no bondage nor 
liberation of any. 


11. All this is the immense Brahma, extending in the form of this vast 
immensity; so you may enlarge your invisible soul by yourself, and by means 
of the knowledge of yourself. 


12. By this comprehensive view of Brahma as all in all, you can find no 
difference between a piece of wood or stone and your cloth; why then are you 
so fond of making these distinctions? 


13. Know the soul as the only indestructible substance, which remains 
quiescent from first to the last; and know this to be the nature of your soul 
also. 


14. Know this boundless universe with all the fixed and moving bodies it 
contains, to be a transcendent void, where there is no room for your joy or 
sorrow whatever. 


15. The shapes of death and disease and of unity and duality, rise 
constantly in the soul, in the form of interminable waves in the sea. 


16. He that remains in the close embrace of his soul, with his inward 
understanding, is never tempted to fall a prey to the trap of worldly 
enjoyments. 


17. He that has a clear head for right judgment, is never moved by the force 
of earthly delights; but remains as unshaken as a rock against the gentle winds 
of the air. 


18. The ignorant, unreasonable, and stupid men, that are guided by their 
desires only, are preyed upon by continued misery, as the fishes of a dried 
tank are devoured mercilessly by cranes. 


19. Knowing the world to be full of the spirit, and without the matter of 
ignorance, avidyd, close your eyes against its visible phenomena, and remain 


firm with your spiritual essence. 


20. Plurality of things is the creation of imagination, without their existence 
in reality. It is like the multifarious forms of the waves in the sea, which are in 
reality its water only. The man, therefore, that relies on his firm faith in the 
unity, is said to be truly liberated and perfect in his knowledge. 


CHAPTER LXXx. 
Investigation of the Phenomenals. 


Argument. Description of Divine Meditation, which keeps the mind from 
its attention to temporary enjoyments. 


Vasishtha continued: — I will now describe to you that pensive excogitation, 
which keeps the reasoning mind from attending to objects placed in its 
presence. 


2. The eyes are for seeing only, and the living soul is for bearing the 
burthen of pain and pleasure alone; they are like the eyes and bodies of a 
beast, or like a bull of burden, which sees and carries a load of food, without 
being able to taste it. 


3. The eyes being confined to the visible phenomena, can do no harm to the 
soul residing in the body; as an ass fallen into a pit, is but a slight loss to its 
owner. 


4. Do not, O base man, regale thy eyes, with the dirty stuff of the sight of 
visibles; which perish of themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and put thee to 
peril also, (by the diseases and difficulties which they load upon thee). 


5. The acts which are deemed as one’s own deeds and beings, and whereby 
the acutely intelligent man thinks himself to be living, and by which he counts 
the duration of his lifetime, (according to the saying, that our lives are 
computed by our acts, and not by the number of our days); these very acts, 
turn at last, against him, for his accountableness of them. 


6. Do not rely thy eyes on visible objects, which are unreal in their nature, 
and are produced to perish soon after, and to please thy sight for a moment 
only. Know them as destroyers of thy otherwise indestructible soul. 


7. O my eyes! that are but witnesses of the forms, which are situated in the 
soul; it is in vain that ye flash only to consume yourselves, like the burning 
lamps after a short while. 


8. The vision of our eyes is as the fluctuation of waters, and its objects are 
as the motes that people the sun-beams in the sky. Whether these sights be 
good or bad, they are of no matter to our minds. 


9. Again, there is that little bit of egoism beating in our minds, like a small 
shrimp stirring amidst the waters; let it throb as it may, but why should we 
attribute it with the titles of, “I, thou, or he, or this, or that?” 


10. All inert bodies and their light appear together to the eye, the one as the 
container of the other; but they do not affect the mind, and, therefore, do not 
deserve our notice. 


11. The sight of objects and the thoughts of the mind, have no connection 
with one another (because the sight is related to the eye, and the thoughts bear 
relation with the mind); And yet they seem to be related to each other, as our 
faces and their reflexions in the mirror. (The retina of the eye receive the 
reflexions, and convey them to the sensory of the cranium, in the form of 
reflections or thoughts, and hence their mutual relations). 


12. Such is their inseparably reciprocal relation in the minds of the 
ignorant; but the wise who are freed from their ignorance, remain aloof from 
the visibles with their mental meditations alone. 


13. But the minds of the vulgar are as closely connected with the visibles, 
as the sacrificial wood with the lac dye. 


14. It is by diligent study, that the chain of mental thoughts are severed 
from the visibles; in the like manner, as our wrong notions are removed by 
means of right reasoning. 


15. After dispersion of ignorance, and the connexion of the visibles from 
the mind, there will be no more a blending of forms and figures and their 
reflexions and thoughts in it. 


16. The sensible impressions which have taken possession of the inner 
mind, are to be rooted out from it as they drive out a demon from the house. 


17. O my mind! says the intelligent man, it is in vain that thou deludest me, 
who have known thy first and last as nothing; and if thou art so mean in thy 
nature (as the progeny of barren woman), thou must be so as nothing even at 
present. 


18. Why dost thou display thyself in thy five-fold form of the five senses 
unto me? Go make thy display before him who acknowledges and owns thee 
as his. (As for me, I own the intellect and not the mind). 


19. Thy grand display of the universe yields me no satisfaction, since I am 


convinced, O vile mind, all this to be no better than a magic play. 


20. Whether thou abidest in me or not, it is of no matter to me; because I 
reckon thee as dead to me as thou art dead to reason. (As the mind is perverse 
to reason, so are reasonable men averse to it. The mind is all along used in the 
sense of the sentient mind, and not the superior intellectual faculty, — chit, 
which is distinct from chitta, synonymous with manas, the mind.) 


21. Thou art a dull unessential thing, erroneous and deceitful and always 
reckoned as dead, the ignorant alone are misled by thee and not the 
reasonable. (It is hard to determine what the attributes of the mind may mean. 
It is said to be dead, because it is kept in mortification and subjection). 


22. It was so long through our ignorance, that we had been ignorant of thee; 
it is now by the light of reason, that we find thee as dead as darkness, under 
the light of a lamp. There is always an impervious darkness under the lighted 
lamp, (zer cheragh tarikist). 


23. Thou hast long taken possession of this mansion of my body, and 
prevented me, O wily mind, from associating with the good and wise. 


24. Thou liest as dull as dead body at the door of this bodily mansion, 
against the entrance of my worshipped guests (of good virtues) to it. 


25. O the gigantic monster of the world! which has its existence in no time. 
Art thou not ashamed, O my mind, to assume to thyself this deceitful form of 
the world, and appear before me in this hideous shape? 


26. Go out of this abode of my body, thou demoniac mind, with the train of 
thy female fiends of avarice and her companions, and the whole host of thy 
devilish comrades of rage, wrath and the like. 


27. Seeing the advance of reason to the temple of the body, the demon of 
the mind flies from it, as the savage wolf leaves its den at the approach of the 
hunter. 


28. O pity for these foolish folks! that are so subdued by this dull and 
deceitful mind, as the unwary people are spellbound by the magic wand. 


29. What is thy boast and might in subduing the ignorant rabble, exercise 
thy power upon me, that defy thy power to prevail over the unity of my belief. 


30. I need not try to defeat the power of my foolish mind, after I have 
already baffled its attempts against me, and laid it to dust. 


31. I had ere long taken thee for a living thing, and passed many a livelong 
life, and day and night, with thy company in this dreary world. 


32. I have now come to know the nullity of the mind, and that it is put to 
death by my power; I have hence given up my concern with it, and betaken to 
my reliance in the ever existent soul only. 


33. It is by good luck, that the living liberated men come to know the 
demise of their minds; and cease to spend their lives under the illusion of its 
existence. 


34. Having driven away the deceitful demon of the mind, from the mansion 
of my body; I am situated at rest without any troublesome thought or turbulent 
passion in me. 


35. I smile to think in myself the many follies, to which I was led for a long 
time under the influence of my demoniac mind. 


36. It is by my good fortune, that the gigantic demon of my mind, is at last 
vanquished by the sword of my reason, and driven out of the mansion of my 
body. 


37. It is by my good fortune also, that my heart is after all purified from its 
evil inclination, by the suppression of my demoniac mind; and that my soul 
now rests alone in peace, in the abode of my body. 


38. With the death of the mind, there is an end of my egoism and all my 
troublesome thoughts and cares; and the expulsion of the ogres of evil 
passions from my breast, by the breath or mantra of reason, has made it a 
place of rest for my soul. 


39. What is this mind with its egoism and eager expectations to me, than a 
family of intractable inmates, of whom I have fortunately got rid by their 
wholesale deaths. 


40. I hail that pure and ever prosperous soul which is self-same with my 
inward soul, and identic with the immutable intellect; (and not with the 
changeful mind). 


41. I hail that ego in me, which is yet not myself, nor I, nor any other 
person, nor is it subject to sorrow or error. 


42. I hail that ego in me, which has no action nor agency, nor any desire 
nor worldly affair of its own. It has no body nor does it eat or sleep (but it is as 
itself). 


43. This ego is not myself nor any other, and there is nothing as I or 
anybody else. The ego is all in all, and I bow down to that being. (There is no 
direct evidence as what the ego is, but is pointed by mere indirect and 
negative evidences as what it is not). 


44. The ego is the first cause and support of all, it is the intellect and the 
soul of all worlds. It is the whole without parts; I, therefore, bow down to that 
ego. 


45. I prostrate to the self-same Ego of all, which is eternal and immutable, 
which is the sole immense soul and without its parts. It is all, in all, and abides 
at all times. 


46. It is without any form or designation, and is manifest as the immense 
spirit. It abides in itself, and I bow down to that ego. 


47. It is the same in all things in its too minute form, and is the manifester 
of the universe. It is the essence of my existence and abiding in me, in which 
state I bow down to it. 


48. It is the earth and ocean with all their hills and rivers, which are not the 
ego, nor they are the ego itself. I bow to the self-same ego which comprises 
the world with all its contents. 


49. I bow to that undecaying and indestructible Lord which is beyond 
thought, and is ever charming and ever the same. Who manifests the endless 
universe with all its worlds and many more yet invisible and unformed bodies. 
He is unborn and undecaying, and his body is beyond all attributes and 
dimensions. 


CHAPTER LXXXI. 
Unsubstantiality of the Mind. 


Argument. The unsubstantiality of the Mind is established by Reasoning 
and Intuition. 


Vasishtha resumed: — Having thus considered and known the mind in 
themselves; and in the aforesaid manner; it is the business of great minded 
philosophers, O mighty Rama, to enquire into the nature of the soul, as far as 
it is knowable (by the help of psychology). 


2. And knowing the world to be purely the soul, it is to be enquired, 
whence arose the phantom of mind which is nothing in reality. 


3. It is ignorance, error and illusion, which exhibit the vacant and visionary 
mind to view, as it is our false imagination, which forms an arbour of trees in 
the vacant air. 


4. As the objects standing on the shore, seem to be moving to ignorant boys 
passing in a boat; so the sedate soul appears to be in motion (like the mind) to 
the unintelligent. 


5. After removal of our ignorance and error, we have no perception of the 
fluctuation of our minds; as we no more think the mountains to be in motion, 
after the velocity of air car is put to a stop. 


6. [have given up the thoughts of all internal and external things, knowing 
them as the creation of my airy mind only. Thus, the mind and its actions 
being null and void, I see all things to exist in the spirit of Brahma alone. 


7.1 am freed from my doubts, and sit quiet, devoid of all care; I sit as Siva 
without a desire stirring in me. 


8. The mind being wanting, there is an end of its youthful desires and other 
properties also; and my soul being in the light of the supreme spirit, has lost 
its sight of all other colours and forms presented to the eyes. 


9. The mind being dead, its desires also die with it, and its cage of the body 


is broken down without it. The enlightened man being no more under the 
subjection of his mind, is liberated from the bondage of his egoism also. Such 
is the state of the soul, after its separation from the body and mind, when it 
remains in its spiritual state in this and the next world. 


10. The world is one calm and quiescent Unity of Brahma, and its plurality 
or multifariousness is as false as a dream. What then shall we think or talk of 
it, which is nothing in reality. 


11. My soul by advancing to the state of divine holiness, becomes as 
rarefied and all-pervasive as the eternal spirit of God, in which it is situated 
forever. 


12. That which is, and what is not, as the soul and the mind, the substantial 
and the unsubstantial, is the counterpart of the something, which is rarer than 
air, calm and quiet, eternal and intangible; and yet all-pervading and extended 
through all. 


13. Let there be a mind in us, or let it remain or perish forever; yet I have 
nothing to discuss about it, when I see everything to be situated in the soul. 


14. I considered myself as a limited and embodied being, as long as I was 
unable to reason about these abstruse subjects; and now I have come to know 
my unlimited form of the spirit; but what is this that I call, “myself,” is what I 
have not yet been able to know, since the whole is full with the one supreme 
spirit. 

15. But the mind being granted as dead, it is useless to dubitate about it; 
and we gain nothing by bringing the demon of the mind to life again. 


16. I at once repudiate the mind, the source of false desires and fancies; and 
betake myself to the meditation of the mystic syllable, “Om,” with the 
quietness of my soul, resting quiescent in the Divine spirit. 


17. With my best intelligence, I continue always to inquire of my God, both 
when I am eating or sleeping or sitting or walking about. 


18. So do the saints conduct their temporal affairs, with a calm and careless 
mind, meditating all along on the Divine soul in their becalmed spirits. 


19. So do all great minded men gladly pass their lives, in the discharge of 
their respective duties, without being elated by pride or the giddiness of 
vanity; but manage themselves with a cheerfulness resembling the gentle 
beams of the autumnal moon. 


CHAPTER LXXXII. 
Investigation into the Nature of the Sensuous Mind. 


Argument. Story of Vitahavya, materialist becomes a spiritualist. 


Vasishtha continued: — It was in this manner that the learned Samvarta, who 
had the knowledge of the soul reasoned with himself, and which he 
communicated to me on the Vindhyan mountain. (Samvarta is said to have 
been the brother of Vrihaspati, both of whom have transmitted to us two 
distinct treatises on law, which are still extant). 


2. Shut out the world, said he, from your sight, and employ your 
understanding to abstract reasoning, in order to get over the vast ocean of this 
world. 


3. Hear me tell you, Rama, of another view of things, whereby the great 
sage Vitahavya gave up the practice of making his offerings to fire, and 
remained dauntless in his spiritualistic faith. 


4. The illustrious Vitahavya wandered about the forests in former times, 
and then resided in a cave of the Vindhya mount, which was as spacious as a 
cave of Meru under the sun’s passage. (The cave of mount Meru is the Polar 
circle about which the sun is said to turn; but Sumeru is the meridian circle on 
which the sun passes). 


5. He grew in course of time dissatisfied with the ritual acts, which serve 
only to bewilder men, and are causes of diseases and difficulties to man, 
(rather than those of their removal). 


6. He fixed his aim to the highest object of unalterable ecstasis, — 
samddhi, and abandoned his cares for the rotten world, in the course of his 
conduct in life. 


7. He built a hut of leaves with the branches of plantain trees; strewed it 
with black stones, and perfumed it with fragrant earth. 


8. He spread in it his seat of deer’s skin, serving as a pure paillasse for holy 


saints; and sat still upon it as a rainless cloud in the clear firmament. 


9. He sat there in the posture of padmdsana with his legs crossed upon one 
another, and held his heels with the fingers of both his hands, and remained 
with his uplifted head, like the fast and fixed peak of a mountain summit. 


10. He closed his eyesight from looking upon the surrounding objects, and 
pent up his mind in his bosom, as the descending sun confines his beams in 
the hollow caves of Meru. 


11. Then having stopped the course of his internal and external senses, he 
thus revolved in his mind, which was free from sin and guile. 


12. How is it that though I have restrained my outer organs, I cannot with 
all my force stop the course of my mind, which is ever as fickle as a leaflet, 
floating on and dancing over the waves. 


13. It impels the external organs, (as a charioteer drives his horses), and is 
propelled by them in turn to their different objects, as a juggler tosses about 
and flings up and down his play balls. 


14. Though I refrain from the exercise of my external faculties, yet it 
pursues them with eagerness, and runs towards the objects from which I try to 
stop its course. 


15. It turns from this object to that, as they say from the pot to the picture 
and from that to the chariot, (ghata, pata and sakata); and in this manner the 
mind roves about the objects of sense, as a monkey leaps from branch to 
branch of a tree. 


16. Let me now consider the courses of the five external senses and their 
organs, which serve as so many passages for the mind. 


17. O my wicked and wretched senses, how shall I counsel to call you to 
your good sense, when you are so senseless as to roll on restlessly like the 
billows of waters in the sea. 


18. Do not now disturb me any more with your fickleness, for I well 
remember to what trains of difficulties I have been all along exposed by your 
inconstancy. 


19. What are ye, O my organs, but passages (to conduct the outer 
sensations) to the inner mind, and are dull and base of yourselves, and no 
better than the billows of the sea and the water in the mirage. 


20. Ye senses that are unsubstantial in your forms, and without any 
spiritual light in you; your efforts are as those of blind men only to fall into 


the pit. 


21. It is the intellectual soul only, that witnesseth the objects of sense, it is 
in vain that ye are busy without the soul. 


22. It is in vain for the organs of sense, to display themselves to view, like 
the twirling of a firebrand and the appearance of a snake in the rope; since 
they have no essence of their own, and are of no use without the soul. 


23. The all-knowing soul knows well the eyes and ears, though none of 
these organs knows the internal soul, and is as far from it, as the heaven and 
hell asunder. 


24. As the wayfarer is afraid of snakes, and the twice born Brahmans are in 
dread of demoniac savages; so the intellect fears and avoids the company of 
the senses for its safety, and remains retired from them for its security. 


25. Yet the unseen intellect directs the organs of sense, to their various 
duties from a distance; as the distant sun directs the discharge, of the diurnal 
duties of men on earth, from his situation in heaven. 


26. O my mind! that art wandering all about like a mendicant, in order to 
fill the belly with food; and actest as a charvaka materialist, to make a god of 
thy body, and to enslave thyself to its service; do not thus rove about the 
world in the vain search of your bane only. 


27. It is a false pretension of thine, to think thyself to be as intelligent as an 
intelligence or as the intellect itself; you two are too different in your natures, 
and cannot agree together. 


28. It is thy vain boast also, to think thyself to be living, and to be the life 
and the ego likewise; because these things belong to the soul, and thou art 
entirely devoid of the same. 


29. Egoism produces the knowledge of, “I am the Ego,” which thou art not; 
and neither art thou anything except a creature of false imagination, which it 
is good for thee to give up at once, (because the mind’s eye sees the fumes of 
fancy only.) 


30. It is the conscious intellect, which exists without its beginning and end, 
and nothing else is existent beside this; what art thou then in this body, that 
takest the name of the mind. 


31. The impression of the activity and passivity of the mind is as wrong, as 
the belief of poison and nectar to be the one and same thing; since the two 
opposites can never meet together. 


32. Do not, therefore, thou fool, expose thyself to ridicule, (that art 
dependent on the organs of the body), by thinking thyself as both the active 
and passive agent, which thou art not; but a mere dull thing as it is known to 
all. 


33. What is thy relation with enjoyments or theirs with thee, that thou 
wishest to have them come to thee? Thou art a dull thing and without thy soul, 
canst have no friend or foe to thee. 


34. The unreal has no existence, and the existence of the mind, is an 
unreality as the redness of a crystal. Knowledge, action and passion belong to 
the soul only, and are not attributable to the mind. 


35. If thou beest the eternal Mind, then thou art self-same with the eternal 
soul; but the painful mutability of thy nature, bespeaks thee to be not the same 
(immutable, everlasting and imperishable soul). 


36. Now as thou hast come to be acquainted, with the falsity of thine action 
and passion, hear now how I am purged of these impressions, by my own 
reasoning as follows. 


37. That thou art an inert unreality, said I, is a truth beyond all doubt; and 
that the activity of an inactive nullity is as false, as the dancing of the ideal 
demon or of inert stones. 


38. Therefore art thou dependent on the Supreme Spirit for thy movement; 
and it is in vain for thee to fain thyself as living or doing anything by thyself 
(being but a puppet player by the power of the Almighty). 


39. Whatever is done by the power of another, is ascribed to that other and 
not to actor; as the harvest which is reaped by the sickle of the husband man, 
is said to be the act of the reaper and not of the instrument. 


40. He who kills one by the instrumentality of another, is considered the 
slayer, and not the intermediate means of slaughter; for nobody upbraids the 
passive sword with guilt, by exculpation of the perpetrator. 


41. He who eats and drinks, is said to be the eater and drinker; and not the 
plate or cup, which hold the eatables or the drinkables. 


42. Thou art entirely inactive in thy nature, and art actuated by the All-wise 
Intellect; therefore, it is the soul only that perceives everything by itself, and 
not thou ignorant mind (that assumest the title of the percipient to thee). 


43. It is the Supreme Soul, that awakens and informs the mind without 
intermission; as the ignorant people require to be constantly guided by their 
superiors by repeated admonitions. 


44. The essence of the soul is manifest to all in its form of intelligence, 
from which the mind derives its power and name for its existence. 


45. Thus the ignorant mind is produced by some power of the soul, and 
remains all along with its ignorance; until it comes to melt away like snow, 
under the sunshine of its spiritual knowledge. 


46. Therefore, O my ignorant mind! that art now dead under the influence 
of my knowledge of the soul; do not boast any more of thy being a particle of 
thy spiritual origin for thy sorrow only. 


47. The conception of the entity of the unreal mind, is as false as the 
production of a plant by the light of a magic lantern; there is only that true 
knowledge which proceeds directly from the Great God. (All else is error and 
misconception). 


48. Know, Rama, these worlds to be no manifestations of Divine power, 
but as illusive representation of His intellect, (chit and mdyd), like the 
glittering waves of waters in the sea. 


49. O thou ignorant mind, if thou art full of intelligence as the Intellect, 
then there would be no difference of thee from the Supreme one, nor wouldst 
thou have any cause of sorrow. (Hence the human mind is not Divine). 


50. The Divine mind is all-knowing and omnipresent and omniform at all 
times; and by the attainment of which one obtains everything. 


51. There is no such thing as thou or he, except the Great Brahma, who is 
always manifest everywhere; we have conceptions of ourselves without any 
exertion on our parts (which proves a Divinity stirring of itself in us). 


52. If thou art the soul, then it is the soul that is everywhere here and 
naught besides; but if thou art anything other than the soul, then thou art 
nothing, because all nature is the body of the universal soul. 


53. The triple world is composed of the Divine soul, beside which there is 
no existence; therefore, if thou art anything thou must be the soul, or 
otherwise thou art nothing. 


54. I am now this, (as a boy), and then another, (as an old man), and that 
these things are mine and those another’s, are thoughts that vainly chase upon 
the mind; for thou art nothing positive here, and positivism is as false a theory 
as the horns of a hare (or rara avis) on earth. 


55. We have no notion of a third thing between the intellect and the body, 
to which we can refer the mind, as we have no idea of an intermediate state 
betwixt sunlight and shade (where we may betake us to rest). 


56. It is that something then, which we get by our sight of (e., by the light 
of) truth, after the veil of darkness has been removed from our eyes. It is our 
consciousness, (the product of the light of truth), that we term the mind. 


57. Hence, O foolish mind! thou art no active nor passive agent of action, 
but art the sedate self-consciousness of Brahma (knowing only, “I am what I 
am,” “Sohamasmi’). Now therefore cast off thy ignorance, and know thyself 
as a condition of the very soul. 


58. Truly the mind is represented as an organ of the sense of perception and 
action, and the internal instrument of knowing the soul, and not the soul itself; 
but this is only by way of explaining the knowable by something familiar and 
better known to us, and serving as its Synonym. (As to see one’s unlookable 
face, by the reflexion of the very face in the looking glass; so it is to perceive 
the invisible soul by its shadow cast upon the mind. This explains the mention 
of the mind in the Srutis such as in the texts: — “It is by means of the mind 
alone, that the knowledge of the soul is to be gained.” “It is through the mind 
only, that the soul is to be seen.” And so many other passages). 


59. The mind being an unreal instrumentality, (as the sight, efc.), can have 
no existence without its support (as the eyes of the sight); nor can it have any 
action of its own, without the agency of an actor (as the sword of the 
swordsman). Hence it is false to attribute activity or sensibility to it. 


60. Without the agency of an actor, the instrument of the mind has no 
power nor activity of its own; as the passive sickle has no power of cutting the 
harvest, without the agency of the reaper. 


61. The sword has the power of slaying men, but by means of the agency of 
the swordsman; otherwise, the dull instrument has no power in any part of its 
body, to inflict a wound on another. 


62. So my friend, thou hast no power nor agency of thine own, to do thine 
actions to trouble thyself in vain. It is unworthy of thee to toil for thy 
worldliness like the base worldling, (i.e., worldly goods), unless it were for 
thy spiritual welfare. 


63. The Lord (who works of his free will), is not to be pitied like thee that 
art subjected to labour, because his works are all as unaccountable as those he 
has not yet done (but thy acts are brought to account for themselves). 


64. Thy boast of serving the soul, proceeds from thy ignorance only and thy 
fellowship with the insensible organs of sense, is quite unworthy of thee. 


65. Thou art wrong to pursue the objects of sense, for the sake of thy maker 
and master; because the Lord is independent of all desire (of the service of 


others,) being full and satisfied in himself forever. 


66. It is by his self-manifestation, and not by act of his exertion of creation, 
that the omnipresent and omniscient God, fills the whole with his unity, which 
admits of no duality even in imagination. 


67. The one God that manifests himself as many, and that is all by himself, 
and that comprises the whole within himself, has nothing to want or seek, 
beside and apart from himself. 


68. All this is the magnificence of God, and yet the foolish mind craves 
after them in vain; as a miserable man longs to have the princely pomp of 
another, which is displayed before him. 


69. Thou mayst try to derive the divine blessings, by being intimate with 
the Divine soul; but there will be no more intimacy between the soul and the 
mind, than there is between the flower and its fruit. (i.e., The fruit which here 
represents the mind, does not inherit the quality of the flower which is here 
put for the soul). — Gloss. 


70. That is called the intimate relation of two things, when the one agrees 
in all its properties with the other; which is here wanting in the case of the 
soul and mind; the first being immortal, calm, and quiet, and the second a 
mortal and restless thing. 


71. O my mind! thou art not of the same kind with the soul, owing to thy 
changing appearances and ever changeful occupations, and promptness for 
multifarious inventions. Thy states of happiness and misery, moreover 
bespeak thee plainly to be of a different nature (from thy source of the soul 
thou art derived from). 


72. The relationship of the homogeneous (as of the liquid and curdled 
milk), as well as of the heterogeneous (as between the milk and water), are 
quite apparent to sight; but there is no relation betwixt the contraries (as it is 
observed in the antagonism of the soul and mind). Note. The spiritual man 
represses the sensuous mind, and the sensualistic mind buries the conscious 
and conscientious soul. 


73. It is true that there are many things, having the qualities of other things, 
or an assemblage of properties common to others; yet everything has a special 
identity of its own; and, therefore, I do beseech thee, not to lose the 
consciousness of thy identity with that of the soul, whereby thou exposest 
thyself to misery; (i.e., keep in mind thy divine nature). 


74. Therefore, employ thyself with intense application to the meditation of 
the soul; or else thou art doomed to misery, for thy ruminating on the objects 


of the visible world in thy internal recesses. 


75. Sliding from consciousness of thyself, and running after the imaginary 
objects of thy desire, are calculated for thy misery only; therefore, forget 
thyself, O man!, to associate with thy mind and the bodily organs, in order to 
find thy rest in the soul or Samadhi, — ecstasy. 


76. Whence is this activity, (i.e., what is this active principle), since the 
mind is proved to be a nullity as a skyflower, and to be utterly extinct, with 
the extinction of its thoughts and desires. 


77. The soul also is as void of activity, as the Sky is devoid of its parts. It is 
only the Divine spirit that exhibits itself in various shapes within itself. 


78. It bursts forth in the form of oceans with its own waters, and foams in 
froths by the billows of its own breathing. It shines in the lustre at all things, 
by its own light in itself. (So says the Urdu poet: — Oleken chamakta hai har 
rang meh). 


79. There is no other active principal anywhere else, as there is no burning 
fire brand to be found in the sea; and the inert body, mind and soul, (as said 
and seen before), have no active force in any one of them. 


80. There is nothing essential or more perspicuous, than what we are 
conscious of in our consciousness; and there is no such thing as this is another 
or this no other, or this is good or bad, beside the self-evident One. 


81. It is no unreal ideal, as that of the Elysian gardens in the sky; it is the 
subjective consciousness samvid, and no objective object of consciousness, 
samvedya, that extends all around us. 


82. Why then entertain the suppositions of, “this is I and that is another,” in 
this unsuppositious existence? There can be no distinction whatever of this or 
that in one unlimited, all extending and undefinable expanse of the soul; and 
the ascription of any attribute to it, is as the supposition of water in the 
mirage, or of a writing in the Sky. 


83. O my honest mind! if thou canst by the purity of thy nature, get thyself 
freed from the unrealities of the world; and become enlightened with the light 
of the soul, that fills the whole with its essence, and is the inbeing of all 
beings, thou shalt verily set me at rest from the uneasiness of my ignorance, 
and the miseries of this world and this miserable life. 


CHAPTER LXXXIII. 
On the Necessity of avoiding all bodily and worldly 
Cares, and abiding in intellectual Delights. 


Argument: — The sensuous Mind and the senses as roots of Evil, and their 
Extinction as the source of God. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear now, Rama, how that great sage of enlightened 
understanding, remonstrated in silence with his refractory senses. 


2. I will tell you the same openly what he admonished in secret to his 
senses; and by hearing these expostulations of him, you will be set above the 
reach of misery. 


3. O my senses, said he, I know your special essences to be for our misery 
only; and, therefore, I pray you, to give up your intrinsic natures for the sake 
of my happiness. 


4. My admonitions will serve to annihilate your actualities, which are no 
more than the creatures of ignorance. 


5. The amusement of the mind with the exilition of its sensitivity, is the 
cause of its fury and fever heat, as the kindlings of fire is for burning one’s 
self or others in its flame. (i.e., The excitement of passions and sensations is 
painful to the peaceful mind of man). 


6. The mind being disturbed and bewildered, makes the restless feelings 
and sensations, flow and fall to it, with the fierceness of boisterous rivers 
falling into the sea, which it breaks out and runs in the form of many a frith 
and firth into the land. (i.e., The sensational man is subject to the excess of 
sensitive excitability and intolerance). 


7. The sensitive minds burst forth in the passions of their pride and egoism, 
clashing against one another like the conflicting clouds; and fall in showers of 
hailstorms on the heads of others. (Sensational men are bent on mutual 
mischief and injury). 


8. The cares of prosperity and adversity, are the tormenting cankers in their 
breasts, and they pierce and perforate the hearts to such a degree, as they are 
intent upon uprooting them from their innermost recesses. (Heart burning 
anxieties attending both on fortune and misfortune). 


9. They are attended with hiccoughs and hard breathings in the chest, with 
groaning and sobbing in the lungs, like hooting owls in the hollow of withered 
trees; whether covered with tufts of moss on their tops, or resembling the 
hoary haired heads on the dried trunks of old and decayed bodies. (Men 
growing old, yet pant and pine for riches the more.) dren sifacara sadshr 
a tte | 


10. The cavities of the heart inside the body, are perplexed with crooked 
cares resembling the folds of snakes, hoary hairs likening hoar frost over 
hanging the head, and the apish wishes lurk about in the caves within the 
bosom. 


11. Avarice is as a dancing stork, clattering her pair of sharp bills (to entice 
men towards her); and then pull off their eyes from their decayed frames, as 
also the intestinal cords of the body. (The avaricious man is deprived of his 
good sense, sight, and heartstrings). 


12. Impure lust and lawless concupiscence, symbolized as the filthy cock, 
scratches the heart as his dunghill, and sounds as shrill on this side and that. 
(Hence the cockish rakes are called coxcombs, and cockneys, from their 
hoarse whistling as the horse neighs, and strutting on stilts as the cock-a- 
hoop). 


13. During the long and gloomy nights of our ignorance we are disturbed 
by the fits of phrenzy, bursting as the hooting owl from the hollow of our 
hearts; and infested by the passions barking in our bosoms like the Vetdla 
demons in the charnel vaults and funeral grounds. 


14. These and many other anxieties, and sensual appetites disturb our rest 
at nights, like the horrible Pisdcha ogres appearing in the dark. 


15. But the virtuous man who has got rid of his gloom of ignorance, 
beholds everything in its clear light, and exults like the blooming lotus in the 
dawning light of the day. 


16. His heart being cleared of the cloud of ignorance, glows as the clear sky 
unclogged by fogs and mists; and a pure light envelopes it, after the flying 
dust of doubts has been driven from it. 


17. When the doubts have ceased to disturb the mind with the gusts of 
dubiety and uncertainty; it becomes as calm and still as the vault of the sky, 


and the face of a city after the conflicting winds have stopped to blow. 


18. Mutual amity or brotherly love, purifies and cheers the heart of 
everybody; and grows the graceful trees of concord and cordiality, as the 
plants bring forth their beautiful blossoms and anthers in spring. 


19. The minds of ignorant and unskilful men, are as empty as a barren 
waste; and are shriveled with cares and anxieties, as the lotusbed is withered 
under the shivering cold and ice. (Here is a pun on the word, jddya, used in its 
double sense of dullness and frost, both of which are cold and inert, jada). 


20. After the fog and frost of ignorance, is dissipated from the atmosphere 
of the mind; it gains its glaring lustre, as the sky gets the sunshine, after the 
dispersion of clouds in autumn. (Learning is the light of the lamp of the mind, 
as sunshine is that of the clear sky). 


21. The soul having its equanimity, is as clear and cheerful and as deep and 
undisturbed, as the deep and wide ocean, which regains its calm and serenity, 
after the fury of a storm has passed over it. 


22. The mind is full within it with the ambrosial draughts of everlasting 
happiness, as the Vault of heaven is filled with the nectarous moonbeams at 
night. (Happiness is the moonlight of the mind). 


23. The mind becomes conscious of the soul, after the dispersion of its 
ignorance; and then it views the whole world in its consciousness, as if it were 
situated in itself. 


24. The contented mind finds its body to be full of heavenly delight, which 
is never perceived by those living souls which are ensnared by their desires of 
worldly enjoyments. (The bliss of content is unknown to the prurient). 


25. As trees burnt by a wildfire, regain their verdure with the return of 
spring; so do people tormented by the troubles of the world, and wasted by 
age and burden of life, find their freshness in holy asceticism. 


26. The anchorites resorting to the woods, are freed from their fear of 
transmigration; and are attended by many joys which are beyond all 
description. (No words can describe the spiritual joys of the soul). 


27. Think, O insatiate man! either thy soul to be dead to thy carnal desires 
or thy desires to be dead in thy soul; in both cases, thou art happy, whether in 
possession or extinction of thy mind; (i.e., having a mind without desires, or 
desires without the mind). 


28. Delay not to choose whatever thou thinkest more felicitous for thyself; 
but better it is to be in possession of thy mind and kill thy cares and desires, 


than kill thy mind with thy troublesome desires and anxieties. 


29. Mind the nullity of that which is painful to thee, because it is 
foolishness to part with what is pleasant to thyself; and if thou hast thy inward 
understanding at all, remain true to thyself by avoiding the false cares of the 
world. 


30. Life is a precious treasure, and its loss is liked by nobody; but I tell thee 
in truth, this life is a dream, and thou art naught in reality. (And this is the 
Verdict of the Sruti and no dictum of mine). — Gloss. 


31. Yet be not sorry that thou livest in vain, because thou hast lived such a 
nullity from before, and thy existence is but a delusion. (Think they living in 
the only living God, and not apart from Him). 


32. It is unreasonable to think thyself as so and so, because the delusion of 
self-existence of one’s self, is now exploded by right reason. 


33. Reason points the uniform entity of the self-same Being at all times; it 
is sheer irrationality that tells thee of thy existence, as it is the want of true 
light that exhibits this darkness unto thee. 


34. Reason will disprove thy entity as light removes the darkness; and it 
was in thy irrationality, my friend, that thou hast passed all this time in vain 
idea of thy separate existence. 


35. It is because of this irrationality of thine, that thy gross ignorance has 
grown so great, as to be sad because of thy calamities only; and thy delusive 
desires have subjected thee to the devil, as boys are caught by their fancied 
demons and ghosts. 


36. After one has got rid of his former states of pain and pleasure, and his 
transitory desires in this temporary world, he comes to feel the delight of his 
soul, under the province of his right reason. 


37. It is thy reason that has wakened thee from thy dullness, and 
enlightened thy soul and mind with the light of truth; therefore, should we 
bow down to reason above all others, as the only enlightener of our hearts and 
souls. 


38. After the desires are cleared from thy heart, thou shalt find thyself as 
the great lord of all; and thou shalt rejoice in thyself, under the pure and 
pristine light of thy soul. (Swaripa). 


39. Being freed from thy desires, thou art set on the footing of the sovran 
lord of all; and the unreasonableness of desires growing in thy ignorance, will 
do away under the domain of reason. 


40. And whether thou likest it or not, thy desires will fly from thy mind 
under the dominion of thy reason; as the deep darkness of night, flies at the 
advance of day light. 


41. The thorough extinction of thy desires, is attended with thy perfect 
bliss; therefore, rely on the conclusion of thy nullity by every mode of 
reasoning. (i.e., Be persuaded of thy impersonality, and the desires will be 
extinct of themselves). 


42. When thou hast lorded over thy mind and thy organs, and thinkest 
thyself extinct at all times, thou hast secured to thy spirit every felicity 
forever. 


43. If thy mind is freed from its disquiet, and is set at rest, and becomes 
extinct in thy present state, it will not be revivified in future; when thou shalt 
have thy anaesthesia forever. (The mind being killed in this life, will never be 
reborn any more. — Mindlessness is believed to be the Summum bonum or 
supreme bliss and beatitude). 


44. When I remain in my spiritual state, I seem to be in the fourth or 
highest heaven in myself; hence I discard my mind with its creation of the 
mental world from me forever. (The third heaven is the Empyrean, and the 
fourth is full with the presence of God alone). 


45. The soul only is the self-existent being, beside which there is nothing 
else in existence; I feel myself to be this very soul, and that there is nothing 
else beside myself. 


46. I find myself to be ever present everywhere with my intelligent soul, 
and beaming forth with its intellectual light. This we regard as the Supreme 
soul, which is so situated in the translucent sphere of our inward hearts. (The 
heart is regarded as the seat of the soul, and the mind as nothing). 


47. This soul which is without its counter-part, is beyond our imagination 
and description; therefore, I think myself as this soul, not in the form of an 
image of it, but as a wave of the water of that profound and unlimited ocean 
of the Divine soul. 


48. When I rest in silence in that soul within myself, which is beyond the 
knowables, and is self-same with my consciousness itself; I find also all my 
desires and passions, together with my vitality and sensibility, to be quite 
defunct in me. 


CHAPTER LXXXIV. 
The Mental or Imaginary World of the Sage. 


Argument. Hybernation of the Sage in a subterraneous cell, and the revery 
of his dominion over aerial spirits. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Sage Vitahavya, having thus reflected in his 
mind, renounced all his worldly desires, and sat in his hypnotic trance in a 
cave of the Vindhyan mountains. 


2. His body became motionless and devoid of its pulsations, and his soul 
shot forth with its intellectual delight; then with his calm and quiet mind, he 
sat in his devotion, as the still ocean in its calmness. 


3. His heart was cold and his breathings were stopped; and he remained as 
an extinguished fire, after its burning flame had consumed the fuel. 


4. His mind being withdrawn from all sensible objects, and intensely fixed 
in the object of his meditation; his eye-sight was closed under the slight 
pulsations of his eyelids. 


5. His slight and acute eye-sight was fixed on the top of his nose, and had 
the appearance of the half opening bud of the lotus. (The lotus is the usual 
simile of the eye, and the opening bud of the half-opened eye). 


6. The erect structure of the head and neck and body of the meditative sage, 
gave him the appearance of a statue hewn upon a rock (in bas relief). 


7. Sitting in this posture with his close attention to the supreme soul in the 
Vindhyan Cave; he passed there the period of thrice three hundred years as 
half a moment; (close attention shortens the course of time, for want of the 
succession of thoughts by which time is reckoned). 


8. The sage did not perceive the flight of this length of time, owing to the 
fixedness of his mind in his soul; and having obtained his liberation in his 
listless state, he did not lose his life in his obstipated devotion. 


9. Nothing could rouse him all this time from his profound hypnotism, nay, 


not even the loud roar of the rainy clouds, could break his entranced 
meditation, Yoga-nidra. 


10. The loud shouts and shots of the soldiers and huntsmen on the borders, 
and the cries and shrieks of beasts and birds, and the growling and snarling of 
the tigers and elephants on the hills, (could not break his sound repose). 


11. The loud roaring of lions, and the tremendous dashing of the water 
falls; the dreadful noise of thunder-claps, and the swelling clamour of the 
people about him (could not shake his firmness). 


12. The deep howling of furious Sarabhas, and the violent crackling of 
earthquakes; the harsh cracking of the woods in conflagration, and the dashing 
of waves and splashing of torrents upon the shore, (could not move him from 
his seat). 


13. The rush of terraqueous waters falling on rocky-shores, and the 
clashing off the torrents dashing on each other; and the noise and heat of wild 
fires, did not disturb his repose: — samddhi, — sang froid. (Such was the 
firmness of dying martyrs and living Yogis, as it was witnessed in the case of 
the Yogi, brought to this town from the jungles). 


14. He continued only to breathe at his will to no purpose, as the course of 
time flows for ever to no good to itself; and was washed over on all sides of 
his cave by currents of rain water, resembling the waves of the Ocean. (The 
recent Yogi was drowned under the flood of the river, and came out alive 
afterward). 


15. In the course of a short time he was submerged under the mud; which 
was carried upon him by the floods of rain water in the mountain cave of his 
devotion. (Yogis are said to live both under water and earth, as it was 
witnessed in the case of the Hatha Yogi of Lahore). 


16. Yet he continued to keep his seat amidst that dreary cell, buried as he 
was by the mud up to his shoulders. (The fact of the Fakir of Lahore who lay 
buried underneath the ground is well known to many, and his head was raised 
like a stone on the cold and stiff rock of his body). 


17. The long period of three centuries passed over him in this way, when 
his soul was awakened to light under the pain of the rains of his mountain cell. 


18. The oppressed body then assumed its intellectual or spiritual form, 
lingadeha; which was a living subtle body as air or light but without its acts of 
breathing the vital air. (The aerial spirit has vitality, without inhaling or 
exhaling the vital air). 


19. This body growing by degrees to its rarefied form by its imagination, 
became of the form of the inner mind, which was felt to reside within the 
heart. (But the mind is seated in the brain, and not in the heart). 


20. It thought in itself of having become a pure and living liberated seer or 
sage, in which state it seemed to pass a hundred years under the shade of a 
Kadamba tree, in the romantic grove of the Kailasa mountain, (a peak of the 
Himalayas). 


21. It seemed of taking the form of a Vidyddhara for a century of years, in 
which state it was quite free from the diseases of humanity. It next thought of 
becoming the great Indra, who is served by the celestials, and passing full five 
Yuga ages in that form. 


22. Rama said: — Let me ask you, Sir, how could the mind of the sage 
conceive itself as the Indra and Vidyddhara, whom it had never seen, and how 
could it have the ideas of the extensive Kaildsa and of the many ages in its 
small space of the cell, which is impossible in nature. 


23. Vasishtha replied. — The Intellect is all comprehending and all 
pervading, and wherever it exerts its power in any form, it immediately 
assumes the same by its own nature. Thus, the undivided intellect exhibits 
itself in various forms throughout the whole creation. 


24. It is the nature of the intellect to exhibit itself in any form, as it 
represents itself in the understanding; and it is its nature to become whatever 
it pleases to be at any place or time. (It is the nature of the finite heart to be 
confined in the finite cell of the body, but the nature of the infinite intellect 
grasps all and everything at once in itself, as it ranges through and 
comprehends the whole and every part of the universe within it). 


25. So the impersonal sage saw himself in various forms and personalities 
in all the worlds, in the ample sphere of his consciousness within the narrow 
space of his heart. (The heart is said to be the seat of the soul. And so, says 
Pope, — “As full and perfect in a hair as heart.’’) 


26. The man of perfect understanding, has transformed his desires to 
indifference; and the desires of men like seeds of trees, being singed by the 
fire of intelligence, are productive of no germ of acts. 


27. He thought to be an attendant on the god (Siva), bearing the crescent of 
the moon on his forehead, and became acquainted with all sciences, and the 
knowledge of all things past, present, and future. 


28. Everyone sees everything in the same manner on his outside as it is 
firmly imprest in his inward mind; but this sage being freed from the 


impression of his personality in his life time, was at liberty to take upon him 
whatever personality he chose for himself. (It is possible for every person and 
thing to become another, by forgetting and forsaking their own identity and 
individuality). 


29. Rama said: — I believe, O chief of sages! that the living liberated man 
who sits in this manner, obtains the emancipation of his soul, even though he 
is confined in the prison house of his body; and such was the case of the self- 
liberated sage Vitahavya. (The body may be confined in a single spot, but the 
soul has its free range everywhere). 


30. Vasishtha answered: — How can Ram! the living liberated souls, have 
the confinement of the body, when they remain in the form of Brahm in the 
outward temple of his creation, which is pure and tranquil as air. (The gloss 
says: — the ideal body like the ideal world cannot be the living or divine soul, 
any more than it is for a burnt vesture to invest the body. Hence Nature which 
is said to be the body of God, has no power over the spirit whose reflexion it 
is). 

31. Wherever the empty and airy consciousness represents itself in any 
form, it finds itself to be spread out there in that form. (Hence it is that the 
conscious spirit assumes any form it likes, and rejects it at will without being 
confined within or by the same). 


32. So there appears many ideal worlds to be present before us, which are 
full with the presence of the all-pervading spirit of God. (Because all these 
worlds are ideas or images or reflexions of God). 


33. Thus Vitahavya, who was confined in the cave and submerged under 
the mire, saw in the intellect of his great soul, multitudes of worlds and 
countless unformed and ideal creations. 


34. And he having thought himself at first as the celestial Indra, conceived 
himself afterwards as an earthly potentate, and preparing to go on a hunting 
excursion to some forest. 


35. This sage, who supposed himself as the swan of Brahma at one time, 
now became a chief among the Dasa huntsmen in the forests of Kailasa. 


36. He who thought himself once as a prince in the land of Surastra, (Surat 
in Bombay), had now became as a forester in a village of the Andhras in 
Madras. 


37. Rama said: — If the sage enjoyed heavenly bliss in his mind, what need 
had he of assuming these ideal forms to himself? (since nobody would even in 
thought, like to exchange his spiritual delight for corporeal enjoyment). 


38. Vasishtha replied: — Why do you ask this question, Rama, when you 
have been repeatedly told that this world is a false creation of the divine mind, 
and so were the creations of the sage’s mind also, (neither of them being 
anything in reality). 


39. The universe which is the creation of the divine intellect, is as 
unsubstantial as empty air; and so the ideal world of the human mind, being 
but a delusion, they are both alike. 


40. In truth, O Rama! neither is that world nor is this other anything in 
reality; nor have I or thou any essentiality in this nonessential world, which is 
filled only with the essence of God. 


41. The one is as the other at all times, whether past, present, or future; all 
this visible world is the fabric of the mind which is again but an ectype of the 
Intellect. 


42. Such is the whole creation, though appearing as otherwise; it is no other 
than the transcendental vacuum, although it seems to be as firm as adamant. 
(Vasishtha resolves everything to his prime essence and unity of vacuity). 


43. It is its ignorance that the mind exhibits itself in the forms of the 
production, growth, and extinction of things; all which are like the rise and 
swinging and sinking of waves, in the ocean of eternal vacuity. 


44. All things are situated in the vacuous sphere of the intellect, and are 
perceived by its representative of the mind, in the form of the firm and 
extended cosmos, though it has no extension in reality. 


CHAPTER LXXXV. 
The sage’s Samadhi or Absorption in the Divine 
Spirit. 


Argument. Lecture on Samddhi Yoga or complete concentration of the 
Mind in God. 


NOTE: Samadhi is described as the continual concentration of thought, by 
means of which all external objects, and even one’s own 
individuality is forgotten, and the mind is fixed completely and 
immovably on the one Being. 


Rama said: — Now tell me Sir, what became of this sage in his mansion of 
the cavern; how he lifted his body from it, and what did he accomplish by his 
austere and intense devotion? 


2. Vasishtha said: — At last the mind of the sage was as extended as the 
divine mind, and he beheld the Divine soul in its full glory in his own soul. 


3. He saw the primeval or dawning light of the intellect in his meditation, 
which exhibited to his remembrance the scenes of his former states of 
existence. 


4. He then beheld the various forms of the bodies, through which he had 
passed in his former lives; as also those things which had passed and gone and 
those living with his present body in the cell. 


5. He found his living body lying in the cave as an insect, and had a mind 
to raise it above the surrounding mud and mire. 


6. This body of Vitahavya which was confined in the cave, was covered 
over with the dirt, carried by the rain waters and collected over its back. 


7. He saw his body pent up in the prison house of the cave, with loads of 
clay on its back, and fettered in its limbs by the shrubs, carried into it by the 
torrents of rain. 


8. He thought in his clear understanding, of raising his incarcerated body 
out of the cave; and made repeated efforts by force of his breathings, to 
extricate it from its confinement. 


9. With all his efforts, he found it impossible for his bodily powers, to 
eliminate himself and walk upon the ground; whereupon he exerted his 
spiritual power (which he had obtained by his devotion), to raise his spirit to 
the orb of the sun. 


10. He thought either of being raised upward by the golden rays of the sun, 
or of obtaining his disembodied liberation, by the disengagement of his soul 
from the bondage of his body. 


11. He thought in his elevated mind, “I lose nothing by the loss of my 
bodily exertions and exercise; but rather loosened myself from my bonds, and 
repairing to my state of blessedness.” 


12. Then remaining for some time in his thoughtful mood on earth, he said, 
“neither is the leaving or having of this body, of any good or loss to me.” 


13. For as we forsake one body, so we betake to another; the difference 
consisting on the size and bulk of the one, and the minuteness and lightness of 
the other. (These are the garimd of the corporeal, and laghimd or anima of the 
spiritual body). 


14. Let me then mount on this golden ray, — pingala, of the sun and fly in 
the open air; and borne by the vehicle of light, I will enter into the body of the 
sun. (“Lo! I mount, I fly.” — Pope’s Dying Christian to his soul). 


15. I will enter in the form of my shadow in the ethereal mirror of the sun, 
and this my aerial breath will conduct me to that orb. (The spiritual body 
resembles the shadow of the material frame, and is reflected in the luminaries 
of heaven as in their mirrors. The departing breath of the dying person, is the 
conductor of his soul to upper worlds). 


16. He ascended with his paryashtaka or subtle and spiritual body upon the 
air, as the heat of fire passes out through the hollow of a pair of bellows; and 
the mindful sun saw a great sage in this state within his breast. (The sun is 
said to be a muni or mindful; i.e., having a mind as any animated being). 


17. On seeing the sage in this state, the high-minded sun, called to his mind 
the former acts of his devotion, and remembered his body lying in the cell of 
the Vindyan region. 


18. The sun traversing amidst the ethereal regions, came to know the 
actions of the sage; and beheld his body lying insensible in the cave, covered 


under the grass and stones. 


19. He ordered his chief attendant to lift up the body of the sage, whose 
soul had now assumed its spiritual form. 


20. The aerial form of the sage, now saluted the adorable sun with his 
reverential mind; and was then recognized and received by him with due 
honour. 


21. He entered into the body of the solar attendant, — Pingala, who was 
now proceeding from heaven to the cell amidst the delightful groves of the 
Vindhyan range. 


22. Pingala entered the Vindhyan grove in the form of a cloud, which 
assuming the shape of a big elephant, removed the earth from the surface of 
the cave, with the long nails of his toes. 


23. He then brought out the body of the sage with his trunk, as a stork pulls 
up a lotus stalk from amidst the mud; and then the spiritual body of the muni, 
fled from the form of Pingala to his own. 


24. The sage after his long wanderings in the regions of ether, like a bird in 
the sky; found at last his own body, into which it entered as its nest, and took 
his leave of Pingala with mutual salutations. 


25. They then hurried to their respective callings with their refulgent forms; 
the one fled into the air, and the other repaired to a lake to cleanse his body. 


26. It shone as a star in the limpid lake, and as sun beams under the water; 
and then it appeared above it, as a full-blown lotus on the surface of waters. 
(The effect of devotion is said to brighten the body also). 


27. He rose out of the water as a young elephant, after its sport in some 
dirty pool; and then offered his adoration to the sun, who had restored his 
body and mind to their luminous states. 


28. Afterwards, the sage passed sometime on the bank of the Vindhyan 
lake, fraught with the virtues of universal benevolence, fellow feeling and 
kindness, and joined with the qualities of his peace and tranquility, his 
wisdom and internal bliss, and above all his seclusion and retirement from 
society, and unconcernedness with the concerns of the world. 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 
Government of Bodily Organs. 


Argument. Necessity of controul over senses for concentration of the Mind. 


Vasishtha resumed: — The muni thought again to resume his accustomed 
meditation, and entered a spacious cave in the Vindhya at the end of the day. 


2. He continued in the investigation of the soul, with his command over the 
sensible organs, and he reflected on the reality and unreality of things in his 
mind. 


3. I find, said he, these organs of sense which were under my subjection 
before, are now set at liberty in the exercise of their various functions (tending 
to the destruction of the mind from its fixed attention). 


4. I will now cease to think concerning the existence and inexistence of 
substances, and will recline solely (with my steady posture on that Being to 
whom the being and not being of things is truly known like that of a mountain 
peak). 


5. I will remain wakeful inwardly, appearing as I were dead and asleep 
outwardly; and yet sensible in my insensibility, as the quiet and living soul, 
and thus continue both with the vigilance and supineness of my spirit in the 
state of my quietism; (i.e., appearing as a dead block before the ignorant, but 
as thinking and vivacious in the eye of the intelligent. Or the wise appear as 
fanatics before the foolish worldlings). 


6. Waking as if asleep and sleeping as awake, I will remain in my torpor of 
turiya, which is neither dead nor quick, (and neither the corporeal nor spiritual 
state. — Gloss). 


7. I will remain retired as a rock from all things, and even apart from my 
mind, and dwell in the bosom of the all pervading soul; I will abide with the 
universal spirit in my tranquility, and having ease from all disease. 


8. Having mused in this manner, he sat at his meditation for six days and 


nights; after which he was roused as a passenger wakes after his short nap on 
the way. 


9. Then this great devotee, having obtained the consummation of his 
devotion, passed his long life in the state of his living liberation. (Or living 
apart from all cares and concerns of the world). 


10. He took delight in nothing nor hated anything; he felt no sorrow for 
aught nor any pleasure in naught; (i.e., he had his stoic indifference to 
everything, whether good or bad). 


11. Whether walking or sitting, he was thoughtless of everything; his heart 
was void of cares, and he conversed with his mind alone at pleasure. 


12. Behold! he said to his mind, O lord of my senses! the unsullied and 
undecaying joy that thou dost enjoy in the tranquility; and say if there is a 
greater felicity than this to be found on earth. (For true felicity, according to 
the Vedantist, consisted not in the possession, but renunciation of earthly 
cares and concerns, so Hafiz: — “Ddaddunidodhilha.” Abandon the world 
and all its people). 


13. Therefore, O my mind! that art the fleetest of all things, repress thy 
flight and excitability; and rely on thy cool composure for thy lasting 
happiness. 


14. O my roguish senses, and O ye my perverted organs, ye have nothing to 
do with me. (The senses are related with the mind, and bear no relation to the 
soul). 


15. The stiffness of the outer organs, is the cause of their failure; and the 
volition of the mind, is the cause of its disappointment; and neither of these 
have the power to protect me from evil. 


16. Those that believe the senses, as same with the soul, are as deluded as 
they, that mistake the rope for a snake. 


17. To take what is not the self for self, is equal to the taking of an unreality 
for reality; want of reason produces this mistake, but right reason removes the 
fallacy. 


18. You my senses, and thou my mind, and my living soul, are different 
things, and quite separate from the unity of Brahma. The mind is the active 
principle, and the intellect is passive, and so no one related to the other. (All 
these have their different functions to perform). 


19. But it is their union, that serves to produce the same effect, as the wood 
that grows in the forest, the rope that is made of flax or hide, the axe made of 


iron, and the carpenter that works for wages, do all combine in the building of 
a house. 


20. Such is the accidental conjunction of different things, that becomes the 
efficient cause of producing certain effects, which could never result alone, as 
in the case of house building just mentioned. 


21. So also in the causation of the various acts of the body, as speech and 
all other works, which are effected by the accidental and simultaneous union 
of the different organs of the body and mind, without the waste or impairing 
of any of them. 


22. Thus when the forgetfulness of death and sleep are buried in oblivion, 
and reminiscence is awakened upon revivification and waking, the 
inactualities are again brought to the position of actuality; (i.e., the inaction is 
changed to action, by combination of mental and bodily activities, which are 
again productive of their purposed results). 


23. In this manner, that great devotee went on with his cogitations for many 
years, in that solitary cell of Vindhya mountain. 


24. Freed from ignorance and afar from temptation, he remained there in 
perfect felicity, and ever contemplating on the means of preventing the 
metempsychosis of his soul. 


25. Seeing the natures of things in their true light, he avoided all that 
presented a false appearance; and for fear of being misled by appearances, he 
resorted to the shelter of meditation (of the intrinsic natures and properties of 
things). 


26. Having his option of choosing what he liked from whatever he disliked, 
he was indifferent to both of them, and his apathetic mind was elevated from 
all that is desirable or detestable in life. 


27. And having renounced the world, and all its connections and the society 
of mankind; and setting himself beyond the bonds of repeated births and 
actions of life, he became one with the incorporeal unity, and drank the 
ambrosial draughts of spiritual delight. 


28. He seemed to sit in his lonely abstraction, in the golden grotto of the 
Sahya mountain; and looked on the entangled paths of the world below, 
without any desire of walking in it, or mixing in its perfidious society. 


29. Then sitting in his erect posture, he said to himself, — “Be passionless, 
O my impassioned heart, and rest at peace my intolerant spirit.” 


30. I bid you farewell, O ye enjoyments of the world, that have tempted me 


to taste your bitter pleasures in innumerable births and transmigrations. 


31. Ye pleasures that have deluded me so long like the indulgences of boys; 
behold me now placed above your reach, by the absence of desire in my state 
of holy and heaven-born nirvana anaesthesia. 


32. [hail thee, O spiritual delight, that madest me forget my past pleasures; 
and I thank you ye pains! that have led me to the inquiry of the soul with so 
much ardour. 


33. It is by thee, O sour misery! that this blissful state is revealed to me; 
and thou art to be thanked for bringing me under the cooling umbrage of 
heavenly delight. 


34. I thank thee Adversity! that hast revealed to me the felicity of my soul; 
and I bless thee, my friend! for thy making the vanity of worldly life known 
unto me. 


35. O my body! that art so intimately united with myself, I see thy union to 
be but a temporary one; and like the short-lived amity of interested men, who 
forsake their beneficient friends in a moment. 


36. Thus am I forsaken by all my bodies, in my various by-gone births; and 
so hath my soul, forsaken them all, in its repeated transmigrations in different 
forms of living bodies. 


37. Even in my present state, my body brings its own ruin on itself; by its 
being slighted by the soul, upon its advancement in spiritual knowledge. 
(Spiritualism is deteriorative of physical powers). 


38. It is no fault of mine, that the body is discontented at my contentment; 
or that it should be impaired by my abstinence, and broken down by my 
indigence. (i.e., The practice of austerities is a preventive of bodily growth). 


39. Grieve not my churlish avarice, that I have grown averse to gain; and 
you must pardon me, O my fond desires, that I have become so devoid of my 
wishes, and betaken myself to the virtue of Vairdgya or insouciance. 


40. I have now betaken myself to my indifference, and want to thrive 
therein; and pray of thee, O thou restless concupiscence! to have no more any 
concern with me. 


41. And I bid my last farewell to thee, O thou deity of piety and pious 
deeds! that I may no more engage myself to the performance of acts, (because 
acts are attended with temporary and no lasting resultants). 


42. I am lifted from the pit of hell and placed in heaven, and bid adieu to 


the arbour of pleasures, growing in the soil of wicked acts, and bearing as its 
fruits the torments of hell. 


43. I bid farewell to the tree of sin, bearing the flowers of our punishment, 
whereby I was doomed to repeated transmigrations in lower births. (Does the 
passage allude to the forbidden tree, which brought death on earth, and its 
sequence of repeated births in endless misery?) 


44. I bow down to that unseen form of delusion, which uttered the sweet 
voice of a sounding bamboo, and covered itself with a garment of leaves. 
(Does it mean the deluded Adam hiding his nudity under the leaves of trees?) 


45. I bow to thee my holy cell, that art my associate in this devout 
devotion; and art the only refuge of this weak body of mine, after its weary 
journey in the rugged paths of the world. 


46. Thou wast my kind companion, and remover of all my desires; and hast 
been my only shelter, after I fled from all the dangers and difficulties of the 
world. 


47. And thou my pilgrim’s staff, that wast the support of my aged body and 
arm; I have found my best friend in thee, for thy relieving my fatigue, and 
guiding my footsteps in this dangerous and cavernous retreat. 


48. I thank thee also, O my aged body! that art the prop of my life, even in 
this old age of thine; when thou art reduced to thy ribs, covering thy bloodless 
entrails, and thy shrivelled veins and arteries. 


49. Depart now my dilapilated body, with the pith and marrow that there 
yet remain in thee; and away ye excrements that were in need of my repeated 
ablutions and purifications. 


50. I bid adieu to all my acts and dealings in the world, which had been the 
destined causes and my connate companions, in all my transmigrations in this 
world. (Human actions being causes of their repeated births, for the sake of 
reaping their proper retributions). 


51. I next bid you farewell, O my vital airs! who kept company with me 
through all my various births, and from whom I, (i.e., my soul), will soon fly 
away. 


52. How oft have I passed with you to foreign parts, and reposed in the 
dales and groves of mountainous tracts; how long have we sported about the 
cities, and how often have we dwelt in mountain retreats. (i.e., The soul with 
its subtle body, is sempiternal and ubiquious). 


53. How many times have we run to different directions, and were engaged 


in various avocations of life. In fact there was no time and place in the space 
of the universe, when and where we did not live together. 


54. In truth I have never done nor seen, nor given nor taken anything apart 
from you; and now I bid you adieu my friend, as I must soon part from you. 


55. All things in the world have their growth and decay, and are destined to 
rise and fall by turns; and so also are the union and separation of things, the 
unavoidable course of nature. 


56. Let this light which is visible to sight, reenter in the sun whence it 
proceeds, and let these sweet scents which come to my smelling, mix with the 
flowers from which they are breathed and blown. 


57. Let my vital breath and oscillation, join with the ethereal air; and let all 
the sounds I hear, return from my ears to the vacuous sphere. (Lit. Let me lose 
my audibility in vacuity which is receptacle of sounds). 


58. Let my taste or sapidity, revert to the orb of the moon whence it has 
sprung; and let me be as quiet as the sea after its churning by the Mandara 
mount; and as the cool hour of the evening after the sun has set. (Gustation or 
flavour, — rasa, comes from the moon. — Sruti. Dindnta-ramya the cooling 
evening. — Kalidasa). 


59. Let me be as silent as the dumb cloud in autumn, and as still as the 
creation, after the great deluge at the end of a Kalpa; let me remain 
thoughtless, as when the mind is concentrated in the dot of om or on, and 
when my soul rests in supreme soul. Let me be as cold as when the fire is 
reduced to ashes, and as extinct as the extinguished and oilless lamp. 


60. Here I sit devoid of all actions, and removed from the sight of all living 
beings; I am freed from the thoughts of worldly things, and am resting in the 
peace of my soul, which is seated in my cranium. 


CHAPTER LXXXVII. 
Term. The one in various term. 


Argument. The manner in which the sage obtained his Bodiless Liberation 
after his Death. 


Vasishtha continued: — Then repeating aloud the sacred syllable Om, and 
reflecting on the Universe contained in it; the sage obtained his internal peace, 
after he had got rid of his thoughts and was freed from his desires. (The 
meditation of Om or on presented all existence to his mind, and it is shown in 
the definition of that word in the Introduction of this book). 


2. He cogitated on the several mdtrds or moments, which compose the 
utterance of that mystic syllable; but leaving aside all its attributes, he 
meditated only on the reality of the pure and imperishable One. 


3. He abstracted his mind from his internal and external organs, as also 
from his grosser and finer feelings and the sensibilities of his heart and body. 
He dismissed of whatever there is in the three worlds and converted all his 
desires to indifference. 


4. He remained unmoved in his body, and as the thoughtful Platonic, 
(chintdmani), rapt in his abstraction; He was full in himself as the full moon, 
and as still as the mount Mandara after its churning was over. 


5. He was as the motionless wheel of the potter’s mill, and as the calm 
ocean undisturbed by waves and winds. 


6. His mind was as the clear firmament, without its sun shine and darkness; 
and his heart was bright, without the light of the sun, moon and stars. His 
intellect was unclouded by the fumes, dust and cloud of ignorance, and his 
soul was as clear as the autumnal sky. (The gloss points out the combination 
of many figures in this tetrastich sloka). 


7. Then raising his voice from the ventricle, to the topmost pranava in the 
cranium of his head; his mind transcended the region of the sensations, as the 
wind oversteps the area of fragrance (which remains below.) 


8. His mental darkness then fled from his mind, as the gloom of night is 
dispelled by the dawning light of morn, and as the percipience of sapience, 
puts down and extinguishes the sparks of anger in the bosom. 


9. He then beheld the reflexion of a flood of light within himself, which he 
found to be ceaseless in its brightness; and unlike the light of the luminaries, 
which is repeatedly succeeded by darkness. 


10. Having attained to that state of ineffable light, and inextinguishable 
effulgence; he found his mental powers to be quickly burnt down by its glare 
as the straws are consumed by the touch of fire. 


11. In a short time, he lost his consciousness of that light, as a new born 
child loses in no time, its knowledge of whatever it perceives by any of its 
sensible organs. 


12. It was in a twinkling or half of that time, that this sedate sage stopped 
the course of his thought, as the current wind stops its motion in a moment. 


13. He then remained as fixed as a rock, with his inattentive and mute gaze 
on what passed before him; and retained his vitality like a motionless dreamer 
in his sleep. (Pasyanti in the text means a patient spectator). 


14. He was next lost in his Susupta-hypnotism, as in the insensibility of his 
profound sleep; and thereby attained his ultimate felicity of turiya, in the 
retention of his absolute felicity only. 


15. He was joyous in his joylessness, and was alive without his liveliness; 
he remained as something in his nothingness, and was blazing amidst 
obscurity. (His soul shone forth amidst the gloom of his mind). 


16. He was intelligent in his spirit, without the intelligence of the senses; 
and was as the Sruti says, neither this nor that, nor the one or the other. He, 
therefore, became that which no words can express. 


17. He became that transparent substance, which is transcendentally pure 
and purifying; and was that all pervasive something, which is corporate with 
nothing. 


18. He was the vacuum of Vacuists, and the Brahma of the Brahmists; he 
was the Knowledge of gnostics, and omniscience of scientists. 


19. He became like the Purusha or spirit of the Sankhya materialists, and 
the Iswara of Yoga philosophers; he was alike the Siva of the Sivites, bearing 
the mark of the crescent moon on their foreheads, and as the Time of 
Timeists. 


20. He was the same with the soul of souls of the Psychologists, and as no 
soul of Physicists; he was similar to the Midst or Midmost of the 
Madhyamikas; (i.e., having no beginning nor end), and the All of the even- 
minded Pantheists. 


21. He was identified with the main Truth of every religion, and the essence 
of all creeds; and was self-same with the All essential and Universal Reality. 


22. He was identic with the pre-eminent and unimpaired light, which is 
seen in all lightsome bodies; and was one with the inward light, which he 
perceived to be glowing within himself. 


23. He became the very thing which is one and many, and which is all yet 
nothing. Which is simple and combined with all, and which is that which is 
Tat Sat, — Al Ast. (Or I am that which I am). 


24. In short, he remained as the one undecaying and without its beginning, 
which is one and many, and simple without its parts. Which is purer than the 
pure ether, and which is the Lord God of all. 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 
A Discourse on Yoga Meditation. 


Argument. The Liberated Sage’s suspension of breathing in his breast, the 
emaciation of his body and absorption of his senses. 


Vasishtha Continued: — After Vitahavya had passed beyond the bounds of 
nature, and crossed over this ocean of misery; he pacified also the fluctuations 
of his mind (after he had restrained the actions of his bodily actions). 


2. Being thus becalmed, and brought to the state of perfect inertness; he 
was absorbed in his ultimate supineness, as a drop of rain water and the 
particles of waves, mix in the main ocean. 


3. Sitting continually in his torpid state, his body became thin and lean, 
without its food and functions, and it decayed fastly like the fading lotus in 
winter, without the supply of its proper moisture of water. 


4. His vital breaths fled from the tree of his body, (i.e., from his lungs and 
arteries), and entered into the cavity of the heart, like birds let loose from the 
net, and flying to their nests; (concentration of vital airs into the heart). 


5. His corporeal body which was composed of flesh and bones and the 
organs of sense, remained of course beneath the shady branches of the 
woodland retreat; but his spirit roved beyond the bounds of the elemental 
worlds above. 


6. His individual intellect was absorbed in the ocean of the Universal 
Intellect; as the particles of metallic substances are fused together in the same 
metal. So the soul of the sage found its rest in its intrinsic nature of the 
supreme soul. 


7. Thus have I related to you, O Rama! regarding the rest of the sage in his 
torpid quietism; all this is full of instruction, and you must consider well the 
hidden meaning which is contained therein. (The Gloss speaks a good deal 
about the mysticisms of Yoga and the mysterious meanings of the words 
tanmaya and kaivalya, which are too long to be given in this place). 


8. And know, O Rama, that by your good gifts of these things, and 
perfections, you will be able to attain to that state of beatitude. 


9. Consider well, O Rama! all that I have told you already, and what I will 
at present and in future expound to you. 


10. As I have myself known and well considered all these things in my long 
life, and by my experience of the past, and my knowledge of present and 
future events, so will you be also. (i.e, As he was a sage by his long 
experience, and a seer by his prescience). 


11. Therefore, have the clear sight or clair-voyance of the sage, as I have 
shown to you, and know that it is by means of your transcendental knowledge 
alone, that you can have your emancipation in both worlds. (i.e., Perfect 
liberation in the present life, ensures the freedom of the next; and bondage in 
this state, leads to perpetual bondage in future). 


12. The light of knowledge dispels the darkness of ignorance, and destroys 
the mist of false fears and woes; and knowledge alone is the cause of that 
consummation, which nothing else can bring about. 


13. See how the sage Vitahavya destroyed all his desires, by means of his 
knowledge; and how he cleared the mountain of his mind, from all its 
poisonous plants of worldliness. 


14. Again, his conscious knowledge or clair-voyance of other spheres, led 
the seer to penetrate into the solar orb of his desire on the wings of his rays; 
and thence return (by his reminiscence) to redeem his buried body from cave 
of earth. (So the soul of Jesus ascended to heaven after his crucifixion, and 
returned to redeem his dead and buried body from the grave after three days. 
It is also recorded of many Yogis to revivify their bodies, as it is predicted in 
the holy writ, of the resurrection of all dead bodies on the last day of judgment 
or Quidmat, when the rotten bones will stand up, (quama), at the sound of the 
last trumpet of the Angel. This sort of resurrection is analogous to the daily 
resuscitation, (jdgara or waking) of animal bodies, after their susupta and 
swapna or sleeping and waking states of everybody. But the relinquishment 
and reanimation of the body, was a voluntary act of the Yogi and entirely 
dependent on his free will and option. Hence the modern Yogis and Jugis, are 
known to bury their dead bodies, and not to burn them like Hindus. And all 
this depends on the knowledge of Yoga philosophy as it is said here in the 
text). 


15. This sage was the personification of the mind, and it is the mind which 
is personified in the sensible or visible forms of, I, thou, he and this other. 
(Because the mind being the essential part of man makes his personality, and 


not the body which is but an appendage to the mind). The mind is also this 
world which consists in it, and without which it is not known to subsist. (The 
mind makes the world and is identified with it, wherefore Brahma, the mind 
of God, is represented as the maker and identic with the world). 


16. By knowing this transcendent truth, and being freed from the faults of 
passions and feelings, and far removed from the foibles and frailties of the 
world, the silent sage followed the dictates of his mind, and attained thereby 
the endless blissfulness of his soul: — the summum bonum of human life. 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 
A Lecture on Rationalistic Meditation. 


Argument. On Freedom from Desires and Delusions, and Aerial flights of 
Yogis, and the Indestructibleness of their bodies. 


Vasishtha said: — Rama! you must have to imitate this sage, in order to know 
the nature of the soul, and all that is knowable and worth knowing. And in 
order to know these things, you must be passionless, and without the emotions 
of fear and perturbation of your spirit at all times. 


2. As this sage seemed to pass the course of many millions of years, in his 
cheerful meditation; so you shall have to habituate yourself to your silent 
contemplation, without the discontentedness of your mind. 


3. There have been many more sages of great minds in their times and 
places, who have had their perfection in the same way; and who are worthy of 
your imitation for the consummation of your object. 


4. Knowing the soul to be inaccessible by pain and pleasure at all times, 
and as everlasting and ubiquitous in all places; no one, O mighty prince! has 
any cause to be sorry for it (or mourn for the loss of what is immortal in its 
nature). 


5. There are many persons living in this world, who are well acquainted 
about the nature of the soul; but nobody is so sorry for the misery of human 
souls like yourself, (as it is related in the beginning of this work). 


6. Remain quiet and in good cheer, with the magnanimity and equanimity 
of thy mind; and know thyself to be imperishable, and without any change or 
regeneration. 


7. No living liberated man like yourself, is ever subject to sorrow or mirth 
at the vicissitudes of life; as the brave lion is never moved from his sedateness 
like the changeful peacock (at the change of seasons like the weather-cock). 


8. Rama said: — Sir, this discourse of yours, gives rise to a doubt in me, 


which I want you to disperse like an autumnal cloud. (The doubt is resembled 
to a thick rainy cloud, and its form is likened to that of a flimsy mist in 
autumn). 


9. Tell me Sir, that art best acquainted with spiritual knowledge, why the 
bodies of living liberated persons, are not to be seen to mount to the skies. 


10. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, the powers of mounting to the sky 
and flying in the air, belong naturally to volant bodies, (as the fowls and flies 
of the air). (And the mounting to the sky is the property of igneous and 
ethereal beings, as those of the flame of fire and aerial spirits). 


11. All the various motions that are seen to act in different directions, are 
according to the natural tendencies of bodies, and are never desired by the 
spiritualist (who would derive no good or benefit whatever by his bodily 
movements). 


12. Volitation is no way desirable to the living liberated soul, when the 
volant power is easily acquired by the unspiritual and unliberated ignorant 
people, by many physical and artificial powers, derived by application of 
proper means, mantras and other practices. (Such as, the flight of winged ants 
before the rains, the aerostatics of balloons and pyrotechnics, the aerostation 
of magical mantras, and the volant power acquired by some practical Yogis, 
who practise the swinging of their bodies in air, by means of the suppression 
of their breath). 


13. Volitation or flying is no business of the spiritualist, who is concerned 
with his knowledge of the soul only; he is content with his spiritual 
knowledge and union with the Supreme soul, and does not meddle with the 
practices of the ignorant practitioners of false Yoga. 


14. Know all earthly contrivances to be the offspring of worldliness, and 
the progeny of spiritual ignorance. Say then what spiritualist is there, that will 
be so foolish as to plunge himself in this gross ignorance. 


15. He who pursues the path of spiritual ignorance, by his meditations and 
contrivances for his temporal welfare; must be blind to the future welfare of 
his soul, against the course of the holy sage and saint. 


16. It is possible for the wise, as well as the unwise, to acquire the power of 
his flying in the air, by the continued practice of Yoga, or some other of the 
aforesaid arts and expedients of mantras and the like. 


17. But the spiritual man remains quite aloof and afar from these, and has 
no desire for any such thing; he is content with himself, and finds his rest in 
the supreme soul, beside which he has nothing in view. 


18. He has neither the aerial journey, nor any supernatural power or 
worldly enjoyment for his object; and neither is earthly glory or honour in his 
view, nor does he desire to live nor fear to die. 


19. He is ever content and quiet in his soul, and is devoid of desires and 
affections in his mind; he is of the form of empty air, and remains with his 
spiritual knowledge as the idol of his soul. 


20. He is unapprehensive of adversity or calamity, and unaffected by 
feelings of pleasure and pain; he has full satiety in his privation of everything, 
and is unconcerned about his life and death, by remaining himself as the 
living dead. 


21. He remains unmoved at all evens and odds, as the Ocean is at a stand- 
still with all the outpourings of the rivers; and he continues to meditate on, 
and adore the divine spirit in his own spirit. 


22. He has no need of acquiring or amassing any wealth for himself, nor is 
he in need of asking anything of any body for his supportance. 


23. The unspiritual man who aims at the acquisition of supernatural 
powers, must sacrifice the means of his consummation to the acquirement of 
such powers. (i.e., He must give up the seeking of his perfection in pursuit of 
those powers. Or, he who wants to wax rich and great, may become so at the 
loss of his peace and content and honesty). 


24. All things are accomplished by application of their proper means, and 
what is thus ordained to take place, cannot be undone even by the three-eyed 
God Siva himself. (It is believed that some mantras and gems are possessed of 
the power, of lifting living bodies in the air). 


25. Thus volitation depends on the application of proper means, and not on 
one’s volition only; and nothing can alter the nature of things, as that of the 
coolness of moon-beams. 


26. Whether one is all-knowing or much-knowing, and all-powerful or 
much-powerful as a Hari or Hara; yet there is no body that has the power of 
setting aside the destined law of nature (as for the terrestrials to fly in air, and 
the celestials to walk on the earth). 


27. Thus it depends on the nature of things, Rama! and the combination of 
times and circumstances, as also the application of proper means and mantras, 
that causes a mortal to fly in the air, and an immortal to descend on earth. 


28. So it is the property of some drugs, gems and mantras, to destroy the 
destructive power of poison; and of wine to intoxicate the wine-bibber; and so 


of emetics to cause vomiting. 


29. Thus all things have naturally the power of producing some effect, 
according to its proper application and the mode and manner of it. 


30. Hence no one that is unacquainted with these things, is able to effect his 
flight in the air; and he that is fraught with his spiritual knowledge, has no 
need of these practices. 


31. All knowledge relating to the properties of things, and their application 
in proper mode and manner for the bringing on of certain ends, is of no good 
to the spiritualist for his attaining to spirituality. 


32. He who wishes to have supernatural powers, may gain them by his long 
practice; but what need has the theosophist of these practices or powers for 
himself? 


33. It is after his freedom from the net of his desires, that the spiritualist 
attains to his spiritual state; how then, can he entertain any desire which is 
opposed to it? 


34. Everyone endeavours to present in the course, to which he is led by the 
desires rising in his heart; and whether he is learned or not, he reaps the 
reward of his endeavours in due time. 


35. Vitahavya never endeavoured to acquire any supernatural power; all his 
endeavours aspired to the gaining of spiritual perfection, which he obtained by 
his devotion in the forest. 


36. It is not impossible or hard, to effect the acquisition of supernatural 
powers; should one persist in the course of practicing and applying the proper 
means to those ends. 


37. The success which attends on anybody in the consummation of his 
object, is entirely owing to his personal exertion, and may be called the fruit 
of the tree of his own labour. 


38. But these successes and consummations, are of no use to those great 
minded men, who have known the Knowable One in himself; and who have 
made an end of their worldly desires. 


39, Rama said: — Sir, I have yet another question for your explanation, and 
it is this, why did not the ravenous beasts of the desert, devour the dead-like 
body of the devoted sage, and why did it not moulder under the earth, by 
which it was covered? 


40. And again, how the bodiless and liberated soul of the sage, which was 


absorbed in the sunlight, return to resume its dilapidated body, which was 
buried in the mountain cave. 


41. Vasishtha replied: — The conscious soul that believes itself to be 
embodied with its mortal body, and beset by the coils of its desires and the 
bonds of its affections, is here subjected both to the feeling of pleasure and the 
pangs of pain. 


42. But the intelligent soul which relies on its pure consciousness, and is 
freed from the net of its desires, remains only with its subtle spiritual body, 
(which no beast or bird can devour, nor any dust or rust can destroy). So says 
the Gita: — It is indivisible and unconsumable, and neither does it moulder 
nor dry up at any time. 


43. Hear now, Rama, the reason why the body of the Yogi, is not subject to 
the accidents of disjunction or corruption for many hundreds of years (under 
the influence of heat and cold and other casualties). 


44. Whenever the mind is occupied with the thought of anything, it is 
immediately assimilated into the nature of that object, and assumes the same 
form on itself. 


45. Thus, upon seeing or thinking of an enemy, the mind turns to enmity, at 
the very sight or thought of its foe; as it assumes the nature of friendliness, on 
the visit and remembrance of a friend. 


46. So on seeing a hill or tree or passenger, that bears no enmity or 
friendship to it, the mind remains equally indifferent towards the same, and 
without any change in its disposition as it is perceived by us. 


47. Again, the mind is sweetened, (pleased), on relishing the sweets, and 
embittered by tasting the bitter. It becomes fond of the sweet, and averse to 
whatever is sour and bitter and unpalatable. 


48. So when a ravenous beast comes in the sight of a dispassionate Yogi, its 
envious nature is changed to dispassionateness, and it desists from doing him 
any injury. (So says Patanjali, — “Good company turns the wicked to 
goodness”). 


49. The malicious being freed from his malice, in the company of the even 
minded stoic, desists from the doing of any harm, to anyone; as the indifferent 
wayfarer has no business to break the straggling branches and trees growing 
on the way side, which the rude rustics are apt to lop off and cut down (for the 
making of their fuel). 


50. But the savage beast being removed from the side of the Yogi, resumes 


its ravenous nature again, in the company of the rapacious and wild beasts of 
the forest. 


51. Hence it was that the envious beasts of the forest, the tigers, lions and 
bears; as also the reptiles and creeping insects of earth, did not molest the 
sedate body of the sage, so long as they lurked and crept about it. 


52. The reason why the body was not reduced to the dust of the earth is, 
because the silent conscience that there dwells in common, in all existent 
bodies of animals, vegetables and minerals, and abides in them as in the 
person of a dumb creature, would not allow them to injure the innocent body 
of the sage lying flat on the ground. 


53. The spiritualised body of the Yogi, is seen to move about on earth, like 
the shadow of something floating on the water. 


54. Therefore, the spiritual body of the sage, which was rarefied above the 
elemental bodies by virtue of his spiritual knowledge, became quite 
incorruptible in its nature. 


55. Hear me tell you another reason, Rama! that it is the want of oscillation 
which is the cause of destruction, as it is the vibration or breathing of the heart 
which is the cause of life. 


56. It is the breathing of vital breaths, which causes the vibration of the 
arteries, and this being stopped, the body becomes as still as a stone. 


57. He who has lost the pulsations of his heart and vital breaths, has lost 
also both his vitality and mortality, and become as stones, (which are neither 
dead nor alive). 


58. When the internal and external pulsations of the body are at a stop, 
know, O well-informed Rama! the intestinal parts are not liable to any change. 


59. The motion of the body being stopped, and the action of the heart 
having ceased; the humours of the body become as stiff and inert, as the solid 
mountain of Meru. 


60. So the want of fluctuation, is seen to cause the steadiness of all things in 
the world; and hence the bodies of sages are known to be as quiet, as the 
blocks of wood and stone. 


61. The bodies of Yogis, therefore, remain entire for thousands of years; 
and like clouds in the sky and stones underneath the water, are neither soiled 
nor rotten at any time. 


62. It was in this manner that this sage, who knew the truth, and was best 


acquainted with the knowledge of the knowable, left his earthy body, in order 
to find the rest of his soul in the Supreme Spirit. 


63. Those men of great minds who are dispassionate, and know what is 
chiefly to be known above all others, pass beyond the bounds of this earth and 
even of their bodies, to assume an independent form of their own. 


64. They are then perfect masters of themselves, whose minds are well 
governed by their right understanding; and are not affected by the influence of 
their destiny or the acts of their past lives, nor moved by their desires of any 
kind. 


65. The minds of consummate Yogis, are of the nature of destiny; because 
they can easily effect whatever they think upon, as if they were the acts of 
chance as in Kdkatdliya Sanyoga. 


66. So it was with this sage, who no sooner thought of the renovation of his 
body, than he found it presented before his sight, as if it were an act of chance 
(or the kdkatdlic accident). 


67. When the soul forsakes its earthly frame, after the fruition of the fruits 
of its passed actions is over; it assumes a spiritual form, which is the state of 
its disembodied liberation, and when it enjoys its perfect liberty in its 
independent state. 


68. The mind being freed from its desires, is released from all its bonds, 
and assumes the spiritual form of the pure soul; it then effects instantly all that 
it wishes to do, and becomes all-powerful as the great Lord of all. 


CHAPTER XC. 
Admonition on the Mind and its Yoga Meditation. 


Argument. The Two ways of subduing selfishness; by Universal 
Benevolence and want of Personality. 


Vasishtha said: — After the sage Vitahavya, had subdued his heart and mind 
by his rationality, there arose in him the qualities of universal benevolence 
and philanthropy (for want of his selfishness). 


2. Rama asked: — How do you say, Sir, that the quality of benevolence 
sprang in the mind of the sage, after it had been wholly absorbed in itself by 
its rationality? (since the total insensibility of one if himself, cannot have any 
regard for others). 


3. Tell me Sir, that art the best of speakers, how can the feelings of 
universal love and friendliness, arise in the heart which is wholly cold and 
quiet, or in the mind which is entranced in the divine spirit? 


4. Vasishtha replied: — There are two kinds of mental numbness, the one 
being its coma in the living body; and the other its deadliness after the 
material body is dead and gone. (The one is swariipa and the other artipa; the 
first having its formal existence, and the other being a formless one). 


5. The possession of the mind is the cause of woe, and its extinction is the 
spring of happiness; therefore, one should practise the abrasion of the essence 
of his mind (or personality), in order to arrive to its utter extinction. 


6. The mind that is beset by the net of the vain desires of the world, is 
subject to repeated births, which are the sources of endless woes. (The world 
is a vale of tears, and worldly-mindedness is the spring of misery). 


7. He is reckoned as a miserable being, who thinks much of his person, and 
esteems his body, as the product of the good deserts of his past lives; and who 
accounts his foolish and blinded mind as a great gift to him. (Human life is 
usually esteemed as the best of all living beings; and the Sdstra says, “the 
human body is the best gain after millions of transmigrations in other forms.’’) 


8. How can we expect the decrease of our distress, as long as the mind is 
the mistress of the body? It is upon the setting down of the mind, that the 
world appears to disappear before us. (As the setting sun hides the world from 
our sight). 


9. Know the mind to be the root of all the miseries of life, and its desires as 
the sprouts of the forest of our calamities. 


10. Rama asked: — Who is it, Sir, whose mind is extinct, and what is the 
manner of this extinction; say also how its extinction is brought on, and what 
is the nature of its annihilation? 


11. Vasishtha replied: — O support of Raghu’s race! I have told you before 
of the nature of the mind; and you will hear now, O best of inquirers! the 
manner of extinguishing its impulses. 


12. Know that mind to be paralysed and dead, which is unmoved from its 
steadiness by pleasure and pain; and remains unshaken as a rock at the gentle 
breath of our breathing. (i.e., the man that lives and breathes, but moves not 
from his purposes). 


13. Know also that mind, to be as dull as dead, which is devoid of the sense 
of its individuality from others; and which is not degraded from the loftiness 
of its universality, to the meanness of its personality. 


14. Know that mind also, to be dead and cold, which is not moved by 
difficulties and dangers; nor excited by pride and giddiness, nor elated by 
festivity nor depressed by poverty and penury; and in short which does not 
lose its serene temperament at any reverse of fortune. 


15. Know, gentle Rama! this is what is meant by the death of the mind, and 
the numbness of the heart; and this is the inseparable property of living 
liberation (of those that are liberated in their lifetime). 


16. Know mindfulness to be foolishness, and unmindedness is true 
wisdom; and it is upon the extinction of mental affections, that the pure 
essence of the mind appears to light. 


17. This display of the intrinsic quality of the mind, after the extinction of 
its emotions; and this temperament of the mind of the living liberated persons, 
is said by some to be the true nature of the mind. 


18. The mind that is fraught with the benevolent qualities, has its best 
wishes for all living beings in nature; it is freed from the pains of repeated 
births in this world of woe, and is called the living liberated mind; (Jivan- 
mukta manas). 


19. The nature of the living liberated mind is said to be its intrinsic essence, 
which is replete with its holy wishes, and exempted from the doom of 
transmigration. 


20. The Swarupa or personal mind, is what has the notion of its personality 
as distinct from its body; and this is the nature of the mind of those that are 
liberated in their lifetime. (This is the nature of the individual and 
unembodied mind). 


21. But when the living liberated person loses the individuality of his mind; 
and becomes as gladsome as moon-beams within himself, by virtue of his 
universal benevolence, it then becomes as expanded and extended, as it 
appears to be present everywhere at all times. 


22. The living liberated person being mindless of himself, becomes as cold 
hearted as a plant growing in a frigid climate, where it blooms with its mild 
virtues, likening the blossoms of the winter plant. 


23. The Arupa or impersonal mind of what I have told you before, is the 
coolness of the disembodied soul, that is altogether liberated from the 
consciousness of its personality. 


24. All the excellent virtues and qualities, which reside in the embodied 
soul, are utterly lost and drowned in the disembodied soul, upon its liberation 
from the knowledge of its personality. 


25. In the case of disembodied liberation, the consciousness of self- 
personality being lost, the mind also loses its formal existence in Viruipa or 
formlessness, when there remains nothing of it. 


26. There remains no more any merit or demerit of it, nor its beauty or 
deformity; it neither shines nor sets any more, nor is there any consciousness 
of pain or pleasure in it. 


27. It has no sense of light or darkness, nor the perception of day and night; 
it has no knowledge of space and sky, nor of the sides, altitude or depth of the 
firmament. 


28. Its desires and efforts are lost with its essence, and there remains no 
trace of its entity or nullity whatever. 


29. It is neither dark nor lightsome, nor transparent as the sky; it does not 
twinkle as a star, nor shines forth as the solar and lunar lights. And there is 
nothing to which it may resemble in its transparency. 


30. Those minds that have freed themselves from all worldly cares, and got 
rid from the province of their thoughts also; are the minds that rove in this 


state of freedom, as the winds wander freely in the region of vacuum. 


31. The intelligent souls that are numb and sleepy, and are set in perfect 
bliss beyond the trouble of rajas and tamas; and which have assumed the 
forms of vacuous bodies, find their rest in the supreme felicity, in which they 
are dissolved in the unity of the Deity. 


CHAPTER XCI. 
On the Origin of the Human Body and 
Consciousness. 


Argument. Of Desire and Breathing as the two seeds, producing the Plant 
of Human Body, bearing the fruits of Worldliness. 


Rama said: — I see the stupendous rock (Brahma) filling the infinite vault of 
vacuum, and bearing the countless worlds as its vast forests, with the starry 
frame for its flowers and the gods and demi-gods for its birds and fowls. 


2. The flashing of lightnings are its blooming blossoms, and the azure 
clouds are the leaves of the forest trees; the seasons and the sun and moon 
fructify these arbors with good looking fruits. 


3. The seven seas are the aqueducts at the foot of this forest, and the 
flowing rivers are its channels; and the fourteen worlds are so many regions of 
it, peopled with various kinds of beings. 


4. This wilderness of the world, is beset by the wide spreading net of 
cupidity; which has overspread on the minds of people, as the creeping vine 
fills the vineyard ground. 


5. Disease and death form the two branches of the arbor of the world, 
(Sansdra Mahiruha), yielding plentifully the fruits of our weal and woe; while 
our ignorance serves to water and nourish this tree to its full growth. 


6. Now tell me, Sir, what is the seed that produced this tree, and what is the 
seed of that seed also. Thus tell me what is the original seed of the production 
of the mundane tree. 


7. Explain to me all this in short, for the edification of my understanding; 
and also for my acquirement of the true knowledge with which you are best 
acquainted. 


8. Vasishtha answered: — Know Rama! the corporeal body to be the seed 
or cause of this arbour of the world. This seed is the desire which is concealed 


in the heart of the body, and shoots forth luxuriantly, in the sprouts of good 
and bad acts and deeds. 


9. It is full of boughs and branches, and luxuriant in the growth of its fruits 
and flowers; and it thrives as thickly and fastly, as the paddy fields flourish in 
autumn. 


10. The mind which is the seed of the body, is subject to and slave of all its 
desires. Its treasure house consists of alternate plenty and poverty, and its 
casket contains the gems of pleasure and pain. 


11. It is the mind which spreads this network of reality and unreality; as it 
stretches the fretwork of truth and falsehood in dreams and visions. 


12. As the dying man sees in his imagination, the messengers of death 
appearing before him; so doth the mind present the figure of the unreal body 
as a reality. 


13. All these forms and figures, which appear to our view in these worlds, 
are the formations of the mind, as the pots and toys are the works of clay. 
(The mind being the same with Brahma, is the formal cause of all existences). 


14. There are two kinds of seeds again which give rise to the arbor of the 
mind, which is entwined by the creepers of its faculties; one kind of these is 
the breathing of the vital breath, and the other is thinking or the train of its 
thoughts. (The text has the words dridha-bhdvana or the certainty of the 
knowledge of its reality). 


15. When the vital air vibrates through the lungs and arteries, the mind then 
has the consciousness of its existence. 


16. When the vital breath ceases to circulate through the lungs and wind 
pipes, there ensues the insensibility of the mind and the circulation of the 
heart-blood is put to a stop. 


17. It is by means of the vibrations of breath and the action of the heart, 
that the mind perceives the existence of the world which is as false as the 
appearance of the blue sky, in the empty space of vacuum. 


18. But when these vibrations and actions fail to rouse the sleeping mind, it 
is then said to enjoy its peace and quiet; otherwise, they merely move the 
body and mind, as the wires move the dolls in the puppet show. 


19. When the body has its sensibility, caused by the breathing of the vital 
air, it begins to move about like a doll dancing in its giddy circle in the Court 
yard, by artifice of the puppet player. 


20. The vibrations of breath awaken also our self-consciousness, which is 
minuter than the minutest atom; and yet all pervasive in its nature, as the 
fragrance of flowers, which is blown afar in the air by the breath of the wind. 


21. It is of great good, O Rama! to confine one’s consciousness in one’s 
self, (as it is to shut the fragrance of the flower in its seed vessel; and it is 
effected by stopping the breathing by means of the practice of prandydma or 
suppression of breath; as the diffusion of odours is prevented by shutting out 
the current air). 


22. By restraining our self-consciousness, we in ourselves succeed to 
refrain from our consciousness of all other things because the knowledge of 
endless objects, (particulars), is attended with infinite trouble to the mind. (All 
knowledge is the vexation of the spirit. — Solomon’s Proverbs). 


23. When the mind comes to understand itself, after it is roused from its 
dormancy of self-forgetfulness (by being addicted to the thoughts of external 
objects); it gains what is known to be the best of gains, and the purest and the 
holiest state of life. 


24. If with the vacillation of your vital breaths, and the fluctuation of your 
wishes, you do not disturb the even tenor of your consciousness, like the 
giddy part of mankind, then you are likened to the great Brahma himself, 
(who lives and does what he likes, without any disturbance of his inward 
intuition). 


25. The mind without its self-consciousness or conscience, is a barren 
waste; and the life of man with its knowledge of truth, is as a mazy path, beset 
with traps and snares of errors and dangers. 


26. The meditative Yogi is practised to the suppression of his breath for the 
peace of his mind, and conducts his prandydma or restraint of respiration, and 
his dhydna or intense meditation, according to the directions of his spiritual 
guide and the precepts of the Sdstras. 


27. Restraint of breath is accompanied by the peace of mind, causing the 
evenness of its temperament; and it is attended with health and prosperity and 
capacity of cogitation to its practiser. 


28. Learn Rama, another cause of the activity of the mind, which is 
considered by the wise as the source of its perpetual restlessness; and this is 
its restless and insatiable concupiscence. 


29. Now this concupiscence is defined as the fixed desire of the mind, for 
the possession of something, without consideration of its prior and ultimate 
conditions. (i.e., Whether it is worth having or not, and whether its gain will 


be productive of the desired object in view). 


30. It is the intensity of one’s thought of getting something that produces it 
before him; in utter disregard of the other objects of its remembrance. (The 
gloss gives a mystic sense of this passage; that reminiscence which is the 
cause of the reproduction of prior impressions, is upset by the intensity of the 
present thought in the mind). 


31. The man being infatuated by his present desire, believes himself as it 
depicts him to be; and takes his present form for real, by his forgetfulness of 
the past and absent reality. (The present unreal appears as real, and the past 
reality passes away as an unreality, as in the case of prince Lava’s believing 
himself a chandala during his dream, and so it is with us to take ourselves as 
we think us to be). 


32. It is the current of our desire, that carries us away from the reality; as 
the drunkard sees everything whirling about him in his intoxication. 


33. Men of imperfect knowledge, are led to like errors by their desires, as a 
man is driven to madness by the impulse of passions. 


34. Such is the nature of the mind, that it leads to the imperfect knowledge 
of things, so as to view the unreal as real, and the unspiritual as spiritual. 


35. It is the eager expectation of getting a thing, which is fixed and rooted 
in the heart, that impels the restless mind to seek its desired object, in repeated 
births and transmigrations. 


36. When the mind has nothing desirable or disgusting to seek or shun, and 
remains apart from both, it is no more bound to regeneration in any form of 
existence. 


37. When the mind is thoughtless about anything, owing to its want of 
desire of the same; it enjoys its perfect composure, owing to its unmindfulness 
of it and all other things. 


38. When there is no shadow of anything, covering the clear face of 
consciousness, like a cloud obscuring the face of the sky; it is then that the 
mind is said to be extinct in a person, and is lost like a lotus-flower, which is 
never seen to grow in the expanse of the sky. 


39. The mind can have no field for its action, when the sphere of the 
intellect is drained and devoid of all its notions of worldly objects. 


40. Thus far have I related to you, Rama, about the form and features of the 
mind; that it is only the entertaining of the thought of something with fond 
desire of the heart. (Here the mind is identified with the fond thought or wish 


of a man). 


41. There can be no action of the mind, when the sphere of the intellect is 
as clear as the empty sky, and without the thought of any imaginary or visible 
object moving before it as the speck of a cloud. 


42. It is called unmindedness also, when the mind is practised to its Yoga, 
or thoughtlessness of all external objects, and remains transfixed in its vision 
of the sole essence of God. 


43. When the mind has renounced the thought of everything within itself, 
and remains in its perfect coolness of cold-heartedness, (sang froid) of Yogis; 
such a mind, though exercising its powers and faculties, it is said to be nil and 
extinct. 


44. He whose want of desires, has chilled his ardour for anything, and 
made him impassionate, is said to have become extinct, and reduced like a rag 
to ashes; (leaving the form without its substance). 


45. He who has no desire of gain to cause his repeated birth and death, is 
called the living liberated; though he should move about in his busy career 
like a potter’s wheel (which is insensible of its motion). 


46. They are also styled the living liberated, who do not taste the pleasure 
of desire; but remain like fried seeds, without regerminating into the sprouts 
of new and repeated births. 


47. Men attaining to spiritual knowledge in their earthly lives, are said to 
have become mindless in this world, and to be reduced to vacuity, (the 
summum bonum of vacuists) in the next. 


48. There are, O Rama! two other seeds or sources of the mind, namely, the 
vital breath and desire; and though they are of different natures, yet the death 
of either occasions the extinction of both. 


49. Both of these are causes of the regeneration of the mind, as the pond 
and the pot (or pipes), are the joint causes of water supply. (Wherein the want 
of the one, is tantamount to the loss of the other also). 


50. The gross desires of men are the causes of their repeated births, as the 
seeds are causes of the repeated growth of trees; and the germ of regeneration 
is contained in the desire, as the future plant is contained in the seed, and the 
oily juice is inbred in the sesamum seed. 


51. The conscious mind is the cause of all things in the course of time, and 
the source of all its pleasure and pain, which rise and fall in itself, and never 
grow without it. (Avindbhavin). 


52. As the union of the breath of life with the organs, produces the 
sensations; so these being united with desire, are productive of the mind. 
(Hence the living and sensitive plants which are devoid of desire, are devoid 
of mind also). 


53. As the flower and its fragrance, and the sesamum seed and its oil are 
united together; so is animal life inseparably connected with its desire. (Hence 
extinction of desire is tantamount to living death). 


54. The desire being the active principle of man, and subversive of his 
passive consciousness; it tends to unfold the seed of the mind, as moisture 
serves to expand the sprouts of vegetable seeds. 


55. The pulsation of the vital breath, awakens the senses to their action, and 
the vibrations of sensation touching the heart strings, move the mind to its 
perception of them. 


56. The infant mind being thus produced by the fluctuating desires, and the 
fluctuations of vital breaths, becomes conscious of itself, as separate and 
independent of its causes. 


57. But the extinction of either of these two sources of the mind, is attended 
with the dissolution of the mind; and also of its pains and pleasures, which 
resemble the two fruits of the tree of the mind. 


58. The body resembles a branching tree, beset by the creepers of its acts; 
our avarice is as a huge serpent coiling about it, and our passions and diseases 
are as birds nestling in it. 


59. It is beset by our erroneous senses, resembling the ignorant birds setting 
upon it; and our desires are the cankers, that are continually corroding our 
breasts and minds. 


60. The shafts of death are felling down the trees of our minds and bodies; 
as the blasts of wind toss the fruits of trees upon the ground; and the flying 
dusts of our desires have filled all sides, and obscured the sights of things 
from our view. 


61. The loose and thick clouds of ignorance overhang on our heads, and the 
pillars of our bodies, are wrapped around by the flying straws of our loose 
desires. 


62. The small bark of our body, gliding slowly along in quest of pleasure, 
falls into the eddy of despair; and so everybody falls into utter gloom, without 
looking to the bright light that shines within himself. 


63. As the flying dust is allayed by the setting down of the winds, so doth 


the dust of the mind subside, by subsidence of the force of our vital airs and 
desires. (The two moving forces of the mind). 


64. Again, it is intelligence or Samvedya, which is the seed or root of both 
of these; and there being this intelligence within us, we have both our vitality 
and our desires also. (The word Samvedya in the text is explained as 
Chaitanya, which is the same with intelligence). 


65. This intelligence springs from Samvid or consciousness; by forsaking 
its universality, and retaining its individuality; and then it becomes the seed 
both of vitality and velleity. (Samvid the consciousness of the impersonal self, 
being vitiated to the knowledge of one’s personality, produces the mind and 
its selfish desires). 


66. Know then your intelligence as the same with your consciousness, and 
resembles the seed of the mind and its desires, both of which quickly die away 
with their root, like a rootless or uprooted plant and tree. 


67. The intelligence never exists without consciousness, and is ever 
accompanied with it, as the mustard seed and its oil. (Or rather, as the oil is 
contained in the mustard seed). 


68. The wakeful conscience gets its intelligence from its desire, as the 
waking consciousness of men, views their death and departure to distant lands 
in dream, from their thoughts of the same. 


69. It is owing to our curiosity only, that our consciousness has its 
intelligence of the intelligible (God); as it is the desire of knowing anything, 
that leads the conscious soul to the knowledge of it. (It means simply that, 
understanding combined with the desire of knowing a thing, becomes the 
knowledge itself. Here is a play of the paronyms, Samvid, Samitti, Samvedya, 
Samvedana and the like). 


70. This world is no more than a network of our imagination, as the boys 
imagine a goblin to be hidden in the dark. (So Bacon: — Men fear death, as 
children fear to go in the dark (for fear of demons)). 


71. It is as the stump of a tree, appearing as a man in the dark; and like the 
streaks and particles of sunbeams and moonlight, issuing through the chink of 
a window or wall, appear as fire; and so are all the cognizables of our 
cognition (but deceptions of our senses). 


72. The objects of our knowledge are as deceptive, as the appearance of a 
moving mountain, to a passenger in a boat. All appearances are the 
presentations of our error or ignorance, and disappear at the sight of right 
knowledge. 


73. As the fallacy of the snake in the rope, and the appearance of two 
moons in the sky, vanish before the keen sightedness of the observer; so the 
representation of the triple world, disappears in like manner, from before the 
penetrating understanding. 


74. The inward certitude of the illusion of the world, is what is called the 
perfection of knowledge by the wise; and the knowledge of all things whether 
seen before or not, is equally a delusion of the mind. 


75. It is therefore right, to rub out the impressions of consciousness with 
diligence; because the preservation of those vestiges, is the cause of our 
bondage in the world. 


76. The erasure of these marks from the mind, is tantamount to our 
liberation; because the consciousness of these impressions, is the sore cause of 
repeated transmigrations in this world of woe. 


77. The uninert consciousness, which is unconscious of the outward world, 
but preserves the consciousness of the self, is attended both with present 
felicity, and want of future regeneration also. Be, therefore, unconscious of 
the externals, and conscious of the internal bliss of your soul; because the 
wakeful soul that is insensible of the externals, is blessed with the sensibility 
of its inward blissfulness. 


78. Rama asked: — How is it possible Sir, to be both unconscious and yet 
uninert; and how can unconsciousness be freed from and get rid of its 
unavoidable supineness? 


79. WVasishtha replied: — That is called the unsluggish or sensible 
unconsciousness, which having its existence, dwells on nothing beside itself; 
and which though it is living, is insensible of everything else (and yet quite 
sensible of its own existence). 


80. He is called both the unconscious and yet uninert, who has no visible 
object in his consciousness; and who discharges his duties and all the affairs 
of his life, without attaching his mind to them. 


81. He is said to be unslumbering and yet unconscious, whose mind is 
insensible of the sensible objects of perception; but yet clear with the 
impressions of the knowable objects of intellectuality; and such a person is 
said to be the living liberated also (who is removed from the material to the 
spiritual world, has his ajadd asamvid or unslumbering unconsciousness). 


82. When the indifferent soul thinks of nothing in itself, but remains with 
its calm and quiet composure, like a young child or a deaf and dumb person, 
in possession of his internal consciousness: — 


83. It becomes then possessed of its wisdom, and rests in full knowledge of 
itself without its dullness; and is no more liable to the turmoils of this life, nor 
to the doom of future births. 


84. When the adept rests in his state of sedate hybernation, by forsaking all 
his desires; he perceives a calm delight to pervade his inmost soul, as the 
blueness overspreading the sky. 


85. The unconscious Yogi remains with the consciousness of his unity with 
that Spirit; which has no beginning nor end; and in which he finds himself to 
be utterly absorbed and lost. 


86. Whether moving or sitting, or feeling or smelling, he seems to abide 
always, and do everything in the Holy spirit; and with his self-consciousness 
and unconsciousness of aught besides, he is dissolved in his internal delight. 


87. Shut out these worldly sights from your mind, with your utmost 
endeavours and painstaking; and go across this world of woes, resembling a 
perilous ocean, on the firm bark of your virtues. 


88. As a minute seed produces a large tree, stretching wide in the sky; so 
doth the minute mind produce these ideal worlds, which fill the empty space 
of the universe, and appear as real ones to sight. 


(The word sankalpa in the text, is used in the triple sense of imagination, 
reminiscence and hope, all of which are causes of the production of things 
appearing both as real and unreal). 


89. When the conscious soul entertains the idea of some figure in itself, by 
its imagination, reminiscence or hope; the same becomes the seed of its 
reproduction, or its being born in the very form which the soul has in its view. 


90. So the soul brings forth itself, and falls into its deception by its own 
choice; and thus loses the consciousness of its freedom, by the subjection to 
the bondage of life. 


91. Whatever form it dotes upon with fondness, the same form it assumes 
to itself; and cannot get rid of it, as long it cherishes its affection for the same; 
nor return to its original purity, until it is freed from its impure passions. 


92. The soul is no god or demigod, nor either a Yaksha nor Raksha, nor 
even a Nara-man or Kinnara-manikin; it is by reason of its original delusion, 
— maya, that it plays the part of a player on the stage of the world. 


93. As the player represents himself in various shapes, and then resumes 
and returns to his original form; and as the silkworm binds itself in the cocoon 
of its own making, and then breaks out of it by itself; so doth the soul resume 


its primal purity, by virtue of its self-consciousness. 


94. Our consciousness is as the water in the great deep of the universe, 
encompassing all the four quarters of the world, and the huge mountains 
within it. (As the sea hides the rocks under it). 


95. The universal ocean of consciousness, teems with the heaven and earth, 
the air and the sky, the hills and mountains and the seas and rivers, and all 
things encompassed by the sides of the compass; as its surges, waves and 
billows and eddies. 


96. It is our consciousness that comprises the world, which is no other 
beside itself; because the all-comprehensive consciousness comprehends all 
things in itself (in its conscious ideas of them). 


97. When our consciousness has its slight pulsation and not its quick 
vibration, it is then said to rest in itself; and is not moved by the action of 
outward objects upon it. 


98. The seed or source of our consciousness, is the Divine Spirit, which is 
the in-being of all beings; and which produces our consciousness, as the solar 
heat produces the light, and as the fire emits its sparks. 


99. This In-being in us exhibits itself in two forms within ourselves; the 
one is our self-consciousness, and the other is our consciousness of many 
things lying without us; the former is uniform and the latter is of mutable 
form. 


100. This two-fold division of the one and same soul, is as the difference of 
ghata and pata, or of the pot and painting, and like that of I and thou, which 
are essentially the same thing, and have no difference in their in-being. 


101. Now do away with this difference, and know the true entity to be a 
pure unity, which is the positive reality remaining in common with all objects. 


102. Forsake the particulars only, and seek the universal one which is the 
same and in common with all existence. Know this Unity as the totality of 
beings, and the only adorable One. 


103. The variety of external forms, does not indicate any variation in the 
internal substance; change of outward form, makes a thing unknowable to us 
as to its former state; but outward and formal differences, make no difference 
in the real essence. 


104. Whatever preserves its uniform and invariable appearance at all times, 
know that to be the true and everlasting inner essence of the thing (and not its 
changeful external appearance). 


105. Rama! Renounce the doctrines which maintain the eternal subsistence 
of time and space, of atoms and generalities and the like categories; and rely 
in the universal category of the one Being in which all others are reducible. 
(All varieties blend into the Unity of Brahma). 


106. Though the endless duration of time, approximates to the nature of the 
Infinite Existence; yet its divisions into the present, past and future, makes it 
an ununiform and unreal entity. 


107. That which admits of divisibility, and presents its various divisions; 
and what is seen to diverge to many, cannot be the uniform cause of all, 
(hence, time being ever changeful and fleeting, cannot be the unchanging 
cause of all). 


108. Think all bodies as appertaining to one common essence, and enjoy 
thy full bliss by thinking thyself as the same, and filling all space. 


109. He who is the ultimate pause or end of all existence in common, 
know, O wise Rama! that Being to be the source and seed of the whole 
universe, which has sprung from Him. 


110. He who is the utmost limit of all things in common, and is beyond 
description and imagination; He is the first and beginning of all, without any 
beginning of his own, and having no source or seed of himself. 


111. He in whom all finite existences are dissolved, and who remains 
without any change in himself; knowing Him in one’s self, no man is 
subjected to trouble, but enjoys his full bliss in Him. 


112. He is the cause of all, without any cause of his own; He is the 
optimum or best of all, without having anything better than himself. 


113. All things are seen in the mirror of his intellect, as the shadow of the 
trees on the border of a river, is reflected in the limpid stream below. 


114. All beings relish their delight in him, as in a reservoir of sweet water; 
and anything delicious which the tongue doth taste, is supplied from that pure 
fountain. 


115. The intellectual sphere of the mind, which is clearer than the mundane 
sphere, has its existence from his essence; which abounds with the purest 
delight, than all dulcet things in the world can afford. 


116. All these creatures in the world, rise and live in him; they are 
nourished and supported by him, and they die and are dissolved in him. 


117. He is the heaviest of the heavy and the lightest of all light bodies. He 


is the most ponderous of all bulky things, and the minutest of the most minute. 


118. He is the remotest of the most remote, and the nearest of whatever is 
most propinqueous to us; He is the eldest of the oldest and the youngest of the 
most young. 


119. He is brighter far than the brightest, and obscurer than the darkest 
things; He is the substratum of all substances, and farthest from all the sides 
of the compass. 


120. That being is something as nothing, and exists as if he were non- 
existent. He is manifest in all, yet invisible to view; and that is what I am, and 
yet as I am not the same. 


121. Rama! Try your best to get your rest, in that supreme state of felicity; 
than which there is no higher state for man to desire. 


122. It is the knowledge of that holy and unchangeable Spirit, which brings 
rest and peace to the mind; know then that all-pervasive soul, and be identified 
with the pure Intellect, for your liberation from all restraint. 


(And the way to this state of perfect liberation, is to destroy by degrees the 
seeds of our restraints to the same. Namely: — To be regardless of the body, 
which is the seed of worldliness; and then to subdue the mind, which is the 
seed of the body; and at last, to restrain the breathings and desires, which are 
the roots of sensations and earthly possessions; and thus to destroy the other 
seeds also, until one can arrive to his intellectual, and finally to his spiritual 
state). 


CHAPTER XCII. 
Means of Obtaining the Divine Presence. 


Argument. Divine knowledge and want of desires and feelings, forming the 
Trivium of salvation. 


Rama said: — Of all the seeds which you have spoken, say Sir, which of these 
is the most essential one to lead us to the attainment of the supreme Brahma. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — It is by the gradual demolition of the seeds and 
sources of woe, which I have mentioned one after the other, that one is 
enabled to attain his consummation in a short time. 


3. You can relinquish by your manly fortitude, your desire for temporal 
objects; and endeavour to seek that which is the first and best of beings: — 


4. And if you remain in your exclusive and intense meditation on the 
Supreme Being, you are sure to see that very moment the Divine light, shining 
in full blaze in and before you. 


5. If it is possible for you to think of all things in general, in your well 
developed understanding; you can have no difficulty to elevate your mind a 
little higher, to think of the universal Soul of all. 


6. O sinless Rama! If you can remain quietly with meditating on your 
conscious soul, you can find no difficulty in the contemplation of the Supreme 
soul, by a little more exertion of your intellect. 


7. It is not possible, O Rama! to know the knowable Spirit at once in your 
understanding, unless you think of it continually in your consciousness. (The 
Divine Spirit is knowable in our spirits and consciousness and by our own 
intuition only). 


8. Whatever thou thinkest and wherever thou goest and dost remain, is all 
known to thee in thy consciousness; and so it is the conscious soul which is 
the seat of God, and wherein He is to be sought and seen. (So says Maulana 
Rumi: — I sought him everywhere and found him nowhere; I looked within 


myself and found him there). 


9. If you will but strive, Rama, to renounce your earthly appetites; you will 
get yourself loosened from all its bonds and diseases and dangers. 


10. Of all others which have been said before, it is the most difficult task to 
get rid of one’s earthly desires; and it is impossible to root them out of the 
mind, as it is to uproot the mount Meru from its basis. 


11. As long as you do not subdue the mind, you cannot get rid of your 
desires; and unless you suppress your desires, you cannot control your restless 
mind. (They are so interwoven together). 


12. Until you know the truth, you cannot have the peace of your mind; and 
so long as you are a Stranger to your mental tranquility, you are barred from 
knowing the truth. 


13. As long you do not shun your desires, you cannot come to the light of 
truth; nor can you come to know the truth, unless you disown your earthly 
desires. 


14. Hence the knowledge of truth, subjection of the mind, and 
abandonment of desires, are the joint causes of spiritual bliss; which is 
otherwise unattainable by the practice of any one of them singly. 


15. Therefore, O Rama! the wise man should betake himself, to the practice 
of all these triple virtues at once; and abandon his desire of worldly 
enjoyments, with the utmost of his manly efforts. (Because it is weakness to 
be a dupe to pleasure, and true bravery consists in contemning them). 


16. Unless you become a complete adept, in the practice of this triplicate 
morality; it is impossible for you to attain to the state of divine perfection, by 
your mere devotion during a whole century. (Because the mendicant Yogis, 
that are devoid both of their divine knowledge and disinterestedness, are never 
blessed with their spiritual rapture). 


17. Know ye, O high-minded Muni! that it is the simultaneous attainment 
of divine knowledge, in combination with the subjection of the mind and its 
desires, that is attended with the efficacy of Divine presence. 


18. The practice of any one of these, in disjunction from the others, is as 
fruitless as imprecations of one’s death or derangement of understanding; 
(i.e., nO one’s curse, can effect any evil on another). 


19. Though the adept may be long inured in the practice of these virtues; 
yet none of them will help him singly to approach to the Supreme; as no 
single soldier or regiment can dare advance before the adverse host. (Here is 


pun of the word, param signifying both the Supreme and the enemy). 


20. These virtues being brought under the practice of the wise man, by his 
undivided attention and vigilance; will break down every obstacle on his way, 
like the current of a confluence of three streams, carrying away a rock from 
the coast. 


21. Accustom yourself with diligence, to destroy the force of your mind 
and its desires and feelings; and habituate your intellect to the acquisition of 
knowledge with equal ardour, and you will escape from every evil and error 
of the world. 


22. Having mastered these triple virtues; you will cut asunder your heart 
strings of worldly affections; as the breaking of the lotus-stalk severs its 
interior fibres. 


23. The reminiscence of worldliness, which is inherited and strengthened in 
the long course of a hundred lives (or transmigrations of the soul), is hard to 
be removed with the assiduous practice of these triple virtues. 


24. Continue to practice these at all times of your life; whether when you 
sit quiet or move about; or talk or listen to another or when you are awake or 
asleep; and it will redound to your greatest good. 


25. The restraining of respirations also, is tantamount to the restraint put 
upon your desires; then you must practise this likewise, according to the 
directions of the wise. 


26. By renunciation of desire, the mind is reduced to an insensible and dead 
block; but by restraining your breathing, you can do whatever you like. By the 
practice of the prandydma, the Yogi identifies himself with the Supreme, and 
can do all things as the Deity. 


27. By the protracted practice of restraining the breathing, according to the 
directions given by the guru; and by keeping the erect posture, and observing 
the rules of diet, etc., one must restrain his respiration. 


28. By right observation of the nature of things, we can have no desires for 
anything (which is so frail and false); and there is nothing which is the same 
or remains unchanged from first to last, except the unchangeable nature of the 
Deity, which must be the only desirable object. 


29. It is the sight and knowledge of God, that serve to weaken our worldly 
desires; and so will our avoidance of society and worldly thoughts (will put an 
end to our earthly desires). 


30. Seeing the dissolution of human bodies, we cease to desire our worldly 


goods; and so also the loss of desired objects, puts a check to our desiring 
them anymore. 


31. As the flying dust is set on the ground, after the gust of the wind is 
over; so the flying thoughts of the mind are stopped, when our breathings are 
put to a stop; they being the one and the same thing. (Swedenborg saw the 
intimate connection between thought and vital life. He says, “thought 
commences and corresponds with vital respiration. A long thought draws a 
long breath, and a quick one is attended with rapid vibrations of breath.’’) 


32. From this correspondence of the motion of thoughts with the vibrations 
of breath, there is heaved a large mass of worldly thoughts resembling heaps 
of dust on earth. Let, therefore, the intelligent men try their utmost to suppress 
their breath, (in order to stop the assemblage of their thoughts also). 


33. Or do away with this process of the Hatha Yogis (if it be hard for you to 
suppress your breath), and sit quietly to suppress your fleeting thoughts only 
at all times. 


34. If you want to keep your control over the mind, you will be able to do 
so in the course of a long time; because it is not possible to subdue the mind 
without the discipline of strict reason. 


35. As it is impossible to restrain the infuriate elephant without its goading; 
so it is not possible for you to curb your indomitable mind, without the help of 
spiritual knowledge, and association with the wise and good. 


36. The abandonment of desires and suppression of breathing, in the 
manner as hereinafter inculcated, are the most efficient means of subduing the 
mind. 


(The mind dwells in the brain which shares the various fortunes of 
breathing; therefore, the suppression of breath tends also to the subjection of 
the mind. — Swedenborg). 


37. There are milder means of pacifying the mind, as the cooling showers 
of rain set down the dust of the earth; and yet the Hatha-Yoga, attempts to 
restrain it by stopping the breath, as it were to prevent the rising of dust, by 
means of a breathless calm. 


38. Ignorant men who want to subdue the mind, by prescriptions of the 
Hatha- Yoga or bodily restraints; are like those silly folks, who want to dispel 
the darkness by black ink instead of a lighted lamp. (Painful bodily practice, is 
no part of Rdja or spiritual Yoga). 


39. Those who attempt to subdue the mind by bodily contortions, strive as 


vainly as they, who wish to bind the mad elephant with a rope of grass or 
straws. 


40. Those rules which prescribe bodily practices, instead of mental 
reasoning and precepts, are known as the patterns of Hatha-Yoga, and 
misleading men to dangers and difficulties. (Because the mind alone governs 
the mind, and bodily austerities have ruined many bodies and killed many 
men also; and the correspondence between the states of the mind and lungs, 
has not been admitted in science). 


41. Wretched men like beasts have no rest from their labour, but wander in 
dales and woods, in quest of herbs and fruits for their food. 


42. Ignorant men who are infatuated in their understandings, are timid 
cowards like timorous stags; and are both dull-headed and weak-bodied, and 
languid in their limbs (by incessant toil). 


43. They have no place of confidence anywhere, but stagger as the 
distrustful deer in the village; their minds are ever wavering between hopes 
and fears, as the sea water rising and falling in waves. 


44. They are borne away like leaves fallen from a tree, by the current of the 
cascade gliding below a water-fall; and pass their time in the errors of 
sacrificial rites and religious gifts and austerities, and in pilgrimages and 
adoration of idols. 


45. They are subject to continued fears, like the timid deer in the forest, and 
there are few among them, who happen by chance to come to the knowledge 
of the soul. (Most men are betaken by the exoteric faith). 


46. Being broiled by outward misery and internal passions, they are rarely 
sensible of their real state; and are subjected to repeated births and deaths, and 
their temporary habitation in heaven or hell. (There is no everlasting reward 
or punishment, adjudged to the temporal merit and demerit of human actions). 


47. They are tossed up and down like play balls in this world, some rising 
up to heaven, and others falling to hell-torments while they are even here. 
(The gloss represents higher births as heaven, and the lower ones as hell- 
torments; and since the Hindu idea of bliss is idleness, he deems the idle life 
of the great his heaven. Otia cumdignitate). 


48. These men roll on like the incessant waves of the sea; therefore, leave 
off the exterior view of the exoteric, and sink deep into the spiritual 
knowledge for your everlasting rest. (The Hatha-Yoga is deemed like the other 
modes of public worship, to belong to the exoteric faith). 


49. Remain quiet and sedate, with your firm faith in your inward 
consciousness; and know that knowledge is power, and the knowing man is 
the strongest being on earth; therefore, be wise in all respects. 


50. Rama! renounce the cognizance of the knowable objects, and depend 
on the abstract knowledge of all things in thy subjective consciousness; 
remain firm in full possession of thy inner soul, and think thyself as no actor 
of thy acts. Then forsaking all inventions of men as falsehoods, (kaland and 
kalpand), shine with the effulgence of thy spiritual light. 


CHAPTER XCIII. 
Universal Indifference or Insouciance. 


Argument. Cultivation of understanding and Reason. 


Vasishtha continued: — Rama! He who is possessed of little reason, and tries 
to subdue his mind as well as he can; succeeds to reap the fruit (object) of his 
life (salvation). 


(Neither is much learning required for divine knowledge, nor is much 
purity necessary for salvation; nor is the entire want of either, attended by its 
main object). 


2. The small particle of reason that is implanted in the mind, becomes by 
culture a big tree in time, projecting into a hundred branches in all 
departments of knowledge. 


3. A little development of reason, serves to destroy the unruly passions of 
the human breast, and then fill it with the good and pure virtues; as the roes of 
a fish fill the tank with fishes. (The seed of reason germinates in all good 
qualities). 


4. The rational man who becomes wise, by his vast observation of the past 
and present, is never tempted by the influence of the ignorant, who value their 
wealth above their knowledge. 


5. Of what good are great possessions and worldly honours to him, and of 
what evil are the diseases and difficulties unto the man, who looks upon them 
with an indifferent eye. 


6. As it is impossible to stop the impetuous hurricane, or to grasp the 
flashing lightning, or hold the rolling clouds in the hand: — 


7. As it is impossible to put the moon, like a brilliant moonstone, in a box 
of jewels; and as it is not possible for a belle to wear the crescent of the moon 
like a moon flower on her forehead. 


8. As it is impossible also for the buzzing gnats, to put to flight the infuriate 


elephant, with the swarm of bees sucking his frontal ichor, and the lotus 
bushes gracing his forehead: — 


9. As it is impossible too for a herd of timid stags, to withstand in fighting 
the brave lion, gory with the frontal pearls of slaughtered elephants in his 
bloody chase: — 


10. As it is impossible likewise, for a young frog to devour a huge and 
hungry snake, which like the poisonous tree attracts other animals to it by its 
poison, and then swallows them entire: — 


11. So it is impossible for the robbers of outward senses, to overpower 
upon the man of reason, who is acquainted with the grounds of Knowledge, 
and knows the knowable Brahma. 


12. But the sensible objects and the organs of sense, destroy the imperfect 
reason; as the violence of the wind, breaks off the stalks of tender plants. 


13. Yet the wicked passions and desires, have no power to destroy the 
perfected understanding; as the lesser gales of minor deluges, are not strong 
enough to remove the mountain. (The great deluge is the mahdkalpdnta, and 
the partial ones are called the Khanda or yuga-pralayas). 


14. Unless the flowery arbor of reason, takes its deep root in the ground of 
the human mind, it is liable to be shaken at every blast of the conflicting 
thoughts; because the unstable soul can have no stability; nor the uncertain 
mind can have any certainty. 


15. He whose mind does not stick to strict reasoning, either when he is 
sitting or walking, or waking or sleeping, is said to be dead to reason. 


16. Therefore, think always within yourself, and in the society of good 
people, about what is all this, what is this world, and what is this body in a 
spiritual light. (ie., Spiritually considered, the material universe will 
disappear from view). 


17. Reason displays the darkness of ignorance, and shows the state of the 
Supreme as clearly, as when the light of the lamp shows everything clearly in 
the room. (Hence reason is said to be the light of the soul). 


18. The light of knowledge dispels the gloom of sorrow, as the solar light 
puts to flight the shadow of night. (Knowledge is the sunlight of the soul). 


19. Upon appearance of the light of knowledge, the knowable comes to 
appear of itself; as the appearance of sunlight in the sky, shows every object 
on earth below. 


20. That science which brings to the knowledge of Divine Truth, the same 
knowledge is known as self-same with the knowable Truth itself. 


21. Spiritual knowledge is the result of reason, and is reckoned as the only 
true knowledge by the wise; it includes the knowledge of the knowable soul, 
as the water contains its sweetness within itself. 


22. The man knowing all knowledge, becomes full of knowledge; as the 
strong dram-drinker turns a tippler himself. (Fullness of spiritual knowledge is 
compared with hard drinking, in the mystic poetry of orientals, to denote the 
inward rapture which is caused by both). 


23. They then come to know the knowable, supreme spirit as immaculate as 
their own souls; and it is only through the knowledge of the supreme spirit, 
that this rapture imparts its grace to the soul. 


24. The man fraught with perfect knowledge, is full of his unfailing rapture 
within himself, and is liberated in his life; and being freed from all 
connections, reigns supreme in the empire of his mind. (This refers equally to 
a savant in all knowledge, to a deep philosopher, as also to a holy man; a Yogi 
and the like). 


25. The sapient man remains indifferent to the sweet sound of songs, and to 
the music of the lute and flute; he is not humored by the songstresses, and by 
the allurement of their persons and the enticement of their foul association. 


26. He sits unaffected amidst the hum of buzzing bees, fluttering joyfully 
over the vernal flowers; and amidst the blooming blossoms of the rainy 
weather, and under the growling noise of the roaring clouds. 


27. He remains unexcited by the loud screams of the peacock, and the 
joyous shrill of storks at the sight of fragments of dark clouds; and by the 
rolling and rumbling of the gloomy clouds in humid sky. 


28. He is not elated by the sound of musical instruments, as that of the 
jarring cymbal or ringing bell held in the hands; and the deep rebellowing 
drum beaten by the rod; nor the wind, wired or skinned instruments can act 
upon his mind. 


29. He turns his mind to nothing that is sweet or bitter to taste, but delights 
in his own thoughts; as the moon sheds her light upon the spreading lotus-bud 
in the lake. 


30. The wise man is indifferent to the attractions of beauties and celestial 
nymphs; who are as graceful in their stature and attire, like the young shoot of 
the plantain tree with its spreading foliage. 


31. His mind is attached to nothing that is even his own, but remains 
indifferent to everything; as a swan exposed to a barren spot. (The world to 
the wise is a barren desert). 


32. The wise have no taste in delicious fruits, nor do they hunger after 
dainty food of any kind. (Here follows the names of some sweet fruits and 
meats which are left out). 


33. He does not thirst after delicious drinks, as milk, curd, butter, ghee and 
honey; nor does he like to taste the sweet liquors at all. He is not fond of 
wines and liquors of any kind, nor of beverages and drinks of any sort, such as 
milk, curds, butter, etc., for his sensual delight. (But he hungers and thirsts for 
eternal life, etc., see the Sermon on the Mount). 


34. He is not fond of the four kinds of food, which are either chewed or 
licked or sucked or drunk; nor of the six flavours as sweet, sour, bitter, 
pungent, efc., to sharpen his appetite. He longs for no sort of vegetable or 
meat food; (because none of these can give him satiety). 


35. Quite content in his countenance, and unattached to everything in his 
mind, the wise Vipra does not bind his heart either to the pleasures of taste, or 
tending to the gracefulness of his person. 


36. The sapient is not observant of the adoration paid to Yama, sun, moon, 
Indra, and Rudras and Marutas (in the Vedas); nor does he observe the 
sanctity of the Meru, Mandara and Kailésa Mountains, and of the table lands 
of the Sahya and Dardura hills; (the early habitations of Indian Aryans). 


37. He takes no delight in the bright moon-beams, which mantles the earth 
as with a silken vesture; nor does he like to rove about the groves of the Kalpa 
arbours, for refreshment of his body and mind. 


38. He does not resort to houses rich with jewels and gold, and with the 
splendour of gems and pearls; nor does he dote upon beauties with their fairy 
forms of celestial nymphs, as an Urvasi, Menaka, Rambha and a Tilottama. 


39. His graceful person and unenticed mind, does not pine or pant for 
whatever is pleasant to sight; but remain about everything with his 
indifference, and the sense of his satisfaction and the fulness of his mind, and 
with his stern taciturnity and inflexibility even among his enemies. 


40. His cold mind is not attracted by the beauty and fragrance of the fine 
flowers of lotuses, and lilies and the rose and jasmine; (the favourite themes of 
lyric poets). 


41. He is not tempted by the relish of the luscious fruits, as apples and 


mango, jamb, efc., nor by the sight of the asoka and Kinsuka flowers. 


42. He is not drawn over by the fragrance of the sweet scenting sandal- 
wood, agulochum, camphor, and of the clove and cardamom trees. 


43. Preserving an even tenor of his mind, he does not incline his heart to 
anything; he holds the perfumes in hatred, as a Brahman holds the wine in 
abhorrence; and his even mindedness is neither moved by pleasure nor shaken 
by any fear or pain. 


44. His mind is not agitated by fear, at hearing the hoarse sound of the 
sounding main, or the tremendous thunder-clap in the sky, or the uproaring 
clouds on mountain tops; and the roaring lions below, do not intimidate his 
dauntless soul. 


45. He is not terrified at the loud trumpet of warfare, nor the deep drum of 
the battle-field; the clattering arms of the warriors and the cracking cudgels of 
the combatants, bear no terror to his mind; and the most terrific of all that is 
terrible, i.e., God, is familiar to his soul. So the Sruti: — “bhaydndm bhayam, 
bhishanam bhishandndm,’ etc. 


46. He does not tremble at the stride of the infuriate elephant, nor at the 
clamour of Vetala goblins; his heart does not thrill at the hue and cry of 
Pisdcha cannibals, nor at the alarm of Yakshas and Rakshas. 


47. The meditative mind is not moved by the loud thunder clap or the 
cracking of rocks and mountains; and the clangor of Indra and Airavana, 
cannot stir the Yogi from his intense reverie. 


48. The rigid sage does not slide from his self-possession, at the harsh noise 
of the crashing saw and the clanking of the burnished sword striking upon one 
another. He is not shaken by the twanging of the bow, or the flying and falling 
of deadly arrows around. 


49. He does not rejoice in pleasant groves, nor pines in parched deserts; 
because the fleeting joys and sorrows of life, find no place in his inevitable 
mind. 


50. He is neither intolerant of the burning sands of the sandy desert, 
resembling the cinders of living fire; nor is he charmed in shady woodlands, 
fraught with flowery and cooling arbours. 


51. His mind is unchanged, whether when he is exposed on a bed of thorns, 
or reposing in a bed of flowers; and whether he is lifted on the pinnacle of a 
mount, or flung into the bottom of a fount; his mind is always meek (as those 
of persecuted saints and martyrs). 


52. It is all the same with himself, whether he roves on rough and rugged 
rocks, or moves under the hot sunbeams of the south, or walks in a temperate 
or mild atmosphere. He remains unchanged in prosperity and adversity, and 
alike both under the favour and frown of fortune. 


53. He is neither sad nor sorrow in his wanderings over the world, nor 
joyous and of good cheer in his rest and quiet. He joys on doing his duty with 
the lightness of his heart, like a porter bearing his light burthen with an 
unberthened mind. 


54. Whether his body is grated upon the guillotine or broken under the 
wheel; whether impaled in the charnel ground, or exiled in a desert land; or 
whether pierced by a spear or battered by a cudgel, the believer in the true 
God remain inflexible, (as the Moslem Shahids and Christian martyrs, under 
the bitterest persecution). 


55. He is neither afraid at any fright nor humiliates himself nor loses his 
usual composure in any wise; but remains with his even temper and well 
composed mind as firm as a fixed rock. 


56. He has no aversion to impure food, but takes the unpalatable and dirty 
and rotten food with zest; and digests the poisonous substances as it were his 
pure and clean diet. (It is the beast of Aghori to gulp unwholesome and nasty 
articles, as their dainty food, and thus their stoicism degrades them to 
beastliness). 


57. The deadly henbane and hellebore, is tasted with as good a zest by the 
impassive Yogi, as any milky and saccharine food, and the juice of hemlock is 
as harmless to him as the juice of the sugarcane. 


58. Whether you give him the sparkling goblet of liquor or the red-hot bowl 
of blood; or whether you serve him with a dish of flesh or dry bones; he is 
neither pleased with the one nor annoyed at the other. 


59. He is equally complacent at the sight of his deadly enemy, as also of his 
benevolent benefactor. (The foe and friend are alike to him). 


60. He is neither gladdened nor saddened at the sight of any lasting or 
perishable thing; nor is he pleased or displeased at any pleasant or unpleasant 
thing, that is offered to his apathetic nature. 


61. By his knowledge of the knowable, and by the dispassionateness of his 
mind, as also by the unconcerned nature of his soul, and by his knowledge of 
the unreliableness of mortal things, he does not confide on the stability of the 
world. 


62. The wise man never fixes his eye on any object of his sight, seeing 
them to be momentary sights and perishable in their nature. (The passing 
scene of the world, is not relied upon by the wise). 


63. But the restless people, who are blind to truth and ignorant of their 
souls, are incessantly pressed upon by their sensual appetites, as the leaves of 
trees are devoured by the deer. 


64. They are tossed about in the ocean of the world, by the dashing waves 
of their desires; and are swallowed by the sharks of their sense, with the loss 
of their lives and souls. 


65. The growing desires and fleeting fancies of the mind, cannot overpower 
upon the reasonable soul, and the orderly and mannerly man; that have found 
their security in peace and tranquility, as the great body of torrents has no 
power to overflow upon the mountain. 


66. Those who have passed the circuit of their longings, and found their 
rest in the supreme Being; have really come to the knowledge of their true 
selves, and look upon the mountain as it were a mite. 


67. The vast world seems as a bit of straw to the wise; and the deadly 
poison is taken for ambrosia, and a millennium is passed as a moment, by the 
man of an even and expanded mind. (The fixed thought of a sedate mind, 
perceives no variation of things and times). 


68. Knowing the world to consist in consciousness, the mind of the wise is 
enrapt with the thought of his universality; and the wise man roves freely 
everywhere with his consciousness, of the great cosmos in himself. (The 
cosmologist is in reality a cosmopolitan also). 


69. Thus, the whole world appearing in its full light in the cosmical 
consciousness within one’s self, there is nothing which a man may choose for 
or reject from his all-including mind. 


70. Know thy consciousness to be all in all, and reject everything as false 
which appears to be otherwise. Again, as everything is embodied in thy 
consciousness, there is nothing for thee to own or disown as thine and not 
thine. 


71. Just as the ground grows the shoots of plants and their leaves and 
branches, so it is in the same manner, that our consciousness brings forth the 
shoots of all predicables, (tatwas), which are inherent in it. (This means the 
eternal ideas which are innate in the mind, and become manifest before it by 
its reminiscence). 


72. That which is a non-entity at first and last, is so also even at present; 
and it is by an error of our consciousness that we become conscious of its 
existence at any time. (This means the erroneous conception of all things, 
which are really nil at all times). 


73. Knowing this for certain, abandon your knowledge of reality and 
unreality; transcend over the knowledge of existence, and transform thyself to 
the nature of thy consciousness (to know thyself only); and then remain 
unconcerned with everything besides. (The transcendentalism of the 
subjective over objective knowledge). 


74. The man who is employed in his business with his body and mind, or 
sits idle with himself and his limbs, he is not stained by anything, if this soul 
is unattached to any object. 


75. He is not stained by the action which he does with an unconcerned 
mind; nor he also who is neither elated nor dejected at the vicissitudes of his 
fortune, and the success or failure of his undertakings. 


76. He whose mind is heedless of the actions of his body, is never stained 
with the taint of joy or grief, at the changes of his fortune, or the speed or 
defeat of his attempts. 


77. The heedless mind takes no notice of a thing that is set before the eyes 
of the beholder; but being intent on some other object within itself, is absent 
from the object present before its sight. This case of the absence of mind is 
known even to boys (and all men). 


78. The absent-minded man does not see the objects he actually sees, nor 
hears what he hears, nor feels what he touches. (So the Sruti, — “Who thinks 
of that, sees naught before him, nor hears aught that he hears.’’) 


79. So is he who watches over a thing as if he winks at it; and smells a 
thing as if he has no smell of the same; and while his senses are engaged with 
their respective objects, his soul and mind are quite aloof from them. 


80. This absence of mind is well known to persons sitting at their homes, 
and thinking of their lodging in another land; and this case of the wandering 
attention, is known even to boys and to ignorant people also. 


81. It is attention which is the cause of the perception of sensible objects, 
and it is the attachment of the mind which is the cause of human society; it is 
mental concern that causes our desires, and it is this concernedness of ours 
about other things, that is the cause of all our woe. 


82. It is the abandonment of connections, which is called liberation, and it 


is the forsaking of earthly attachments, which releases us from being reborn in 
it; but it is freedom from worldly thoughts, that makes us emancipate in this 
life. (Freedom in this state, makes us free in the next). 


83. Rama said: — Tell me briefly, my lord, that dost like a gale blow away 
the mist of my doubts; what are these connections that we are to get rid of, in 
order to be freed both in this life and in the next. 


84. Vasishtha answered: — that impure desire of the pure soul, for the 
presence or absence of something which tends to our pleasure or pain, is 
called our attachment to the same. (The desire of having the desirable and 
avoiding the contrary, is the cause of our attachment to the one, and our 
unconnection with the other). 


85. Those who are liberated in their lifetime, foster the pure desire which is 
unattended by joy or grief; and is not followed by future regeneration (or 
metempsychosis of the soul). 


86. Thus the pure desire being unconnected with any worldly object, is 
styled unworldly and is apart from the world; it continues through life, and 
whatever actions are done by it, they do not tend to the bondage of the soul, 
nor lead it to future transmigrations. 


87. The ignorant men that are not liberated, in their present state of 
existence in this world, entertain impure desires causing their pleasure and 
pain in this life, and conducing to their bondage to repeated transmigrations in 
future. 


88. This impure desire is expressed also by the term attachment, which 
leads its captive soul to repeated births; and whatsoever actions are done by it, 
they tend to the faster bondage of the miserable soul. 


89. Abandon, therefore, thy desire for, and thy attachment to anything of 
this kind, which is at best but to the trouble of the soul; and thy freedom from 
them will keep thy mind pure, although thou mayst continue to discharge thy 
duties of life, with a willing mind and unenslaved soul. 


90. If thou canst remain unaffected by joy or grief, or pleasure or pain, and 
unsubjected by passions, and unsubdued by fear and anger; thou becomest 
impassible and indifferent. 


91. If you do not pine in your pain, or exult in your joy, and if you are not 
elated by hope, nor depressed by despair; you are truly unconcerned about 
them. 


92. If you conduct your affairs with equanimity, both in your prosperity and 


adversity; and do not lose your temper in any circumstance of life, you are 
truly insensible and regardless of them. 


93. When you can know the soul, and by knowing it you can see the same 
in yourself; and manage yourself with evenness, under any circumstance as it 
may happen to thee; you are then unconscious of them. 


94. Rely, Rama, in your easily obtainable insouciance and stick firmly to 
your liberation in this life; be passionless and even tempered, and rest in your 
peace forever. 


95. That man is honourable, who is free from the feverish passions of pride, 
giddiness and envy in his mind; and possessing his liberation, taciturnity and 
full mastery over his organs of sense. 


96. So is he who retains his equanimity and meekness of mind, in all things 
which are presented before him; and never deviates from the connate duties of 
his caste, to do others which bear no relation with him. 


97. One who attends to his hereditary duties, which are co-natural with 
him, and discharges them with a mind freed from all concern and expectation, 
is truly happy in himself. 


98. Whether under the trial of troubles and tribulations, or under the 
temptations of rank and prosperity; the great minded man, does not transgress 
his intrinsic nature, as the Milky ocean does not tarnish its whiteness, though 
perturbed under the charming Mandara mountain. 


99. Whether gaining the sovereignty of the earth, or elevated to the dignity 
of the lord of gods; or degraded to grovel upon the earth, or lowered to a 
creeping worm underneath the ground; the great minded man remains 
unchanged at his rise and fall, as the bright sun remains the same, both in his 
elevation and culmination. 


100. Freed from tumults and differences of faith, and exempted from 
pursuits for different results, employ your great mind, O Rama! to the highest 
duty of investigation into the nature of the soul, and securing your ultimate 
liberation by it. 


101. Live by the clear and purpling stream of your investigation, and you 
will come to rely in the undecaying and unsullied state of the pure soul; and 
then by coming to the knowledge and sight of the Supreme Spirit, by the light 
of your understanding; you will no more be bound to the bonds of future 
births upon this earth. 


BOOK VI. 
NIRVANA-PRAKARANA. 
ON ULTIMATE EXTINCTION. 
PURVARDHA. 
OR THE FORMER OR FIRST 
HALF. 
PART I. 


CHAPTER I. 


Description of the evening and Breaking of the Assembly. 


Argument. — The close of the day, its announcement, the court breaks for 
Evening service, and the effect of the Sage's sermon on the Audience. 


VALMIKI says: — You have heard the relation of the subject of Stoicism or 
composure of the soul; attend now to that of Nirvana, which will teach you 
how to attain the final liberation of yourselves. 


NOTE. Nirvana or ultimate annihilation of the living or animal soul, being 
the aim and end of Buddhism, it is doubtful whether Vasishtha had derived his 
doctrine from the Buddhists or they from him. 


2. As the chief of Sages was saying his magniloquent speech in this manner, 
and the princes remained mute with their intense attention to the ravishing 
oration of the Sage: 


3. The assembled chiefs remained there as silent and motionless portraits, and 
forgot their devotions and duties, by being impressed in their minds with the 
sense and words of the Sage's speech. 


4. The assemblage of Saints, was reverently pondering upon the deep sense of 
the words of the Sage, with their curled brows and signs of their index fingers 
(indicating their wonder). 


5. The ladies in the Seraglio were lost in wonder, and turned upward their 
wondering eyes, resembling a cluster of black bees, sucking intently the 
nectarious honey of the new blown flowers (of the Sage's speech). 


6. The glorious sun sank down in the sky, at the fourth or last watch of the 
day; and was shorn of his radiant beams as he was setting in the west (as a 
man becomes mild with his knowledge of truth at the end of his journey 
through life). 


7. The winds blew softly at the eve of the day, as if to listen to the sermon of 
the Sage, and wafted about the sweets of his moving speech, like the 
fragrance of the gently shaking mandara flowers. 


8. All other sounds were drowned in the deep meditation of the audience, as 
when the humming of the bumble bees, is pushed in their repose, amidst the 
cell of blooming flowers at night. 


9. The bubbling waters of the pearly lakes, sparkled unmoved amidst their 
embordered beds; as if they were intently attentive to listen to the words of the 
Sage, which dropped as strings of pearls from his flippant lips. (So the verse 
of Hafiz affixed to the title page of Sir William Jones' Persian grammar: — 
“Thou hast spoken thy verse, and strung a string of pearls’). 


10. The pencil of the declining ray penetrating the windows of the palace, 
bespoke the halting of the departing sun, under the cooling shade of the royal 
canopy, after his weary journey all along the livelong day. 


11. The pearly rays (or bright beams) of the parting day, being covered by the 
dust and mist of the dusk, it seemed to be besmeared as the body of a dervish 
with dust and ashes; and had gained its coolness after its journey under the 
burning sun. (The cool and dusky eve of the day is compared with the dust- 
sprinkled body of the ascetic approaching to his cell). 


12. The chiefs of men with their heads and hands decorated with flowers, 
were so regaled with the sweet speech of the Sage, that they altogether 
remained enrapt in their senses and minds. 


13. The ladies listening to the sage, were now roused by the cries of their 
infants and the birds in their cages, to get up from the place and to give them 
their suck and food. (It means that the birds and boys, were alone insensible of 
the Sage's discourse). 


14. Now the dust flung by the pinions of fluttering bees, covered the petals of 
the night blooming kumuda flowers; and the flapping chouries were now at 
rest, with the tremulous eyelids of the princes. 


15. The rays of the sun, fearing to be waylaid by the dark night shade, which 
had now got loose from the dark mountain caves, fled through the windows to 
the inner apartment of the palace (which was already lighted with lamps). 


16. The time watches of the royal palace, knowing it to be passed the fourth 
watch of the day, sounded aloud their drums and trumpets, mingled with the 
sound of conch-shells, loudly resounding on all sides. 


17. The high-sounding speech of the sage, was drowned under the loud peal 
of the jarring instruments; as the sonorous sound of the peacock, is hushed 
under the uproar of roaring clouds. 


18. The birds in the cages, began to quake and shake their wings with fear; 
and the leaves and branches of the lofty palm trees, shook in the gardens, as 
by a tremendous earthquake. 


19. The babes sleeping on the breasts of their nurses, trembled with fear at the 
loud uproar; and they cried as the smoking clouds of the rainy season, 
resounding between the two mountain craigs resembling the breasts. (It is 
common in Indian poetry to compare the swelling breasts to rising hills, and 
say Kucha giri). 


20. This noise made the helmets of the chieftains, shed the dust of their 
decorating flowers all about the hall; as the moving waves of the lake, sprinkle 
the drops of water upon the land. 


21. Thus the palace of Dasharatha being full of trepidation at the close of the 
day, regained its quiet at the gradual fall of the fanfare of sounding conch 
shells, and the hubbub of drum beatings at the advance of night. 


22. The Sage put a stop to his present discourse, and addressed Rama, then 
sitting in the midst of the assembly, in a sweet voice and graceful language. 
(Mudhura-Vritti is the middle or graceful style between the high and low). 


23. Vasishtha said: — O Raghava! I have already spread before you the long 
net of my verbosity; do you entrap your flying mind in the same way, and 
bring it to your bosom and under your subjection. 


24. Take the purport of my discourse in such manner, as to leave out what is 
unintelligible, and lay hold on its substance; as the swan separates and sucks 
the milk which is mixed with water. 


25. Ponder upon it repeatedly, and consider it well in thy mind, and go on in 
this way to conduct yourself in life, (viz. by suppression of your desires, 
weakening the mind, restraining the breathing, and acquiring of knowledge). 


26. By going on in this manner, you are sure to evade all dangers; or else you 
must fall ere long like the heavy elephant, in some pitfall of the Vindhya 
mountain. (Pitfalls are the only means of catching elephants). 


27. If you do not receive my words with attention, and act accordingly, you 
are sure to fall into the pit like a blind man left to go alone in the dark; and to 


be blown away like a lighted lamp, exposed in the open air. 


28. In order to derive the benefit of my lectures, you must continue in the 
discharge of your usual duties with indifference, and knowing insouciance to 
be the right dictum of the Sdstras, be you regardless of everything besides. 


29. Now I bid you, O mighty monarch, and ye, princes and chiefs, and all ye 
present in this place, to get up and attend to the evening services of your daily 
ritual. (Abnika). 


30. Let all attend to this much at present, as the day is drawing to its close; 
and we shall consider the rest, on our meeting in the next morning. 


31. Valmiki related: — After the Sage had said so far, the assembly broke, 
off; and the assembled chiefs and princes rose up, with their faces blooming as 
the full-blown lotuses at the end of the day. 


32. The Chiefs having paid their obeisance to the monarch, and made their 
salutation to Rama, they did their reverence to the sage, and departed to their 
respective abodes. 


33. Vasishtha rose up from his seat with the royal sage Viswamitra, and they 
were saluted on their departure by the aerial spirits, who had attended the 
audience all along. 


34. The Sages were followed closely, by the king and chieftains a long way, 
and they parted after accosting them, according to their rank and dignity on 
the way; 


35. The celestials took their leave of the sage, and betook to their heavenward 
journey; and the munis repaired to their hermitages in the woods, when some 
of the saints turned about the palace, like bees flying in about the lotus bush 
(in different directions). 


36. The king having offered handfuls of fresh flowers at the feet of Vasishtha, 
entered the royal seraglio with his royal consorts. 


37. But Rama and his brother princes, kept company with the sage to his 
hermitage; and having prostrated themselves at his feet, they returned to their 
princely mansions. 


38. The hearers of the Sage having arrived at their houses made their 
ablutions; then worshipped the gods, and offered their offerings to the manes 
of their ancestors. They then treated their guests and gave alms to beggars. 


39. Then they took their meals with their Brahman guests, and members of the 
family; and their dependents and servants were fed one after the other, 
according to the rules and customs of their order and caste. 


40. After the sun had set down, with the diurnal duties of men, there rose the 
bright moon on high, with impositions of many nocturnal duties on mankind. 


41. At last the great king and the princes, and chiefs of men and the munis, 
together with the sages and saints, and all other terrestrial beings, betook 
themselves to their several beds, with silken coverlets and bed cloths of 
various kinds. 


42. They lay thinking intensely in themselves, on the admonitions of the sage 
Vasishtha; on the mode of their passing over the boisterous gulf of this world, 
by means of this spiritual knowledge. 


43. Then they slept and lay with their closed eyelids, for one watch of the 
night only; and then opened their eyes, like the opening buds of lotuses, to see 
the light of the day. 


44. Rama and his brother princes, passed full three watches of the night in 
waking; and pondering over the deep sense of the lectures, of their spiritual 
guide, — Vasishtha. (The present ritual allots three watches of the night to 
sleep, while formerly they gave but one watch to it). 


45. They slept only one and a half watch of the night, with their closed eye 
lids; and then they shook off the dullness of their sleep, after driving the 
lassitude of their bodies by a short nap. 


46. Now the minds of these, being full of good will, raised by the rising 
reason in their souls, and knowledge of truth; they felt the crescent of spiritual 
light lightning their dark bosoms, as the sextant of the moon, illumes the 
gloom of night; which afterwards disappeared at the approach of daylight, and 
the gathering broils of daytime. 


CHAPTER II. 


On the Perfect Calm and Composure of the Mind. 


Argument. — The sages joining the assembly the next morning, and 
preaching of Divine knowledge to it. 


VALMIKI related: Then the shade of night, with her face as dark as that of 
the darkened moon, began to waste and wane away; as the darkness of 
ignorance and the mists of human wishes, vanish before the light of reason. 


2. Now the rising sun showed his crown of golden rays, on the top of the 
eastern mountain, by leaving his rival darkness to take its rest, beyond the 
western or his setting mount of astdchala; (the two mountains mean the 
eastern and western horizons). 


3. Now the morning breeze began to blow, being moistened by the moon- 
beams, and bearing the particles of ice, as if to wash the face and eyes of the 
rising sun. 


4. Now rose Rama and Lakshmana, with their attendants also, from their beds 
and couches; and after discharging their morning services, they repaired to the 
holy hermitage of Vasishtha. 


5. There they saw the Sage coming out of his closet, after discharge of his 
morning devotion; and worshipped his feet with offerings of arghya, (or 
flowers and presents worthy of him). 


6. In a moment afterwards, the hermitage of the Sage was thronged by munis 
and Brahmans, and the other princes and chiefs, whose vehicles and cars and 
horses and elephants, blocked the pathways altogether. 


7. Then the Sage being accompanied by these, and attended by their suite and 
armies; and followed by Rama and his brothers, was escorted to the palace of 
the Sovereign King Dasaratha. 


8. The king who had discharged his morning service, hastened to receive the 
Sage beforehand; and walked a great way to welcome him, and do him honour 
and pay his homage. 


9. They entered the court hall, which was adorned with flowers and strings of 
gems and pearls; and there they seated themselves on the rich sofas and seats, 
which were set in rows for their reception. 


10. In a short time, the whole audience of the last day, composed both of the 
terrestrial men and celestial spirits, were all assembled at the spot, and seated 
in their respective seats of honor. 


11. All these entered that graceful hall, and saluted one another with respect; 
and then the royal court shone as brilliant as a bed of blooming lotuses, gently 
moved by the fanning breeze. 


12. The mixed assemblage of the munis and rishis or the saints and Sages, and 
the Vipras and Rdjas or the Brahmans and Kshatriyas, sat in proper order, on 
seats appropriated for all of them. 


13. The soft sounds of their mutual greetings and welcomes, gradually faded 
away; and the sweet voice of the panegyrists and encomiasts, sitting in a 
corner of the hall, was all hushed and lulled to silence. 


14. The sun-beams appearing through the chinks in the windows, seemed to 
be waiting in order to join the audience, and to listen to the lectures of the 
Sage. (Another translation has it thus: — The audience crept in the hall, no 
sooner the sun-beams peeped through the windows). 


15. The jingling sound of bracelets, caused by the shaking of hands of the 
visitors in the hall; was likely to lull to sleep the hearers of the sage. (It was a 
custom in olden times, to make a tinkling sound to ear, in order to lull one to 
sleep, as by a kind of mesmerism). 


16. Then as Kumara looked reverently on the countenance of his sire Siva, 
and as Kacha looked with veneration upon the face of the preceptor of the 
God or Brihaspati; and as Prahlada gazed upon the face of Shukra, — the 
preceptor of demons, and as Suparna viewed the visage of Krishna. 


17. So did Rama gloat upon the countenance of Vasishtha, and his eye-balls 
rolled upon it, like the black bees fluttering about a full-blown lotus. 


18. The sage resumed the link of his last lecture, and delivered his eloquent 
speech to Rama, who was well versed in eloquence also. 


19. Vasishtha said: — Do you remember Rama! the lecture that I gave 
yesterday, which was fraught with deep sense and knowledge of 
transcendental truth? 


20. I will now tell you of some other things for your instruction, and you shall 
have to hear it with attention, for the consummation of your spiritual wisdom. 


21. Whereas it is the habit of dispassionateness, and the knowledge of truth; 
whereby we are enabled to ford over the boisterous ocean of the world, you 
must learn therefore, O Rama! to practice and gain these betimes. 


22. Your full knowledge of all truth, will drive away your bias in untruth; and 
your riddance from all desire, will save you from all sorrow. (Desire is a 
burning fire, but want of yearning is want of pain and sorrowing). 


23. There exists but one Brahma, unbounded by space and time; He is never 
limited by either of them; and is the world himself, though it appears to be a 
distinct duality beside Him. 


24. Brahma abides in all infinity and eternity, and is not limited in anything; 
He is tranquil and shines with equal effulgence on all bodies; He cannot be 
any particular thing, beside his nature of universality. 


25. Knowing the nature of Brahma as such, be you freed from the knowledge 
of your egoism, (personality); and knowing yourself as the same with him, 
think yourself as bodiless and as great as he; and thus enjoy the tranquillity 
and felicity of your soul. 


26. There is neither the mind nor the avidyd (or ignorance), nor the living 
principle, as distinct things in reality; they are all fictitious terms (for the one 
and same nameless Brahma himself). 


27. It is the self-same Brahma, that exhibits himself in the forms of our 
enjoyments, in the faculties of enjoying them, in our desires and appetites for 
the same, and in the mind also for their perception. The great Brahma that is 
without beginning and end, underlies them all, as the great ocean surrounds 
the earth (and supplies its moisture to everything upon it). 


28. The same Brahma is seen in the form of his intellect (or wisdom) in 
heavens, on earth and in the infernal regions, as also in the vegetable and 
animal creations; and there is nothing else beside him. 


29. The same Brahma, who has no beginning nor end, spreads himself like the 
boundless and unfathomable ocean, under all bodies and things; and in 


whatever we deem as favourable and unfavourable to us, as our friends and 
our enemies. 


30. The fiction of the mind, like that of a dragon, continues so long, as we are 
subject to the error and ignorance of taking these words for real things; and 
are unacquainted with the knowledge of Brahma (as pervading all existence). 


31. The error of the mind and its perceptibles, continues as long as one 
believes his personality to consist in his body; and understands the 
phenomenal world as a reality; and has the selfishness to think such and such 
things to be his, (since there is nothing which actually belongs to anybody, 
besides its temporary use). 


32. So long as you do not raise yourself, by the counsel and in the society of 
the wise and good; and as long as you do not get rid of your ignorance; you 
cannot escape from the meanness of your belief in the mind. 


33. So long as you do not get loose of your worldly thoughts, and have the 
light of the universal spirit before your view; you cannot get rid of the 
contracted thoughts of your mind, yourself and the world. 


34. As long as there is the blindness of ignorance, and one's subjection to 
worldly desires; so long there is the delusion of falsehood also, and the 
fictions of the fallacious mind. 


35. As long as the exhalation of yearnings infest the forest of the heart, the 
chakora or parrot of reason will never resort to it; but fly far away from the 
infected air. 


36. The errors of thought disappear from that mind, which is unattached to 
sensual enjoyments; which is cool with its pure inappetency, and which has 
broken loose from its net of avarice. 


37. He who has got rid of his thirst and delusion of wealth, and who is 
conscious of the inward coolness of his soul, and who possesses the 
tranquillity of his mind; such a person is said to have fled from the province of 
his anxious thought. 


38. He who looks upon unsubstantial things, as unworthy of his regard and 
reliance; and who looks upon his body as extraneous to himself; is never 
misled by the thoughts of his mind. 


39. He who meditates on the infinite mind, and sees all forms of things as 
ectypes of the universal soul; and who views the world absorbed in himself; is 


never misled by the erroneous conception of the living principle. 


40. The partial view of a distinct mind and a living principle, serves but to 
mislead a man (to the knowledge of erroneous particulars); all which vanish 
away, at the sight of the rising sun of the one universal soul. 


41. Want of the partial view of the mind, gives the full view of one undivided 
soul; which consumes the particulars, as the vivid fire burns away the dry 
leaves of trees, and as the sacrificial fire consumes the oblations of ghee or 
clarified butter. 


42. Those men of great souls, who have known the supreme one, and are self- 
liberated in their lifetime; have their minds without their essences, and which 
are therefore called asatwas or non-entities. (These minds, says the gloss, are 
as the watermarks on the sand, after a channel is dried up (or its waters have 
receded); meaning that the mind remains in its print but not in its substance). 


43. The body of the living liberated man, has a mind employed in its duties, 
but freed from its desires; such minds are not chittas or active agents, but 
mere sattwas or passive objects. They are no more self-volitive free agents, 
but are acted upon by their paramount duties. (Free will is responsible for its 
acts, but compulsion has no responsibility). 


44. They that know the truth, are mindless and unmindful of everything save 
their duty; they rove about at pleasure and discharge their duties by rote and 
practice, in order any object to gain. 


45. They are calm and cold with all their actions and in all their dealings; they 
have the members of their bodies and their senses under full control, and 
know no desire nor duality. 


46. The saint having his sight fixed upon his inner soul, sees the world burnt 
down as straws by the fire of his intellect; and finds his erroneous conceptions 
of the mind, to fly far away from it, like flitting flies from a conflagration. 


47. The mind which is purified by reason, is called the sattwa as said above, 
and does not give rise to error; as the fried paddy seed, is not productive of the 
plant. (The sattwa mind is spiritless and dead in itself). 


48. The word Sattwa means the contrary of Chitta, which latter is used in 
lexicons to mean the mind, that has the quality of being reborn on account of 
its actions and desires. (The chitta is defined as the living seed of the mind, 
and productive of acts and future regenerations, which the Sattwa or deadened 
mind cannot do). 


49. You have to attain the attainable Sattwa or torpid state of your mind, and 
to have the seed of your active mind or chitta, singed by the blaze of your 
spiritual mind or sattwa. 


50. The minds of the learned, which are lighted by reason, are melted down at 
once to liquidity; but those of the ignorant which are hardened by their 
worldly desires, will not yield to the force of fire and steel; but continue still 
to sprout up as the grass, the more they are mowed and put on fire. (The over- 
growing grass in the fields, though set on fire, will grow again from their 
unburnt roots, and become as rank as before). 


51. Brahma is vast expanse, and such being the vastness of the universe too 
there is no difference between them; and the intellect of Brahma is as full as 
the fulness of his essence. 


52. The Divine Intellect contains the three worlds, as the pepper has its 
pungency within itself. Therefore, the triple world is not a distinct thing from 
Brahma, and its existence and inexistence, (i.e., its creation and dissolution), 
are mere fictions of human mind. (It is ever existent in the eternal mind). 


53. It is the use of popular language to speak of existence and non-existence 
as different things; but they are never so in reality to the right understanding. 
Since whatever is or is not in being, is ever present in the Divine Mind. 


53. This being a vacuity, contains all things in their vacuous state, (which is 
neither the state of sensible existence, nor that of intellectual inexistence 
either). God as the Absolute, Eternal, and Spiritual substance, is as void as 
Thought. (The universe is a thought in the mind of God, and existence is 
thought and activity in the Divine Mind. — Aristotle). 


54. If you disbelieve in the intellectual, you can have no belief in your 
spirituality also; then why fear to die for fear of future retribution, when you 
leave your body behind to turn to dust. Tell me Rama! how can you imagine 
the existence of the world in absence of the intellectual principle. (There can 
be no material world, without the immaterial mind; nor can you think of it, if 
you have no mind in you). 


55. But if you find by the reasoning of your mind, all things to be mere 
intellections of the intellect at all times; then say why do you rely on the 
substantiality of your body. 


56. Remember Rama, your pellucid intellectual and spiritual form, which has 
no limit nor part of it, but is an unlimited and undivided whole; and mistake 


not yourself for a limited being by forgetting your true nature. 


57. Thinking yourself as such, take all the discreet parts of the universe as 
forming one concrete whole; and this is the substantial intellect of Brahma. 


58. Thou abidest in the womb of thy intellect, and art neither this nor that nor 
any of the many discrete things interspersed in the universe. Thou art as thou 
art and last as the End and Nil in thy obvious and yet thy hidden appearances. 


59. Thou art contained under no particular category, nor is there any 
predicable which may be predicated of thee. Yet thou art the substance of 
every predicament in thy form of the solid, ponderous and calm intellect; and 
I salute thee in that form of thine. 


60. Thou art without beginning and end, and abidest with thy body of solid 
intellect, amidst the crystal sphere of thy creation, and shining as the pure and 
transparent sky. Thou art calm and quiet, and yet displayest the wondrous 
world, as the seed vessel shows the wooden of vegetation. 


CHAPTER III. 


On the Unity and Universality of Brahma. 


Argument. — Showing the identity of Brahma with the Mind, Living Soul, 
the body and the world and all things and extirpation of all dualisms, by the 
establishment of one universality. 


VASISHTHA continued: — As the countless waves, which are continually 
rising and falling in the Sea, are no other than its water assuming temporary 
forms to view; so the intellect exhibits the forms of endless worlds heaving in 
itself; and know, O sinless Rama! this intellect to be thy very self or soul. (All 
personal souls are self-same with the impersonal Self; because it is in the 
power of both the finite and infinite souls to produce and reduce the 
appearance of the worlds in them, which proves them beyond any doubt as the 
Chiddtma or the Intellectual soul). 


2. Say thou that hast the intellectual soul, what relation doth thy immaterial 
soul bear to the material world, and being freed from thy earthly cares, how 
canst thou entertain any earthly desire or affection in it. (The spiritual soul has 
no concern with the material world). 


3. It is the Intellect which manifests itself in the forms of living soul or jiva, 
mind and its desires, and the world and all things; say then what else can it be, 
to which all these properties are to be attributed (if not to the eternal intellect). 


4. The intellect of the Supreme Spirit, is as a profound sea with its huge 
surges; and yet, O Rama! it is as calm and cool as thy soul, and as bright and 
clear, as the transparent firmament. 


5. As the heat is not separate from fire, and the fragrance not apart from the 
flower; and as blackness is inseparable from collyrium, and whiteness from 
the ice; and as sweet is inborn in the sugar-cane, so is intellection inherent in, 
and unseparated from the intellect. 


6. As the light is nothing distinct from the sun-beams, so is intellection no 
other than the intellect itself; and as the waves are no way distinct from the 
water; so the universe is in no ways different or disjoined from the nature of 
the intellect, which contains the universe. (The noumenon contains the 
phenomenon, and become manifest as the world). 


7. The ideas are not apart from the intellect, nor is the ego distinct from the 
idea of it; the mind is not different from the ego, nor is the living soul any 
other than the mind. 


8. The senses are not separate from the mind, and the body is not unconnected 
with the senses; the world is the same as the body, and there is nothing apart 
from the world. (The body is the microcosm of the cosmos; [Sanskrit: 
shuddhabrahmdnanda)). 


9. Thus the great sphere of universe, is no other than the unbounded sphere of 
intellect; and they are nothing now done or made, or ever created before, (for 
whatever there is or comes to pass, continues forever in the presence of the 
intellect). 


10. Our knowledge of everything is but our reminiscence of the same; and this 
is to continue for evermore in the manner of all partial spaces, being contained 
in infinity, without distinction of their particular localities. (All spaces of 
place occupied by bodies, are contained in the infinite and unoccupied vacuity 
of Mind). 


11. As all spaces are contained in the endless vacuity, so the vastness of 
Brahma is contained in the immensity of Brahma; and as truth resides in 
verity, so in this plenum contained, is the plenitude of Divine mind. (Here 
Brahma the great means by figure of metonymy, the Brahmanda or vastness 
of his creation). 


12. Seeing the forms of outward things, the intelligent man never takes them 
to his mind; it is the ignorant only that set their minds to the worthless things 
of this world. 


13. They are glad to long after what they approve of, for their trouble only in 
this world; but he who takes these things as nothing, remains free from the 
pleasure and pain of having or not having them. (So said the wise Socrates: — 
How many things are here, which I do not want). 


14. The apparent difference of the world and the soul of the world, is as false 
in reality, as the meaning of the words sky and skies, which though taken in 


their singular and plural senses, still denote the same uniform vacuity. (So the 
one soul is viewed as many in appearance only). 


15. He who remains with the internal purity of his vacant mind, although he 
observes the customary differences of external things, remains yet as 
unaffected by the feelings of pain and pleasure, as the insensible block of 
wood and stone (with his stoical indifference in joy and grief). 


16. He who sees his blood-thirsty enemy in the light of a true friend, is the 
person that sees rightly into the nature of things. (Because the killers of our 
lives, are the givers of our immortality). 


17. As the river uproots the big trees on both its sides, by its rapid currents 
and deluge; so doth the dispassionate man destroys the feelings of his joy and 
grief to their very roots. 


18. The sage that knows not the nature of the passions and affections, and 
does not guard himself from their impulse and emotions, is unworthy of the 
veneration, which awaits upon the character of saints and sages. 


19. He who has not the sense of his egoism, and whose mind is not attached to 
this world, saves his soul from death and confinement, after his departure 
from this world. (There is a similar text in the Bhagavad gita, and it is hard to 
say which is the original one and which is the copy). 


20. The belief in one's personality, is as false as one's faith in an unreality, 
which does not exist; and this wrong notion of its existence, is removed only 
by one's knowledge of the error, and his riddance from it. 


21. He who has extinguished the ardent desire of his mind, like the flame of 
an oilless lamp; and who remains unshaken under all circumstances, stands as 
the image of a mighty conqueror of his enemies in painting or statue. 


22. O Rama! that man is said to be truly liberated, who is unmoved under all 
circumstances, and has nothing to gain or lose in his prosperity or adversity, 
nor anything to elate or depress him in either state. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Argument. — Vasishtha exposes the evils of selfish views, pardg-drishti, and 
exalts the merit of elevated views, pratyag-drishti. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Rama! knowing your mind, understanding, 
egoism and all your senses, to be insensible of themselves, and deriving their 
sensibility from the intellect; say how can your living soul and the vital 
breaths, have any sensation of their own. 


2. It is the one great soul, that infuses its power to those different organs; as 
the one bright sun dispenses his light, to all the various objects in their diverse 
colours. 


3. As the pangs of the poisonous thirst after worldly enjoyments, come to an 
end; so the insensibility of ignorance, flies away like darkness at the end of 
the night. 


4. It is the incantation of spiritual knowledge only, that is able to heal the pain 
of baneful avarice; as it is in the power of autumn only, to dispel the clouds of 
the rainy-season. 


5. It is the dissipation of ignorance, which washes the mind of its attendant 
desires; as it is the disappearance of the rainy weather, which scatters the 
clouds in the sky. 


6. The mind being weakened to unmindfulness, loses the chain of its desires 
from it; as a necklace of pearls being loosened from its broken string, tosses 
the precious gems all about the ground. 


7. Rama! they that are unmindful of the Sdstras, and mind to undermine them, 
resemble the worms and insects, that mine the ground wherein they remain. 


8. The fickle eye-sight of the idle and curious gazer on all things, becomes 
motionless after their ignorant curiosity is over and has ceased to stir; as the 
shaking lotus of the lake becomes steady, after the gusts of wind have passed 


away and stopped. 


9. You have got rid, O Rama! of your thought of all entities and non-entities, 
and found your steadiness in the ever-steady unity of God; as the restless 
winds mix at last with the calm vacuum (after their blowing and breathing 
over the solid earth, and in the hollow sky). 


10. I ween you have been awakened to sense, by these series of my sermons 
to you; as kings are awakened from their nightly sleep, by the sound of their 
eulogists and the music of timbrels. 


11. Seeing that common people of low understandings, are impressed by the 
preachings of their parish parsons; I have every reason to believe that my 
sermons must make their impression, upon the good understanding of Rama. 


12. As you are in the habit of considering well, the good counsel of others in 
your mind; so I doubt not, that my counsel will penetrate your mind, as the 
cool rain-water enters into the parched ground of the earth. 


13. Knowing me as your family priest, and my family as the spiritual guides 
of Raghus race for ever; you must receive with regard my good advices to 
you, and set my words as a neck-chain to your heart. 


CHAPTER V. 


Argument. — Rama's relation to Vasishtha, of his perfect rest in godliness. 


Rama said: — O my venerable guide! My retrospection of your sermons, has 
set my mind to perfect rest, and I see the traps and turmoils of this world 
before me, with a quite indifferent and phlegmatic mind. 


2. My soul has found its perfect tranquillity in the Supreme Spirit, is as the 
parched ground is cooled by a snow or of rainfall after a long and painful 
drought. 


3. Iam as cool as coldness itself, and feel the felicity of an entire unity in 
myself; and my mind has become as tranquil and transparent, as the limpid 
lake that is undisturbed by elephants. 


4. I see the whole plenum of the universe, O sage! in its pristine pure light; 
and as clear as the face of the wide extended firmament, without the dimness 
of frost or mist. 


5. I am now freed from my doubts, and exempted from the mirage of the 
world; I am equally aloof from affections, and have become as pure and 
serene, as the lake and sky in autumn. 


6. I have found that transport in my inmost soul, which knows no bound nor 
decay; and have the enjoyment of that gusto, which defies the taste of the 
ambrosial draught of gods. 


7. I am now set in the truth of actual existence, and my repose in the joyous 
rest of my soul. I have become the delight of mankind and my own joy in 
myself, which makes me thank my felicitous self, and you also for giving me 
this blessing. (The Sruti says, — Heavenly bliss is the delight of men, and the 
heartfelt joy of everybody). 


8. My heart has become as expanded and pure, as the expanse of limpid lakes 
in autumn; and my mind hath become as cold and serene, as the clear and 


humid sky in the season of autumn. 


9. Those doubts and coinings of imagination, which mislead the blind, have 
now fled afar from me; as the fear of ghosts appearing in the dark, disappear 
at the light of day-break. 


10. How can there be the speck or spot of impurity, in the pure and 
enlightened soul; and how can the doubts of the objective nature, arise in the 
subjective mind? All these errors vanish to naught, like darkness before moon 
light. 


11. All these appearances appearing in various forms, are but the diverse 
manifestations of the self-same soul; it Is, therefore, a fallacy to suppose, this 
is one thing and that another, by our misjudgment of them. 


12. I smile to think in myself, the miserable slave of my desires that I had 
been before; that am now so well satisfied without them. (The privation of 
desire gives greater satisfaction than its fulfilment). 


13. I remember now how my single and solitary self, is one and all with the 
universal soul of the world; since I received my baptism with the ambrosial 
fluid of thy words. 


14. O the highest and holiest station, which I have now attained to; and from 
where I behold the sphere of the sun, to be situated as low as the infernal 
region. 


15. I have arrived at the world of sober reality and existence, from that of 
unreality and seeming existence. I therefore thank my soul, that has became so 
elevated and adorable with its fulness of the Deity. 


16. O venerable Sage: — I am now situated in everlasting joy, and far 
removed from the region of sorrow; by the sweet sound of the honeyed words, 
which have crept like humming bees, into the pericarp of my lotus-like heart. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Argument: — Prevalence and influence of delirium (moha). 


VASISHTHA Continued: — Hear me moreover to tell you, my dear Rama, 
some excellent sayings for your good, and also for the benefit of every one of 
my audience here. 


2. Though you are unlike others in the greater enlightenment of your 
understanding, yet my lecture will equally edify your knowledge, as that of 
the less enlightened men than yourself. 


3. He who is so senseless as to take his body for the soul, is soon found to be 
upset by his unruly senses; as a charioteer is thrown down by his head-strong 
and restive horses. (So says the Sruti also: — “The soul is the charioteer of the 
vehicle of the body, and the senses are as its horses’’). 


4. But the Sapient man who knows the bodiless soul and relies therein, has all 
his senses under the subjection of his soul; and they do not overthrow him, as 
obstinate horses do their riders. 


5. He who praises no object of enjoyment, but rather finds fault with all of 
them, and discerns well their evils, enjoys the health of his body without any 
complaint. (The voluptuary is subject to diseases, but the abstinent is free 
from them; for in the midst of pleasure there is pain). 


6. The soul has no relation with the body, nor is the body related with the 
soul; they are as unrelated to each other as the light and shade. (And are 
opposed to one another as sun-light and darkness). 


7. The discrete soul is distinct from concrete matter, and free from material 
properties and accidents; the soul is ever shining and does not rise or set as the 
material sun and moon (and it never changes as the everchanging objects of 
changeful nature and mind). 


8. The body is a dull mass of vile matter, it is ignorant of itself and its own 


welfare; it is quite ungrateful to the soul, that makes it sensible; therefore, it 
well deserves its fate of diseases and final dissolution. (The body is frail, and 
is at best but a fading flower). 


9. How can the body be deemed an intelligent thing, when the knowledge of 
the one, (i.e., the soul), as intelligence, proves the other, (i.e., the body), to be 
but a dull mass. They cannot both be intelligent, when the nature of the one is 
opposite to that of the other; and if there is no difference between them, they 
would become one and the same thing, (ie., the soul equal with the body, 
which is impossible). 


10. But how is it then, that they mutually reciprocate their feelings of pain and 
pleasure to one another, unless they are the one and the same thing, and 
participating of the same properties? (This is a presumptive objection of the 
antagonistic doctrine, touching the co-relation of the mind and body). 


11. It is impossible, Rama, for the reciprocation of their feelings, that never 
agree in their natures; the gross body has no connection with the subtle soul, 
nor has the rarefied soul any relation with the solid body. (It is the gross mind 
that sympathises with the body, and not the unconnected spirit or soul). 


12. The presence of the one, nullifies the existence of the opposite other; as in 
the cases of day and night, of darkness and light, and of knowledge and 
ignorance (which are destructive of their opposites). 


13. The unbodied soul presides over all bodies, without its adherence to any; 
as the omnipresent spirit of Brahma, pervades throughout all nature, without 
coalescing with any visible object. (The spirit of God resides in all, and is yet 
quite detached from everything). 


14. The embodied soul is as unattached to the body, as the dew drop on the 
lotus leaf is disjoined with the leaf; and as the divine spirit is quite 
unconnected with everything, which it fills and supports. 


15. The Soul residing in the body, is as unaffected by its affections, as the sky 
remains unmoved, by the motion of the winds raging in its bosom. It is 
figuratively said, that tempests rend the skies, and the passions rend their 
recipient bosom; but nothing can disturb the empty vacuity of the sky or soul. 


16. Knowing your soul to be no part of your body, rest quietly in it to eternity; 
but believing yourself as the body, be subject to repeated transmigrations of it 
in endless forms. 


17. The visibles are viewed as the rising and falling waves, in the boundless 


ocean of the Divine soul; but reliance in the supreme soul, will show the light 
of the soul only. 


18. This bodily frame is the product of the Divine soul, as the wave is 
produced of the water of the sea; and though the bodies are seen to move 
about as waves, yet their receptacle, the soul, is ever as steady as the sea; — 
the reservoir of the moving waves. 


19. The body is the image of the soul, as the sun seen in the waves is the 
reflection of that luminary; and though the body like the reflected sun, is seen 
to be moving and waving, yet its archetype, — the soul, is ever as steady as 
the fixed and unfluctuating sun in the sky. 


20. The error of the substantiality and stability of the body is put to flight, no 
sooner the light of the permanent and spiritual Substratum of the soul, comes 
to shine over our inward sight. (Knowledge of the immaterial and immortal 
soul, removes the blunder of the material and mortal body). 


21. The body appears to be in the act of constant motion and rotation like a 
wheel, to the partial and unspiritual observers of materialism; and it is 
believed by them to be perpetually subject to birth and death, like the 
succession of light and darkness. (Lit.: — As candle light and darkness follow 
each other, so is the body produced and dissolved by turns). 


22. These unspiritual men, that are unconscious of their souls, are as shallow 
and empty minded, as arjuna trees; which grow without any pith and marrow 
within them. 


23. Dull headed men that are devoid of intelligence, are as contemptible as the 
grass on the ground; and they move their limbs like the blades of grass, which 
are moved by force of the passing wind (and by direction of the Judging 
mind). Those that are unacquainted with the intelligent soul, resemble the 
senseless and hollow bamboos, which shake and whistle by breath of the 
winds alone. (The internal air moves the body and the limbs, as the external 
breeze shakes the trees). 


24. The unintelligent body and limbs, are actuated to perform and display 
their several acts, by action of the vital breath; as the vacillation of the 
insensible trees and leaves, is caused by the motion of the breeze; and both of 
them cease to move, no sooner the current airs cease to agitate them. 


25. These dull bodies are as the boisterous waves of the sea, heaving with 
huge shapes with tremendous noise; and appearing to sight as the figures of 


drunken men, staggering with draughts of the luscious juice of Vine. 


26. These witless men resemble the rapid currents of rivers, which without a 
jot of sense in them, keep up on their continual motion, to no good to 
themselves or others. 


27. It is from their want of wit, that they are reduced to utmost meanness and 
misery; which make them groan and sigh like the blowing bellows of the 
blacksmith. 


28. Their continued motion is of no real good to themselves, but brings on 
their quietus like the calm after the storm; they clash and clang like the twang 
of the bowstring, without the dart to hit at the mark. 


29. The life of the unintelligent man, is only for its extinction or death; and its 
desire of fruition is as false, as the fruit of an unfruitful tree in the woody 
forest. 


30. Seeking friendliness in unintelligent men, is as wishing to rest or sleep on 
a burning mountain; and the society of the unintellectual, is as associating 
with the headless trunks of trees in a forest. (The weak headed man like the 
headless tree, can neither afford any sheltering shade, nor nourishing fruit to 
the passenger. So the verse: — It is vain to expect any good or gain, from men 
of witless and shallow brain). 


31. Doing any service to the ignorant and lack witted men goes for nothing; 
and is as vain as beating the bush or empty air with a stick; and anything 
given to the senseless, is as something thrown into the mud. (Or as casting 
pearls before the swine, or scattering grains in the bushes). 


32. Talking with the ignorant, is as calling the dogs from a distance, (which is 
neither heard nor heeded by them). Ignorance is the seat of evils, which never 
betide the sensible and the wise. (So the Hitopadesa, — A hundred evils and 
thousand fears, daily befall to the fool, and not to the heedful wise). 


33. The wise pass over all errors in their course amidst the world; but the 
ignorant are exposed to incessant troubles, in their ceaseless ardour to thrive 
in the pleasures of life. 


34. As the carriage wheel revolves incessantly, about the axle to which it is 
fixed; so the body of man turns continually about the wealthy family, to which 
the foolish mind is fixed for gain. 


35. The ignorant fool can never get rid of his misery, so long as he is fast 


bound to the belief of taking his body as his soul, and knowing no spiritual 
soul besides. 


36. How is it possible for the infatuated, to be freed from their delusion; when 
their minds are darkened by illusion, and their eyes are blind-folded, by the 
hood-wink of unreal appearance. 


37. The seeing man or looker on sights, that regales his eyes with the sight of 
unrealities; is at last deluded by them, as a man is moonstruck by fixing his 
eyes on the moon, and becomes giddy with the profuse fragrance of flowers. 


38. As the watering of the ground, tends to the growth of grass and thorns and 
thistles; so the fostering of the body, breeds the desires in the heart, as thick as 
reptiles grow in the hollow of trees; and they invigorate the mind in the form 
of a rampant lion or elephant. 


39. The ignorant foster their hopes of heaven on the death of their bodies; as 
the farmer expects a plenteous harvest, from his well cultivated fields; (i.e., 
expectation of future heaven is vain, by means of ceremonial acts in life). 


40. The greedy hell-hounds are glad to look upon the ignorant, that are fast- 
bound in the coils of their serpentine desires; as the thirsty peacocks are 
pleased to gaze on the black clouds, that rise before their eyes in the rainy 
season. 


41. These beauties with their glancing eyes, resembling the fluttering bees of 
summer, and with lips blooming as the new blown leaves of flowers; are 
flaunting to catch hold of ignorant men; as poisonous plants are displayed, to 
lay hold on ignorant flies. 


42. The plant of desire, which shoots out of the goodly soil of ignorant minds, 
shelters the flying passions under its shady foliage; as the coral plants foster 
the coral insects in them. (The corallines are known to be the formation of 
coral insects). 


43. Enmity is like a wild fire, it consumes the arbour of the body, and lets out 
the smoke through the orifice of the mouth in the desert land of the heart, and 
exhibits the rose of the heath as the burning cinders. 


44. The mind of the ignorant is as a lake of envy, covered with the leaves of 
spite and calumny; jealousy is its lotus-bed, and the anxious thoughts are as 
the bees continually fluttering thereupon. 


45. The ignorant man that is subjected to repeated births, and is rising and 


falling as waves in the tumultuous ocean of this world, is exposed also to 
repeated deaths; and the burning fire which engulphs his dead body, is as in 
the sub-marine fire of this sea. 


46. The ignorant are exposed to repeated births, attended by the vicissitudes of 
childhood, youth, manhood and old age, and followed at last by a painful 
death and cremation of the beloved body on the funeral pile. 


47. The ignorant body is like a diving bucket, tied by the rope of 
transmigration to the Hydraulic machine of acts; to be plunged and lifted over 
again, in and over the dirty pool of this world. 


48. This world which is a plane pavement and but narrow hole, (lit., a cow 
foot-cave) to the wise, by their unconsciousness of it; appears as a boundless 
and unfathomable sea to the ignorant, owing to their great concern about it. 
(The wise think lightly of the world; but the worldly take it heavily upon 
themselves). 


49. The ignorant are devoid of their eye-sight, to look out beyond their limited 
circle; as the birds long confined in their cages, have no mind to fly out of 
them. 


50. The revolution of repeated births, is like the constant rotation of the wheel 
of a chariot; and there is nobody that is able to stop their motion, by 
restraining his earthly desires; which are ever turning as the spokes affixed to 
nave of the heart. 


51. The ignorant wander at large, about the wide extended earth; as huntsmen 
rove amidst the forest, in search of their prey; until they become a prey at the 
hand of death, and make the members of their bodies as morsels, to the 
vultures of their sensual appetites. 


52. The sights of these mountainous bodies, and of these material forms made 
of earthly flesh, are mistaken by the ignorant for realities; as they mistake the 
figures in painting for real persons. 


53. How flourishing is the arbour of this delusion, which is fraught with the 
endless objects of our erroneous imagination; and hath stretched out these 
innumerable worlds from our ignorance of them. 


54. How flourishing is the Kalpa tree or all fruitful arbour of delusion; which 
is ever fraught with endless objects of our imaginary desire, and stretches out 
the infinite worlds to our erroneous conception as its leaves. 


55. Here our prurient minds like birds of variegated colours, rest and remain 
and sit and sport, in and all about this arbour. 


56. Our acts are the roots of our repeated births as the stem of the tree is of its 
shoots; our prosperity and properties are the flowers of this arbor, and our 
virtues and vices are as its fruits of good and evil. 


57. Our wives are as the tender plants, that thrive best under the moon-light of 
delusion; and are the most beautiful things to behold in this desert land of the 
earth. 


58. As the darkness of ignorance prevails over the mind, soon after the setting 
of the sun light of reason; there rises the full moon of errors in the empty 
mind, with all her changing phases of repeated births. (This refers to the dark 
ages of Puranic or mythological fictions, and also to the Darshanic or 
philosophical systems which succeeded the age of Vedantic light, and were 
full of changeable doctrines, like the phases of the moon; whence she is styled 
dwija or mistress of digits. There is another figure of equivocation in the 
word, doshah, meaning the night as well as the defect of ignorance). 


59. It is under the influence of the cooling moon-light of ignorance; that our 
minds foster the fond desire of worldly enjoyments; and like the chakora birds 
of night, drink their fill of delight as ambrosial moon-beams. (The ignorant are 
fond of pleasures, and where ignorance is bliss, it is foolish to be wise). 


60. It is under this delusion, that men view their beloved ones as buds of roses 
and lotuses, and their loose glancing eyes, as the black bees fluttering at 
random; they see the sable clouds in the braids and locks of their hair, and a 
glistening fire in their glowing bosoms and breasts. 


61. It is delusion, O Rama! that depicts the fairies with the beams of fair 
moon-light nights; though they are viewed by the wise, in their true light of 
being as foul as the darkest midnight. 


62. Know Rama, the pleasures of the world, to be as the pernicious fruits of 
ignorance; which are pleasant to taste at first, but prove to be full of bitter gall 
at last. It is, therefore, better to destroy this baneful arbour, than to lose the 
life and soul by the mortal taste of its fruits. (It is the fruit of the tree of 
ignorance rather than that of knowledge, which brought death into the world 
and all our woe. — Milton). 


CHAPTER VII. 


Argument: — The effects of ignorance, shown in the evils brought on by our 
vain desires and fallacies or erroneous judgments. 


VASISHTHA continued: — These beauties that are so decorated with 
precious gems and jewels, and embellished with the strings of brilliant pearls, 
are as the playful billows in the milky ocean of the moon-beams of our fond 
desires. 


2. The sidelong looks of the beautiful eyes in their faces, look like a cluster of 
black bees, sitting on the pericarp of a full-blown lotus. 


3. These beauties appear as charming to the enslaved minds of deluded men; 
and as the vernal flowers which are strewn upon the ground in forest lands. 


4. Their comely persons which are compared with the moon, the lotus flower, 
and sandal paste for their coolness by fascinated minds; are viewed as 
indifferently by the wise, as by the insensible beasts which make a prey of 
them. (Lit. by the rapacious wolves and dogs and vultures which devour 
them). 


5. Their swollen breasts which are compared with lotus-buds, ripe 
pomegranates and cups of gold, are viewed by the wise as a lump of flesh and 
blood and nauseous liquor. 


6. Their fleshy lips, distilling the impure saliva and spittle, are said to exude 
with ambrosial honey, and to bear resemblance with the ruby and coral and 
vimba fruits. 


7. Their arms with the crooked joints of the wrists and loins, and composed of 
hard bones in the inside, are compared with creeping plants, by their 
infatuated admirers and erotic poets. 


8. Their thick thighs are likened to the stems of lumpish plantain trees, and the 
decorations of their protuberant breasts, are resembled to the strings of 


flowers, hung upon the turrets of temples. 


9. Women are pleasant at first, but become quarrelsome afterwards; and then 
fly away in haste, like the goddess of fortune; and yet they are desired by the 
ignorant. (But when the old woman frets, let her go alone). 


10. The minds of the ignorant, are subject to many pains and pleasures in this 
life; and the forest of their misdeeds, shoots forth in a thousand branches, 
bearing the woeful fruits of misery only. (The tree of sin brought death into 
the world and all our woe. — Milton). 


11. The ignorant are fast bound in the net of their folly, and their ritual 
functions are the ropes that lead them to the prison-house of the world. The 
words of their lips, like the mantras and musical words of their mouths, are 
the more for their bewilderment. (The ignorant are enslaved by their ritualistic 
rites; but the Sages are enfranchised by their spiritual knowledge). 


12. The overspreading mist of ignorance, stretches out a maze of ceremonial 
rites, and envelopes the minds of common people in utter darkness; as the 
river Yamuna overflows its banks with its dark waters. 


13. The lives of the ignorant, which are so pleasant with their tender 
affections, turn out as bitter as the juice of hemlock, when the affections are 
cut off by the strong hand of death; (i.e., the pleasures of life are embittered by 
the loss of relatives). 


14. The senseless rabble are driven and carried away, like the withered and 
shattered leaves of trees, by the ever-blowing winds of their pursuits; which 
scatter them all about as the dregs of earth, and bespatter them with the dirt 
and dust of their sins. 


15. All the world is as a ripe fruit in the mouth of death, whose voracious 
belly is never filled with all its ravages, for millions and millions of Kalpa 
ages. (The womb of death is never full). 


16. Men are as the cold bodies and creeping reptiles of the earth, and they 
crawl and creep continually in their crooked course, by breathing the vital air, 
as the snakes live upon the current air. (Serpents are said to live a long time 
without food, simply by inhaling the open air). 


17. The time of youth passes as a dark night, without the moon-light of 
reason; and is infested by the ghosts of wicked thoughts and evil desires. 


18. The flippant tongue within the mouth, becomes faint with cringing 


flattery; as the pistil rising from the seed vessel, becomes languid under the 
freezing frost. 


19. Poverty branches out like the thorny Sdlmali tree, in a thousand branches 
of misery, distress, sorrow, sickness, and all kinds of woe to human beings. 
(Poverty is the root of all evils in life). 


20. Concealed covetousness, like the unseen bird of night, is hidden within the 
hollow cavity of the human heart, resembling the stunted chaitya trees of 
mendicants; and then it shrieks and hoots out from there, during the dark night 
of delusion which has overspread the sphere of the mind. 


21. Old age lays hold on youth by the ears, as the old cat seizes on the mouse, 
and devours its prey after sporting with it for a long while. 


22. The accumulation of unsubstantial materials, which causes the formation 
of the stupendous world, is taken for real substantiality by the unwise; as the 
foaming froths and ice-bergs in the sea, are thought to be solid rocks by the 
ignorant sailor. (So all potential existences of the Vedantist, are sober realities 
of the positive philosophy). 


23. The world appears as a beautiful arbour, glowing with the blooming 
blossoms of Divine light, which is displayed over it; and the belief of its 
reality, is the plant which is fraught with the fruitage of all our actions and 
duties. (The world is believed as the garden of the actions of worldly men, but 
the wise are averse to actions and their results). 


24. The great edifice of the world, is supported by the pillars of its mountains, 
under its root of the great vault of heaven; and the sun and moon are the great 
gateways to this pavilion. (The sun and moon are believed by some as the 
doors leading the pious souls to heaven). 


25. The world resembles a large lake, over which the vital breaths are flying 
as swarms of bees on the lotus-beds of the living body; and exhaling the 
sweets which are stored in the cell of the heart; (i.e., the breath of life wafts 
away the sweets of the immortal soul). 


26. The blue vault of heaven appears as a spacious and elevated dome to the 
ignorant who think it to contain all the worlds, which are enlightened by the 
light of the sun situated in the midst. But it is an empty sphere, and so the 
other worlds beyond the solar system, to which the solar light doth never 
reach. 


27. All worldly-minded men, are as old birds tied down on earth by the strong 


strings of their desires; and their heart moves about the confines of their 
bodies, and their heart strings throb with hopes in the confines of their bodies, 
as birds in cages in the hope of getting their release. 


28. The lives of living beings are continually dropping down, like the 
withered leaves of trees, from the fading arbours of their decayed bodies, by 
the incessant breathing of their breath of life. (The respiration of breath called 
ajap4d, is said to be the measure of life). 


29. The respectable men, that are joyous of their worldly grandeur for a short 
time, are entirely forgetful of the severe torments of hell, awaiting on them 
afterwards. 


30. But the godly people enjoy their heavenly delights as gods, in the cooling 
orb of the moon; or range freely under the azure sky, like heavenly cranes 
about the limpid lakes. 


31. There they taste the sweet fruits of their virtuous deeds on earth; and 
inhale the fragrance of their various desires, as the bees sip the sweetness of 
the opening lotus. 


32. All worldly men are as little fishes, (shrimps), swimming on the surface of 
this pool of the earth; while the sly and senile death pounces upon them as a 
kite, and bears them away as his prey without any respite or remorse. 


33. The changeful events of the world, are passing on every day, like the 
gliding waves and the foaming froths of the sea, and the ever-changing digits 
of the moon. 


34. Time, like a potter, continually turns his wheel, and makes an immense 
number of living beings as his pots; and breaks them every moment, as the 
fragile play-things of his own whim. 


35. Innumerable Kalpa ages have been incessantly rolling on, over the shady 
quiescence of eternity; and multitudes of created worlds have been burnt 
down, like thick woods and forests, by the all-desolating conflagrations of 
desolation. (According to the Hindus the universal destruction, takes place by 
the Violent concussion of all the elements, and by the diluvian floods also). 


36. All worldly things are undergoing incessant changes, by their appearance 
and disappearance by turns; and the vicissitudes of our states and 
circumstances, from these of pleasure and prosperity to the state of pain and 
misery and vice versa, in endless succession. (Pain and pleasure succeed one 
another). 


37. Notwithstanding the instability of nature, the ignorant are fast bound by 
the chain of their desire, which is not to be broken even by the thunder-bolt of 
heaven. (Man dies, but his desires never die, they keep their company 
wherever he may fly). 


38. Human desire bears the invulnerable body of the Jove and Indra, which 
being wounded on all sides by the Titans of disappointment, resumed fresh 
vigour at every stroke. (So our desires grow stronger by their failure, than 
when they are allayed by their satisfaction). 


39. All created beings are as particles of dust in the air, and are flying with the 
currents of wind into the mouth of the dragon-like death, who draws all things 
to his bowels by the breath of his mouth. (Huge snakes are said to live upon 
air, and whatever is borne with it into his belly). 


40. As all the crudities of the earth, and its raw fruits and vegetables, together 
with the froth of the sea and other marine productions, are carried by the 
currents to be consumed by the sub-marine heat, so all existence is borne to 
the intestinal fire of death to be dissolved into nothing. 


41. It is by a fortuitous combination of qualities, that all things present 
themselves unto us with their various properties; and it is the nature of these 
which exhibits them with those forms as they present to us; as she gives the 
property of vibration to the elementary bodies, which show themselves in the 
forms of water and air unto us. 


42. Death, like a ferocious lion, devours the mighty and opulent men; as the 
lion kills the big elephant with his frontal pearls. 


43. Ambitious men are as greedy birds of air upon earth, who like the 
voracious vultures on the tops of high hills, are born to live and die in their 
aerial exploits, as on the wings of clouds in search of their prey. 


44. Their minds liken painter's paintings on the canvas of their intellects, 
showing all the variegated scenes of the world, with the various pictures of 
things perceptible by the five senses; (i.e., the images of all sensible objects 
are portrayed in the intellect). 


45. But all these moving and changeful scenes, are breaking up and falling to 
pieces at every moment; and producing our vain sorrow and griefs upon their 
loss, in this passing and aerial city of the world. 


46. The animal creations and the vegetable world, are standing as passive 
spectators, to witness and meditate in themselves the marvelous acts of time, 


in sparing them from among his destruction of others. 


47. How these moving creatures are subject every moment, to the recurrent 
emotions of passions and affections, and to the alterations of affluence and 
want; and how they are incessantly decaying under age and infirmity, disease 
and death from which their souls are entirely free. (Hence the state of torpid 
immobility is reckoned as a state of bliss, by the Hindu and Buddhistic Yogis 
and ascetics). 


48. So the reptiles and insects on the surface of the earth, are continually 
subjected to their tortuous motions by their fate, owing to their want of quiet 
inaction, of which they are capable in their subterranean cells. (The Yogis are 
wont to confine themselves in their under-ground retreats, in order to conduct 
their abstract meditations without disturbance. So Demosthenes perfected 
himself in his art of eloquence in his subterrene cave). 


49. But all these living bodies are devoured every moment, by the all- 
destructive time in the form of death; which like the deadly and voracious 
dragon lies hidden in his dark-some den. (Here the word kAla is used in its 
triple sense of time, death, and snake all which being equally destructive and 
hidden in darkness, it is difficult to distinguish the subject from its 
comparison. Hence we may say, time like death and snake or death like time 
and snake or the snake like time and death, devours all living creatures, 
insects and other reptiles also). 


50. The trees, however, are not affected by any of these accidents, because 
they stand firm on their roots, and though suffering under heat and cold and 
the blasts of heaven, yet they yield their sweet fruits and flowers for the 
supportance and delight of all living creatures. (So the Yogis stand firm on 
their legs, and while they suffer the food and rest privations of life and the 
inclemencies of weather, they impart the fruits of divine knowledge to the rest 
of mankind, who would otherwise perish like the insects of the earth, without 
their knowledge of truth and hope of future bliss). 


51. The meek Yogis that dwell in their secluded and humble cells, are seen 
also to move about the earth, and imparting the fruits of their knowledge to 
others; as the bees residing in the cells of lotuses, distribute their stores of 
honey after the rains are over. (The Yogis and the bees remain in their cells 
during the four months of the rainy season (varshd-chdtur mdsya), after which 
they be-take to their peregrinations abroad). 


52. They preach about the lectures as the bees chaunt their rhyme all about, 
saying; that the earth which is as a big port; it supplies the wants of the needy, 


for making them a morsel in the mouth of the goddess of death; (i.e., the earth 
supports all beings for their falling into the bowels of death). 


53. The dreaded goddess Kali, wearing the veil of darkness over her face, and 
eying all with her eyeballs, as bright as the orbs of the sun and moon, gives to 
all beings all their wants, in order to grasp and gorge them in herself. (The 
black goddess Kali or Hecate, nourishes all as mdtrikd or matres, and then 
devours them as death, like the carnivorous glutton, that fattens the cattle to 
feed and feast upon them). 


54. Her protuberant and exuberant breasts are as bountiful as the bounty of 
God, to suckle the gods and men and all beings on earth and hills and in the 
waters below. (But how can death be the sustainer of all). 


55. It is the energy of the Divine intellect, which is the mdtrikd-mater or 
mother, (mater or materia of all, and assumes the forms of density and tenuity 
and also of motion and mobility; the clusters of stars are the rows of her teeth, 
and the morning and evening twilights, are the redness of her two lips). 


(She is called Usha and sandhya or the dawning and evening lights, because 
of her existence in the form of the twilights, before the birth of the solar and 
lunar lights. The Vedas abound with hymns to ushd and sandhyd and these 
form the daily ritual of the Brahmans to this day under the title of their Tri- 
sandyd, — the triple litany at sun-rise, sun-set and vertical sun). 


56. Her palms are as red as the petals of lotuses, and her countenance is as 
bright as the paradise of Indra; she is decorated with the pearls of all the seas, 
and clad with an azure mantle all over her body (Hence the goddess Kali is 
represented as all black from her blue vest). 


57. The Jambudwipa or Asia forms her naval or midmost spot, and the woods 
and forests form the hairs of her body. She appears in many shapes and again 
disappears from view, and plays her part as the most veteran sorceress in all 
the three worlds. (The text calls her an old hag, that often changes her paints 
and garments to entice and delude all men to her). 


58. She dies repeatedly and is reborn again, and then passes into endless 
transformations, she is now immerged in the great ocean or bosom of Kala or 
Death her consort, and rises up to assume other shapes and forms again. 
(Hence the mother-goddess is said to be the producer and destroyer of all by 
their repeated births and deaths in their everchanging shapes and forms). 


59. The great Kalpa ages are as transitory moments in the infinite duration of 


Eternity, and the mundane eggs (or planetary bodies in the universe); are as 
passing bubbles upon the unfathomable ocean of infinity; they rise and last 
and are lost by turns. 


60. It is at the will of God, that the creative powers rise and fly about as birds 
in the air; and it is by his will also, that the uprisen creation becomes extinct 
like the burning flash of the lightning. (The flaming worlds shoot forth, and 
are blown out as sparks of fire). 


61. It is in the sunshine of the divine Intellect, and under the canopy of 
everlasting time, that the creations are continually rising and falling like the 
fowls of forestlands, flying up and down under the mist of an all- 
encompassing cloud of ignorance. 


62. As the tall palm tree lets to fall its ripened fruits incessantly upon the 
ground; so the over topping arbor of time, drops down the created worlds and 
the lords of Gods perpetually into the abyss of perdition. (There is an 
alliteration and homonym of the words, tdla and pdattdla meaning both tall and 
the tdla or palm tree). 


63. The gods also are dying away like the twinklings of their eyes, and old 
time is wearing away with all its ages, by its perpetual tickings. (The ever- 
wakeful eyes of gods are said to have no twinkling; but time is said to be 
continually twinkling in its ticking moments). 


64. There are many Rudras existing in the essence of Brahma, and they 
depend on the twinkling of that Deity for their existence. (The immortal gods 
are mortal, before the Eternal God). 


65. Such is Brahma the lord of gods, under whom these endless acts of 
evolutions and involutions are forever taking place, in the infinite space of his 
eternal Intellect and omnipotent will. 


66. What wonderous powers are there that cannot possibly reside in the 
Supreme spirit, whose undecaying will gives rise to all positive and possible 
existences. It is ignorance, therefore, to imagine the world as a reality of itself. 


67. All these therefore, is the display of the deep darkness of ignorance, that 
appears to you as the vicissitudes of prosperity and adversity, and as the 
changes of childhood, youth, old-age and death; as also the occurrences of 
pain and pleasure and of sorrow and grief. (All of which are unrealities in 
their nature). 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Allegory of the Spreading Arbour of Ignorance. 


Argument: — Description of ignorance as a wide spreading tree. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Hear me now relate to you Rama, how this 
poisonous tree of ignorance has come to grow in this forest of the world, and 
to be situated by the side of the intellect, and how and when it came to 
blossom and bloom. (The Divine intellect is the stupendous rock, and the 
creation is the forest about it, in which there grew the plant of error also). 


2. This plant encompasses all the three worlds, and has the whole creation for 
its rind, and the mountains for its joints. (Here is a play of the word parva and 
parvata which are paronymous terms, signifying a joint and mountain; Hence 
every mountain is reckoned as the joint or land-mark of a country dividing it 
from another tract of land). 


3. It is fraught with its leaves and roots, and its flowers and fruits, by the 
continuous births and lives and pleasures and pains and the knowledge and 
error of mankind. (All these are the productions of human ignorance). 


4. Prosperity gives rise to our ignorance of desiring to be more prosperous in 
this or in our next lives (by means of our performance of ceremonial rites), 
which are productive of future welfare also. So doth adversity lead us to 
greater error of practising many malpractices to get rid of it; but which on the 
contrary expose us to greater misfortunes. (Hence it is folly to make choice of 
either, which is equally pernicious). 


5. One birth gives rise to another and that leads to others without end; hence it 
is foolishness in us to wish to be reborn again. (All births are subject to 
misery; it is ignorance, therefore, to desire a higher or lower one, by 
performance of pdratrika acts for future lives). 


6. Ignorance produces greater ignorance, and brings on unconsciousness as its 


effect; so knowledge leads on to higher knowledge, and produces self- 
consciousness as its result. (Good tends to the best, and bad to the worst. 
Better tends to the best, and worse to the worst). 


7. The creeping plant of ignorance, has the passion for its leaves, and the 
desires for its odours; and it is continually shaking and shuffling with the leafy 
garment on its body. 


8. This plant falls sometimes in its course, on the way of the elephant of 
Reason; it then shakes with fear, and the dust which covers its body, is all 
blown away by the breath of the elephant's trunk; but yet the creeper 
continues to creep on by the byways according to its wont. 


9. The days are its blossoms, and the nights are the swarms of black bees, that 
overshadow its flowers; and the continued shaking of its boughs, darts down 
the dust of living bodies from it, both by day and night. (i.e., Men that live 
upon their desires and hopes, are daily dying away). 


10. It is overgrown with its leaves of relatives, and overloaded with the 
shooting buds of its offspring; it bears the blossoms of all seasons, and yields 
the fruits of all kinds of flowers. 


11. All its joints are full of the reptiles of diseases, and its stem is perforated 
by the cormorants of destruction; yet it yields the luscious juice of delight to 
those that are bereft of their reason and good sense. 


12. Its flowers are the radiant planets, that shine with the sun and moon every 
day in the sky; the vacuum is the medium of their light, and the rapid winds 
are vehicles, that bear their rays as odours unto us. (Vacuity is the receptacle 
of light, but the vibrations of air transmit it to our sight). 


Ignorance blossoms every day in the clusters of the bright planetary bodies, 
that shine with the sun and moon by day and night; and the winds playing in 
the air, bear their light like perfumes to us. (ie., It is the spirit that glows in 
the stars, and breathes in the air, but ignorance attributes these to the planets 
and breezes, and worships them as the navagrahas and marut ganas, both in 
the vedas and the popular Puranic creeds). 


Ignorance blossoms in the clusters of stars and planets, shining about the sun 
and moon every day; and breathes in the breezes blowing at random amidst 
the vacuous firmament. (Hence the ignorant alone adore the stars and winds in 
the vedas, but the sapient know the light of God to glow in the stars, and his 
spirit to breathe in the air). 


13. These innumerable stars that you see scattered in the vault of heaven, O 
son of Raghu's race, are the blooming blossoms of this arbor of ignorance; 
(i.e., ignorance shows them as twinkling stars to us, while they are numberless 
shining worlds in reality). 


14. The beams of the sun and moon, and the flames of fire, which are scattered 
about us like the crimson dust of flowers; resemble the red paint on the fair 
body of ignorance, with which this delusive lady attracts our minds to her. 


15. The wild elephant of the mind, ranges at large under the arbour of 
Ignorance; and the birds of our desires, are continually hovering and warbling 
upon it; while the vipers of sensual appetites, are infesting its stem, and 
avarice settles as a huge snake at the root. (The text has the words, “and 
greediness decorates its bark,” which bear no meaning). 


16. It stretches with its head to the blue vault of the sky, forming as a canopy 
of black arbour of black Tamdla trees over it. The earth supports its trunk, and 
sky overtops its top; and it makes a garden of the universe (with its out 
stretched arms). 


17. It is deeply rooted underneath the ground, and is watered with milk and 
curds, in the canals of the milky and other oceans, which are dug around its 
trunk. 


18. The rituals of the three vedas, are fluttering like the bees over the tree, 
blooming with the blossoms of beauteous women, and shaking with the 
oscillations of the mind; while it is corroded in the inside by the cankering 
worms of cares and actions. (It means to say, that the vedic rites, the love of 
women, the thoughts of the mind and the bodily actions, are all attendants of 
ignorance; and he is wise who refrains from them in foto). 


19. The tree of ignorance, blossoming like the flowers of the garden of 
paradise, exhales the sweet odours of pleasure around; and the serpent of vice 
twining round it, leads the living souls perpetually to evil deeds, for the 
supportance of their lives. 


20. It blooms with various flowers, to attract the hearts of the wise; and it is 
fraught with various fruits, distilling their sweets all around. (These fruits and 
flowers are the sensual pleasures, which allure the ignorant to them). 


21. With the aqueducts about, it invites the birds of the air to drink of them; 
and being besmeared with the dust of its flowers, it appears to stand as a rock 
of red earth or granite to the sight. (The water beds below it, are mistaken for 


the salsabil or streams of Paradise, and its rock-like appearance, shows the 
grossness of ignorance crasse or tabula rasa). 


22. It shoots out with buds of mistakes, and is beset by the briars of error; it 
grows luxuriant in hilly districts, with exuberance of its leafy branches. 
(Meaning that the hill people are most ignorant). 


23. It grows and dies and grows again, and being cut down it springs out 
anon; so there is no end of it. (It is hard to extirpate ignorance at once). 


24. Though past and gone, yet it is present before us, and though it is all 
hollow within, it appears as thick and sound to sight. It is an ever fading and 
ever green tree, and the more it is lopped and cropt, the more it grows and 
expands itself. 


25. It is a poisonous tree, whose very touch benumbs the senses in a moment; 
but being pressed down by reasoning, it dies away in a trice. 


26. All distinctions of different objects, are dissolved in the crucible of the 
reasoning mind; but they remain undissolved in their crude forms in the minds 
of the ignorant, who are employed in differentiating the various natures of 
men and brutes, and of terrene and aquatic animals. 


27. They distinguish the one as the nether world, and the other as the upper 
sky; and make distinctions between the solar and lunar planets, and the fixed 
starry bodies. (But there are no ups and downs, nor any thing as fixed in 
infinite vacuity). 


28. Here there is light, and there is darkness on the other side, and this is 
empty space and that is the solid ground; these are the Sdstras and these are 
the Vedas, are distinctions unknown to the wise. 


29. It is the same spirit that flies upward in the bodies of birds, or remains 
above in the form of gods; the same spirit remains fixed in the forms of fixed 
rocks or moves in continued motion with the flying winds. 


30. Sometimes it resides in the infernal regions, and at others it dwells in the 
heavens above; sometimes it is exalted to the dignity of gods, and some where 
it remains in the state of mean insects and worms. 


31. In one place it appears as glorious as the god Vishnu, and in another it 
shows itself in the forms of Brahma and Siva. Now it shines in the sun, and 
then it brightens in the moon; here it blows in the blowing winds, and there it 
sways in the all-subduing yama. (Some Europeans have conjectured and not 


without good reason, the relentless god of death, the yama of Hindus, to be 
same with as the ruthless king Jamshed of prehistoric Persia. So says Hafiz 
Ayineye, Sekendar Jame jamast bingars). 


32. Whatever appears as great and glorious, and all that is seen as mean and 
ignoble in their form, from the biggest and bright sun down to the most 
contemptible grass and straw; are all pervaded by the universal spirit; it is 
ignorance that dwells upon the external forms; but knowledge that looks into 
the inner soul, obtains its sight up the present state. 


CHAPTER IX. 


Ascertainment of True Knowledge. 


Argument. — Division of the three gunas or qualities. Pure essence of the 
Gods Hara and others, nature of knowledge and ignorance, and other subjects. 


RAMA said: — You said Sir, that all formal bodies are representations of 
illusion or ignorance, (Avidyd); but how do you account for the pure bodies of 
Hari, Hara and other divinities, and god-heads who are of pure essence in 
their embodied forms, and which cannot be the creation of our error or 
delusion. Please, Sir, explain these clearly to (spun) me and remove my 
doubts and difficulties on the subject. (The exhibition of gross bodies is the 
deception of our sense, but the appearance of pure spiritual forms, cannot be 
production of ignorance or sensible deception. We may ignore the forms of 
material substances, but not those immaterial essences which are given in the 
Sdstras. — Gloss). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The perceptible world represents the manifestation of 
the one quiescent and all inherent soul, and exhibits the glory, (dbhdsha), of 
the essential intellect, (sach-chit), which is beyond conception or thought 
divine. 


3. This gives rise to the shape of a partial hypostasis, or there rises of itself 
hypostatics, ([Sanskrit: kaldkalaruipini]), resembling the rolling fragment of a 
cloud appearing as a watery substance or filled with water. (This original 
fiction of the glory of God giving rise to the watery mist like a lighted lamp 
emitting the inky smoke, is represented in the common belief of dark 
ignorance, ([Sanskrit: avidyd]), proceeding from the bright light of divine 
knowledge ([{Sanskrit: vidyd]), and exhibited by the allegory of the black 
goddess of ignorance and illusion, ({Sanskrit: avidyd] and [Sanskrit: mdyd]), 
gushing out of the white and fair god lying inactive and dormant under her; 
she is hence designated by the various epithets of ({Sanskrit: shydmd, kali, 
jaladha| and [Sanskrit: niradavarand]) and so forth, and this is the whole 


mystery of the Sakta faith). 


4. This hypostatic fragment is also conceived in its three different lights or 
phases, of rarity, density and rigidity or grossness, ([Sanskrit: sukhsmd; 
madhya, sthild]), resembling the twilight, midday light, and darkness of the 
solar light. The first of these is called the mind or creative will, the second 
styled the Brahma Hiranyagarbha or the creative power, and the third is 
known as Virdj, the framer of the material frame, and as identic with creation 
itself. 


5. These are again denominated the three qualities, (trigunas), according to 
their different states, and these are the qualities of reality, brightness and 
darkness satva, rajas and tamas, which are designated also as the triple nature 
of things or their swabhdvas or prakriti. 


6. Know all nature to be characterised by ignorance of the triple states of the 
positive and comparative and superlative degrees; these are inbred in all living 
beings, except the Being that is beyond them, and which is the supreme one. 


7. Again the three qualities of satva, rajas, and tamas or the positive, 
comparative and superlative, which are mentioned in this place, have each of 
them its subdivisions also into three kinds of the same name. 


8. Thus the original Ignorance, ({Sanskrit: avidyd]), becomes of nine kinds by 
difference of its several qualities; and whatever is seen or known here below, 
is included under one or of the various kinds. (Hence the saktas reckon ten 
different forms of [Sanskrit: mahdvidyd], comprising the primary ignorance 
and its nine-fold divisions). 


9. Now Rama, know the positive or satwika quality of ignorance, to comprise 
the several classes of living beings known as the Rishis, Munis, the Siddhas 
and Nagas, the Vidyddharas and Suras. (All of these are marked by the 
positive quality of goodness inborn in their nature). 


10. Again this quality of positive goodness comprises the Suras or gods Hara 
and others of the first class that are purely and truly good. The sages and 
Siddhas forming the second or intermediate class, are endued with a less share 
of goodness in them, while Nagas or Vidyddharas making the last class 
possess it in the least degree. 


11. The gods being born with the pure essence of goodness, and remaining 
unmixed with the properties of other natures, have attained the state of purity 
(Holiness) like the divine Hari Hara and others. (i.e., So long the divine nature 


of a god is not shrouded under the veil of ignorance, (avidyd dvarana), he is 
to be held in the light of a divinity as a Christ or Buddha); otherwise, rajasha 
or qualified states of Hari Hara as they are represented by the vulgar, are 
neither to be regarded as such. 


12. Rama! whoever is fraught with the quality of goodness in his nature, and 
acquainted with divine knowledge in his mind, such a one is said to be 
liberated in this life, and freed from further transmigration. 


13. It is for this reason, O high-minded Rama! that the gods Rudra and others 
who possess the properties of goodness in them, are said to continue in their 
liberated state to the final end of the world. 


(Hence the immortals never die and being released from their earthly coil, 
their good spirits rove at large in open air; last and until the last doomsday 
rorqucamat or final resurrection of the dead). 


14. Great souls remain liberated, as long as they continue to live in their 
mortal bodies; and after the shuffling of their frail bodies, they become free as 
their disembodied spirits; and then reside in the supreme spirit. (i.e., They 
return to the source from which they had proceeded). 


15. It is the part of ignorance to lead men to the performance of acts, which 
after their death, become the roots of producing other acts also in all 
successive states of transmigration. (Ignorance leads one to interminable 
action in repeated births, by making the acts of the prior life to become the 
source of others in the next, so the acts of ignorance, become the seeds and 
fruits of themselves by turns, and there is no cessation nor liberation from 
them). 


16. Ignorance rises from knowledge, as the hollow bubble bursts out of the 
level of liquid water; and it sets and sinks in knowledge likewise, as the 
bubble subsides to rest in the same water. (Ignorance and its action which are 
causes of creation, have both their rise from the omniscience and inaction of 
God until they are dissolved at the dissolution of the world. Physical force 
rises from and rests in the spiritual. Ignorance, — avidyd, being but a negation 
of knowledge, — vidyd, is said to proceed from: — the negative being but 
privation of the positive). 


17. And as there is no such thing as a wave; but a word coined to denote the 
heaving of water; so there is nothing as ignorance but a word fabricated to 
express the want of knowledge. (Hence the believers in ignorance are 
mistaken in relying their faith in a power which has no existence whatever). 


18. As the water and waves are identic in their true sense, and there is no 
material difference between them; so both knowledge and ignorance relating 
to the same thing, and expressing either its presence or absence, there can be 
no essential difference in their significance. 


19. Leaving aside the sights of knowledge and ignorance, there remains that 
which always exists of itself, (that is, the self-existent God exists, beyond both 
the knowledge and ignorance of men, or whether they know him or not). It is 
only the contradiction of adverse parties, ([Sanskrit: pratiyogi byavaccheda)), 
that has introduced these words. (i.e., calling the opponents as ignorant and 
themselves as the knowing, in their mutual altercation with one another). 


20. The sights of knowledge and ignorance are nothing; (i.e., they are both 
blind to the sight of truth); therefore, be firm in what is beyond these, and 
which can neither be known nor ignored by imagination of it. 


21. There is something which is not anything, except that it exists in the 
manner of the intellect and consciousness chit-samvit, and this again has no 
representation of it, and, therefore, that ens or sat is said to be inevident, 
avidyd, the unknowable. 


22. That One Sat being known as this or such, is said to be the destroyer of 
ignorance; whereas it is want of this knowledge, that gives rise to the false 
conception of an Avidyd or ignorance. (Avidyd, mithyd, kalpand signifies 
ignorance to be a false imagination and personification also, as it is seen in the 
images of the ten Avidyds here). 


23. When knowledge and ignorance are both lost in oblivion within one in the 
intellect as when both the sun-shine and its shadow are lost in shade of night. 
(i.e., both the knowledge of the subjective ego and objective non-ego which is 
caused by ignorance being concentrated in the consciousness of the intellect 
only within one's self). 


24. Then there remains the one only that is to be gained and known, and thus 
it is, that the loss of ignorance tends to the dissipation of self-knowledge 
likewise, (which is caused by it); just as the want of oil extinguishes the lamp. 
(Egoism and ignorance being akin to one another, both of them rise and 
remain and die together. ({Sanskrit: ajndnahdmkarayoreko  satitayorut 
pattindshau yigavadeba}).) 


25. That what remains afterwards, is either nullity or the whole plenum, in 
which all these things appear to subsist, or it is nothing at all. (The one is the 
view of atheists who deny all existence, and the other of mdyikas who 


maintain the visible nature as mere illusion. ({Sanskrit: 
mdydmayamidamakhilam])). 


26. As the minute grain of the Indian fig-tree contains within it the future 
arbor and its undeveloped state, so the almighty power of omnipotence is 
lodged in the minute receptacle of the spirit before its expansion into 
immensity. (The developed and undeveloped states of the supreme power, are 
called its vydkrita and avydkrita forces). 


27. The divine spirit is more rarefied than the subtle air, and yet is not a 
vacuity having the chit or intellect in itself. It is as the sun-stone with its 
inherent fire and the milk with the latent butter unborn in it. (Hence the spirit 
of God is said to be the embryonic seed of the universe. [Sanskrit: 
brahmdndavijam)). 


28. All space and time reside in that spirit for their development, as the spark 
proceeds from the fire and light issues from the sun in which they are 
contained. (The will or word of God produces all things from his spiritual 
essence). 


29. So all things are settled in the Supreme intellect, and show themselves 
unto us as the waves of the sea and as the radiance of gems; and so our 
understandings also are reflexions of the same. 


30. The Divine intellect is the store-house of all things, and the reservoir of all 
consciousness; (i.e., the fountain-head of the understandings of all living 
beings). It is the Divine essence which pervades the inside and outside of 
everything. (All things are dependent to the entity of God for their existence, 
and there is no independent particle whatever). 


31. The Divine soul is as imperishable as the air within a pot which is not 
destroyed by breaking of the vessel, but mixes and continues forever with the 
common and its surrounding air. Know also the lives and actions of living 
beings to be dependent upon the will of the God, as the mobility of the iron 
depends upon the attraction of the loadstone. (This passage negatives the free 
agency of man, and allows him an activity in common with that of all living 
beings, under the direction of the great magnet of the Divine spirit and will). 


32. The action of the inactive or quiescent spirit of God, is to be understood in 
the same manner, as the motion of the lead is attributed to the causality of 
magnetic attraction, which moves the immovable iron. So the inert bodies of 
living beings, are moved by force of the intellectual soul. 


33. The world is situated in that mundane seed of the universe, which is 
known under the name of intellect attributed to it by the wise. It is as void and 
formless as empty air, it is nothing nor has anything in it except itself, and 
represents all and everything by itself, like the playful waves of the boundless 
ocean. 


CHAPTER X. 


Removal of Ignorance. 


Argument. — Ignorance and its bonds of Erroneous conceptions, and reliance 
on temporal objects, and the ways of getting release from them, by means of 
good understanding and right reasoning. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Therefore, this world with all its moving and 
unmoving beings is nothing (or no being at all). There is nothing that has its 
real being or entity, except the one true Ens that thou must know. (all beings 
are not being except the one self-existing Being. So says Sadi. All this is not 
being and thyself art the only being. Haman nestand anchi hastitue, so also 
the sruti, — Toam asi ndnyadasti. Tu est nullum est). 


2. Seek him, O Rama! who is beyond our thought and imagination, and 
comprises all entity and non-entity in himself, and cease to seek any living 
being or anything in existence. (In Him is all life and everything, that is or is 
not in Being and he is the source of life and light). 


3. I would not have my heart to be enticed and deceived by the false 
attachments and affections of this world; all which are as delusive, as our 
misconception of a snake in a rope. (All our earthly relations with our 
relatives and properties, are deceptions that are soon detected by our good 
sense and reason, and they vanish as soon as our mistake of the snake in rope. 
Therefore, let no worldly tie bind down thy heart to this earth). 


4. Ignorance of the soul is the cause of our error of conceiving the distinctions 
of things; but the knowledge of the self-same soul puts an end to all 
distinctions of knowledge of the reality of things, distinctive knowledge of 
existences, — bheda jndna, is erroneous; but their generalization, — abheda 
Jnana, leads to right reasoning. 


5. They call it ignorance, avidyd, when the intellect is vitiated by its 
intellection of the intelligibles or chetyas, but the intelligibles being left out, it 


comes to know the soul which is free from all attributes. 


6. The understanding only is the embodied soul, purusha, which is lost upon 
the loss of the understanding; but the soul is said to last as long as there is 
understanding in the body, like the ghatambare or air in the pot lasts with the 
lasting of the pot, and vanishes upon the loss or breaking of the vessel. (The 
soul lasts with the intellect in the body, but flies away upon the intellect's 
desertion of it. This is maintained by sruti). 


7. The wandering intellect sees the soul to be wandering, and the sedate 
understanding thinks, it to be stationary, as one perceives his breath of life to 
be slow or quick, according as he sits still or runs about. In this manner the 
bewildered understanding finds the soul to be distracted also. (The 
temperament of the mind is attributed to the soul, which is devoid of all 
modality). 


8. The mind wraps the inward soul with the coverlet of its various desires, as 
the silkworm twines the thin thread of its desires round about itself; which its 
wants of reason prevent it from understanding. (The word in the text is 
bdlavat, boyishness, which is explained in the gloss to mean nirvivekatwa or 
want of reason, and applied to the mind, means puerile foolishness). 


9. Rama said: — I see Sir, that when our ignorance becomes too gross and 
solid, it becomes as dull and solid as stone; but tell me, O venerable Sir, how 
it becomes as a fixed tree or any other immovable substance. 


10. Vasishtha replied: — The human intellect not having attained its perfect 
state of mindlessness, wherein it may have its supreme happiness and yet 
falling from its state of mindfulness, remains in the midmost position of a 
living and immovable plant or of an insensible material substance. (The 
middle state is called tatastha bhava, which is neither one of perfect 
sensibility nor impassivity). 


11. It is impossible for them to have their liberation, whose organs of the eight 
senses lie as dormant and dumb and blind and inert in them as in any dull and 
dirt matter; and if they have any perception, it is that pain only. (The 
puryastaka are the eight internal and external organs of sense instead of the 
ten organs casandria. By dormancy is meant their want of reason, and 
muteness and blindness express respectively the want of their faculties of 
sensation and action, inertness means here the want of mental action.) 


12. Rama rejoined: — O Sir, that best knowest the knowables! that the 
intellect which remains as unshaken as a fixed tree, with its reliance in the 


unity and without its knowledge of duality, approximates its perfection and 
approaches very near to its liberation, (contrary to what thou sayest now, 
regarding impossibility of the dormant minds arriving to its freedom). 


13. Vasishtha replied: — Rama! we call that to be the perpetual liberation of 
the soul, which follows persuasion of one common entity, after its rational 
investigation into the natures of all other things and their false appearances. 
(or else the blind torpidity of the irrational Yogi, amounts rather to his 
bondage to ignorance than the liberation of his soul from it). 


14. A man is then only said to have reached to his state of soliety, kaivalya, 
when he understands the community of all existence in the unity, and forsakes 
his desire for this thing and that. (But is said in sundry places of this work that 
the abandonment of the knowledge of the subjective and as well as of the 
objective, which constitutes the true liberation of the soul; which means the 
taking of the subject and object of thought and all other duties in nature in one 
self-existent unity and not to forget them all at once). (So says Sadi, — when I 
turned out duality from my door I came to knowledge of one in all). 


15. One is then said to recline in Brahma who is inclined to his spiritual 
Contemplation, after his investigation of divine knowledge in the Sdstras, and 
his discussion on the subject in the company of the learned doctors in divinity. 
(The unlearned religionist is either a zealot or an opiniatra, — abhakta tatwa 
jndni). 


16. One who is dormant in his mind and has the seed of his desire lying latent 
in his heart, resembles an unmoving tree, bearing the vegetative seed of future 
regenerations (transmigrations) within its bosom. 


17. All those men are called blocks who liken the blocks of wood and stone, 
and to be like brains who lack their brain work, and whose desires are gone to 
the rack. These men possessing the property of dullness as of dull matter, are 
subject to the pains of repeated births, recurring like the repetends of their 
remaining desires. (The doctrine of transmigration is, that the wish being 
father to the thought, everyone meets with his lot in his next birth, as it is 
thought of or fostered by him in his present life. [Sanskrit: vasand eva 
pratydvrittikdranam)). 


18. All stationary and immovable things, which are endowed with the 
property of dull matter, are subject to repeated reproductions. (Owing to the 
reproductive seed which is inborn in them, like the inbred desire of living 
beings), though they may long continue in their dormant state (like images of 
saints in their trance). 


19. Know, O pure hearted Rama! the seed of desire is as inbred in the breasts 
of plants, as the flowers are inborn in the seeds and the earthenwares are 
contained in the clay. (The statue says, Aristotle lies hid in the wood, and the 
gem in the stone, and require only the chisel of the carver and statuary to 
bring them out). 


20. The heart that contains the fruitful seed of desire in it, can never have its 
rest or consummation, even in its dormant state; but this seed being burnt and 
fried to its unproductiveness, (by means of divine knowledge), it becomes 
productive of sanctity, though it may be in its full activity. 


21. The heart that preserves the slightest remnant of any desire in it, it again 
filled with its full growth to luxuriance; as the little remainder of fire or the 
enemy, and of a debt and disease, and also of love and hatred, is enough to 
involve one in his ruin as a single drop of poison kills a man. (This stanza 
occurs in Chanakya's Excerpta in another form, meaning to say that, “No wise 
man should leave their relic, lest they grow as big as before” [Sanskrit: 
punasva bhavati tasmddyasmat sesam na kdrayet)). 


22. He who has burnt away the seed of his desire from any thing, and looks 
upon the world with an even eye of indifference, is said to be perfectly 
liberated both in his embodied state in this earth, as also in his disembodied or 
spiritual form of the next world, and is no more subjected to any trouble 
(Subjection to desire is deadly pain and freedom from it is perfect bliss. Or as 
it is said: — Desire is a disease, and its want is ease. [Sanskrit: dshabhai 
param dukham nairdshyam paramamsukham]. Again, our hopes and fears in 
constant strife, are both the bane of pig man life. [Sanskrit: bhaydshd 
jivapashah\, etc.) 


23. The intellectual power which enveloped by the seed of mental desire, 
supplies it with moisture for its germinating both in the forms of animals and 
vegetables everywhere; (i.e., The divine power which inheres in the embryos 
of our desires, causes them to develope in their various forms). 


24. This inherent power resides in the manner of productive power in the 
seeds of living beings, and in that of inertness in dull material bodies. It is of 
the nature of hardness in all solid substances, and that of tenuity in soft and 
liquid things. (i.e., The divine power forms the particular properties of things, 
and causes them to grow and remain in their own ways). 


25. It exhibits the ash colour in ashes, and shows the particles in the dust of 
the earth; it shows the sableness of all swarthy things, and flashes in the 
whiteness of the glittering blade. 


26. It is the spiritual power which assumes the communal form and figure, in 
which it resides in the community of material things, as a picture, a pot 
(ghata-pata) and the like. (The vanity of the unity is expressed in the words of 
Veda, “the one in many.” [illegible Sanskrit]) 


27. It is in this manner that the divine spirit fills the whole phenomenal world, 
in its universally common nature, as overspreading cloud, fills the whole 
firmament in the rainy season. 


28. I have thus expounded to you the true nature swariipa, — of the unknown 
Almighty power, according to my best understanding, and as far as it had 
been ascertained by the reasoning of the wise; that it fills all and is not the all 
itself, and is the true entity appearing as no entity at all. 


29. It is our want of the sight of this invisible spiritual power, that leads us to 
erroneous conception of the entity of the external world, but a slight sight of 
this almighty Ens, removes all our pains in this scene of vanity. 


30. It is our dimsightedness of Almighty power, which is styled our blindness 
or ignorance, [Sanskrit: avidyd], by the wise. It is this ignorance which give 
rise to the belief of the existence of the world, and thereby produces all our 
errors and misery. 


31. Who is so freed from this ignorance and beholds the glorious light of God 
full in his view; he finds his darkness disappear from his sight, as the icicles of 
night melt away at the appearance of solar light. 


32. The ignorance of a man flies off like his dream, after he wakes from his 
sleep, and wishes to recall his past vision of the night. 


33. Again, when a man betakes himself to ponder well the properties of the 
object before him, his ignorance flies away from before his face, as darkness 
flies at the approach of light. 


34. As darkness recedes from a man, that advances to explore into it with a 
lamp in his hand, and as butter is melted down by application of heat, so is 
one's ignorance dispelled and dissolved by application of the light and the rise 
of reason. 


35. As one pursuing after darkness sees a lighted torch in his hand, sees but a 
blaze of light before, and no shadow of darkness about him; so the inquirer 
after truth perceives the light of truth, shining to his face and no vestige of 
untruth left behind him. 


36. In this manner doth ignorance, (Avidyd), fly away and disappear at the 
sight of the light of reason; and although an unreal nothing, she appears as 
something real, wherever there is the want of reason. (Hence all unreasoning 
men are the most ignorant). 


37. As the great mass of thick darkness, disappears into nothing at the 
advance of light; it is in the same manner that the substantiality of gross 
ignorance, is dissolved into unsubstantiality at the advancement of 
knowledge. (so the advancement of inductive science, has put flight the 
dogmatic doctrines of old). 


38. Unless one condescends to examine in a thing, it is impossible for him to 
distinguish it from another (as the shell from silver and rope for the snake); 
but upon his due examination of it, he comes to detect the fallacy of his 
prejudgment (as those of the silver and snake in the shell and the rope). 


39. He who stoops to consider whether the flesh or blood or bones of his 
bodily frame, constitutes his personality, will at once perceive that he is none 
of these, and all these are distinct from himself. (The personality of a man 
consisting in his soul, and not in any part or whole of his body). 


40. And as nothing belonging to the person makes the persons, but something 
beyond it that forms one's personality; so nothing in the world from its first to 
last is that spirit, but something which has neither its beginning nor end, is the 
eternal and infinite spirit. (The same is the universal soul). 


41. Thus ignorance being got over there remains nothing whatever, except the 
one eternal soul which is the adorable Brahma and substantial whole. 


42. The unreality of ignorance is evident from the negative term of negation 
and ignoring of its essentiality, and requires no other proof to disprove its 
essence; as the relish of a thing is best proved by the tongue and no other 
organ of sense. (The term Avidyd signifying the want of vidyd, — knowledge 
and existence. [Sanskrit: vidyamdnatd]). 


43. There is no ignorance nor inexistence except the intelligence and existence 
of God, who pervade over all visible and invisible natures, which are 
attributed with the appellations of existence and inexistence. (The whole 
being God, (to Pan, — the All), there is no existence or inexistence without 
Him). 


44. So far about Avidyd, which is not the knowledge but ignorance of Brahma; 
and it is the dispersion of this ignorance which brings us to the knowledge of 


God. 


45. The belief of this, that and all other things in the world, are distant and 
distinct from Brahma, is what is called Avidyd or ignorance of him; but the 
belief that all things visible in the world, is the manifestation of omnipresence, 
causes the removal of ignorance, by presenting us to the presence of God. 


NOTE TO CHAPTER X. 


The following lines of the English poet, will be found fully to illustrate the 
divine attribute of omnipresence in the pantheistic doctrine of Vedanta and 
Vasishtha, as shown in this chapter et passen. 


All are but parts, of one stupendous whole, 
Whose body nature is, and God the soul; 

That, changed through all, and yet in all the same; 
Great in the earth, as in the ethereal frame; 
Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze; 
Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees; 
Lives through all life, extends through all extent, 
Spreads undivided, operates unspent; 

Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part. 

As full as perfect, in a pair as heart: 

As full as perfect, in vile man that mourns, 

As in the rapt seraph, that adores and burns; 

To him no high, now, no great, no small; 

He fills, he bounds, connects and equals all. 


Pope's Mortal Essays I. IX. 


CHAPTER XI. 


Ascertainment of Living Liberation. 


Argument. — Instances of Living Liberation in Hari, Hara and others, and its 
consisting in the oecumenical knowledge of the one Brahma in all and 
everything. 


VASISHTHA said: — I tell you again and repeatedly, O pious Rama! for 
your understanding, that you can never know the spirit without your constant 
habit, of contemplating on it in your self-cogitation. (So the Sruti. — Atma 
vara, mant avyam, “the soul is to be constantly thought upon,” and so also the 
Vedanta aphorism, “asakrit upadesat,’ the soul is known by repeated 
instructions on spiritual knowledge). 


2. It is gross ignorance which is known as nescience, and it becomes compact 
by the accumulated erroneous knowledge of previous births and past life, 
(namely, — the errors of the dualities of matter and spirit and of the living and 
Supreme soul, and the plurality of material and sensible objects). 


3. The perceptions of the external and internal senses of body, both in the 
states of sensibility and insensibility, are also the causes of great errors or 
ignorance crasse of embodied beings. (i.e., The sensible perceptions are 
preventives of spiritual knowledge which transcends the senses and is called 
[Sanskrit: atindriya]). 


4. Spiritual knowledge is far beyond the cognizance of the senses, and is only 
to be arrived at after subjection of the five external organs of sense, as also of 
the mind which is the sixth organ of sensation. 


5. How then is it possible to have a sensible knowledge of the spirit, whose 
essence is beyond the reach of our faculties of sense, and whose powers 
transcend those of all our sensible organs? (i.e., Neither is the spirit 
perceptible by our senses, nor does it perceive all things by senses like ours). 
So the Srutis, — He is not to be perceived by the faculties of our sense, who 


does and perceives all with our organs. ([Sanskrit: na tatra vaggacchati 
namani dpanipddau yavanagtahitd]). 


6. You must cut off this creeper of ignorance, which has grown up in the 
hollow of the tree of your heart, with the sharp sword of your knowledge, if 
you should have your consummation as an adept in divine wisdom. 


7. Conduct yourself Rama! in the same manner in the practice of your 
spiritual knowledge, as the king Janaka does with his full knowledge of all 
that is knowable to man. 


8. He is quite confident in his certain knowledge of the main truth, both when 
he is employed in his active duties, in his waking state, as well as when he 
remains quiet at his leisure. (The end of knowledge is to know God, and to 
rely on him both in busy and in active life). 


9. It was by his reliance on this certain truth, that Hari was led to the 
performance of his various acts in his repeated births or incarnations. (A god 
in human flesh does his works as a god). 


10. May you, Rama! be certain of the main truth, which conducted the three- 
eyed god Siva in the company of his fair consort; and which led the 
dispassionate Brahma to the act of creation. (ie., the passionate and 
unimpassioned and those that are active or inactive are equally assured of this 
truth). 


11. It was the assurance of this eternal verity, which led the preceptors of the 
gods and demons, even Brihaspati and Bhargava, in their duties; and which 
guide the sun and moon in their courses, and even directs the elements of fire 
and air in the wonted ways. 


12. This truth was well known to the host of Sages, including Narada and 
Pulastya, Angira and Pracheta, and Bhrigu Krutu, Atri and Suka, as it is 
known to me also. 


13. This is the certainty which has been arrived at by all other learned 
Brahmans and Sages, and this is the firm belief of everybody, that has been 
liberated in his life time. 


14. Rama said: — Tell me truly, O venerable Sir, the true nature of the truth, 
on which the great gods and wisest sages, have grounded their belief, and 
became freed from their sorrow and grief (in this world of sorrow and tears). 


15. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me tell you! O worthy prince that art great in 


arms as in thy knowledge of all things, the plain truth in reply to your 
question, and the certitude arrived at by all of them (named above). 


16. All these spacious worlds, that you behold to be spread all about you, they 
are all that One or on, and are situated in the immensity of Brahma. (In their 
real or spiritual nature, and after obliteration of the erroneous forms in which 
they appear to you. Their phenomenal appearances, being but the 
misconceptions of our errors). 


17. Brahma is the intellect, and the same is this world and all its animate and 
inanimate creatures also; Myself and Brahma and so art thou thyself, and such 
are all our friends and foes beside us. 


18. Brahma is the triple-time of the past, present and future, all which are 
comprehended in his eternity; in the manner of the continuity of waves, 
billows and surges, contained in the immensity of the ocean. 


19. It is thus the same Brahma that appears to us in all the various forms of 
our perception, and in the different shapes of the actor, action and its act, as 
those of the feeder, feeding and the food, and of the receiver, reception and 
the thing received. (There being but the only unity of God, the same is 
changed to all forms of action and passion and so says the poet, “that change 
through all and yet in all the same,” and also unvaried in all with a varied 
name. This the vedanta says to be the vivarta rupa or the one changed in 
many form vividha many, and varta let vertuus changed; [Sanskrit: 
paribatta].) 


20. Brahma expands in himself by his power of evolution, or unfolding 
himself by his vivarta sakti; Hence He would be our enemy if he would do 
anything unfavourable into us. (God is good and never does any evil to any 
one; all he does in and to himself)? 


21. Thus Brahma being situated and employed with himself, does nothing 
aught of good or evil to any other. The attribution of passions to him, is as the 
planting of a tree in empty air. (God is not capable of any human attribute, as 
it is usual with anthropomorphists to load him with). 


22. How very delighted are they that are dead to their desires, to reflect on this 
truth, that they are continually living and moving in the all-pervading Brahma. 
(In Him we live and move). 


23. All things are full of Brahma, and there is naught of pleasure or pain 
herein; Brahma resides in his self-same all and is pleased with all in himself. 


(The one is full of bliss with all in himself). 


24. The Lord is manifest in his Lordship, and I am no other person beside 
himself; this pot and that painting and I myself, are full with the self-same 
Brahma. 


25. Hence it is in vain to speak of our attachment or aversion to worldliness, 
since we bear our bodies and dare to die in Brahma only. (It is that something, 
for which we bear to live, and dare to die. — Pope). 


26. Our bodies being the abodes of Brahma, it is as false to think to our bodily 
pains, as also of our pleasure in bodily enjoyments, as to take a rope for a 
serpent. (Hence we can have no sense of our pleasure or pain, as long as we 
know ourselves to be situated in Brahma and He in us). 


27. How say you, that this or that is your doing, when you have the power of 
doing nothing. (The fluctuation of the billows on the surface of the sea, cannot 
agitate the waters of the deep below). 


28. Myself, thyself, and himself, and all others, are but the breaths of the 
universal spirit; and they heave and then subside to rest as waves of the sea; 
but the spirit of God, like the water of the deep, neither rises nor falls as 
ourselves or the fleeting waves at any time. 


29. All persons returning to Brahma after their death, have their bodies also 
reduced into Him and retain their personal identity in Him in the same 
manner, as the moving and unmoving waters rest alike in the sea. 


30. All moving and unmoving souls and bodies, rest alike in the supreme 
Brahma; as the Jiva and its form reside in God, and the whirling and still 
waters remain in the same sea. 


31. The soul and the body, are the two states of the likeness and unlikeness of 
Brahma, the one is the living soul of bodies, and the other is the gross body 
itself. 


32. Irrational souls, that are ignorant of this truth, are verily subject to 
delusion; but the rational souls are not so, but enjoy their full bliss on earth, 
while the other is ever doomed to misery. 


33. The blind behold the world all dark, while the eye-sighted find it fully 
bright and shining; so the wise are blessed with the knowledge of the one soul 
of the whole, while the ignorant are immerged in misery, by their want of 
such knowledge. 


34. As the darkness of the night, presents its goblins and spectres, to the sight 
of children only, and not those of the grown up and adult; so the world 
presents its delusions to the ignorant and never to the wise, who behold one 
Brahma only in all things before them. 


35. There is nothing here that lives of itself, nor dies away to nothing; all 
equally exist in God at all time, and nothing is doomed to be born or perish 
herein to happiness or misery. 


36. All beings are situated in the universal soul, as the waves in the vast 
expanse of the ocean, therefore, it is erroneous to say the one reside in the 
spirit, and another to be beside it. 


37. As there is an inborn light in the crystal, which is capable of reflecting a 
variety of rays, so the spirit of God dwells in his own spirit in the form of the 
universe, showing various shapes to view by the inner light of the spirit. 


38. As the particles of water flying from the waves, fall into the sea and mix 
with its body of water; so the bodies of dying people, fall into the body of 
Brahma, wherein they subsisted in their lifetime. (So there is neither an 
increase or diminution of the essence of Brahma, by the birth or death or 
increase or decrease of beings in the world). 


39. There is nobody nor being, beside the being of Brahma, as there is no 
wave nor foam or froth of the sea beside the water of the deep. 


40. As the billows and waves, the surges and eddies, and their froths and 
foams, and bubbles and minute particles, are all formations of water in the 
great body of waters; so are all beings but productions of the spirit in the 
Infinite spirit. (All matter is reduced to the spirits, and the spirits are 
consolidated to material substances by chemical process). 


41. All bodies with their various modes, and organs of sense and their several 
functions, and all visible objects and their growth and decay, together with 
everything conducing to our happiness and misery, and all other energies and 
their gains, are the works of Brahma in himself. (ie., they are the self- 
reflective acts of gods and not done for the sake of others). 


42. The production of these various beings in esse, is from the essence of 
Brahma; as the formation of different ornaments, is from the substance of 
gold. There is no other formal cause or formation distinct from Brahma, and 
the distinction of the cause and its creation, is the erroneous conception of the 
ignorant. 


43. The mind, understanding, egoism, and the elemental atoms, and the organs 
of sense, are all the various forms of Brahma; wherefore there is cause of our 
joy or grief. 


44. The words I, thou, he, and this, and that, as also the terms of the mind and 
matter, are all significant of the self-same Brahma, dtmdtmani, in the same 
manner as the roaring of a cloud in the hills, resounds in a hundred echoes 
through their caverns. (All words applied to everything, relate to the one self- 
same Brahma who is all in all to pan). 


45. Brahma appears as an unknown stranger to us, through our ignorance of 
him, as the visions seen in a dream by our mind itself, appear foreign to us. 
(i.e., Our belief in the visibles is the cause of our disbelief in the invisible 
God; as our familiarity with the objects of our waking state, makes us reject 
our visionary dreams as false). 


46. Ignorance of Brahma as Brahma or what he is, makes men to reject divine 
knowledge altogether; as our ignorance of the quality of gold causes us to cast 
it off dross. (Brahma to the brute is, as the gem in the dung hill cast away by 
the silly cock). 


47. Brahma is known as the Supreme spirit and sole Lord, by those who are 
acquainted with divine knowledge; but he is said to be unknown and involved 
in ignorance by them that are ignorant of Him. 


48. Brahma being known as Brahma, becomes manifested such in a moment; 
just as gold when known as such, is taken in due esteem. 


49. Those who are versed in divine knowledge, know Brahma as without a 
cause and causing nothing by himself, and that he is free from decay, and is 
the Supreme spirit and sole Lord of all. 


50. He who can meditate in himself, on the omnipotence of the Supreme spirit 
of Brahma, comes to behold him as such in a short time, even without a leader 
to guide him in his spiritual knowledge; (one's own faith in Divine 
Omnipotence, is the surest means to the sight of his Maker). 


51. The want of divine knowledge, that is called the ignorance of the ignorant; 
whereas it is the knowledge of God, that constitutes the true knowledge which 
removes the ignorance. 


52. As an unknown friend is no friend at all, until he is recognized as such, 
after removal of one's forgetfulness; so God is no God to one, as long as he 
continues in ignorance of Him. 


53. We can then only know God, when the mind comes to perceive the 
unconnection of the soul with the body; and whereby it alienates itself from 
all worldly connections in disgust. 


54. It is then that we come to know the one true God, when the mind is freed 
from its knowledge of duality; and by its distaste of dualism, it abandons its 
attachment to the world. 


55. We then come to the knowledge of God, when we come to know 
ourselves to be other than our persons; and when by getting rid of our 
personal egoism, we forsake our affection for this unkindred world. 


56. It is then that the thought of God rises in our minds, when we come to the 
true knowledge of thinking ourselves the same with Brahma; and when the 
mind is absorbed in the meditation of the divine truth in one's self. (This is the 
sublimation of the Yogi to the divine state; or when the Yogi loses himself, in 
his rapturous vision on the one God. This kind of meditation is indicated in 
the formula “Soham” in Vedanta and an ald Hug in sufism). 


57. God being known as the tout ensemble or comprising the whole plenum, 
we come to believe the same as Brahma; and losing our egoism and tuism in 
the same, we come to the knowledge of that entity only comprising the entire 
universe. (This belief of the entirety of the Deity, is expressed in the words, 
“Tat Sat,’ corresponding with to on, idest, alast, that is, He in the creeds of 
other people). 


58. When I come to know this true and omniform Brahma, as all in all, and 
forming the entire whole; I become released from all my sorrow and grief, and 
am set free from all my delusion and desire, and the responsibility of my 
duties (from the belief of God's agency in all things). 


59. I am quite calm and at ease and without any sorrow or grief, by my 
knowledge of the truth, that I am no other than Brahma Himself; I am as cool 
as the moon, without her spots and phases in me, and I am the all entire, 
without any disease, decay or diminution in me. (This is said with regard to 
the universal soul, which engrosses all souls and things in itself). 


60. It is true that I am the all-pervading Brahma, and, therefore, I can neither 
wish to have or leave anything from me; being of myself the blood, bones and 
flesh of my body. (The soul is the source of the body, and the spirit its life, 
without which it decays and dies away). 


61. It is true that I am Brahma the universal soul, and, therefore, the intellect, 


mind and sensibility also; I am the heaven and sky with their luminaries and 
quarters and the nether worlds also. 


62. It is true that 1 am Brahma, composing this pot and painting, these bushes 
and brambles, these forests and their grass, as also the seas and their waves. 
(One God is manifest in many forms). 


63. The unity of Brahma is a certain truth, and it is the ego which is manifest 
in the seas and mountains and all living beings; and in the qualities of 
reception and emission, and of extension and contraction in all material 
bodies. (It is the Divinity that actuates the physical powers in nature). 


64. All things of extended forms situated in the intellectual spirit of Brahma, 
who is the cause of the growth of creepers and plants, and of the germination 
of vegetative seeds. 


65. The supreme Brahma resides in his sheath of the intellectual soul, in the 
manner of flavour in the cup of the flower; and thence diffuses itself on all 
sides in the form of everything everywhere. 


66. He that is known as only soul of all, and who is ascertained as the supreme 
spirit, and who is designated by the appellations of the intellectual soul, 
Brahma the great, the only entity and reality, the Truth and Intelligence and 
apart from all. 


67. He is said to be the all-inhering element, and Intelligence only without the 
intelligibles in it; He is the pure light that gives every being its consciousness 
of itself. 


68. He appears to the spiritualist to be existent everywhere, as the tranquil and 
intelligent Brahma; and contains in himself the powers of all the faculties of 
the mind and body, such as the understanding and the organs of sense, so the 
sruti: — “He is the mind of the mind, the sight of the eye.” [Sanskrit: yascat? 
u sascat?unmandsd manoyadityddi). 


69. Give up the thought of thy difference from Brahma by knowing thyself as 
the reflexion of the intelligent soul; which is the cause of the causes of the 
existence of the world. Such as vacuum and others, which are causes of sound 
and are caused by the vacuous spirit of God, (and not as the vacuists and 
materialists believe them to be increate essences from eternity). 


70. The intellect of Brahma is the transparent receptacle of all essences, and 
my ego is of the same essence, which exudes continually as a shower of rain, 
from the transparent spirit of God. 


71. Tam that light which shines in the souls of Yogis, and I am that silent spirit 
which is supported by the ambrosial drops of Divine Intellect; which 
continually distils its nectarious juice into our souls, as we may feel in 
ourselves. 


72. I am as a wheel or circle without having the beginning or end of myself, 
and by having the pure intellect of Brahma in me. I am quiet in my deep sleep 
of samadhi meditation, and I perceive holy light shining within me. (The Yogi 
in his devotion is absorbed in the calmness of his soul and is wrapt in divine 
light). 


73. The thought that I am Brahma, affords a far greater delight to the soul, 
than the taste of any sweet meat, which gives but a momentary delight, so the 
sruti: — God is all sweetness; [Sanskrit: rasobetat] (sweet is the memory of a 
friend, and sweeter far must be the thought of God, who is best and greatest 
friend). 


74. One knowing his soul and intellect, knows the indestructible Brahma and 
himself as identic with the same; as one whose mind is possessed with the 
image of his beloved, beholds her bright countenance in the shining orb of the 
moon. 


75. As the sights of earthly people are fixed in the ethereal moon, so the sight 
of intellectual beings, is fixed in the supreme and indestructible soul, which he 
knows as the self-same with himself. 


76. The intellectual power which is situated in the vacuity of the heart, is 
verily the verity of the immaculate Brahma himself. Its pleasure and pain, and 
mutability and divisibility, are attributed to by ignorance only. 


77. The soul that has known the truth, knows himself as the supreme Intellect, 
as the pilgrim on the way sees only his saint before him, and no intermediate 
object besides. 


78. The belief that I am the pure and all-pervading intellect, is attended with 
the purity and holiness of the soul, and the knowledge of the Divine power as 
the cause of the union of earth, air and water in the production of the germ of 
creation, is the main creed of all creeds. 


79. I am that intellect of Brahma which is inherent in all things as their 
productive power; and I am that soul which causes the sweetness of the beal 
and bitterness of nimba fruits. 


80. I am that divine intellect which inheres alike in all flavours, which is 


devoid of pain and pleasure and which I perceived in my mind by my 
consciousness. 


81. I am the undecaying intellect of Brahma, and deem my gain and loss in 
equal light of indifference; while I view this earth and sky, and the sun and 
moon displayed before my eyes in all their glory. 


82. I am that pure and serenely bright Brahma, whose glory is displayed alike 
in all of these, and which I behold to shine vividly before me, whether when I 
am awake or asleep or whenever I am in the state of dreaming or profound 
sleep. 


83. I am that Brahma who is without beginning and end, who is known by his 
four-fold hypostases, and is ever indestructible and undecaying. He resides in 
the souls of men in the form of sweetness in the sugarcane through all their 
transmigrations. 


84. I am that intellect of Brahma, which like the sunshine pervades equally in 
the form of transparent light in and above all created beings. 


85. I am that all pervasive intellect of Brahma, which like the charming moon 
light fills the whole universe; and which we feel and taste in our hearts, as the 
delicious draught of ambrosia. 


86. I am that intellect of Brahma, which extends undivided over the whole and 
all parts of the universe, and which embraces all existence as the moving 
clouds of heaven encompasses the firmament. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Argument. — Investigation in the doubts respecting living liberation. 


VASISHTHA said: — Great minded men that are certain of these truths, are 
purified from their sins, and finding their tranquillity in the reliance on truth, 
enjoy the delight of the even equanimity of their souls, both in their prosperity 
and adversity. (Truthfulness and equanimity are god-like attributes). 


2. So the wise men of perfect understandings, being evenly dispassionate in 
their minds, feel themselves neither glad nor sad, either in the enjoyment or 
deprivation of their lives (which are alike to them, because death is but the 
beginning or continuance of life in another state or world). 


3. They remain as unseen and marvelously mighty, as the arms of Narayana 
(god); and as straight and firm and yet as low and fragile as the body and 
broken rocks of mount Meru on earth. 


4. They roam about at pleasure in woodlands and over islands and amidst 
cities also, and like the gods of paradise they wander about the beautiful 
groves and sceneries of nature. 


5. They roved in flowery gardens shaken by the playful breezes, and also in 
the romantic forests on the skirts and tops of mountains. 


6. They conquer also their enemies, and reign in their realms with the chouri 
and umbrella ensigns of their royalty; they enjoy the various produce and 
wealth of their kingdom, and observe the various customs and usages of their 
country. (The wise man freely enjoy all things without being bound into 
them). 


7. They follow all the rules and rites, established by the laws of their 
countries; and inculcated as duties for the observance of all. 


8. They do not disdain to taste the pleasures, that would make the beauties 
smile at; nor are they averse to the enjoyment of luxuries, that they can rightly 


use and enjoy. 


9. They smell the fragrance of mandara-flowers, and taste the sweet juice of 
mango-fruits; they regale themselves with the sweet songs of Apsaras, and 
revel in the arbours of Nandara or pleasure garden. 


10. They never disregard the duties that bind all mankind to them, nor neglect 
to perform the sacrifices and observe the ordinances that are imperious on 
domestic life. 


11. But they are saved from falling into dangers and evils of all kinds, and 
escape the danger of falling under the feet of murderous elephants, and avoid 
the uproar of trumpets and the imminent death in battle-fields; (i.e., Wise men 
avoid the dangers to which the ignorant are liable). 


12. They abide with those that are afflicted in their hearts, as among the 
marauding plunderers of the country; they dwell among the oppressed 
cowardly people, as also amongst their oppressors. Thus they are conversant 
with the practices of all opposing parties, without mixing with any one of 
them. 


13. But their minds are clear of doubts and free from errors unaffected by 
passions and affections, and unattached to any person or thing. They are quite 
discrete and disengaged, free and liberated, tranquil and serene, inclined to 
goodness reclining and resting in Supreme spirit. 


14. They are never immerged in great dangers, nor are they ever involved in 
very great difficulties. But remain as the boundary mountains, remaining 
unimmersed amidst the water of a circum-jacent lake. 


15. They are never elated with joy, at the fluctuating favours of fond and 
fascinating fortune; nor are they swollen, like the sea at the increasing digits 
of the moon. 


16. They do not fade away under sorrow or sickness, like plants under the 
scorching sun beams, nor are they refreshed by refreshments, like medicinal 
plants under the refreshing dews of night. 


17. They are employed calmly and without anxiety in the discharge of their 
duties and in the acts of fruition karma, and neither long for nor relinquish the 
fruition, which is attendant upon them; (i.e., They do what is to be done, not 
for reward but as a matter of course). 


18. They are neither elated with the success of their undertakings, nor are they 


depressed by the mishap of their efforts, they are not joyous at their joy and 
hey-day, nor do they sink under in danger and difficulty. 


19. They do not droop down under despondence, nor are they dejected in 
despair, they are not merry in their prosperity, nor do they wail and weep in 
their adversity. 


20. They discharge their customary duties as prescribed by law and usage, but 
their minds remain as firm and unmoved, as a mountain at all the efforts of the 
body. 


21. Now Rama! remove your sight for thy own egoism, and keep it fixed on 
the true ego which is a destroyer of all sins; and then go on with your ordinary 
course of conduct as thou mayest like. 


22. Look at these creations and their various creatures, as they have existed in 
their successive stages and phases; but do you remain as firm as rock and as 
deep as the sea, and get rid of your errors. (i.e., Your observation of nature 
can only remove your errors). 


23. Know this grand whole as the reflexion of one sole Intellect, beside which 
there is nothing as a reality or unreality, or as some thing or nothing. (Jo kuch 
hai ohi hai, nehinaur kuch'he. Whatever there is, is he himself, and there is nil 
beside his ens or self). 


24. Rama! have thy greatness as the great Brahma, and preserve the dignity of 
human nature about thee; reject all whatever as unworthy of thee, and with an 
unattached heart to everything, manage thyself with gentleness everywhere, 
and thus pass the days here. (As an heir of eternity). 


25. Why dost thou weep with thy heart full of sorrow and grief, and why dost 
thou lament like the deluded, and why rovest thou with thy wandering mind, 
like a swimming straw to the whistling eddy. 


26. Rama replied: — Verily Sir, the dart of my doubts is now rubbed out of 
my mind, and my heart is awakened to its good senses by thy kindness, as the 
lotus is enlivened by thy rising sun-light. 


27. My errors are dispersed as the morning fog in autumn; and my doubts are 
set down by your lectures; which I will always adhere to. 


28. I am now set free from the follies of pride, vanity, envy and insensibility; 
and I feel lasting spiritual joy rising within me after the subsidence of all my 
sorrows. And now if you are not tired, please deliver your lectures with your 


clear understanding, and I will follow and practice them without fear or 
hesitation. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


The Two Yogas of Knowledge and Reasoning. 


Argument. — The two yogas or Habits of restraining the Desires and 
Respiration herein before described, are followed by two others: namely, the 
Acquisition of knowledge and the Training to reasoning which are yogas also. 


Rama said: — I am verily becalmed and set at ease, O Brahman! by 
relinquishing all my desires, from my full knowledge of their impropriety; and 
by my being staid in the state of the liberated, even in this my present life. 
(The heaven of the holy, commences in their earthly life). 


2. But tell me, Sir, how a man can have his liberation, by restraining his 
respirations for a time; and how the restraint of one's breathings, can put a 
restriction to his desires, which reside and rise from the mind; while it belongs 
to the body and comes in and out of the heart and lungs. (Nostrils). 


3. Vasishtha said: — The means of fording over the ocean of this earth is 
known, O Rama! by the word Yoga or union, which is composed of the 
quality of pacifying the mind in either of the two ways or processes (as shown 
below). 


4. The one is the acquisition of religious instruction, leading to the knowledge 
of the soul and of the Supreme soul, and the other is the restraining of 
respiration, which you will learn from the lecture that I am about to deliver. 


5. Here Rama interrupted and said: — Tell me, Sir, which of the two is more 
delectable, owing to its facility and unpainfulness; and the knowledge or 
practice whereof, releases us from all fear and trouble whatsoever. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — Rama! although I have mentioned here of two kinds 
of Yoga, yet the common acceptation of the term, restricts it to the restriction 
of breathing. (The vulgar have no idea of esoteric occultism or jnana Yoga, 
but call him a Yogi, who is employed in his exoteric practices of asceticism 


and austerities, suppression of breath; and all kinds of willful pains). 


7. The true Yoga is the concentration of the mind in God, which is the only 
means of our salvation in this world; and this is achieved in either way of the 
regulation of breathing, or perfection in learning, both of which tend to the 
one and same effect, of fixing the attention in divine meditation. 


8. The practical Yoga by the regulation of respiration, appears as too arduous 
a task to some persons, while proficiency in knowledge seems to be too 
difficult of attainment to others. But to my understanding, the ascertainment of 
truth by theoretical knowledge seems to be far better than practice. (The 
theoretical meditation is known as the rdja Yoga, and the forced contraction 
of the breath is called the hatha Yoga or forced devotion, and is the device of 
Dattatreya who was an ancient Rishi also). 


9. Ignorance is ever ignorant of truth, which does not lend its light to us in 
either our walking or sleeping states. So the ignorant practiser is always in 
ignorance both when he is in his meditative trance, [Sanskrit: yoga vidyd] or 
otherwise; but knowledge is always knowing, both when the knower is awake 
or asleep. 


10. The practical Yoga which stands in need of fixed attention, painful 
postures, and proper times and places, is impossible to be practiced, owing to 
the difficulty of getting all these advantages at all times. 


11. I have thus described to you, O Rama! both the two kinds of Yoga 
propounded in the Sdstras, and the superiority of the pure knowledge, which 
fills the intellect with its unfading light. 


12. The regulation of the breathings, the firmness of the body and dwelling in 
sequestered cells, are all, I ween, as pregnant of consummation, — siddhi; but 
say, which of these is capable of giving knowledge, [Sanskrit: vritti], to the 
understanding, which is the greatest perfection in human nature. 


13. Now Rama! if you think it possible for you, to sit quiet with utter 
suppression of your breaths and thoughts; then can you attempt to sit in your 
sedate posture of meditation without uttering a single word. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Narrative of Bhusunda and description of mount Meru. 


Argument. — Vasishtha's visit to Meru in expectation of seeing Bhusunda 
and his description of the Mountain. 


VASISHTHA related: — The vast universe, O Rama! is but an evolution of 
the will of the Infinite Brahma, just as the various representations in the 
mirage, are but eversions of solar rays. (Or these are the reflexions of the self- 
same Deity, as the Fata Morgana are the reflex of solar light). 


2. Here the divine Brahma that is born of the lotiform navel of Brahma, takes 
the title of the creator and preserver of all, that has been produced by the 
supreme spirit; and is called also the great father of all, for his producing the 
prime progenitors of mankind. (Here Brahma resembles Adam of the 
scriptures). 


3. This divine being brought me forth from his mind, wherefore I am called 
the mdnasaputra or progeny of the mind, of the mind of this holy personage. 
He made me settle first in the fixed polar circle of the starry frame, I viewed 
the revolutions of the planetary spheres, and the successive Manvantaras 
before me. (The Manus were all the progeny of the divine mind, whence they 
bear their name of Manu or mind-born). 


4. Residing once in the imperial court of the lord of gods, — Indra, I heard the 
accounts of many long living persons and people, from the mouths of Narada 
and other messengers of the gods. (Narada is the Mercury of Hindu 
mythology, and answers an angel of the scriptures). 


5. There was once on a time the sage Salatapa among them; who was a person 
of great understanding, a man of honor and taciturn in his speech; and said by 
way of conversation: — 


6. That there was in the north east summit of Mount Meru, a spot full of 


sparkling gems, where there was a Kalpa tree of the chuta or mango kind, 
which yielded its fruits in all seasons of the year. 


7. The tree was covered all over with fresh and beautiful creepers, and a 
branch of it extending towards the south, had a large hollow in its top, 
containing the nest of birds of various kinds. 


8. Among them there was a crow's nest, belonging to one old raven by the 
name of Bhusunda, who lived quite happy with himself; as the god Brahma 
dwells content in his lotus-bed. 


9. There is no one in the womb of this world so long lived as he, nor even the 
gods in heaven can boast a greater longevity than he among the feathered 
tribe; and it is doubtful whether there may be another as old as he in times to 
come. (Old as Adam and as old as Methuselah). 


10. This crony crow was beauteous even in old age, and had become 
passionless and great-minded by his long experience. He remained quiet with 
the tranquillity of his mind, and was as graceful as he was full of knowledge 
of all times. (Achromatic as old Nestor of the present, past and future, — 
trikdlajna). 


11. If any one may have the long life of this crow, his life becomes 
meritorious, and his old age is crowned with sapience. (The vigour of life is 
productive of meritorious works, and its decay is fraught with wisdom). 


12. In this manner, he related the virtues of the bird in full, at the request of 
the gods in heaven; and did not utter anything more or less, before the 
assembly of the deities who knew all things. 


13. After the gods had been satisfied with the narration of the veteran crow, I 
felt a great curiosity in me, to see and know more of this superannuated bird, 
(for who is it that has not an eager desire to learn the art of longevity). 


14. With this desire, I hastened to the spot, where the crow was said to rest in 
his happy nest; and I reached in a short time to the summit of Meru, which 
was shining with its precious stones. (The descent from heaven to the lofty top 
of Meru could not be long, since the gods are said to be all situated on this 
high mountain. ({Sanskrit: tasminnadrau trayasvimsat vasatihiga nadevatah)]), 
and again ([{Sanskrit: yédvatmerausyitadevah)).) 


15. The peak of the mountain was flaming as fire, with the glare of its gems 
and red earth, — gairika, and these painted the upper sky, with the bright hue 
of florid honey and sparkling wine. 


16. The mountain shone as brightly as it were burning with the blaze of the 
last conflagration, and the sky was reddened by their reflexion with shades of 
clouds; appearing as the smoke of fire or the blue lustre of sapphire. 


17. The mountain appeared to be formed by a collection of all kinds of 
colours on earth, which gave it the appearance of the variegated sky in west at 
the time of the setting sun. 


18. The flame of fire proceeding from its crater, and emitted through the 
crevice on its top, seemed as the culinary fire of the Yogi, carried up from his 
bowels to the cranium in Yoga. (This is styled the Utkranti Yoga or lifting the 
physical powers, and concentrating them all in the head, — the seat of 
intellect). 


19. The ruddy peaks and pinnacles of Sumeru, resembled his arms and fingers 
painted with lac-dye; in order to lay hold on his consort the fair moon by way 
of sport. (It means the mountain tops reaching to and touching the orb of the 
moon. So Kalidasa makes his Himalaya transcend the sphere of the sun). 


20. The lurid flame of wild fire on this mountain, seemed as the burning blaze 
of sacrificial fires, which are fed with clarified butter were rising to heaven. 
(Hence fire is styled the bearer of our offerings to the gods above, — havya- 
vdahana, because there is nothing on the earth except the flames of fire, — that 
has the power of rising upwards, whence they are termed Urdha, — jwalana, 
— havir, — bhujas. ({Sanskrit: urdha jvalana havirbhujam])) 


21. The mount with its elevated summit seemed to kiss the face of the sky, 
and to raise its fingers in the form of its peaks and pinnacles, with their 
blazing gems resembling the nails of the fingers, in order to count the 
scattered stars. 


22. The clouds were roaring on one side of it with the loud noise of the drums, 
and the young plants and creepers were dancing in the happy arbours on 
another, clusters of flowers were smiling as blooming beauties on this side, 
and the swarms of humming bees were hovering on them on that. 


23. Here the lofty palm trees seemed to be smiling with shewing their teeth in 
their denticulated leaves, on seeing the giddy groups of Apsaras, swinging 
and strolling about loosely in their amorous dalliances under their shade. 


24. There the celestials were resorting in pairs to their grottos in the mountain, 
in order to relieve themselves of their trouble of trudging over the rugged 
paths of the craggy mountain; and they were clothed in the white vest of the 


open sky, (nudity), and having the stream of Ganges falling from high for 
their sacred thread. (Here Meru means any mountain and Ganga is put for any 
stream descending from it). 


25. The hoary mountain stood as a grey headed hermit, holding the reeds 
(with which it abounded) as canes in his hand; and the celestial inhabitants of 
the mount, rested in the coverts of the creepers, being lulled to sleep by 
gurgling sound of the waters falling from precipice to precipice. 


26. The mountain king was crowned by the full-blown lotuses that grow on its 
top, and was regaled by the sweet fragrance; which the odoriferous breezes 
bore from them. It was decorated with the gems of the starry frame on its 
crown, and charmed with the sweet songs of the gandharvas playing their 
strains on it. 


27. His hoary head pierced the silvery region of heaven, and was one with it 
in being the abode of the gods. 


28. The many coloured tops of Meru, emitting the various colours of the red, 
white, black, blue, yellow, and gray stones that are embodied in its body, lent 
the sky its variegated hues in the morning and evening, while the versicolor 
blossoms on its tops, invited the Heavenly nymphs to their rambles and sports 
over them. 


CHAPTER XV. 


Vasishtha's visit to Bhusanda. 


Argument. — Description of the scenery on the top of Mount Meru. Allegory 
of the arbour of desire, the resort of all living beings. Description of Birds of 
the mountainous region, and lastly the character of kaka bhusanda. 


VASISHTHA continued: — I saw the kalpa tree on the top of one of these 
peaks, which was girt by its branches on all sides; and covered with flowers 
appearing as tufts of hairs on its head. 


2. This tree was covered with the dust of its flowers, which shrouded it as a 
thick mist or cloud; and its flowers shown as bright as brilliant gems upon it; 
its great height reaching to the sky, made it appear as a steeple or pinnacle 
standing upon the peak. (Allegorically the Kalpa tree is the tree of Desire, 
which branches out into the various objects of our wish. Its flowers are all our 
sanguine hopes and expectations, which are hidden under the dark mist of 
futurity. The crown dwelling in its dark hollow, is the undwelling obscure 
soul, which is hid under the impervious gloom of our ignorant minds and false 
egoism. Its nest is in the highest divinity, and it is immortal because it is a 
particle of Eternal spirit). 


3. Its flowers were twice as much as the number of stars in heaven, and its 
leaves redoubled the clouds in their bulk and thickness. Its filaments were 
more shining than the flash of lightnings, and the pollen of the flowers were 
brighter far than the circumambient beams of the radiant sun. (The flowers of 
the tree of Desire, being our hopes and expectations, they are of course more 
numerous than the countless stars in the sky, but it is to say, what things are 
meant under the allegory of their leaflets farina and pistils). 


4. The songs of the sylphs dwelling on the branches of this tree, resounded to 
the buzz of the humming bees, and the nimble feet and waving palms of the 
Apsaras in their sportive dance on every leaflet, reduplicated the number of 


the leaves as much again. (The feet and palms are always compared with the 
leaves of trees, so these meeting on every leaf is the lightsome leaping and 
skipping of the airy sylphs over them, increased the number of leaves to more 
than ever so many). 


5. The spirits of the aerial Siddhas and gandharvas hovering on this tree, far 
out-numbered the number of birds that flocked and fluttered about it; and the 
greyish frost which wrapped it as a gemming mantle, out-shone the glossy 
rind which served for its raiment of fine linen. 


6. The top of this tree touches the lunar sphere, and by deriving its moisture 
from that humid planet, yields its fruits of larger size than the orb of the moon 
itself. And the clouds gathering about its trunk, have doubled the size of its 
joints. (e., The fruits of high desire are fairer and larger and more cooling 
than even the orb of the moon, and its sections are as bright as the bodies of 
clouds). 


7. The gods rested on the trunk of this tree, and the Kinnaras reposed 
themselves on its leaves, the clouds covered its arbours, and the Asuras slept 
on its banks. 


8. The Fairies repelled their mates by the sound of their bracelets, as the bees 
put the beetles to flight by their busy buzzing, and sucked the honey from the 
flower-cup to their fill. (It means that females very often taste the sweets of 
their desire, while men are driven to labour). 


9. The arbour of desire extends on all sides of the sky, and fills the space of 
the whole world, by embodying the gods and demi-gods and men and all 
kinds of living beings in it. (It is some desire or other that tends both the 
mortals and immortals in the course of their lives. Desire is the in-being of 
active life, and its want is either dullness or death). 


10. It was full of its blooming buds and blossoms, and was covered with its 
tender leaves and leaflets, it was fraught with its flourishing flowers, and had 
graced the forest all around. 


11. It flushed with its filaments, and abounded with its gemming florets; it was 
replete with its radiant vestures and ornamented trappings, to afford to the 
wants of its votaries, and it was ever in a flurry with sportive dance of the 
tender plants and creepers all around it. 


12. It was full laden with flowers on all aides, and was abundant with its fruits 
on all its branches, and being fraught with the copious farina of its flowers, 


which it lavished and scattered on all its sides, it became charming and 
attractive of all hearts towards it. 


13. I saw flock of the feathered tribe fluttering about the happy bowers, or 
resting about the broad boughs and branches of the tree; some of these were 
reposing in the coverts of the leafy arbour, and others pecking the flowers and 
fruits with their bills. 


14. I saw the storks and geese which are the vehicles of Brahma, feeding on 
fragments of lotus-stalks, resembling the digits of the bright moon in 
whiteness; and picking the bulbous roots of the arjuna and lotus plants in the 
lakes. 


15. The goslings of the geese of Brahma, muttered the omkdra, the initial 
syllable of the Veda, as they were addicted in it by their preceptor the god, — 
Brahma himself. 


16. I saw the parrots with their blue pinions resembling the blue clouds of 
heaven, and beheld their red dusk beaks shining as the flash of lightnings, and 
uttering their shrill sound in the manner of the swdhda of the veda. (The parrot 
is the vehicle of the god of fire, wherefore it is fit for him to utter the syllable 
swdaha; which is used in the invocation of fire: — as swdhd agnaye). 


17. I saw also the green parrots of the god of fire, scattered all about like the 
green kusa grass lying scattered on the sacrificial alter of the gods; and I 
beheld the young peacocks with their crests glowing as the glistening flames 
of fire. 


18. I saw there the groups of peacocks fostered by the goddess Gauri, (The 
peacocks of Juno), as also the big peacocks belonging to the god Kumara; I 
beheld likewise the vehicle of skanda, which are versed in knowledge. (One 
of these is said to be the expounder of a grammar, known by the name of 
Kaumari Kalapa Vyakarana). 


19. I saw there many bulky and big bodied birds, that are born to live and 
breed and die away in their natal air, and never alight on the nether ground. 
These were as white as the clouds of autumn and nestles with their mates in 
air, and are commonly known under the name of Aerial Birds. 


20. I saw the goslings of the breed of Brahma's geese, and the younglings of 
the brood of Agni's parrots. I beheld the big breed of the peacocks forming the 
vehicles of war god; (Skanda, Alexander)? 


21. I saw the Bharadwaja and I saw there many other kinds of big birds. 


(Charui, birds with two mouths and gold finches with their golden crests). I 
saw also kalavinca sparrows, the little cranes and pelicans and cuckoos and 
vultures likewise and cranes and cocks. 


22. I saw likewise a great variety of other birds as the Bhushus, Chushus and 
partridges of many kinds, whose numbers are no less than all the living 
animals of this earth taken together. (That is to say, the air and water abound 
with fowls and fishes of as great a variety and number as the animals on earth, 
and all of them dwell in tree of Desire as mankind and other terrestrial 
animals. Nemo sine desiderium). 


23. I then began to pray from my ethereal seat, and through the thickening 
leaves of the tree to the nest of the bird; amidst the hollows of far distant 
boughs towards the south. 


24. After some time, I came to descry at a distance a body of ravens, sitting in 
rows like leaves of the branches, and resembling the streaks of sable clouds on 
either sides of the Lokdloka, — horizon. (The Lokdloka mountain is a 
fictitious name for the horizon, which has light and darkness ever attendant on 
its either side. The term /okdloka or light and shade, is also used to represent 
vicissitudes of life). 


25. Here I beheld awhile afterwards, a lonely branch with a spacious hollow 
in it. It was strewn over with various flowers and redolent with a variety of 
perfumes. (The houses of great men are always scented with odours. 
({Sanskrit: subdsit harmmatalam manoramam]).) 


26. It was as the happy abode of virtuous women in heaven, which are 
perfumed with sweet scenting clusters of flowers, and there the crows were 
sitting in rows, as they were perfectly freed from all cares and sorrows. 


27. Their great group appeared as the big body of a cloud, separated from the 
tumultuous air of the lower atmosphere and resting on the calm firmament of 
the upper sky; and the venerable Bhusunda was seen sitting quietly with his 
exalted body. 


28. He sat there as an entire sapphire shining prominent amongst fragments of 
glass, and seemed to be of a stout heart and mind, and of a dignified mien and 
graceful appearance. 


29. Being heedful of the rule of the restriction of his respiration and 
suppression of his voice, he was quite happy with his long longevity, and was 
renowned everywhere as a long lived passe. (seer). 


30. He witnessed the course of ages and periods, and marked their advent and 
exodus in repeated succession; and was thereby known as the time worn 
Bhusunda in this world, and a being of stout and unflinching mind. 


31. He was weary with counting the revolutions of the Kalpa cycles, and with 
recounting the returns of the preserving divinities of the world; such as the 
Sivas, Indras, the gods of the winds and other. 


32. He was the chronicler of all antiquity, and the recorder of the wars of the 
gods and demons, and the hurling of the high hills in heaven; and yet he was 
of a clear countenance and profound mind; he was complacent to all, and his 
words are as sweet as honey. 


33. This old seer related distinctly all that was unknown and indistinct to 
others, he was wanting in his egotism and selfishness, and was the lord over 
all his friends and children, and his servants and their seniors and he was the 
true narrator of all things at all times. 


34. His speech was clear and graceful, sweet and pleasing, and his heart was 
as tender as the cooling lake, and as soft as the lotus-flower; he was 
acquainted with all usages and customs and the depth and profoundness of his 
knowledge, ever the serenity of his appearance. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Conversation of Vasishtha and Bhusunda. 


Argument. — Reception of Vasishtha by Bhusunda, and the Inquiries of the 
sage regarding the life and acts of the crow. 


VASISHTHA Continued: — I then alighted before the veteran crow with my 
brilliant ethereal body, as a bright meteor falling from the sky on the top of a 
mountain; and this my sudden appearance startled the assembly, as if they 
were disturbed by my intrusion. 


2. The assembly of the black birds trembled like the lotuses of the lake, at the 
shaking of the gentle breeze; and the agitation of the air at my slow descent, 
troubles them as much as an earthquake troubles the waters of the deep. 


3. But Bhusunda who was a seer of the three times, was not at all disturbed at 
my arrival; but know me as Vasishtha, now in attendance upon him. (Like a 
flimsy cloud from the mount). 


4. He then rose from his leafy seat, and advancing slowly before me, he said 
with sweet sounds distilling as honey. I welcome thee great sage to my 
humble cell. 


5. Then he stretched both hands to me, holding clusters of flowers that he had 
at his will and then strewed them in handfulls upon me, as a cloud scatters the 
dewdrops over the ground. (The comparison of raindrops with the shedding of 
flowers is common in India and well known by the compound term pushpa- 
vrishti). 


6. Take this seat said he, and stretched with his hand a newly shorn rind of the 
Kalpa tree; this he had plucked with his own hand, nor needed the help of his 
attendant crows in this gladsome task. 


7. On the rising of Bhusunda, the menials also arose from their seats, and then 
on seeing the sage seated on his seat, they looked to and betook themselves to 


their respective seats and posts. 


8. Then having refreshed myself with the sweet scent of the Kalpa creepers all 
about me, I was surrounded by all the birds that gathered round me, and had 
their chief sitting face to face in front of me. (This time worn etiquette of old 
India is still in vogue in the politest courts of the world). 


9. Having offered me the water and honey for my refreshment, together with 
the honorarium worthy of me, the high minded Bhusunda felt the cheer of his 
mind, and then accosted me with complaisance and in words sweet as honey. 
(The serving of honey and water to guests of yore, served the offering of 
brandy and water of modern fashion). 


10. Bhusunda said: — O lord! thou hast after long favoured us with your kind 
visit, which has by its ambrosial influence resuscitated our arbor and 
ourselves. (Such is the visit of a superior to an inferior). 


11. I ween, O great Muni! that art honoured of the honourable, that it is by 
virtue of my long-earned virtues that you are now brought to this place, and 
want to be informed from where your course is bent to my humble abode. 


12. You Sir, that have long wandered amidst the great gloom of this world, 
and know its errors by your infallible experience, must have at last in the 
peace of your mind. (Peace after broils and strife. Pax post turba). 


13. What is it that makes you take this trouble on yourself today, is what we 
wished to be informed at present; and your answer to those that are expectant 
of it, will be deemed as a great favour by them. 


14. It is by the sight of your holy feet, O venerable sage! that we are put to the 
knowledge of everything; and yet our obligation at this uncalled for call of 
yours here, emboldens us to ask this farther favour of yours. (Nobody asks 
nobody, that has nothing to do with him). 


15. We know that it is your remembrance of us among the long living, that 
has directed your attention towards us, and made your holiness to sanctify this 
place by your gratuitous visit to us. 


16. Though thus we know this as the cause of your calling into us; yet it is our 
desire of satisfying ourselves with the sweetness of your nectarious words, 
that has prompted to propose this query to you at present. 


17. In this manner did the longeval crow, that was clear sighted with his 
knowledge of the three times, deliver his inquiry by way of formality. 


18. Vasishtha answered: — Yes, O king of birds! it is true as thou sayst, that I 
have come here thus to see thy diuturnal self; (because the aged are honoured 
as sages, and their shrines are visited as those of saints). 


19. You are verily very fortunate with your cold heartedness, and your 
sagacity has haply saved you from falling into the dangerous snares of this 
world. 


20. Now Sir, deign to remove my doubt regarding to your anility, and tell me 
truly of what family you are born, and how you come to know what is worth 
knowing (respecting the origin and end of beings, and their good or bad lot 
afterwards). 


21. Tell me, Sir, if you remember the length of life that you have passed, and 
if you recollect by your long sightedness how you came to be settled in this 
lodging. (Lit. who appointed this place for your habitation). 


22. Bhusunda replied: — I will relate to you all, O great sage! that you ask of 
me, and your great soul shall have to hear it attentively without any 
inadvertence of your mind. 


23. It is certain, O venerable Sir! that the topics, which deserve the attention 
of great minded souls like yourselves, will prove effective of destroying the 
evils of the world, as the influence of the clouds and their propitious rains 
remove the heat of the sun. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Description of Bhusunda's Person. 


Argument. — Vasishtha relates to Rama of the perfections of Bhusunda's 
Body and Mind, which entitled him to the enjoyment of his liberation in his 
living time. 


VASISHTHA said: — Now Rama, know this Bhusunda, who was of a 
complexion as black as that of a cloud heavy with water in the rainy season; 
to have a countenance which neither merry nor sorry, and a mind free from 
guile and cunning. 


2. His voice was grave and mild, and his words were accompanied by a gentle 
smile, and he spoke of the three worlds, as if he balanced three beal fruits in 
his hands. (His knowledge of the worlds, was as that of the globe in his 
hands). 


3. He looked on all things as they were mere straws before him, and weighted 
the lives of men in proportion to their enjoyments, and by the ratio of their 
rations on earth, he had the knowledge of the knowables and the unknowable 
one, (called the common and transcendental knowledge, — pardnara). 


4. He was big bodied grave and quiet, and sedate as the mount Mandara; and 
his mind was as full and clear as the calm ocean after a storm. 


5. His mind was perfectly tranquil and quite at ease; and full of joy within 
itself; and acquainted with the appearance and dis-appearance of all beings 
born in this world. 


6. His countenance was delightsome with his inward delight, and his voice 
was as sweet as the melody of a sweet song; he seemed to have taken a new 
born form on himself, and his joyfulness dispelled the fears of men. 


7. After he had respectfully received and accosted me, with his pure and 
dulciate words; he began to recite to me his own narration, as the rumbling of 


a rainy cloud, delights the hearts of the thirsty world. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


Manners of the Matrika Goddesses. 


Argument. — Bhusunda traces his origin from the Matres, whose manners 
and revelries he describes in length. 


BHUSUNDA related: — There is in this world, the god of gods, Hara 
(Horus?) by name; who is the chief among the celestials, and honoured by all 
the divinities of heaven. 


2. He had his consort Gauri, constituting the better half of his body, and by 
whom he is embraced in the manner of an ivy clasping the young Amra tree. 
Her bosom likened a cluster of blooming blossom, and her eyes resembled the 
lines of black bees fluttering in the summer sky. 


3. The hoary locks of hair on the braided head of Hara, were entwined as with 
a white lace, by the snow-white stream of Ganges, whose billows and waves 
as clusters of flowers on the hair-band. 


4. The crown of his head was decorated with the gemming milk-white disk of 
the moon, which sprung from the bosom of the milky ocean; and spread her 
bright radiance and ambrosial dews about his person. (The streams of 
ganguari are represented as consorts of Hara, and the moon as forming the 
discus on the braces of the hairs on his head). 


5. The incessant effusion of ambrosial draughts, from the disk of the moon on 
his crest, has made him immortal by assuaging the heat of the deadly poison 
which he swallowed, and has marked his throat with the bluish hue of the 
sapphire or lapis lazuli, whence he named the blue gulletted Nila Kantha. 
(Hara is said to have swallowed the kdla-kuta poison, as Hercules drank his 
full bowl of henbane). 


6. The god is besmeared with powdered ashes on his body, as emblematical of 
the particles of dust, to which the world was reduced by the flame of his all- 


destructive conflagration; while the stream of water flowing from the Ganges 
on his head, is typical of the current of his clear knowledge of all things. 
(Others make the burning fire of his frontal eye, bhdla netra, to represent the 
flash of his cognoscence, — jndndgni). 


7. His body is decorated with strings of blanched bones, which are brighter far 
than the silvery beams of fair moon, and these serve as necklaces of argent 
and pearly gems about his person. (Hence he is named as Jala-padda-malika). 


8. His vest is the open sky with its plates of folded clouds, which are washed 
by the milk white beam of the moon, and studded with the variegated spots of 
the stars. (This means the nudity of the god, hence called Digamvara or sky 
attired). 


9. He is beset by the prowling shakals, devouring the burnt carcasses on 
funeral grounds, and holds his abode beyond the habitations of men, in 
cemeteries and mortuaries in the outer skirts of cities. (Whence his name of 
Smashdna sdyi). 


10. The god is accompanied by the Matres, who are decorated with strings of 
human skulls about their necks, and girt with the threads of their entrails on 
their bodies; while the fat and flesh of dead bodies, and the blood and 
moisture of putrid carcasses, form their delectable food and drink. 


11. Their bodies are soft and shining as gold, and moving about with 
sparkling gem on their heads and bracelets of snakes curled round their wrists. 


12. The acts of this god are dreadful to relate, and strike terror in hearts of the 
gods and demons, and all beings beside. One glance of his eye, (coup d’oeil), 
is enough to set the mountains in a blaze, and his hunger grasps the whole 
world in one morsel. 


13. The perpetual rest of his meditative mind in holy trance, samddhi, hath 
restored the world to rest; and the movement of his arms at intervals, is 
attended with the destruction of demons. 


14. His forms of the elements are intently lent on their fixed purposes, without 
being deterred from them by the impulses of his anger, enmity or affection; 
and the wind of his breath makes the mountains to tremble, and turn the 
humid earth to arid ground. 


15. His playmates are the devils with their heads and faces, resembling those 
of bears and camels, goats and serpents; and such as have their heads for 
hoofs, and their hoofs as their hands, and whose hands serve as their teeth, 


and who have their faces and mouths set upon their bellies and breasts. 


16. His face shone brightly with the rays of his three eyes, (whereby he is 
denominated the triple eyed god trinetra); and the mdtres were dependent on 
him as his dependent demoniac bands, — gana-devatas. 


17. The Matres joined with the bands of demons, dance about him lowly at his 
bidding, and feed upon the living bodies, that are born and dead in all the 
fourteen regions of creation. 


18 The Matres having their faces as those of asses and camels, rove at great 
distances from him; and are fond of feeding on the flesh and fat, and drinking 
the red-hot blood of bodies as their wine. They have the fragments and 
members of dead bodies, hanging about their persons as strings of pearls. 


19. They reside in the hollows of hills, in the open sky and in other regions 
also; they dwell also in the holes underneath the grounds, and like to abide in 
cemeteries and in the holes and pores of human and brute bodies. 


20. There are the goddesses known under the names of Jaya and Vijaya, 
jayanti and Aparajitaé; and again, siddha Raktaé and Alambusha, and also 
another bearing the name of utpata. 


21. These eight are denominated the Nayikai of leaders, of the whole body of 
Matrikas; the others are subordinate to these, and there are others again 
subordinate to them. 


22. Among all these venerable Matres, there one by name of Alambusha, that 
is the source of my birth; and this I have revealed to you on account of your 
great favour to me, by your kind call to my cell. 


23. She had the crow by name of Chanda for her vehicle, which had its bones 
and bills as strong as the bolts of Indra's thunder; it was as dark as a mountain 
of jet-black or blue agate, and served her goddess as Garuda served the 
consort of Vishnu. 


24. This octad of Matri goddess were once assembled together, and bent their 
course in the ethereal firmament on some of their malevolent purposes. 


25. They made their merry makings and religious revels in the air, and then 
turned their course to the left side where they halted at the shrine of Tumburu, 
which was sacred to Siva. 


26. They there worshipped the forms of Tumburu and Bhairava, which are 
adored in all the worlds; and then regaled themselves with a variety of 


discourses, seasoned with drinking and to ping. 


27. Then they look up the topic among other subjects of their conversation, as 
to whether they were slighted and disliked by their paramour, — the spouse of 
Uma, who is taken to share one half of his body. (In the shape of androgyne, 
— Uma, — Maheswara or Hara, — Gauri; having the male and female bodies 
joined in two halves in one bisex forms). 


28. We shall now show him our prowess, that he may never think of despising 
our great powers even by a contemptuous look, for though the god feigns to 
be single and naked, yet we know he is bipartite with his consorts Uma 
forming his better half. 


29. Thus determined the goddesses overpowered on Uma by some potent 
charm of theirs, and by sprinkling a little water upon her, as they do to 
captivate a beast, which they are going to sacrifice before the altar, and by this 
spell they succeeded both to change the fine features of Durga, as also to 
enervate her frame. 


30. They succeeded also by their power of enchantment, to detach Uma from 
the body of Hara, and set her before them, with an imprecation of converting 
her fair form to their meat food. 


31. They made great rejoicings on the day of their execration of Parvati; when 
they all joined in dancing and singing, and making their giddy revelries before 
her. 


32. The shouts of their great joy and loud laughter resounded in the sky, and 
the jumping and hopping of their big bodies, laid open their backs and bellies 
to sight. 


33. Some laughed as loudly with the deafening clappings of their palms, that 
they rebounded in the sky as the roarings of lions and clouds. They showed 
the gestures of their bodies in their warlike dance, and the sound of their 
singing rang through the forests and reached in the mountains. 


34. Others sang as loud as it rang through the mountain caves, and ran to the 
depth of the ocean; which re-billowed with its surges as at the time of the full- 
moon tide. 


35. Others drank their bowls, and daubed their bodies from head to foot with 
liquor; and muttered their drunken chatters, that chattered in the sky. 


36. They drank over and sang louder and louder, they turned about as tops, 


and uttered and muttered as sots. They laughed and sipped and chopped and 
fell down and rolled and prattled aloud. Thus they reeled in fits, and bit the 
bits of their flesh meats, till these Bacchanal goddesses did all their orgies in 
their giddy revels. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Bhusunda's Nativity and Habitation. 


Argument. — Account of the birth of Bhusunda. 


BHUSUNDA continued: — Thus while the goddesses were in the acts of their 
merriment, their bonny vehicles or carrier birds also caught the infection, and 
indulged themselves in their giddy jigs and giggles, and in tippling the red 
blood of their victims for their liquor. 


2. Then giddy with their drink the gabbling geese, that were fit vehicles for 
Brahma’'s consorts, danced and frolicked in the air, in company with the crow 
Chanda the carrying bird of Alambusha. 


3. Then as the geese darted down, and kept dancing and drinking and tittling 
on the banks of streams, they felt impassioned and inflamed by lust; because 
the borders of waters are excitants of concupiscence. 


4. Thus the geese being each and all excited by their carnal desire, dallied 
with that crow in their state of giddiness, which is often the cause of unnatural 
appetites. 


5. Thus that single crow, — Chanda by name, became spoused to seven geese 
at once on that bank; and cohabited one by one with every one of them, 
according to their desire. 


6. Thus the geese became pregnant after gratification of their lust, and the 
goddesses being satisfied by their merry dance, held their quiet and took to 
their rest. 


7. Then these goddesses of great delusion, (mahd mdyd), advanced towards 
their consort Siva, and presented unto him his favorite Uma for his food. 


8. The god bearing the crescent moon on his fore-head, and holding the trident 
spike in his hand; coming to know that they had offered his beloved one for 


his meat, became highly incensed on the Matres. 


9. Then they brought out the parts of the body of Uma, which they had taken 
in as their food from their bodies; and presented her entire for her remarriage 
with the moon-headed deity. 


10. At last the god Hara and his consorts being all reconciled to one another 
together with their dependents and vehicles, retired to their respective quarters 
with gladness of their minds. 


11. The geese of Brahma perceiving their pregnancy, repaired to the presence 
of their goddess, and represented to bear their case, as I have, O chief of 
sages! already related unto you. 


12. The Devi on hearing their words, spake kindly unto them and said: — you 
my menials, cannot now be capable of bearing my car in the air as before; but 
must have the indulgence of moving about at your pleasure, until you have 
delivered of your burthens. 


13. After the kind goddess had said these words to her geese, that were ailing 
under the load of foetuses, she betook herself to her wonted meditation, and 
remained in her irreversible rest with the gladness of her mind. 


14. The geese that were now big with the burden of their embryos, grazed in 
the lotus bed of Vishnu's navel, which had been the birth place of the great 
Brahma before. (Brahma the creative power, owed his birth to the lotiform 
navel of Vishnu, and the same place was all owed for the pasture of the geese 
and the nativity of the goslings). 


15. The geese then being matured in their pregnancy, by feeding upon the 
lotus-like navel of Vishnu, brought forth their tender eggs in time, as the 
calmly creepers shoot out in sprouts in the spring. 


16. They laid thrice seven eggs in their proper time, which afterwards split in 
twain, like so many mundane eggs in their upper and lower valves or canals. 


17. It was these eggs, O great sage! that gave birth to thrice seven brethren of 
ours, all of whom are known under the appellation of the fraternity of chanda 
crows. 


18. These being born in the lotus bed of Vishnu navel, were fostered and bred 
up in the same place, till they were fledged and enabled to fly and flutter in the 
air. 


19. We then joined with our mother geese in the service of our Matri-goddess, 


who after our long services unto her, was roused from her intense meditation 
at last. 


20. Now Sir, it was in course of time, that the goddess inclined of her own 
complaisance, to receive us into her good grace, and favour us with the gift 
(of foresight), whereby we are quite liberated in this life. (It is over one's 
blindness of the future, that is the cause of the error and mischief of life). 


21. Thought in ourselves of remaining in peace, and in the tranquillity of our 
minds; and being determined to betake ourselves to solitary contemplation, 
we went to our sire the old crow Chanda for his advice. (In the Vindhyan 
mountain). 


22. We were received into the embrace of our father, and favoured with the 
presence of his goddess, Alumbusha; they looked on us with kindness, and 
allowed us to remain near them with our self-restricted conduct. 


23. Chanda said: — O my darlings! Have ye obtained your release from 
weaving the web of your desires? You are then set free from the snare of this 
world, which binds fast all beings in it. 


24. If not so, then I will pray unto this goddess of mine, who is always 
propitious to her devotees, to confer on you the blessing of consummate 
knowledge, (which alone can save you from all worldly evils). 


25. The crows replied: — O Sir! we have known whatever is knowable, by the 
good grace of the Goddess Brahmé, it is only a good solitary place, which we 
now seek for the sake of undisturbed meditation. 


26. Chanda returned: — I will point it out to you, in the high mountain of 
Meru in the polar region; which is the seat of all the celestials, and the great 
receptacle of all the treasures and gems on earth. 


27. This mountain stands as the lofty pillar of gold, in the midst of the great 
dome of the universe; it is lighted by the luminous orbs of the sun and moon 
as its two lamps, and is the residence of all kinds of animals. 


28. This lofty mountain stands as the lifted arm of this orb of the earth, with 
its gemming peaks and pinnacles resembling its fingers and their jewels, and 
having the moonbeam, as a golden canopy raised over its head, and the 
sounding main girding the islands for its bracelets. 


29. The mount Meru is situated in the midst of the Jambudwipa, (Asia), as its 
sole monarch, and is beset by the boundary mountains as its chieftains on all 


sides. With its two eye balls of the rolling sun and moon, it glances over the 
surrounding hillocks, as the king seated in the centre, looks on the courtiers 
sitting all about him. 


30. The clusters of stars in the sky, hangs as wreaths of mdlati flowers around 
his neck, and the bright moon that leads the train of stars, forms the crowning 
jewels over his head, the firmament on the ten sides girds him as his vest, and 
the nagas of both kinds; (i.e., the elephants and serpents) are warders at his 
gates. 


31. The nymphs of heaven are employed in fanning him with the breeze from 
all quarters, and flapping over him their chouries of the passing clouds, with 
their hands decorated with the variegated hues of heaven as their ornaments. 


32. His huge body stretched over many leagues, and his feet are rooted fast 
many fathoms underneath the earth; where they are worshipped by the nagas, 
Asuras and large serpents. (That dwell at the foot of the mount, while the 
races of gods are situated on its top). 


33. It has thousands of ridges and steeps, craigs and cliffs, below its two eyes 
of sun and moon; and these are lauded as celestial regions by the Gods, 
gandharvas and kinnaras that inhabit in them. 


34. There are fourteen kinds of superior beings, inhabiting the supernal sphere 
of this mountain; and these dwell there with their households and relatives, in 
their respective circles, without ever seeing the city or citadel of another. 
(This means the great extent and distance of the several separate ridges from 
one another. Its fourteen ridges or regions are known as the chaturdasa, — 
vhuvanas, and fourteen peoples are included under the title of thirteen classes 
of celestials, — troadasa-gana-devatds. These are the brahmarshis, Rajarshis, 
Devarshis, Devas, Pitris, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Apsaras, Vidydadharas, 
Yakshas, Rakshas, Pramathas, Guhyakas and Nagas; (the last of whom are not 
recognized among celestial beings).) 


35. There is a large ridge on the north east corner of this mount, with its 
gemming summit rising as high and bright as the shining sun. 


36. There stands a large Kalpa tree on the outside of that ridge, which is 
peopled with living beings of various kinds; and appears to present a picture 
of the whole world in miniature. 


37. The southern stem of this tree has a protruding branch with its aureate 
leaves, and its blossoms blooming as clusters of brilliant gems; and presenting 


its fruit as lucid and luscious to view, as the bright and cooling orb of the 
moon. 


38. I had formerly built my nest on that branch, and decorated it with all sorts 
of shining gems; and there it was, oh my offspring! that I sported and enjoyed 
myself, as long as my goddess sat in her meditative mood. 


39. My nest was hid under the gemming flowers, and stored with luscious 
fruits, and its door was fastened with bolts of precious gems. 


40. It was full of young crows, who knew how to behave properly with one 
another; Its inside was strewn over with flowers, and was cooling at all times 
and seasons. 


41. Repair, therefore, my children! to that nest, which is inaccessible even to 
the gods; because by remaining there, you will obtain both your livelihood 
and liberation without any molestation. (Livelihood with liberty, is the best 
blessing on earth). 


42. Saying so, our father kissed and embraced every one of us; and presented 
to us the meat food, which he had got from his goddess. 


43. After taking our repast, we prostrated ourselves at the feet of our father 
and his goddess, and then flew in the air, from the Vindhyan range which is 
sacred to the divinity of Alumbusha. 


44. We passed over the nether sky, entered into the region of the clouds; then 
coming out of their hollow caves, we flew aloft on the wings of the winds to 
the vacuous void of the ethereal gods to whom we paid our homage. 


45. Having then passed the solar world, we arrived at another sphere of the 
fixed stars above, where we saw the heaven of the immortals and thence 
reached the empyrean of Brahma. 


46. There we bowed down to the goddess Brahmi, and our mother (the goose) 
which was her vehicle; and related in length to them the behest of our father 
unto us. 


47. They endeared and embraced us with kind affection, and then bade us to 
do as we were bid by our sire. At this we bowed down to them, and took our 
departure from the seat of Brahma. 


48. We then directed our flight to Meru where we found out this Kalpa tree 
and our appointed nest in it. Here we line apart and remote from all, and hold 
our silence in all matters. 


49. We passed the region of the regents of the skies, which shone to a great 
distance with the blaze of solar rays; we fled through the empty air with the 
velocity of winds. 


50. I have thus related to you in length in answer to your query, regarding the 
manner of our birth and how we are settled in this place. I have told you also 
how we came to the knowledge of truth, whereby we have come to this state 
of undisturbed peace and tranquillity. Now bid us, O great Sage! what more 
can we relate to satisfy your curiosity about us. 


CHAPTER XX. 


Explication of the Mysterious Character of Bhusunda. 


Argument. — The stability of the world, even at the change and dissolution of 
the worldly objects; and the immortality of Bhusunda, even after the Demise 
of his Brethren. 


BHUSUNDA continued: — This world has existed by the prior and bygone 
Kalpa, in the very same state as it does at present, and there is no variation in 
the formation or location of anything in any wise. (The ante-diluvean world 
alike the post-diluvean). 


2. Therefore, O great Sage! I am accustomed to look to the past and present 
with an equal eye, and will relate the events of my passed life and by gone 
ages for your information, as if they are existent with me even at present. (It is 
the fashion of the old chroniclers, to describe the long past as if it is actually 
present before them). 


3. I find today, O great Sage! the fruit of my pious acts of my passed life, that 
have rewarded me with your blessed presence in this my humble cell. 


4. This nest of mine, this branch of the tree, this Kalpa arbour and this myself, 
are all blessed by your propitious presence in this place. (The sight of a 
superior is a great favour). 


5. Deign Sir, to accept of this seat and this honorarium, which are here offered 
to you by a suppliant bird; and having purified us by your kind acceptance of 
our poor offerings, please command what other service can we render unto 
you. (i.e., what more can I relate to you). 


6. Vasishtha said: — Rama! after Bhusunda had again presented the seat and 
honorarium to me, I proffered to him another request in the following words. 


7. I said: — tell me, O thou senior among birds, why don't I see here those 
brethren of yours, who must be equally senile and strong in their bodies and 


intellects, as thou showest thyself to be. 


8. Bhusunda answered and said: — I am here destined to remain alone, O 
Muni! to witness the continuous course of time, and to count and recount the 
revolutions of ages, as they reckon the succession of days and nights. 


9. During this length of time, I had the misfortune to witness all my juniors 
and younger brothers, to their mortal frames as trifling straws, and find their 
rest in the blessed state (Of eternity). 


10. I saw, O great Sage! the very long lived, and the very great indignity, the 
very strong and very wise, to be all gorged in the unconscious bowels of 
bodiless death. (The great and small equally fall; and time at last devours 
them all. Non semper erit estas). 


11. Vasishtha said: — Say, O venerable father! how you remained unmolested 
by the deluvian tempest, which outstripped the winds in its velocity, and bore 
the great bodies of the sun and moon and stars as jewels hanging about its 
neck. 


12. (The deluvian tempest is called tufani nuh or hurricane of Noah in the 
Koran. The Khandapralaya is a partial deluge of the earth, but the 
mahdpralaya is the aggregate of all the cosmic revolutions of the whole 
world). 


Say, O primeval seer! how you escaped unscorched by the burning flame of 
solar rays, which melted down the uprising mountains, and consumed there 
the woods in one all devouring conflagration. (The burning sun on the day of 
the last dissolution, is said in the Koran, to come down and stand at a lance's 
distance above the heads of men). 


13. Say, O senile sire, how you remained unfrozen under the cold moon 
beams, that froze the limpid waters to hard stone; and how you fled unhurt 
from the showers of hail, which were poured in profusion by the deluvian 
clouds. 


14. Say, O ancient bird! why you were not crushed under the snows, which 
fell from the deluvian clouds as thickly as huge trees, when they are felled by 
axes from the tops of high hills. 


15. Say, why this kalpa tree which rises higher than all other forests, was not 
broken down, when all other arbors on earth, were levelled to the ground by 
the universal tornado. 


16. Bhusunda replied: — Our station, O Brahman! in the open and empty air, 
is quite supportless and without any solid or fixed support. It is either 
unnoticed or looked upon with disregard and contempt by all, and our living 
and livelihood is the most despicable among all living beings. (All this is 
meant of the soul, which is here personified as a bird, — a dark crow, and 
named as the amara Bhusunda, a contemptuous word often applied to senile 


people). 


17. Thus has the Lord of beings appointed these aerial beings, to remain free 
from disease and death in these forests, or fly about in the empty air in their 
aerial course. (The forests mean the living bodies, and the empty air is the 
field for the rambles of disembodied spirits). 


18. How then, O venerable Sir, can any sorrow or sickness betide us here, 
where we are born to be immortal, and rove freely in open air; and are free 
from those pains and sorrows, which betake those birds that are bound in 
snares of their desires, and are subject to their hopes and fears. 


19. We Sir, have always placed our reliance on the peace and contentment of 
our souls, and never allow ourselves to fall into error, of taking the 
insubstantials for substantial. 


20. We are quite content with what simple nature requires and affords, and are 
entirely free from those cares and endeavours which are attended with pain. 
We live only to pass our time in this our own and lonely lodging (which is 
allotted to us by providence). 


21. We neither wish to live long to wallow in our bodily enjoyments nor 
desire death to avoid the retribution of our acts; but live as long as we have to 
live, and die when death comes upon us. (Neither love thy life nor hate, but 
live well how long or short permit to heaven. — Milton). 


22. We have seen the changeful states of mankind, and witnessed many 
instances of the vicissitudes of human affairs, and have thereby banished all 
sorts of levity from our bodies and minds. (Lit. the restlessness of body and 
mind). 


23. By the constant light of our internal spirit, we are kept from the sight of all 
sorrow and grief; and from our seat on the height of the kalpa tree, we clearly 
see the course of the world and the changes of time. (The kalpa tree of desire 
is at once the tree of life and knowledge of the garden of paradise, because 
both of them are equally desirable to man; and anyone who is seated above 
this tree, must know all things by his all knowingness and immortality as the 


soul of Bhusunda). 


24. Though we are wholly unacquainted with the changes of days and nights, 
on this high pinnacle of our heavenly mountain (where there is the eternal 
sunshine of Divine presence); yet we are not ignorant of the vicissitudes of the 
times and events, in the solar and sublunary worlds which roll incessantly 
below us. 


25. Though our habitation in the cell of this kalpa tree, is ever illumined by 
the light of gems which are inlaid in it; yet we can know the course of time by 
the respirations of our breath, which as a chronometer informs us with the 
regular course of time. (The ajapd or breathings indicate the succession of 
time, as any time piece or the course of days and nights). 


26. Knowing what is real from all that is unreal, I have desisted from my 
pursuit after unrealities, and settled in my knowledge of the true reality; and 
by forsaking its natural fickleness, my mind is practised to rest at all times in 
its perfect peace and tranquillity. (The mind is no more troubled with the 
tempting trifles of the world, after it has come to know their falsity and 
vanity). 


27. We are not led to the snare of false worldly affairs, nor frightened like 
earthly crows in our hankering after food by the hissings of men. 


28. It is by the serene light of the supreme felicity of our souls, and by the 
virtue of the unalterable patience of our minds, that we look into the errors 
and delusions of the world, without falling in them ourselves. 


29. Know, great sage, that our minds remain unruffled, even under the shock 
of those dangers and perils, which ruffle the tempers and understandings of 
ordinary people; just as the pure crystal remains unstained by the blackest 
hues that environ it all around. 


30. The course of the world, appears very smooth and pleasant in its first 
beginning; but upon mature consideration, it proves to be frail, fickle, and 
false, as one goes on in it. 


31. Thus, all living beings are seen to pass away, and whether to return here 
again or not, nobody can tell; what then is it that we must fear (knowing death 
and demise to be the unavoidable doom of nature). 


32. As the course of streams runs continually to the ocean, so the progress of 
life tends incessantly to the depth of eternity; but we that stand on the border 
of the great ocean of eternity, have escaped from being carried away by the 


current of time. 


33. We neither cling to our life nor fling it away, but bear it as well as we 
may, and remain as airy orchids, lightly touching and unattached to their 
supporting arbour. 


34. It is moreover by the good of the best sort of men, who are beyond the 
reach of fear, sorrow and pain like yourself; that we have been set free from 
all sorts of malady. 


35. From the examples of such persons, our minds have become cold, and 
unconcerned about the affairs of busy life; and are employed only in scanning 
truth and the true nature of things. (Blessed are they that meditate on the laws 
of God both day and night). 


36. Our souls finding their rest in their unchangeable and unperturbed state, 
have the fullness of their light and delight, as the sea has its flux of floodtide 
at the rising of the full and new moon upon its bosom. (The flood of spiritual 
light in the soul, resembling the flood of hightide in the sea). 


37. Sir, we were as highly pleased at your presence here at this time, as the 
milky ocean was overflown at its churning by the Mandara mountain. (The 
Mandara mountain is said to have been the resort of the remnants of men at 
the great deluge, and was used by them as their churning stick, to recover their 
lost properties from the depth of the waters. The recovery was rather joyous to 
the men than it could be to the sea). 


38. Sir, we do not account anything as more precious and more favourable 
unto us, than that the holy saints that have nothing to desire, should take pains 
to pay their kind visit to our humble cell. 


39. What do we gain from our enjoyments, which are pleasant for the time 
being, and lose their zest the next moment; it is the company of the great and 
good only, that gives the best gifts like the philosopher's stone. 


40. You Sir, who are cool and grave in your nature, and soft and sweet and 
slow in your speech, are like the beneficent bee, that sits and sips the juice 
from the flowers in the three worlds, and converts it to the sweet balm of 
honey. 


41. I ween, O spiritual Sage! all my sins to be removed at your blessed sight, 
and the tree of my life to be blest with its best fruit of spiritual bliss, which 
results from the society of the virtuous, and whose taste removes all diseases 
and dangers. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


Explanation of the Cause of the Crow's Longevity. 


Argument. — The eminence of the kalpa tree, and its durability in all ages. 
The doings of destiny, and the results of past reminiscence. 


BHUSUNDA continued: — This kalpa tree whereon we dwell remains firm 
and unshaken amidst the revolutions of ages and the blasts of all destroying 
cyclones and hurricanes. (Figuratively said of human desires, which continue 
with the soul through all the vicissitudes of life, and all its endless 
transmigrations, so says ([{Sanskrit: kdlah krinati gacchatydyustadapi 
namunchatydsdrbayuh))) 


2. This arbor of desire is inaccessible to other people dwelling in all worlds; it 
is, therefore, that we reside here in perfect peace and delight, and without 
disturbance of any kind. (i.e., We dwell on the firm rock of our secret hopes 
and expectations, where nobody can obtrude upon us, and of which no 
external accident has the power to despoil us). 


3. When Heranyakha, the gigantic demon of antediluvian race, strove to hurl 
this earth with all its septuple continents into the lowest abyss, even then did 
this tree remain firm on its roots, and on the summit of this mountains. 


4. And then as this mountainous abode of the gods, stood trembling with all 
other mountains of this earth (on the tusk of the divine Varaha or boar), even 
then did this tree remain unshaken on its firm basis. 


5. When Narayana supported this seat of the gods on his two arms, (i.e., the 
Meru), and uplifted the mandara mount on the other two, even then did this 
tree remain unshaken. 


6. When the orbs of the sun and moon, shook with fear, at the tremendous 
warfare of the gods and demons, and the whole earth was in a state of 
commotion and confusion, even then did this tree stand firm on its root. 


7. When the mountains were up-rooted by the hail-storms blowing with 
tremendous violence, and sweeping away the huge forest trees of this mount 
of Meru, even then was this tree unshaken by the blast. 


8. When the mount Mandara rolled into the milky ocean, and gusts of wind 
filling its caverns (like canvases of a vessel), bore it afloat on the surface of 
the water; and the great masses of diluvian clouds rolled about in the vault of 
heaven, even then did this tree remain steadfast as a rock. 


9. When this mount of Meru was under the grasp of Kalanemi and was going 
to crush by his gigantic might (with its inhabitants of the gods), even then this 
tree remained steady on its roots. 


10. When the Siddhas were blown away by the flapping wings of Garuda, — 
the king of birds, in their mutual warfare for this ambrosial fare, even then this 
remained unmoved by the wind. 


11. When the snake which upholds the earth, was assailed by Rudra in the 
form of Garuda, who shook the world by the blast of his wings, even then was 
this tree unshaken by the wind. 


12. When the flame of the last conflagration, threatened to consume the world 
with the seas and mountains; and made the snake which supported the earth 
on his hoods, throw out living fire from all his many mouths, even then this 
tree was neither shaken nor burnt down by the gorgeous and all devouring 
fire. 


13. Such being the stability of this tree, there is no danger, O Sage! that can 
betake us here, as there is no evil than can ever betide the inhabitants of 
heaven. How can we, O great Sage! be ever exposed to any danger, who are 
thus situated in this tree which defies all casualties. We are out of all fear and 
danger as those that are situated in heaven. (The object of one's desire is in a 
manner his highest heaven). 


14. Vasishtha rejoined: — But tell me, O Sagely bird! that has borne with the 
blasts of dissolution, how could you remain unhurt and unimpaired, when 
many a sun and moon and stars have fallen and faded away. 


15. Bhusunda said: — When at the end of a Kalpa period, the order of the 
world and laws of nature are broken and dissolved; we are then compelled to 
forsake our nest as an ungrateful man alienates his best friend. 


16. We then remain in the air freed from our fancies, the members of the body 
become defunct of their natural functions, and the mind is released from its 


volitions. 


17. When the zodiacal suns shine in their full vigour, and melt down the 
mountains by their intense heat, I then remain with my understanding; under 
the influence of Varuna's mantra or power. (Varuna, the god of water, is said 
to be allied with the human soul, which is a watery substance). 


18. When the diluvian winds blow with full force, and shatter and scatter the 
huge mountains all around, it is then by minding the pdrvati mantra, that I 
remain as fixed as a rock. (Vasishtha has explained the meaning of this 
mantra in the latter part of the Nirvana prakarana). 


19. When the earth with its mountains is dissolved into water, and presents the 
face of an universal ocean over its surface; it is then by virtue of the vayu 
mantra or my volatile power, that I keep myself aloft in the air. 


20. I then convey myself across this visible world, and rest in the holy state of 
the spotless spirit; and remain in a state of profound sleep, without any 
agitation of the body and mind. 


21. I remain in this torpid state, until the lotus-born Brahma is again employed 
in his work of creation, and then I re-enter into the limits of the re-created 
world, where I settled again on this arbour of desire. (The departed soul is free 
from desire, which it re-assumes to itself upon its re-entrance into life). 


22. Vasishtha said: — Tell me, O lord of birds, why the other Yogis do not 
remain as steady as you do by your dhdranad or fixed attention. 


23. Bhusunda replied: — O venerable Sir! It is because of the inseparable and 
overruling power of destiny, which nobody can prevent or set aside; that I am 
doomed to live in this wise and others in their particular modes of life. 


24. None can oppose or remodel what must come to pass on him; it is nature's 
law that all things must be as they are ordained to be. (There is no helping for 
what is destined to happen, what is allotted, cannot be averted). 


25. It is because of my firm desire that things are so fixed and allotted to my 
share, that they must so come to pass to my lot at each Kalpa and over again, 
and that this tree must grow on the summit of this mountain, and I must have 
my nest in its hollow. (The heart is the hollow of the tree of the body, and the 
soul is the bird that is confined there of its own desire). 


26. Vasishtha said: — You Sir, are as longeval as our salvation is diuturnal, 
and are able to guide us in the paths of truth; because you are sapient in true 


wisdom, and sedate in your purpose of Yoga or deep meditation. 


27. Sir, you have seen the many changes of the world, and have been 
experienced in all things in the repeated course of creations; must be best able 
to tell me the wonders that you have witnessed during the revolution of ages. 


28. Bhusunda replied: — I remember, O great sage! the earth beneath this 
mount of Meru to have been once a desolate land, and having no hill or rock, 
nor trees, plants or even grass upon it. (This was the primeval state of the 
earth, when nothing grew upon it, and agrees with what the Persian sophist 
thinks with regard to the priority of the soul to all other created things, as 
“manan wakt budam ke nechak nabud,” J existed when there is nothing in 
existence). 


29. [remember also the earth under me, to have been full of ashes for a period 
of myriads and centuries of years. (This was the age after the all-devouring 
conflagration on earth). 


30. I remember a time when the lord of day, — the sun, was unproduced, and 
when the orb of the moon was not yet known, and when the earth under me 
was not divided by day and light, but was lighted by the light of this mount of 
Meru. 


31. [remember this mountain throwing the light of its gems on one side of the 
valley below it, and leaving the other in utter darkness; and resembling the 
lokdloka mount presenting its light and dark side to the people on either side 
of the horizon. (The sun is said to turn round the Meru, and the day and night 
as he is on one or the other side of this mountain). 


32. I remember to have seen the war rising high between the gods and 
demons, and the flight and slaughter of people on all sides of the earth. 


33. I remember to have witnessed the revolution of the four yuga-ages of the 
world, and the revolt of the haughty and giddy assyrians, — asuras all along; 
I have also seen the Daitya, — demons driven back to the wall. 


34. I remember the spot of the earth, which was borne away beyond the 
boundaries of the universal flood; and recollect the cottage of the world, to 
have only the increate three (the Holy triad) left in it. 


35. I remember to have seen no other creature on earth, except the vegetable 
creation for the long duration of one half of the four yuga-ages. (The earth 
was covered with jungle for a long period after the great flood). 


36. I also remember this earth to be full of mountains and mountainous tracts, 
for the space of full four Yugas; when there were no men peopled on earth, 
nor their customs and usages got their ground in it. 


37. I remember to have seen this earth filled with the bones of dead Daityas 
and other fossil remains, rising in heaps like mountains, and continuing in 
their dilapidated and crumbling state for myriads of years. (These are the 
fossil remains of the monsters of the former world). 


38. [remember that formless state of the world, when darkness prevailed over 
the face of the deep, when the serpentine support of the earth fled for fear, and 
the celestials left their ethereal courses; and the sky presented neither a bird or 
the top of a tree in it. 


39. I remember the time when the northern and southern divisions (of India), 
were both included under the one boundary mountain (of Himalaya); and I 
remember also when the proud vindhyan vied to equal the great Meru. 


40. I remember these and many other events, which will be too long to relate; 
but what is the use of long narrations, if you will but attend to my telling you 
the main substance in brief. 


41. [have beheld innumerable Munis and manwantaras pass away before me, 
and I have known hundreds of the quadruple Yugas glide away one after the 
other, all of which were full of great deeds and events; but which are now 
buried in oblivion. 


42. I remember the creation of one sole body named Virdj in this world, when 
it was entirely devoid of men and asuras in it. 


43. I remember that age of the world, when the Brahmans were addicted to 
wine and drunkenness, when the Sudras were out casted by the Suras, 
(Aryans); and when women had the privilege of polyandry (which is still 
practised among the Pariahs of Deccan). 


44. When the surface of the earth presented the sight of one great sheet of 
water (after the deluge), and entirely devoid of any vegetable produce upon it; 
and when men were produced without cohabitation of man and woman, I 
remember that time also (when Bhrigu and the patriarchs were born in this 
manner). 


45. I remember that age of the world, when the world was a void, and there 
was no earth or sky nor any of their inhabitants in it, neither men nor 
mountains were in existence, nor were there the sun and moon to divide the 


days and nights. 


46. I remember the sphere of heaven shrouded under a sheet of darkness, and 
when there was no Indra nor king to rule in heaven or earth, which had not yet 
its high and low and middle classes of men. 


47. It was after that, the Brahma thought of creating the worlds, and divided 
them into the three spheres of the upper, lower and the intermediate regions. 
He then settled the boundary mountains, and distinguished the Jambudvipa or 
the continent of Asia from the rest. 


48. Then the earth was not divided into different countries and provinces, nor 
was there, the distinctions of cast and creed, nor institutions for the various 
orders of its people. There was then no name for the starry frame, nor any 
denomination for the polar star or its circle. 


49. It was then that the sun and moon had their birth, and the gods Indra and 
Upendra had their dominions. After this occurred the slaughter of Hiranya- 
Kasipu, and the restoration of the earth by the great Varaha or boar like 
incarnation of Vishnu. 


50. Then there was the establishment of kings over the peoples on earth, and 
the revelation of the Vedas given to mankind; after this the Mandara mountain 
was uprooted from the earth, and the ocean was churned by the gods and giant 
races of men. 


51. I have seen the unfledged Garuda or bird of heaven, that bore Vishnu on 
his back; and I have seen the seas breaking in bays and gulfs. All these events 
are remembered by me as the latest occurrences in the course of the world, 
and must be in the memory of my youngsters and yourself likewise. 


52. I have known in former ages the god Vishnu with his vehicle of Garuda, 
to have become Brahma with his vehicle of swan, and the same transformed 
to Siva having the bull for his bearer and so the vice-versa. (This passage 
shows the unity of the Hindu trinity, and the interchangeableness of their 
persons, forms and attributes). 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Account of past ages. 


Argument. — The various Events of bygone days, and the changes in the 
order of things in the world. 


BHUSUNDA continued: — Moreover, I will tell you Sir, many other things 
that I remember to have occurred in the course of the world, and under the 
flight of by gone times. I remember the births of the seers Bharadwaja, 
Pulasta, Atri, Narada, Indra, the Marichis and yourselves also. 


2. I bear in my mind the venerable Pulaha, Uddalaka, Kratu, Bhrigu, Angiras 
and Sanatkumara, Bhringi and Ganesa, and Skanda and others in their train, 
who were known as Siddharshis or consummate sages of yore. 


3. I retain the memory of Guari, Saraswati, Laxmi, Gayatri and many more 
famous females, who are reckoned as female personifications of divine 
attributes. I have seen the mountains Meru, Mandara, Kailasa, the Himalayas 
and the Dardura hills. 


4. I carry in my memory the exploits of the demons Hiranyaksha, Kalanimi, 
Hayagriva, Hiranya Kasipu, Vati and Prahlada and many others of the 
Ddnava or Demoniac race. 


5. [keep in my mind the remembrance of the renowned Sibi, Nyanku, Prithu, 
Vainya, Nala, Nabhaga, Mandhata, Sagara, Dilipa and Nahusa kings of men 
and rulers of earth. 


6. I know by heart the names of Atriya, Vyasa, Valmiki, Sukadeva, 
Vatsyayana and other sages, and know by rote the names of Upamanyu, 
Manimanki, Bhagiratha and other pious princes of old. 


7. So there are many things of remote past times, and others of later ages and 
some relating to the present age; all of which are imprinted in the memory, 
wherefore it is needless to recount them over again. 


8. O thou Sagely son of Brahma! I remember thy eight births, in the eight 
different epochs of the world, and this is verily thy eight births in which thou 
hast become a guest to my nest. 


9. You are at one time born of air, and at another of heavenly fire; you are 
some time produced from water, and at others from empty vacuity or of the 
solid rock. (i.e., formed of one or other of these elementary bodies at different 
periods of the world). 


10. The constitution of created bodies, conforms us with the nature of the 
principle elements of which they are formed; and the positions of heavenly 
bodies, have a great influence on their production. I have witnessed three such 
formations of the world composed of igneous, aqueous and terrene substances 
at different times. 


11. I remember ten repeated creations, in which the usages of people were 
uniform and alike; and the gods were settled in their abodes. (i.e., the Aryans 
led nomadic life). They were coeval with the Asuras whom they braved in 
battle, and were located in their homestead. 


12. I saw the earth sinking five times under, and lifted up as many times by 
the divine Kurmamanantara, or incarnation of Vishnu in the form of the 
tortoise, from below the overflowing ocean. 


13. I witnessed the great tumult of Suras and Asuras or the Gods and demi- 
gods, in uprooting and uplifting the Mandara mountain, for churning out the 
last ambrosia from underneath the ocean for twelve times over. (The meaning 
of Samudara manthana or churning of the sea, seems to be the refining of the 
salt water of the deluging sea). 


14. Thrice have seen the imposing Hiranydksha, that levied his tax upon the 
gods in heaven, hurling the fruitful earth with all her balmy and medicinal 
plants underneath the ocean. 


15. I beheld Hari to have come down six times in the shape of Renuka's son or 
Parashurama, and extirpate the Kshetriya race at the intervals of very long 
periods. 


16. I remember, O Sage! the return of a hundred kali-yuga ages, and a 
hundred incarnations of Hari in the form of Buddha, and as the son of royal 
Suka or Suddhadana in the land of Kirata. 


17. I bear in my remembrance the overthrow of Tripura thrice ten times by 
Siva, and the discomfiture of Dakhas' ceremony for more than once by the 


irritated Hara; and I recall to my mind the downfall of ten Indras by the 
offending God, who bears the crescent moon on his forehead, (and the 
confinement of their thunder-bolts within the caverns of volcanoes glass). 


18. I recollect the battle that has been fought eight times between Hari and 
Hara, and the first appearance of Vishnu and Siva, jvaras or the cold typhoid 
fevers in these conflicts. (This means the rising of the malarious fevers of 
Dinajpur, which raged among the belligerent forces on both sides). 


19. [remember, O silent Sage! the difference in the intellects of men at every 
succeeding age, and the various readings of vedas at the ceremonial 
observances of mankind. (This means the varieties of reading of the vedas as 
pointed in the prati sdkha, and the difference of phonetic intonation as shown 
in the sikshas, have greatly tended to the depravity of vedic recitation, and 
consequently to their inefficacy in producing their desired consequence also). 


20. O sinless saint! The Puranas also though they agree in the main substance, 
are so full of interpolations, that they have been greatly multiplied in 
successive ages. (It is quite true of works in manuscript and without their 
gloss). 


21. I remember also many historical works, which have been composed by 
authors learned in the vedas in the succeeding ages. (These works are called 
Itihdsas or legendary accounts, as the epics of Ramayana and Mahabharata by 
Valmiki and Vyadsa respectively). 


22. I have the recollection of the other wondrous composition of legendary 
accounts, under the title of the Maharamayana a work comprising one 
hundred thousand slokas or tetrastichs, and replete with sound wisdom. (This 
was revealed by Brahma to Vasishtha and Viswamitra). 


23. This work presents the conduct of Rama for the imitation of the men, and 
sets the misbehaviour of Ravana to the opprobrium of mankind. This precept 
contains the essence of all wisdom, and serves as the luscious fruit of the tree 
of knowledge, placed in the palm of all people. (The substance of these 
instances is, that virtue is true happiness below and vice is bane of life). 


24. This work is composed by Valmiki, who will compose some others also in 
time; and these you will come to know, when they will be presented to world 
in time, (as I have known them before hand by my foreknowledge of things. 
— Gloss) (This work is called Vasishtha Rama samvada in the form of a 
dialogue as those of Socrates and Plato). 


25. This work, whether it is a composition of Valmiki or the composition of 
some other person, is published for the twelve times, and is now going to be 
almost forgotten by men. 


26. The other work of like importance, is known under the name of Bharata; I 
remember it to have been written by Vy4sa at first, but is becoming obsolete 
at present. 


27. Whether it is the composition of person known by the name of Vyasa, or a 
compilation of some other person, it has up to this time undergone its seventh 
edition, and is now going fastly to be forgotten. 


28. I remember also, O chief of Sages! many tales and novels and other 
Sdstras, composed in every age and Yuga; which have been written in a 
variety of styles and diction. 


29. O good sage! I remember to have seen also many new productions and 
inventions, following one another in succeeding age; and it is impossible to 
enumerate this innumerable series of things. 


30. I remember the Lord Vishnu descending many times on earth, for the 
destruction of ferocious Rdkshasas, and is now to appear here the eleventh 
time under the appellation of Rama. 


31. I know the lord Hari to have thrice come down in his form of Nrisinha or 
leonine man, and thrashed the demon Hiranyakasipu as many times, as a lion 
kills a gigantic elephant. (i.e., Although the gods are of smaller forms and 
figures, yet they got the better of the giants, by means of their better arms and 
knowledge of warfare). 


32. Vishnu is yet to be born in his sixteenth incarnation at Vasudeva's abode, 
for the purpose of rescuing the earth from the burthen of the oppression of its 
tyrannic lords and despots. 


33. This cosmic phenomenon is no reality, nor it is even in existence; it is but 
a temporary illusion, and appears as bubble of water to disappear in next 
moment. 


34. This temporary illusion of the phenomenals, rises and sets in the conscious 
soul of its own accord; as the boisterous billows heave and subside themselves 
in the bosom of the waters. 


35. I have known the world to be sometimes uniform in its course and in the 
state of things, at others there is a partial difference in their nature and order, 


and again total change has also been observed to take place in the constitution 
of things. (Nature is never uniform, but all are subject to change more or less 
from its original state). 


36. I remember the former nature and state of things, and the manner and 
actions of bygone people and the usages of those times; I saw them give room 
to others in their turn and those again to be displaced by others. (He that wants 
an even uniformity to see, expects what never had been, nor ever will be). 


37. Every Manwantara or revolution of time, is attended O Brahman! with a 
reversion in the course of the world; and a new generation is born to supplant 
the old men of renown. 


38. I have then a new set of friends and a new train of relatives; I get a new 
batch of servants, and a new habitation for my dwelling. 


39. I had to remain sometimes in my solitary retreat by the side of the 
Vindhyan range, and sometimes on the ridge of the Sahya Mountain. I had at 
other times my residence on the Dardura Hills, and so my lodging is ever 
shifting from one place to another and never fixed in any spot forever. (The 
Dardura is the Dardue Hill in Afghanistan). 


40. I have often been a resident of the Himalayas, and of the Malaya 
Mountain in the South of India, and then led by destiny as described before, I 
have found my last abode on this mount of Meru. 


41. By getting to it, I built my nest on the branch of an Amra or mango tree, 
and continued to live there, O chief of the Munis! for ages and time without 
end. 


42. It is by my pristine destiny that this tree has grown here for my residence, 
therefore, O sage! I can have no release from this body of mine to come to my 
desirable end. (i.e., the soul like a bird is destined by its prior acts, to endless 
transmigrations in material bodies, which are compared to its habitable trees, 
and from which it can have no release, although it pines for its dis-embodied 
liberation, as a decrepit old man wishes to get loose of his loathsome body). 


43. It is by appointment of the predestination, that the same tree has grown 
here in the form of the kalpa arbour, which preserves the beauty even now, as 
it did at the time when my father Chanda had been living. 


44. Being thus pre-ordained by destiny I was settled in this place, when there 
had been no distinction of the quarters of heaven as the north or east, nor of 
the sky or mountain. 


45. Then the north was on another side, and this Meru was in another place; I 
was then one and alone, and devoid of any form or body, and was as bright as 
the essence, which is never shrouded by the darkness of night. 


46. After awaking from the insensibility of my trance (at the beginning of 
another kalpa creation or of my generation), I saw and recognized all the 
objects of creation (as one comes to see and know the things about him after 
waking from the forgetfulness of his sleep); and knew the situations of the 
Meru and other hills and dales from the positions of the stars, and the motions 
of heavenly bodies. 


47. The site of the polar circle of Meru and the course of the planets being 
changed in different creations, there ensues an alteration of the points of the 
compass, and a difference in the sides of the quarters; therefore, there is 
nothing as a positive truth, except our conception of it such and such. 


48. It is the vibration of the soul, that displays these wonderful conceptions in 
the mind; and excites the various phenomena in nature. It converts a son to a 
father and makes a son of the father, and represents a friend as a foe and again 
shows a foe in the light of a friend. (Hence there is no such thing as a positive 
certainty, but becomes transmutable to one in opposite nature, as the father 
supports the child in its youth, and is supported by the boy in his dotage). 


49. I remember many men to become effeminate, and many women also to 
grow quite masculine; and I have seen the good manners of the golden age to 
prevail in Kali-[yuga], and those of Iron-age gaining ground in its preceding 
ages. 


50. I have seen also many men in the Tretd and Dwdpara Yugas or the silver 
and brazen ages of the world, that were ignorant of the Vedas and 
unacquainted with their precepts; and followed the fictions of their own 
invention which led them to heterodoxy. 


51. I remember also O Brahman! the laxity of manners and morals among the 
gods, demi gods and men since the beginning of the world. 


52. [remember after the lapse of a thousand cycles of the four Yuga ages, that 
Brahma created from his mind some aerial beings of unearthly forms; and 
these spiritual beings occupied a space extending over ten cycles of creations. 


53. I remember likewise, the varying positions and boundaries of countries, 
and also the very changing and diversified actions and occupations of their 
people. I remember too the various costumes and fashions and amusements of 
men, during the ceaseless course of days and nights in the endless duration of 
time. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


Desire of Tranquillity and Quiescence of the Mind. 


Argument. — Relation of the vices and virtues which hasten and prevent 
death, and the peace and rest of the mind which is sought after by mankind. 


VASISHTHA rejoined: — I then besought the chief of the crows, that was 
stationed on one end of a branch of the kalpa tree, to tell me how he was not 
liable to fall into the hands of death, when all other animals moving about the 
expanse of the world, are doomed to be crushed under its all devouring jaws. 


2. Bhusunda replied: — You, Sir, that know all things and would yet ask me 
to tell that you know full well. Such bidding of my master emboldens your 
servant to speak out where he should otherwise hold his tongue. 


3. Yet when you desire me to tell, I must do it as well as I can, because it is 
deemed to be the duty of a dependent, to carry out the commands of their kind 
masters. 


4. Death will not demolish the man, who does not wear on his bosom the 
pearl-necklace of his vicious desires; as a robber does not kill a traveller that 
has not the pernicious chain of gold hanging on his breast. 


5. Death will not destroy the man whose heart is not broken down by sorrows, 
whose breast is not sawed as a timber by the friction of his sighs, and whose 
body is not worsted by toil like a tree by canker worms. 


6. Death will not overtake the man, whose body is not beset by cares like a 
tree by poisonous snakes, lifting their hoods above its head; and whose heart 
is not burnt by its anxieties, like a wood by its enraging fire. 


7. Death will not prey upon the person, which is not vitiated by the poison of 
anger and enmity, and cavity of whose heart does not foster the dragon of 
avarice in its darkness, and whose heart is not corroded by the canker of cares. 


8. He is not carried away by the cruel hand of death, whose body is not 
already fried by the fire of his resentment, which like hidden heat of the sub- 
marine fire, sucks up the waters of reason in the reservoir of the mind. 


9. Death will not kill the person whose body is not inflamed by the fiery 
passion of love; which like the wild fire consumes the hoarded corn of good 
sense, and as a pair of sharp scissors rives the heart strings of reason. 


10. Death doth not approach the man, that puts his trust in the one pure and 
purifying spirit of God, and hath the rest of his soul in the lap of the supreme 
soul. 


11. Death does not lay hold on the person that is firm and sedate in the same 
posture and position, and does not ramble like an ape from one tree to another, 
and whose mind is a foreigner to fickleness. 


12. Thus then, the mind being settled in unalterable state of calm repose in its 
Maker, it is no more possible for the evils and diseases of this world, to 
overtake it at any time. 


13. The fixed and tranquil mind, is never overtaken by the sorrows and 
diseases of the world; nor it is liable to fall into the errors and dangers, which 
betide the restless mob here below. 


14. The well composed mind, hath neither its rising nor setting, nor its 
recollection nor forgetfulness at any time or other. It has not its sleeping or 
waking state, but has its heavenly revery which is quite distinct from 
dreaming. 


15. The vexatious thought which take their rise from vitiated desire and 
feelings of resentment and other passions, and darken the region of the heart 
and mind, can never disturb the serenity of those souls, which have their 
repose in the Supreme Spirit. 


16. He whose mind is enrapt in holy meditation, neither gives away to nor 
receives anything from others, nor does he seek or forsake whatever he has or 
has not at any time. He does his duties always by rote as he ought without 
expectation of their reward or merit. 


17. He whose mind has found its repose in holy meditation, has no cause of 
his repentance, for doing any misdeed for his gain or pleasure at any time. 


18. He has enough of his gain and an excess of his delight and a good deal of 
every good, whose mind has met with the grace of his God. (He that has the 


grace of God, has everything given and added to him). 


19. Therefore, employ your mind to what is attended with your ultimate good 
and lasting welfare; and wherein there is nothing of doubt or difficulty, and 
which is exempt from false expectation. 


20. Exalt your mind above the multiplicities of worldly possessions, which the 
impure and unseen demon of evil presents for the allurement of your heart, 
and settle it in the unity of the Divinity. (So did Satan attempt in vain to tempt 
our Lord to worldly vanities and all its possessions). 


21. Set your heart to that supreme felicity which is pleasant both in the 
beginning and end, and even delectable to taste; that is pleasant to sight, sweet 
to relish, and is wholesome in its effect. 


22. Fix your mind to what is sought by all the good and godly people, which 
is the eternal truth and the best diet of the soul, from its beginning and during 
its course in the middle and end and throughout its immortality. 


23. Apply your mind to what is beyond your comprehension, which is the 
holy light, which is the root and source of all, and wherein consists all our 
best fortune and the ambrosial food for our souls. 


24. There is no other thing so very permanent or auspicious among immortals 
or mortals, and among the gods and demi-gods, Asuras and Gandharvas, and 
Kinnaras and Vidyadharas, nor among the heavenly nymphs, as the spiritual 
bliss of the soul. 


25. There is nothing so very graceful or lasting, to be found in cities and 
mountains and in the vegetable creation, nor among mankind and their king, 
nor anywhere in earth or heaven as this spiritual felicity. 


26. There is nothing steady or graceful, among the Naga-snake or Asura races 
and their females, and in the whole circles of infernal region. 


27. There is nothing so lovely and lasting in the regions above and below and 
all around us, and in the spheres of all other worlds, so very graceful and 
durable as the lasting peace of mind. 


28. There is nothing that is felicitous or persistent in this world, amidst all its 
sorrows and sicknesses and troubles which encompass all about. All our 
actions are for trivial matters and all our gains are but trifles at best. 


29. There is nothing of any lasting good, in all those thoughts which employ 
the minds of men and gladden their hearts, and which serve at best to delude 


the sapient to the fickleness of their spirits. 


30. No permanent good is derived from the ever-busy thoughts and volitions 
and nolitions of mankind, which tend at best to trouble their minds, as the 
Mandara mountain disturbed the waters of the deep, at the time of its churning 
by the gods and demons. 


31. No lasting good results to anybody from his continuous exertions, and 
various efforts about his gain and loss even at the edge of the sword; (i.e., 
even at the peril of one's life). 


32. Neither is the sovereignty of the whole earth so great a boon, nor is one's 
elevation to the rank of a deity in heaven so great a blessing; nor even is the 
exaltation of one to the position of the world supporting serpent so great a 
gain, as the sweet peace of mind of the good. 


33. It is of no good to trouble the mind, with its attention to all the branches of 
learning, nor is it of any advantage to one to employ his wits and enslave his 
mind to the service of another, nor of any use to anybody, to learn the 
histories of other people, when he is ignorant of himself and his own welfare. 


34. It is of no good to live long, under the trouble of disease and the sorrow of 
life. Neither is life or death, nor learning nor ignorance, nor heaven or hell any 
advantage or disadvantage to anybody, until there is an end of his desires 
within himself. 


35. Thus these various states of the world and all worldly things, may appear 
gratis to the ignorant vulgar, but they afford no pleasure to the learned who 
knows their instability. (Hence longevity and stability depend on one's 
reliance in the eternal God, and not on the transient world). 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


Investigation of the Living Principle. 


Argument. — Disquisition of the Arteries and organs of the body. The seat of 
life and its actions. 


BHUSUNDA continued: — All things being thus unstable, unprofitable and 
unpleasant to man, there is one reality only in the view of the wise, which is 
beyond all error and imperishable, and which though present in all things and 
all places, transcends the knowledge of all. 


2. This essence is the soul or self, and its meditation is the remover of all 
sorrow and affliction. It is also the destroyer of the erroneous vision of the 
world, which has passed every man, and biased his understanding by his long 
habit of thinking this phantom of his dream as a sober reality. 


3. Spiritual contemplation dawns in the clear atmosphere of the unpolluted 
mind, and traverses amidst its whole area like the solar light, and it destroys 
the darkness of all sorrows and erroneous thought which over spreads it. 


4. Divine meditation being unaccompanied by any desire or selfish view, 
penetrates like the moon-beams through the darkness of the night of 
ignorance. 


5. This spiritual light is easily obtainable by Sages like you, and too difficult 
to be retained, (dhdrand), by brutes like ourselves. Because it is beyond all 
imaginable resemblance, and is known by the ravished Sages as the 
transcendent light. 


6. How can a man of common understanding come to the knowledge of that 
thing, which is an associate to the clear understanding of the meditative Sage 
only. 


7. There is a little resemblance of this spiritual light, with the intellectual light 
of philosophers, whose minds are enlightened by the cooling moon-beams of 


philosophy, as those of the inspired saints are illumed with spiritual light. 


8. Among the associates of spiritual knowledge, there is one particularly 
friendly to me, which alleviates all my sorrows, and advances my prosperity, 
and this relates to the investigation of the vital breath which is the cause of 
life. 


9. Vasishtha said: — After speaking in this manner, the Sagely bird Bhusunda 
held his silence, when I calmly joined my rejoinder, and adduced my question 
to him by way of amusement, though I was full well acquainted with the 
subject. 


10. I addressed him saying, — O thou long living bird, and remover of all my 
doubts, tell me truly, my good friend, what you mean by meditation of the 
vital breath (which you say to be the cause of vitality). 


11. Bhusunda replied: — You, Sir, who are learned in the knowledge of 
Vedanta, and sure remover of all doubts in spiritual science, are now by way 
of joke only, putting this question to me who am but a brute bird and an 
ignorant crow. 


12. Or it may be to sound my shallow knowledge of the subject, and to 
instruct me the rest in which I am imperfect, that you like to have my answer 
to the question, wherein I can lay no objection, (as nobody is unprepared to 
know more and better of a subject). 


13. Hear me tell you something relating to cogitation of vital breath, which 
has the cause of Bhusunda's longevity and the giver of Bhusunda's spiritual 
knowledge. 


14. You see, Sir, this beautiful fabric of the body, supported upon the three 
strong pillars or posts of the three humours; and having nine doorways about 
it. (The three humours are the bile, phlegm and wind, and the nine openings 
are the earholes, nostrils, the sockets of the eyes, the mouth). 


15. This abode is occupied by its owner or the haughty house holder, — 
Ahankdra or egoism, who dwells in it with his favourite consort Puryashtakd, 
and his dependents of the Tanmdtras at all times. (These terms have been 
explained before). 


16. You well know the inside of this house which I need not describe, its two 
ears are as its two upper storied rooms, the two eyes are as its two windows, 
and the hairs on the head are as its thatched covering on the top of the house. 


17. The opening of the mouth is the great door way to the house, the two arms 
are as its two wings; and the two sets of teeth answer the strings of flowers, 
which are hung on the gate way for its decoration. 


18. The organs of sense are the porters to this house, and convey the sights 
and sounds, flavours and feelings of things in to it. These are enclosed by the 
great wall of the body, and the two pupils keep watch on tower of this edifice. 


19. The blood, fat and flesh form the plaster of this wall, and the veins and 
arteries answer the strings to bind the bamboos of the bones together, and the 
thick bones are the big posts that uphold this fabric. 


20. There are two tender nerves called Idd and Pingald, which lie and stretch 
along the two sides of this building. 


21. There are three pairs of lotus-like organs formed of soft flesh and bones, 
and these stretch up and down perpendicularly in the body, and are attached to 
one stalk like artery connecting them with one another. 


22. Then the ethereal air which is inhaled through the nostrils, supplies these 
lotiform organs with moisture, as if it poured water at their roots, and makes 
them shoot out in soft leaflets, shaking gently at the breath of air, passing 
incessantly through the lungs and nostrils. 


23. The shaking leaves agitate the vital air, as the moving leaves of the trees 
in the forest, increase the force of the current air in the firmament. 


24. The inflated vital air then passes in many ways, through the holes of the 
entrails inside the body, and extends to and fills all the pores and canals of the 
frame from top to bottom. 


25. These then receive different appellations, according to their course 
through the several, and are denominated as the five-fold vital airs of prdna, 
apdna, samdna, uddna, and vydna; by them that are skilled in science of 
pneumatic. (The prdna-vdyu is the breathing of the nostrils, the apdna is the 
wind in ano, samdna is the air circulating through the whole body, uddna is 
the air of speech, and the vydna is the air let out through the pores of the 
whole body). 


26. All the vital powers reside in the triple lotiform organ of the heart, and 
thence extend up and down and on all sides like beams from the lunar disk. 


27. These vital powers are employed in passing in and out, in taking in and 
letting out, in rising and falling, and also in moving throughout the body. 


28. The prdna or air of life is said by the learned to be situated in the lotus 
formed organ of the heart, which has also the power of moving the eyelids in 
their twinklings. (Hence one's life time is measured both by the numbers of 
his breathings, as also by that of the twinklings of his eye). 


29. This power sometimes assumes the form of touch or the feeling of 
perception, and at others it takes the shape of breath by blowing through the 
nostrils. Sometimes it is seated in the stomach for culinary action, and oft- 
times it gives utterance to speech. 


30. What more shall I say, than that it is our lord, — the air, that moves the 
whole machine of the body, as a mechanic models everything by means of his 
machinery. 


31. Among these there are two principal airs, by name of prdna and apdna, 
which take their two different courses upward and downward, the one is the 
breath of life and the other is the vitiated which is let out. 


32. It is by watching the course of these airs that I remain quiet at this place, 
and undergo the vicissitudes of heat and cold, as it is destined to the lot of the 
feathered tribe. 


33. The body is a great machine, and the two airs are its indefatigable mover. 
It has the sun and moon or the fire and moonlight, shining in the midst of its 
heart. 


34. The body is a city and the mind is its ruler, the two airs are as the car and 
wheel of the body; while Egoism is the monarch of this city, and the eight 
members are as so many horses attached to the car of the body. 


35. Thus by watching the motion of those airs, (i.e., of the prdna and apdna, 
— inspiration and expiration for the whole of my lifetime); I find the course 
of my life to be as interminable, as that of the continuity of my breathings. 
(The thought of continuity prolongs the course of life). 


36. The airs serve the body alike in all its states of waking, dreaming, and 
sound sleep, and his days glide on imperceptibly who remains in his state of 
profound sleep. (so the Yogi remaining in his trance is utterly insensible of the 
course of time). 


37. These breaths being divided into a thousand threads, according as they 
pass through the many canals of the body, are as imperceptible as the white 
fibres passing inside the stalks of lotus plants. 


38. By watching the incessant course of vital airs, as also by attending to the 
continued course of time, and thinking in one self of the interminable course 
of his respirations, and the moments of time and train of his thoughts, as also 
by attempting to restrain their course by the habit and practice of prandydma, 
that he is sure to lengthen the duration of his life in this world; and attain to 
his eternal life in the next. 


CHAPTER XXvV. 


On Samddhi. 


Argument. — On the Breathings of Inspiration, Respiration and Expiration, 
and their rise and fall from and in the spirit of Brahma the origin and end of 
all. 


VASISHTHA said: — Hear Rama, when the bird had said so far, I interrupted 
him and said, tell me, O ancient seer, how and what is the nature of the course 
of vital airs. 


2. Bhusunda replied: — How is it, O sage! that you who know everything, 
should propose this question to me as if it were in jest, but as you ask this of 
me, I must tell you all I know about it. 


3. The vital breath, O Brahman! is a moving force by its nature, and is always 
suo motu in its own motion, and pervades both in the inside and outside of 
bodies which it animates. 


4. The apdna or the emitting air also is a self-motive power, and in its 
incessant motion; and is both within and without the living body, in its 
downward or receding direction. 


5. It is good for livings being to restrain these vitals breaths both in their 
waking and sleeping states, and now hear me tell you, O learned sage, how it 
is to be effected for their best gain. 


6. The internal vital air, (prdna), extends from the lotus-like heart to the 
crevice in the cranium, its effort to come out (by the mouth and nostrils), is 
termed by the wise as rechaka or exhaled air. (The expiration coming out of 
the heart, and reaching the cerebrum is called the rechaka breath). 


7. The meeting of breaths at the distance of twelve inches from and below the 
nostrils, is called the puraka or inhaling-breath. (This is termed the [Sanskrit: 
vahyaptraka] or external inspiration). 


8. It is also called Puraka, when the breath passes from without, and enters 
within the inner apdna without any effort, and fills the inside from the heart to 
the cerebrum. 


9. When the apdna air has subsided in the heart, and prdna breath does not 
circulate in the breast, it is called the Kumbhaka state, and is known to the 
Yogis only. 


10. All these three sorts of breaths, are perceived at the place from where the 
apdna takes its rise, and this is at the distance of twelve inches below on the 
outside of the tip of the nose. 


11. Hear now, O great minded sage! what the clear minded adepts have said, 
respecting the natures of the ever continuative and effortless. (i.e., self- 
respiring) breathings. 


12. Know, Sir, that the air which is inhaled from the distance of twelve inches 
on the outside of the tip of the nose, the same receives of its own nature the 
name of puraka or that of another. 


13. As the outer part of a pot planted in the earth appears to sight, so the 
apdna breath stretching to the distance of twelve inches just opposite to the tip 
of the nose in the air on the outside, is perceptible to the Yogi, and is called 
Kumbhaka by the learned. 


14. The exhaling air which rises from the heart, and extends to the tip of the 
nose, is styled the primary and external puraka breath ({Sanskrit: ddyah 
vdahyapurakam}) by the adepts in Yoga practice. 


15. There is another (or secondary) external puraka air known to the wise, 
which takes its rise from the tip of the nose, and extends to the distance of 
twelve inches out-side of it. 


16. After the prdna breath sets outside the nostrils, and before the apdna 
breath has yet its rise, this interval of the entire abeyance of both, is known as 
the state of perfect equalization, and termed the external Kumbhaka. 


17. The air which breathes out in the heart or pulsates within it, and without 
the rising of the apdna breath; is styled the external rechaka in the Yoga 
system; and its reflection confers perfect liberation to man. 


18. And this rising at the distance of twelve inches, in another kind of it and 
called the strong rechaka. 


19. There is another kind of puraka, which is on the outside of the apdna; and 


when it stretches to the inside of the navel within, it is known under the names 
of Kumbhaka, etc. 


20. The intelligent man who meditates by day and night on the octuple nature, 
and course of the prdna and apdna or the inhaling and exhaling airs, is not 
doomed to be reborn any more in this miserable earth. 


21. I have thus related to you the various courses of the bodily airs, a restraint 
of which in the waking and sleeping states of man, as also in his states of 
sitting and waking, is productive of his liberation. 


22. Though these are very fleeting in their natures, yet they are restrained by 
the good understanding of man, even when he is employed in his work or is in 
his act of eating. 


23. The man that practises the Kumbhaka or suppression of his breathing 
within himself, cannot be employed in any action; but must remain calmly in 
this act of suppression, by giving all external thoughts and actions. (i.e., as in 
a state of torpidity). 


24. A few days practice of this Yoga, by abnegation of all outward objects 
from the mind, enables a man to attain to the state of his soliety, or his unity 
with the sole entity of the Deity. 


25. Intelligent men have no fondness for worldly things, but bear an aversion 
to them as a holy Brahman has against the sweet milk contained in a flask of 
skin. They remain regardless of visible objects, with his eyes closed against 
them, as a blind man takes no heed of outward appearances. 


26. They are in possession of all, which is the sum total (tout ensemble) of 
what is to be had as the best gain; and whether when they are awake or asleep 
or walking or sitting, they never lose sight of that true light which leads them 
to the other world. 


27. Those who have obtained the knowledge of the course of his breathings, 
have got rid of all delusion and rest in quiet within themselves. (i.e., In 
watching their inspirations and over-looking the external phenomena). 


28. And whether the intelligent people are employed in busy life, or sit 
inactive at home; they are always quiet and at rest by following the course of 
their respiration, (neither breathing hard or being out of breath). 


29. I know, O Brahman! the exhaling breath, to rise from its source of the 
lotus like heart, and stretch to the distance of twelve inches out of it, where it 


sets or stops. (As is mixed up with the current air). 


30. The apdna or inhaling breath is taking in from the same distance of twelve 
inches, and is deposited in the cup of the lotus situated in the human heart. 


31. As the prdna respiration is exhaled out in the air, to the distance of twelve 
inches from the heart, so the inhaled air of apdna is taken into the breast, from 
the same distance of the open sky. 


32. The prdna or exhaling breath runs towards the open air, in the form of a 
flame of fire, and the inhaled breath turns inward to the region of the heart, 
and goes downward like a current of water. 


33. The apdna or inhaled breath is like the cooling moon light, and refreshes 
the body from without; while prdna respiration resembling the sunshine or a 
flame of fire, warms the inside of the body. 


34. The prdna breath warms every moment the region of the heart, as the 
sunshine inflames the region of the sky; and then it torrifies the atmosphere 
before it, by the exhalation of breath through the mouth. 


35. The apdna air is as the moonlight before the moon, and being inhaled 
inward, it washes the sphere of the heart as by a deluge; then it refreshes the 
whole inside in a moment. 


36. When the last digit of the moon-like apdna or inhaling breath, is 
swallowed by the sun of the prdna or exhaling breath; it meets with the sight 
of supreme spirit, and has no more any cause of affliction. 


37. So also when the last portion of the sun-like prdna or exhaling breath, is 
swallowed by the moon-like apdna or inhaling breath; then there ensues the 
same visitation of Brahma in the inside, and the soul is emancipated from 
further transmigration in this world. (The meeting of the two is a Yoga or 
junction of the human and Divine spirits). 


38. The prdna or exhaling breath assumes the nature of the solar heat, both in 
the inside and outside of the body; and afterwards it becomes and remains as 
the cooling moonlight. (It is the one and same breath of air, that takes the two 
names, according to its two different natures of inspiration and expiration. — 
Gloss). 


39. The prdna expiration forsakes its nature of the cooling moon, and turns in 
a moment to assume the nature of the hot sun, that dries and sucks up 
everything before it. 


40. As long as the prdna exhalation is not converted to the nature of the 
moon, after forsaking its solarity, it is so long considered as unconditioned by 
time and place, and freed from pain and grief. (The prdna being peculiarised 
by time, place and number, is long or short and subject to misery; but its 
extinction in the interval, is instinct with the supreme spirit. Patanjali Yoga 
sutra II 50). 


41. He who sees the seat of his soul in the mind situated within his heart, and 
at the confluence of the sol-luni prdna and apdna breathings in the Kumbhaka 
or retained breath, is no more subjected to be reborn and die. 


He who feels the sun and moon of his prdna and apdna breaths, ever rising 
and setting in the kumbhaka or retained breath with his heart, verily sees the 
seat of his mind and soul placed at their confluence, and is freed from further 
birth and death. (The plain meaning is that, the mind and soul consist in the 
air deposited in the heart by the two inhaling and exhaling breaths of prdana 
and apdna). 


42. He verily sees the soul in its full light, who beholds this bright sun 
[Sanskrit: prdna] shining in the sphere of his heart, in conjunction with the 
rising and setting moon beams apdna in his mind. 


43. This light never fades nor grows faint at any time, but dispels the darkness 
of the heart, and produces the consummation, — Siddhi of the meditative 
mind. 


44. As the dispersion of outward darkness presents the world to view, so the 
disappearance of inward obscurity gives out the light of the spirit before the 
mental sight. 


45. The removal of intellectual darkness, produces the liberation of the soul, 
and shows the rising and setting sun of the vital breath vividly to view. 


46. When the moon of the apdna or inspired breath, sets in the cavity of the 
heart, the sun of the prdna or expiratory breathing, rises immediately to gush 
out of the same. 


47. The apdna or inhaling breath having set in the cell of the lotus like heart, 
the exhaling breath of prdna rises at the very moment to come out of it, as the 
shadow of the night being dispersed from sight, the bright sun of the day 
ushers his light. 


48. As the prdna expiration expires in the open air, the inhaling breath rises 
and rushes in a moment; just as the light having fled from the horizon, is 


succeeded immediately by deep darkness. 


49. Know ye intelligent men, that the apdna breath becomes extinct, where 
the prdna comes to be born; and the prdna respiration is lost, where the apdna 
takes its rise. 


50. When the prdna breathing has ceased and the apdna has its rise, it is then 
that one supports himself upon the Kumbhaka retained air, and does not 
depend on two other passing breaths. 


51. On the extinction of apdna, and the rise of the prdna breath, one relying 
on the Kumbhaka air which is deposited within himself, is exempted from his 
pain and sorrow. 


52. By depending on the rechaka breath, and practicing the suppression of 
Kumbhaka breath, at the great distance of sixteen inches from the apdna; a 
man has no more to be sorry for anything. 


53. By making the apdna a receptacle of rechaka, and filling the prdna in the 
inside, and finding himself filled with the puraka all within his body, a man 
has no more to be born on earth. 


54. When a man finds the perfect tranquillity of his soul, by subsidence of 
both the prdna and apdna within himself; he has no longer to sorrow for 
anything whatever. 


55. When a man reflects his prdna breath to be devoured by the apdna air 
both within as well as without himself, and loses his thoughts of time and 
space, he has no more any cause for sorrow. 


56. He who sees his prdna breath devouring the apdna air, both within and 
without himself, together with his sense of space and time, has no more his 
mind to be reborn on earth. 


57. When the prdna is swallowed up by the apdna, or the apdna by the prdna, 
both in the in-side and out-side of the adept; together with his thoughts of time 
and place; 


58. At this moment the Yogi finds his prdna to set down, and his apdna to rise 
no more, and the interval between the two, is common to all animals though it 
is known to Yogis alone. 


59. The Kumbhaka taking place of itself on the outside, is known as the divine 
state, but when it happens to occur in the inside, and without any efforts on 
the part of the adept, it is said to be the state of the most supreme. (Because 


God does not breathe). 


60. This is the nature of the divine soul, and this is the state of the supreme 
intellect, this is the representation of the eternal spirit, and one attaining to this 
state, is never subject to sorrow. 


61. Like fragrance in the flower, there is an essence indwelling within the vital 
breath also, and this is neither the prdna nor apdna, but the intellectual soul 
which I adore. (As the true God). 


62. As taste indwells in the water, so is there an essence immanent in the 
apdna; and this is neither the apdna nor the not apdna, but the intelligent soul 
which I adore. 


63. There is at the end of the extinction of prdna, and beyond the limit of the 
exhaustion of apdna, and situated in the interval between the extremities of 
both of these, which I ever adore. 


64. That which forms the breathing of breath, and is the life of life, what is the 
support and bearer of the body, is the intellectual spirit which I ever adore. 


65. That which causes the thinking (power) of the mind, and the cogitation of 
the understanding; as also the egotism of egoism, is the intellectual soul, 
which I have learnt to adore. 


66. That which contains and produces all things, which is all (or permeated in 
all things, as everything is (evolved from) itself; and what is changed to all at 
all times, is that mind which I adore forever.) 


67. What is the light of lights, what is holiness and the holy of holies, and 
what is unchangeable in its nature, is the intellect which I adore. 


68. I adore that pencil of pure intellectual light, which rises at the juncture of 
the setting of the apdna and springing up of the prdna breath. (This sloka 
occurs in the Kashmere Mss). 


I adore that intellect which trolls on the tip of the nose, at the point where the 
prdna sets in, and the apdna has not yet taken its rise. 


69. I adore the intellect which rises at the time when both the prdna and 
apdana breaths have stopped, and when neither of them has taken its rise. 


70. I adore that intellect which appears before the Yogi, and supports him at 
the point which he has reached unto upon the setting of the prdna and apdna 
breaths, both within and without himself. 


71. I adore that intellect which is force of all forces, and rides in the car of 
prdna and apdna breaths, and when both of them are compressed in the heart 
of the Yogi. 


72. I adore the lord intellect, which is the Kumbhaka breath in the heart, and 
the apdna Kumbhaka on the outside; and a part of the puraka left behind. 


73. I adore the essence of that intellect, which is attainable by reflection of the 
breathings, and which is the formless cause of our intelligence of the natures 
of the prdna and apdna breaths, as also the motive principle of their actions. 


74. I adore the essence of that intellect, which is the cause of the causes, and 
the main spring of the oscillations of vital airs, and giver of the felicity 
derived from the vibrations of breath. 


75. | adore that prime and supreme Being Brahma, who is worshipped by the 
gods bowing down before him, who makes himself known to us by his own 
power, and who is, by the particles of vital breaths, under the name of Spirit. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


Relation of the Cause of Longevity. 


Argument. — Reflection and Restraint of Respiration leading to the 
tranquillity of the soul, and the steadiness of the spirit, conducing to long life 
and felicity on earth. 


BHUSUNDA continued: — This is the tranquillity of the mind, which I have 
attained by degrees, by means of my meditation of the nature and course of 
the vital breath in myself. 


2. I sit quiet at all times, with view fixed at the movement of my breath; and 
never stir a moment from my meditative mood, though the mount Meru may 
shake under me. 


3. Whether I am awake or asleep, or move about or remain unmoved in my 
seat, I am never at a loss of this meditation even in dream, nor does it slide a 
moment from my steadfast mind. (For who can ever live without breathing, or 
be unconscious of its ceaseless course, or that the breath is both the cause and 
measure of life). 


4. I am always calm and quiet and ever steady and sedate, in this ever varying 
and unsteady world; I remain always with my face turned inward in myself, 
and fixed firmly in the object I have at heart. (This is the soul, — the life of 
the life situated in the heart). 


5. The breeze may cease to blow, and the waters may stop to flow but nothing 
can prevent my breathing and meditation of them, nor do I remember ever to 
live without them. (The gloss explains by metonymy the air to mean the 
planetary sphere, which rests and moves in it, the waters as the ever flowing, 
[Sanskrit: vdyu], currents of rivers, and the samddhi, ([Sanskrit: 
Jyotichakraha], meditation as composed of breath and thought, to be in 
continuous motion and resistless in their course). 


6. By attending to the course of my inhaling and exhaling breaths of life, I 
have come to the sight of the soul (which is their life), and have thereby 
become freed from sorrow by seeing the prime soul of all souls. (Ze., The 
highest soul of God). 


7. The earth has been sinking and rising repeatedly, since the great deluge, 
and I have been witnessing the submersion and immersion of things, and the 
perdition and reproduction of beings, without any change of the sedateness of 
my soul and mind. 


8. I never think of the past and future, my sight is fixed only on the present, 
and my mind sees the remote past and future as ever present before it. 
(Meditation makes a man a seer of all time). 


9. 1am employed in the business that presents itself to me, and never care for 
their toil nor care for their reward. I live as one in sleep and solely with 
myself. (This is the state of Kaivalya or soliety). 


10. I examine all what is and is not, and what we have or have not, and 
consider likewise all our desires and their objects; and finding them to be but 
frailties and vanities, I refrain from their pursuit and remain unvexed by their 
cares forever. 


11. I watch the course of my inspiration and expiration, and behold the 
presence of the super excellent (Brahma) at their confluence; whereby I rest 
satisfied in myself, and enjoy my long life without any sorrow or sickness. 


12. This boon have I gained this day, and that better one shall I have on 
another, are the ruinous thoughts of mortal men, and unknown to me whereby 
I have so long living and unailing. 


13. I never praise or dispraise any act of myself or others, and this indifference 
of mine to all concerns; hath brought me to this happy state of careless 
longevity. (Platonic imperturbability). 


14. My mind is neither elated by success, nor it is depressed by adversity, but 
preserves its equanimity at all times, and is what has brought this happy state 
on me. (A sane and sound old age). 


15. I have resorted to my religious relinquishment of the world, and to my 
apathy to all things at all times; I have also abandoned the desire of sensuous 
life and sensible objects, and these have set me free from death and disease. 


16. I have freed my mind, O great muni! from its faults of fickleness and 


curiosity, and have set it above sorrow and anxiety, it has become deliberate 
calm and quiet, and this has made me long-lived and un-sickly. 


17. I see all things in an equal light, whether it be a beauty or a spectre, a 
piece of wood or stone, a straw or a rock, or whether it is the air, water or fire, 
and it is this equanimity of mine that has made me sane and sound in every 
state of life. 


18. I do not think about what I have done today, and what I shall have to do 
tomorrow, nor do I ail under the fever of vain thoughts regarding the past and 
future, and this has kept me forever sound and sane. 


19. I am neither afraid of death, disease or old age, nor am I elated with the 
idea of getting a kingdom in my possession; and this indifference of mine to 
aught of good or evil, is the cause of my length of my life and the soundness 
of my body and mind. 


20. I do not regard, O Brahman! any one either in the light of a friend or foe to 
me; and this equality of my knowledge of all persons, is the cause of my long 
life and want of my complaint. 


21. I regard all existence as the reflexion of the self-existent one, who is all in 
all and without his beginning and end; I know myself as the very intellect, and 
this is the cause of my diuturnity and want of disease and decay. 


22. Whether when I get or give away anything, or when I walk or sit, or rise 
and breathe, or am asleep or awake; I never think myself as the gross body but 
its pure intelligence, and this made me diuturnal and durable forever. (The 
intelligent soul never dies). 


23. I think myself as quite asleep, and believe this world with all its bustle to 
be nothing in reality (but the false appearance of a dream); and this has made 
me long-lived and undecaying. 


24. I take the good and bad accidents of life, occurring at their stated times, to 
be all alike to me, like my two arms both of which are serviceable to me; and 
has made me longeval and imperishable. 


25. With my fixed attention, and the cool clearness of my mental vision, I see 
all things in their favourable light (that they are all good, and adapted to their 
various uses); I see all things as even and equal, and this view of them in the 
same light, has made me lasting and wasteless. (So says the Bharata: — “All 
crookedness leads to death, and evenness to the one even Brahma.”’) 


26. This material body of mine to which I bear my moiety, is never viewed by 
me in the light of my ego; and this has made me undying and undecaying. 
(The deathless soul is the ego, and the dying body the non-ego). 


27. Whatever I do and take to my food, I never take them to my heart; my 
mind is freed from the acts of my body, and this freedom of myself from 
action, has caused my undecaying longevity. (Because action being the 
measure of life, its want must make it measureless and imperishable). 


28. Whenever, O Sage, I come to know the truth, I never feel proud of my 
knowledge, but desire to learn more about it; and this increasing desire of 
knowledge, has increased my life without its concomitant infirmity. 
(Knowledge is unlimited, and one needs be immortal in order to know all). 


29. Though possessed of power, I never use it to do wrong or injure to 
another; and though wronged by any one, I am never sorry for the same; and 
though ever so poor, I never crave anything of anybody; this hath prolonged 
my life and kept me safe and sound. (It is the Christian charity not to retaliate 
an injury, but rather to turn to him the right cheek who has slapped on the 
left). 


30. I see in these visible forms the intellect that abides all bodies, and as I 
behold all these existent bodies in an equal light, I enjoy an undecaying 
longevity. 


31. I am so composed in my mind, that I never allow its faculties, to be 
entangled in the snare of worldly desires and expectations; nor do I allow 
these to touch even my heart, and this conferred on me the bliss of my 
unfading longevity. 


32. I examine both worlds as two globes placed in my hands, and I find the 
non-existence of the visible world as it appears to a sleeping man; while the 
spiritual and invisible world appear full open to my view, as it does to a 
waking person, and this sight of mine has made me as immortal as the world 
of immortality. 


33. I behold the past, present and future as set before me; and I see all that is 
dead and decayed, and all that is gone and forgotten, as presented anew in my 
presence. This prospect of all keeps me alive and afresh to them alike. 


34. I feel myself happy at the happiness of others, and am sorry to see the 
misery of other people; and this universal fellow feeling of mine with the weal 
and woe of my fellow creatures, has kept me alive and afresh at all times. 


35. I remain unmoved as a rock in my adversity, and am friendly to everyone 
in my prosperity; I am never moved by want or affluence, and this steadiness 
of mine is the cause of my undecayed longevity. 


36. That I am neither related to nor belong to anybody, nor that any one is 
either related or belongeth to me; is the firm conviction that has laid hold of 
my mind, and made me live long without feeling sick or sorry for another. 


37. It is my belief that I am the one Ego with the world, and with all its space 
and time also, and that I am the same with the living soul and all its actions; 
and this faith of mine has made me longeval and undecaying. 


38. It is my belief that I am the same Intelligence, which shows itself in the 
pot and picture; and which dwells in the sky above and in the woods below. 
That all this is full of intelligence is my firm reliance, and this has made me 
long abiding and free from decay. 


39. It is thus, O great sage! that I reside amidst the receptacle of the three 
worlds, as a bee abides in the cell of a lotus flower, and am renowned in the 
world as the perennial crow, Bhusunda by name. 


40. I am destined to dwell here forever in order to behold the visible world, 
rising and falling in tumultuous confusion, in the infinite ocean of the 
immense Brahma, and assuming their various forms like the waves of the sea 
at their alternate rise and fall for all eternity. 


CHAPTER XXVILI. 


Conclusion of the Narrative of Bhusunda. 


Argument. — Vasishtha's praise of Bhusunda, and his homage to the sage, 
whose return to Heaven through the midway-sky is described at length. 


BHUSUNDA added: — I have thus far related to you, O sage! what I am and 
how I am situated at this place. It was by your behest only, that I was lead to 
the arrogance of speaking so far to one of superior intelligence. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — O Sir, it is a wondrous relation that you have given of 
yourself; O excellent! it is a jewel to my ears and fills me with admiration. (It 
beggars description, and is mirabile dictu). 


3. Blessed are those eminent souls, (great men), that have the good fortune to 
behold your most venerable person, which in respect of antiquity is next to 
none, expect the great grandfather of the gods the lotus born Brahma himself. 


4. Blest are my eyes, that are blessed this day with the sight of your holy 
person, and thrice blest are my ears that are filled with the full recital of your 
sacred knowledge and all purifying sermon. 


5. I have in my peregrinations all about the world, witnessed the dignity and 
grandeur of the great knowledge of gods and learned men; but have never 
come to see anywhere, so holy a seer as yourself. 


6. It may be possible by long travel and search, to meet with a great soul 
somewhere or other; but it is hard to find a holy soul like yourself anywhere. 
(Man may be very learned and wise as a sapient, (savant), but never so holy 
and godly as a saint). 


7. We rarely come to find the grain of a precious pearl in the hollow of a 
lonely bamboo tree, but it is rarer still to come across a holy personage, like 
yourself in any part of this world. 


8. I have verily achieved an act of great piety, and of sanctity also at the same 
time; that I have paid a visit to your holy shrine, and seen your sacred person 
and liberated soul this very day. 


9. Now please to enter your cell, and fare you well in this place; it is now the 
time of midday devotion, and the duties of my noontide service, call my 
presence to my heavenly seat. 


10. Hearing this, Bhusunda rose from his arborescent seat, and held out a 
golden twig of the tree with his two fictitious hands. (Holy persons have the 
power to add to the members of their bodies). 


11. The accomplished, (lit. full knowing), crow made a vessel with his beak 
and hands, and filled it with the snow-white leaves, and flowers and pistils of 
the kalpa plant, and put a brilliant pearl in it to be offered as an honorarium, 
— arghya worthy of the divine sage. 


12. The prime-born (ancient) bird, then took the arghya with some water and 
flowers; and sprinkled and scattered them over me even from my head to foot, 
in as great a veneration, as when they adore the three eyed god Siva. 


13. Then said I, — it is enough, and you need not take the pains to walk after 
me (in token of your respect). So saying, I rose from my seat and made a lift, 
as when a bird puts to its wings for its aerial flight. (Bishtdra, — a seat, means 
also a bedding like the Persian bistar and Urdu bistara derived from the root 
stri to spread). 


14. Yet the bird followed me a few miles (yojana) in the air, when I hindered 
his proceeding farther by compelling him to return after shaking our hands. 
(The custom of shaking hands both on meeting and parting; is mentioned to 
have been in fashion with the ancients). 


15. The chief of birds looked up for some time, as I soared upward in my 
ethereal journey, and then he returned with reluctance, because it is difficult to 
part from the company of the good (or of good people). 


16. Then both of us lost the sight of one another in the intermediate air, as the 
sight of the waves is lost after they sink down in the sea; and I full with the 
thoughts of the bird and his sayings, proceeded upward to meet the munis 
there. I arrived at last at the sphere of the Pleiades, where I was honorably 
received by Arundhati my wife. 


17. It was in the beginning of the golden age (satya yuga) before, and after 
two hundred years of it had passed away that I had been at Bhusunda's, and 


sat with him upon the tree on the summit of Sumeru. 


18. Now, O Rama! that golden age has gone by, and the Tretd or silver age 
has taken its place; and it is now the middle of this age, that thou art born to 
subdue thy enemies. 


19. It is now only eight years past that (or the eight years since) I met with 
him again on the same mountain, and found him as sound and same as I had 
seen him long before. 


20. Now I have related unto you the whole of the exemplary character of 
Bhusunda; and as you have heard it with patience, so should you consider it 
with diligence, and act according to his sayings. (In order to be as long-lived 
as he). 


21. Valmiki says: — The man of pure heart, that considers well the narrative 
of the virtuous Bhusunda, will undoubtedly pass over the unstable gulf of this 
world, which is full of formidable dangers on all sides. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


Lecture on Theopathy or Spiritual Meditation. 


Argument. — Learning from examples and parables. Falsity of phenomenal 
and reliance in the noumenal. 


VASISHTHA said: — I have thus far related to you, O sinless Rama! the 
narrative of Bhusunda; who had passed over the perilous sea of delusion, by 
means of his intelligence and wisdom. 


2. Keeping this instance in view, and following his practice of prandydma or 
regulation of breath; you will also, O mighty armed Rama! pass over the wide 
ocean of this hazardous ocean. 


3. As Bhusunda has obtained the obtainable one, by means of his knowledge 
and by virtue of his continued practice of Yoga; so do you strive to gain the 
same by imitation of his example. 


4. Men of uninfatuated understanding may attain the stability of Bhusunda, 
and their reliance in the transcendental truth like him by their attending to the 
practice of prandydma or restraining of their breath. 


5. Thus you have heard me relate to you many things, relating to true 
knowledge; it now depends on your own understanding to do as you may like 
to choose for yourself. (Either to betake yourself to spiritual knowledge or the 
practice of prdndydma or either as the gloss explains it, either to esoteric 
contemplation Yoga or exoteric adoration, upasana). 


6. Rama replied: — you Sir, that are the luminous sun of spiritual light on 
earth, have dispelled the thick gloom of unspiritual knowledge from my mind 
at once (by transcendental light of your holy lectures). 


7. 1am fully awake to and joyous in my divine knowledge, and have entered 
into my state of spirituality; I have known the knowable, and am seated in my 
divine state like yourself. 


8. O the wondrous memoir of Bhusunda that you have narrated! It fills me 
with admiration, and is fraught with the best instruction. (Lit. it is instructive 
of the highest wisdom). 


9. In the account that you have given of Bhusunda, you have said that the 
body is the abode of the soul, and is composed of flesh and blood, and of the 
inner bones and outer skin (as its materials and plaster). 


10. Please tell me Sir, who made this fabric and how it came to be formed; 
how it is made to last, and who abides therein. 


11. Vasishtha answered: — Listen now Rama, to what I will relate to you for 
the instruction of the supreme knowledge, as also for removal of the evils 
which have taken root instead of true knowledge. 


12. This dwelling of the body, Rama! which has the bones for its posts, and 
the blood and flesh for its mortar, and the nine holes for so many windows, is 
built by no one; (but is formed of itself). 


13. It is a mere reflection, and reflects itself so to our vision; as the appearance 
of two moons in the sky by illusion, is both real as well as unreal. (This 
vedantic doctrine is opposed to the popular faith of the creatorship of God). 


14. It may be right to speak of two moons from their double appearance to our 
sight, but in reality, there is but one moon and the other its reflection. (So are 
all phenomenal bodies but reflections of the noumenal). 


15. The belief of the existence of body makes it a reality, the unreal seems as 
real, and, therefore, it is said to be both real and unreal at the same time. (The 
perception is real but the object of perception an unreality. Just so the 
perception of a snake in the rope may be true, though the snake in the rope is 
quite untrue). 


16. Anything seen in a dream is true as a dream, and appears to be so in the 
state of dreaming, but afterwards it proves to be untrue, so a bubble of water 
is true as a bubble, which comes to be known afterwards to be false in reality. 
(So all things appearing to be true to sight, vanish into nothing when they are 
judged aright, and even a judge may deem a thing as just, which upon further 
and right investigation is known as unjust). 


17. The body seems to be substantiality in the doing of bodily actions, but it 
proves otherwise when we view the essentiality of the spirit only; so the 
reflection of the sun on the sandy desert, makes the mirage appear as water, 
whose reality proves to be unreal the next moment; (so it is of the body). 


18. The body existing as a reflexion disappears the next moment. It is no more 
than a reflexion, and so it reflects itself. 


19. It is your error to think that you are the material body which is made of 
flesh and bones. It is the inward thought of your mind that is situated in the 
body, and makes you to think yourself as so and so and such a one. (The 
reminiscence of the mind of its former body, causes to think itself as an 
embodied being, in all its repeated transmigrations. — Gloss). 


20. Forsake, therefore, the body that you build for yourself at your own will, 
and be not like them, who while they are asleep on their pleasant beds, deport 
themselves to various countries with their dreaming bodies; (which are all 
false and unreal). 


21. See, O Rama! how you deport yourself to the kingdom of heaven even in 
your waking state, in the fanciful reverie of your mind; say then where is your 
body situated. (It neither accompanies the mind to heaven, nor is it on earth 
being unperceived and unaccompanied by the mind). 


22. Say Rama, where is your body situated, when your mind wanders on the 
Meru in your dream, and when you dream to ramble with your body about the 
skirts of this earth. 


23. Think Rama, how you seem to saunter about the rich domains (of the 
gods) in the fancied kingdom of your mind, and tell me whether you are then 
and there accompanied with your body, or is it left behind. 


24. Tell me, where is that body of yours situated; when you think of doing 
many of your bodily and worldly acts without your body, in the fancied realm 
of your mind. 


25. Tell me, O strong armed Rama! where are those members of your body 
situated; with which you think to coquette and caress your loving courtezans 
in the court of your painful mind. 


26. Where is that body of yours, with which you seem to enjoy anything; the 
enjoyment belongs to the mind and not to the body, and both of them are real 
as well as unreal, owing to their presence at one time and absence at another. 


27. The body and the mind are known to be present with coeval with their 
actions, and they participate with one another in their mutual acts, (without 
which they are said to be inexistent). Therefore, it is erroneous to say that, I 
am this body and am situated here, and these things are mine, all which are 
illusory and caused by illusion. (Egoism and meity are illusive ideas). 


28. All this is the manifestation of the will or energy of the mind, and you 
must know it either as a long dream or lengthened fallacy of the mind. 


29. Know this world, O son of Raghu's race, to be a display of the vast 
kingdom of your imagination, and will vanish into nothing, when you will 
come to your good understanding by the grace of your God. 


30. You will then see the whole as clearly as in the light of the rising sun, and 
know this world to be like a creation of your dream or volition. (i.e., as you 
wish to have a thing for yourself). 


31. So is this world a display of the will of the lotus-born Brahma, as I have 
said before in length in the book of creation. 


32. There rises of itself a willful creation within the mind, and out of its own 
accord as if it were so ordained by destiny; and the mind being fully possessed 
of the great variety of forms, is lost at last into the error of taking them for 
true. 


33. It is a creation of the will only and a display of it in the same manner, as 
the fancied chimera of Brahmanship had possessed the minds of the sons of 
Indu. (See the narrative of Indu's sons in the upasama Prakarana). 


34. After the soul has passed from its former frame, it receives the same form 
which it has in view before it after the fancy of the mind, which is either of 
the kind, to which it has been long used and accustomed, or what it fondly 
longs in the mind. 


35. The body shows itself in the form as it is shaped by the prior acts of a 
person, and is also convertible to the intellect by the manly exertions of some; 
(whose corporeal bodies may become intellectual beings, as some persons 
have mere brutal, while others are highly intellectual). 


36. He that thinks himself as another, is transformed to the nature of that air, 
(as it is the pattern that moulds a thing after its own model); and the thought 
that you are this or that, and have this thing or others for yourself, is what 
actually makes you so in this world. (The metamorphose of the natures and 
forms of things and persons to other kinds in Ovid, were all owing to their 
tendencies and inclinations towards them). 


37. Whatever is thought upon keenly and firmly, the same comes to take place 
accordingly; and whatever is thought of with intense and great force of 
thought, the same must occur in a short time; (so are all things done to which 
we set our minds). 


38. We see every day the objects of our desire, presenting their fair forms to 
our view, like the comely faces of our beloved ones present before our sight, 
in the same manner as the sights in a dream and distant objects, are recalled to 
the mind of men; with their closed and half-shut eyes. (This is the doctrine of 
reminiscence which reproduces our long remembered bodies to us). 


39. This world is said to be a creation of the thoughts of men, and appears to 
sight from habitual reflection of it, in the same manner as the sights in a 
dream, appear to the mind of a man in the day time. 


40. The temporary world appears to be as lasting, as the river which appears 
in the sky under the burning sunshine. (Though in fact both of them are 
equally evanescent). 


41. This inexistent earth also appears as existent in our cogitation, as there 
appears bundles of peacock's feathers in the sky to the vitiated or purblind 
eye. 


42. It is only the vitiated understanding that dwells upon the beauties of 
creation, as the vitiated eye sight looks upon the various tinges in the sky. But 
to the clear sighted understanding the one is as evanescent, as the other is to 
the clear-sighted eye. 


43. The sharp-sighted man is never led away by the display of worldly 
grandeur, as even the most timid man is never afraid of a tiger in his 
imagination. 


This great show of worldly grandeur can never mislead the penetrating sight 
of the wise, as a monstrous creature of imagination cannot terrify even the 
most timid. (Because the one knows the falsity of the show as well as the 
other does that of imaginary monster). 


44. The wise man is never afraid of his imaginary world, which he knows to 
be the production of his own mind, from its nature of self-evolution, bahir 
mukhata. (The mind is naturally possessed of both its power of self-involution 
in the interior soul, as also that of its evolving itself in the form of the exterior 
world). 


45. He that has stood in the path of this world, needs not fear for anything in 
it, and he that is afraid of it for fear of falling into its errors, should learn to 
purify his understanding from all its dross and impurity. (Stretch your mind, 
and the world will appear to light, curb it in yourself and everything will 
disappear from view). 


46. Know Rama, that the soul is free from the erroneous conception of the 
world, and from the errors which pervade all over it. Look well into these 
things, and you will have a nature as pure as your inward soul. 


47. The soul is not soiled by impurity, as a pure gold is not spoiled by dirt; 
and though it may sometimes appear to be tarnished as copper, yet it soon 
resumes its colour after its dirt is cleansed or burnt away. Thus, the world 
being a reflexion of the omnipresent Brahma, is neither an entity nor a non- 
entity of its own nature. 


48. Thus the abandonment of all other thoughts, besides that of the universal 
soul or Brahma, is called the true discernment of the mind; which derives the 
thoughts of life and death, heaven and hell into nothing, and proves all 
knowledge to be ignorance alone. 


49. The knowledge of the nullity of everything, except its being a reflexion of 
the Intellect, is called the individuality and right discernment of the mind, 
which removes the thought of the separate and independent existence of the 
ego and tu, and also of this world and its ten sides; (i.e., of the subjective as 
well as the objective). 


50. That all things are but reflexions of the soul, is what is known as the true 
and right discernment of the mind; and is derived from its observation of true 
nature of things in this real and unreal world. (The real is the spiritualistic 
view of the world, and the unreal is illusory phenomenal appearance). 


51. That nothing rises or sets or appears or disappears in this world, is what 
the mind perceives by its right discernment of things; and by its investigation 
into the true and apparent natures of all. (In their true light all things are in a 
state of continued revolution, and nothing rises anew to view or disappears 
into nothing). 


52. Right discernment gives the mind its peace and tranquillity, and its 
freedom from all desires; and makes it indifferent to joy and grief, and callous 
to all praise and censure. 


53. The mind comes to find this truth as the cooling balsam of the heart, that 
we are all doomed to die one day or other, with all our friends and relations in 
this world of mortality. 


54. Why, therefore, should we lament at the demise of our friends, when it is 
certain that we must die one day sooner or later (and without the certainty of 
when or where). 


55. Thus, when we are destined to die ourselves also, without having any 
power in us to prevent the same; why then should we be sorry for others when 
we can never prevent also. 


56. It is certain that anyone who has come to be born herein, must have some 
state and property for his supportance here; but what is the cause of rejoicing 
in it (when neither our lives nor their means are lasting forever). 


57. All men dealing in worldly affairs, gain wealth with toil and pain for their 
trouble and danger only; what is the reason, therefore, for pining at its want, 
or repining at its loss. 


58. These spheres of worlds enlarge, expand and rise to our view, like bubbles 
of water in the sea which swell and float and shine for a time, and then burst 
and subside in the water of eternity. 


59. The nature of reality, (the entity of Brahma), is real at all times, and the 
condition of the unreal world is unsubstantial forever, and can never be 
otherwise or real, though it may appear as such for a time. Why then sorrow 
for what is nil and unreal. 


60. I am not of this body nor was I in it, nor shall I remain in it; nor is it any 
thing, even at present, except a picture of the imagination. Why then lament at 
its loss. 


61. If I am something else beside this body, that is a reflexion of the pure 
intellect; then tell me of what avail are these states of reality and unreality to 
me, and wherefore shall I rejoice or regret. 


62. The Sage who is fully conscious of the certainty of this truth in himself, 
does not feel any rise or fall of his spirits at his life or death, nor doth he 
rejoice or wail at either in having or losing his life. 


63. Because he gains after the loss of his gross body, his residence in the 
transcendental state of Brahma or spiritual existence; as the little bird tittera 
builds its nest of tender blades, after its grassy habitation is broken down or 
blown away. 


64. Therefore, we should never rely in our frail and fragile bodies, but bind 
our souls to the firm rock of Brahma by the strong rope of our faith, as they 
bind a bull to the post with a strong cord. 


65. Having thus ascertained the certitude of this truth, rely thy faith on the 
reality of thy spiritual essence, and by giving up thy reliance on thy frail body, 
manage thyself with indifference in this unreal world. 


66. Adhere to what is thy duty here, and avoid whatever is prohibited to thee; 
and thus proceed in thy course with an even tenor of thy mind, without 
minding at all about thy reliance on the one and miscreance of the other. 


67. He gets a cool composure of his mind; like the coolness at the close of a 
hot summer-day, who shuts out from his view the reflexions of all worldly 
objects. 


68. Look on this universe, O sinless Rama, as one common display of Divine 
light, like the appearance of day light which is common to all; it is the mind 
which taints it with various forms, as the sun-beams are reflected in sundry 
piece by objects. 


69. Therefore, forsake all reflexions, and be without any impression in thy 
mind, be of the form of pure intellectual light, which passes through all 
without being contaminated by any. 


70. You will be quite stainless by your dismissal of all taints and appearances 
from your mind, and by your thinking yourself as nothing and having no true 
enjoyment in this world. 


71. That these phenomena are nothing in reality, but they show themselves 
unto us for our delusion only; and that yourself also are nothing will appear to 
you, by your thinking the whole as a display of the Divine Intellect. 


72. Again, the thought that these phenomena are not false, nor do they lead to 
our illusion since they are the manifestation of the supreme Intellect, is also 
very true and leads to your consummation. 


73. It is well Rama, and for your good also if you know either of these; 
because both of these views will tend equally to your felicity. 


74. Conduct yourself in this manner, O blessed Rama! and lessen gradually all 
your affection and dislike to this world and all worldly things. (i.e., Neither 
love nor hate aught at any time). 


75. Whatever there exists in this earth, sky and heaven, is all obtainable by 
you, by means of the relinquishment of your eager desire and hatred. 


76. Whatever a man endeavours to do, with his mind freed from his fondness 
for or hatred to it, the same comes shortly, to take place, contrary to the 
attempts of the ignorant; (whose excessive desire and dislike turn to their 
disadvantage). 


77. No good quality can have its abode in the heart that is troubled by the 
waves of faults; as no stag will set its foot on the ground, heated by burning 
sands and wild fires. 


78. What acquisitions does he not make, in whose heart there grows the kalpa 
tree of desire, and which is not infested by the snakes of ardent desire or 
dislike (the two cankers of human breast). 


79. Those men who are wise and discreet, learned and attentive to their duties, 
and at the same time influenced by the feelings of love and hatred, are no 
better than jackals (or jack asses) in human shape, and are accursed with all 
their qualifications. 


80. Look at the effects of these passions in men, who repine both at the use of 
their wealth by others, as also in leaving their hard earned money behind 
them. (This proceeds from excessive love of wealth on the one hand, and 
hatred of family and heirs on the other as is said, [Sanskrit: putrddapi 
ghanabhajam bhdati], the monied miser, dislikes even his son). 


81. All our riches, relatives and friends, are as transitory as the passing winds; 
why then should a wise man rejoice or repine at their gain or loss. 


82. All our gains and wants and enjoyments in life, are mere illusion or mdyd, 
which is spread as a net by Divine power, all over the works of creation, and 
entraps all the worldlings in it. 


83. There is no wealth, nor any person, that is real or lasting to anyone in this 
temporary world; it is all frail and fleeting, and stretched out as a false magic 
show to sight. 


84. What wise man is there that will place his attachment on anything, which 
is an unreality both in its beginning and end, and is quite unsteady in the 


midst. No one has any faith in the arbour of his imagination or aerial castle. 


85. As one fancies, he sees a fairy in a passing cloud, and is pleased with the 
sight of what he can never enjoy, but passes from his view to the sight of 
distant peoples; so is this passing world, which passes from the sight of some 
to that of others, without its being fully enjoyed or long retained in the 
possession of anyone. (The passing world passes from hand to hand, without 
its standing still at any one's command). 


86. The bustle of these fleeting bodies in the world, resembles the commotion 
of an aerial castle, and the appearance of a city in an evanescent dream and 
fancy. 


87. I see the world as a city in my protracted dream, with all its movables and 
immovable things, lying as quiet and still as in profound sleep. 


88. Rama, you are wandering in this world, as one rolling in his bed of 
indolence, and lulled to the long sleep of ignorance; which lends you from one 
error to another, as if dragged by a chain of continuous dreaming. 


89. Now Rama, break off your long chain of indolent ignorance, forsake the 
idol of your errors, and lay hold on the inestimable gem of your spiritual and 
divine knowledge. 


90. Return to your right understanding, and behold your soul in its clear light 
as a manifestation of the unchangeable luminary of the Intellect; in the same 
manner as the unfolding lotus beholds the rising sun. 


91. I exhort you repeatedly, O Rama! to wake from your drowsiness, and by 
remaining ever wakeful to your spiritual concerns; see the undecaying and 
undeclining sun of your soul at all times. 


92. I have roused you from your indolent repose, and awakened you to the 
light of your understanding, by the cooling breeze of spiritual knowledge, and 
the refreshing showers of my elegant diction. 


93. Delay not Rama, to enlighten your understanding even now, and attain 
your highest wisdom in the knowledge of the supreme being, to come to the 
light of truth and shun the errors of the delusive world. 


94. You will not be subject to any more birth or pain, nor will you be exposed 
to any error or evil, if you will but remain steady in your soul, by forsaking all 
your worldly desires. 


95. Remain steadfast, O high-minded Rama, in your trust in the tranquil and 


all soul of Brahma, for attainment of the purity and holiness of your own soul, 
and you will thereby be freed from the snare of your earthly desires, and get a 
clear sight of that true reality, wherein you will rest in perfect security, as 
were in profound sleep. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


Pantheism. 
or 


Description of the World as full with the Supreme soul. 


Argument. — Elucidation of the same subject, and further Instruction to 
Rama. 


VALMIKI relates: — Hearing this discourse of the sage, Rama remained 
sedate with the coma (sama) of his mind, his spirits were tranquil, and his soul 
was full of rapture. 


2. The whole audience also that was present at the place, being all quiet, calm 
and silent (comatose-upasanta), the sage withheld his speech for fear of 
disturbing their spiritual repose; (which converted them to stock and stone). 


3. The sage stopped from distilling the drops of his ambrosial speech any 
more, after the hearts of the audience were lulled to rest by their draughts, as 
the clouds cease to rain drops, having penetrated into the hearts of ripened 
grains. 


4. As Rama, (with the rest of the assembly), came to be rose from their torpor 
after a while; the eloquent Vasishtha resumed his discourse in elucidation of 
his former lecture. (On spirituality). 


5. Vasishtha said: — Rama! you are now fully awakened to light, and have 
come to and obtained the knowledge of thyself; remain hence forward fixed to 
the only true object, wherein you must rely your faith, and never set your feet 
on the field of the false phenomenal world. 


6. The wheel of the world is continually revolving round the centre of desire, 
put a peg to its axis, and it will stop from turning about its pole. 


7. If you be slack to fasten the nave (ndbhi) of your mind, by your manly 
efforts (purushdrtha); it will be hard for you to stop the wheel of the world, 
which runs faster as you slacken your mind.) 


8. Exert your manly strength, (courage), with the aid of your mental powers 
and wisdom, stop the motion of your heart, which is the centre of the 
wheeling course of the world. 


9. Know that everything is obtainable by means of manly exertion, joined 
with good sense and good nature, and assisted by a knowledge of the Sdstras; 
and whatever is not obtained by these, is to be had nowhere by any other. 


10. Relinquish your reliance on destiny which is a coinage of puerile 
imagination; and by relying on your own exertions, govern your heart and 
mind for your lasting good. 


11. The unsubstantial mind which appears as a substantiality, has had its rise 
since the creation of Brahma; and taken a wrong and erroneous course of its 
own. (The human understanding is frail from first to beginning, it is a power, 
and no positive reality). 


12. The unreal and erroneous mind, weaves and stretches out a lengthening 
web of its equally unreal and false conceptions, which it is led afterwards to 
mistake for the substantial world. 


13. All these bodies that are seen to move about us, are the products of the 
fancies and fond desires of the mind; and though these frail and false bodies 
cease to exist forever, yet the mind and its wishes are imperishable; and either 
show themselves in their reproduction in various forms, or they become 
altogether extinct in their total absorption in the supreme spirit. (The doctrine 
of eternal ideas, is the source of their perpetual appearance in various forms 
about bodies). 


14. The wise man must not understand the pain or pleasure of the soul from 
the physiognomy of man, that a sorrowful and weeping countenance is the 
indication of pain; and a clear (cheerful) and tearless face is the sign of 
pleasure. (Because it is the mind which moulds the face in any form it likes). 


15. You see a man in two ways, the one with his body and the other in his 
representation in a picture or statues, of these the former kind is more frail 
than the latter; because the embodied man is beset by troubles and diseases in 
his fading and mouldering, decaying and dying body, whereby the other is 
not. (The frame of the living man, is frailer than his dead resemblance). 


16. The fleshy body is assuredly doomed to die, notwithstanding all our efforts 
for its preservation; but a body in the portrait being taken good care of, lasts 
for ages with its undiminished beauty. 


17. As the living body is sure to die in despite of all your care for it, the 
pictured body must be deemed far better, than the false and fancied fleshy 
body, produced by will of the mind, (sankalpa deha). 


18. The quality and stability which abide in a pictured body, are not to be 
found in the body of the mind; wherefore the living body of flesh, is more 
insignificant than its semblance in a picture or statue. 


19. Think now, O sinless Rama, what reliance is there in this body of flesh; 
which is a production of your long fostered desire, and a creature of your 
brain. (Your mind makes it seem as such). 


20. This body of flesh is more contemptible than those ideal forms, which our 
dreams and desires produce in our sleeping and waking states; because the 
creature of a momentary desire, is never attended with a long or lasting 
happiness or misery. (Because the products of the variable will, are of short 
duration, and so are their pains and pleasures also). 


21. The bodies that are produced by our long desire, continue for a longer 
time, and are subjected to a longer series of miseries in this world. (So it is 
said, a “long life is a long term of woes and calamities.’’) 


22. The body is a creature of our fancy, and is neither a reality or unreality in 
itself; and yet are the ignorant people fondly attached to it, for the 
prolongation of their misery only. 


23. As the destruction of the portrait of a man, does no harm to his person; 
and as the loss of a fancied city is no loss to the city, so the loss of the much 
desired body of any one, is no loss to his personality in any wise. 


24. Again as the dis-appearance of the secondary moon, (halo), is no 
deprivation of the primary satellite, (moon), and as the evanescence of the 
visionary world, is no annihilation of the external world. (So there is no loss 
of the soul, as the loss of the shadow, is no loss of the substance). 


25. As the dis-appearance of water in the sunny banks of rivers, is no 
deprivation of the river's water; so the creations of fancy which are not 
negative in their nature, cannot be destructive of what is positive, nor any 
damage done to the machine of the body, can ever injure the dis-embodied 
soul. 


26. The body is a piece of work wrought by the architect of the mind, in its 
dreaming somnambulation over the sleeping world; wherefore its decoration 
or disfigurement, is of no essential advantage or dis-advantage to inward soul. 


27. There is no end of the Intellect in its extent, nor any motion of the soul 
from its place; there is no change in the Divine spirit of Brahma, nor do any of 
these decay with the decline of the body. 


28. As the inner and smaller wheel, makes the outer and larger wheel to turn 
about it, so the inner annulus of the mind, sees in its delirium spheres over 
spheres revolving in empty air. 


29. The mind views by its primitive and causeless error, the constant rotation 
of bodies both in the inside and outside of it; and some as moving forward and 
others as falling down, and many as dropped below. 


30. Seeing the rise and fall of these rotatory bodies, the wise man must rely on 
the firmness of his mind, and not himself to be led away by these rotations in 
repeated succession. 


31. Fancy forms the body and it is error that makes the unreal appear as real; 
but the formation of fancy, and the fabrications of untruth, cannot have any 
truth or reality in them. 


32. The unreal body appearing as real, is like the appearance of a snake in a 
rope; and so are all the affairs of the world quite untrue and false, and 
appearing as true for the time being. 


33. Whatever is done by an insensible being, is never accounted as its action 
(or doing); hence all what is done by the senseless bodies (of man), is not 
recounted as done by it. (But by the impulse of the actuating mind). 


34. It is the will which is the active agent of its actions, and this being so, 
neither the inactive body nor the unchanging soul is the actor of any action. 
(The soul being the witness of the bodily actions done by the impelling mind. 
— Gloss). 


35. The inert body being without any effort, is never the doer of any act, 
which is desired by its presiding soul; it is only a viewer of the soul, which 
witnesses it also. (The body is attendant or dependent to the soul, as the other 
is a resident in it, they are both devoid of action, and unstained by those done 
by the will of the mind). 


36. As the lamp burns unshaken and with its unflickering flame, in the 


breathless air and in itself only; so doth the silent and steady soul dwell as a 
witness, in all things and of all acts existing and going on in the world. (So 
doth the human soul abide and inflame itself in the body, unless it is shaken 
and moved by the airy mind). 


37. As the celestial and luminous orb of the day, regulates the daily works of 
the living world from his seat on high, so do you, O Rama, administer the 
affairs of thy state from thy elevated seat on the royal throne. 


38. The knowledge of one's entity or egoism, in the unsubstantial abode of his 
body, is like the sight of a spirit by boys in the empty space of a house or in 
empty air. (The substantiality of the unsubstantial body, is as false as the 
corporeality of an incorporeal spirit). 


39. Whence comes this unsubstantial egoism in the manner of an inane ghost, 
and takes possession of the inner body under the name of the mind, is what 
the learned are at a loss to explain. 


40. Never enslave yourself, O wise Rama! to this spectre of your egoism, 
which like the ignis fatuus leads you with limbo lake or bog of hell. (The 
sense of one's personality is the cause of his responsibility). 


41. The mad and giddy mind, accompanied with its capricious desires and 
whims, plays its foolish pranks in its abode of the body, like a hideous demon 
dancing in a dreary desert. 


42. The demoniac mind having made its way, into the hollow heart of the 
human body; plays its fantastic parts in so odd a manner, that wise men shut 
their eyes against the sight, and sit in their silent contemplation of the 
secluded soul. (It is good to fly from the fields, where fools make a prominent 
figure). 


43. After the demon of the mind, is driven out of the abode of the body, there 
is no more any fear for anyone to dwell in it in peace; as nobody is afraid of 
living in a deserted and desolate city. 


44. It is astonishing that men should place any reliance in their bodies, and 
consider them as their own, when they had had thousands of such bodies in 
their repeated births before, and when they were invariably infested by the 
demon of the mind. 


45. They that die in the grasp and under the clutches of the cannibal of the 
mind, have their minds like those of the pisdcha cannibals in their future 
births, and never of any other kind of being. (The will ever accompanies a 


man, in all his future states). 


46. The body which is taken possession of by the demon of egoism, is being 
consumed by the burning fires of the triple afflictions; occurring from local, 
natural and accidental evils, and is not to be relied upon as a safe and lasting 
abode of any body. 


47. Do you, therefore, desist to dance your attendance on, and follow the 
dictates of your egoism (or selfishness). Be of an extended and elevated mind, 
and by forgetting your egotism in your magnanimity, rely only on the 
supreme spirit. 


48. Those hellish people that are seized and possessed by the devils of 
Egotism, are blinded in their self-delusion and giddiness; and are 
unbefriended by their fellows and friends, as they are unfriendly to others in 
this world. (Egotism is explained in its double sense of selfishness and pride, 
both of which are hated and shunned by men as they hate and shun others). 


49. Whatever action is done by one bewitched by egoism in his mind, the 
same grows up as a poisonous plant, and produces the fatal fruit of death. 
(The fruits are mutual quarrels, enmity and the like). 


50. The ignorant man that is elated by his egoistic pride, is lost both to his 
reason and patience; and one who is attached to the former by his neglect of 
the latter, is to be known as approaching fast to his perdition. (Pride goes 
before destruction). 


51. The simpleton that is seized by the devil of Egoism, is made as fuel to the 
fire of hell (where he is doomed to burn with ceaseless torment). 


52. When the snake of Egoism hisses hard in the hollow heart of the tree of 
the body, it is sure to be cut down by the inexorable hand of death, who fells 
the noxious tree like a wood cutter to the ground. 


53. O Rama! that are the greatest among the great, never look at the demon of 
egoism, whether it may reside in your body or not; because the very look of it, 
is sure to delude anyone. 


54. If you disregard deride or drive away the demon of egoism, from the 
recess of your mind, there is no damage or danger, that it can ever bring upon 
you in any wise. 


55. Rama! what though the demon of Egoism, may play all its freaks in its 
abode of the body, it can in no way affect the soul which is quite aloof of it. 


(Egoism contaminates the mind, and cannot touch the soul that contemns it). 


56. Egoism brings a great many evils, upon them that have their minds 
vitiated by its influence, and it requires hundreds of years, to count and 
recount their baneful effects. 


57. Know Rama, that it is the despotic power of egoism, that makes men to 
groan under its thraldom, and incessantly uttering the piteous exclamations, 
“Oh! we are dying and burning and such other bitter cries.” 


58. The soul is ubiquitous and free to rove everywhere, without its having any 
connection with the ego of any body; just as the ubiquity of the all-pervading 
sky, is unconnected with everything in the world. 


59. Whatever is done or taken in by the body, in its connection with the airy 
thread of life; know Rama, all this to be the doing of egoism, which empties 
and impels the body to all its various actions. 


60. Know thus quiescent soul impels also, to be the cause of all the exertions 
of the mind or mental operations, as the inactive vacuum is the material cause 
of the growth of trees. (i.e., the circumambient air affords room for the 
expansion of the plant). 


61. It is owing to the presence of the soul, that the mind develops itself in the 
form of the body and all its members; as it is the presence of the light, that 
makes the room display its contained objects to sight. (The soul is the light of 
the mind, — nous, the container of infinite ideas). 


62. Think now Rama, on the relation between the ever unconnected soul and 
mind, to resemble the irrelation subsisting between the dis-connected earth 
and sky, and betwixt light and darkness and betwixt the intellect and gross 
bodies. 


63. Those that are ignorant of the soul, view the quiet mind as such, after its 
motion and fluctuation are stopped by the restraint of respiration, — 
Prdndydma. (This is the doctrine of the Sankhya and Buddhist, that view the 
becalmed and quiescent mind as the soul). 


64. But the soul is self-luminous and ever-lasting, omnipresent and super- 
eminent, while the mind is deceptive and egoism. It is situated in the heart 
with too much of its pride and vanity. 


65. You are in reality the all-knowing soul, and not the ignorant and deluded 
mind; therefore, drive afar your delusive mind from the seat of the soul, as 


they can never meet nor agree together. 


66. Rama! the mind has also like a demon, taken possession of the empty 
house of the body, and has like an evil spirit, silenced and overpowered upon 
the intangible soul in it. 


67. Whatever thou art, remain but quiet in thyself, by driving away the demon 
of thy mind from thee; because it robs thee of thy best treasure of patience, 
and loads all kinds of evils upon thee. (i.e., the impatient mind is the source of 
all evil). 


68. The man that is seized by the voracious Yaksha of his own mind, has no 
change of his release from his grasp, either by the lessons of the Sdstras or by 
the advice of his friends, relatives and preceptors. (Greediness devours the 
greedy that desire to glut all things). 


69. The man who has appeased the demon of his mind, is capable of being 
released from its clutches, by means of the dictates of Sdstras, and the 
admonitions of his friends, as it is possible to liberate a deer from a shallow 
quagmire. 


70. All things that are seen to be stored in this vacant city, of the vacuous 
world, are all of them polluted by the lickerishness of the mind, licking at 
them from inside the house of its body. 


71. Say who is not afraid in this dreary wilderness of the world, which is 
infested in every corner of it by the demoniac mind. (The rapacity of the 
ambitious, converts the fair creation to a scene of horror). 


72. There are some wise men in this city of the world, who enjoy the abodes 
of their bodies in peace, having tranquilized the demon of their minds in them. 
(A peaceful mind makes a peaceful abode). 


73. Rama! All the countries that we hear of in any part of the world, are found 
to be full of senseless bodies, in which the giddy demon of delusion are 
Raving (and Ranging) as the sepulchral grounds. (The bodies of ignorant 
people, are as sepulchres of dead bodies. — Gloss). 


74. Let people rely on their patience, and redeem their souls by their own 
exertions; which are otherwise seen to be wandering about in the forest of this 
world, like lost and stray boys; (that know not how to return to their homes). 


75. Men are wandering in this world, as herds of stags are roving in burning 
deserts; but take care, Rama, never to live contented with a grazing on the 


sapless grass, like a young and helpless deer. 


76. Foolish men are seen to graze as young stags, in their pastures amidst the 
wilderness of this world; but you, Rama, must stir yourself to kill the great 
Elephant of Ignorance, and pursue the leonine course of subduing everything 
in your way. 


77. Do not allow yourself, O Rama, to ramble about like other men, who 
wander like senseless beasts in their native forests of the Jambudwipa. 


78. Do not plunge yourself like the foolish buffets, in the bog of your relatives 
and friends; it appears to you as a cold bath for a while, but daubs you with its 
mud and mire afterwards. (The circle of relatives may appear as a limpid lake 
at first; but dive in it, and you will be daubed with its dirt afterwards). 


79. Drive afar your desire of bodily enjoyments from you, and follow the 
steps of respectable men; and having well considered thy sole object of the 
soul, (from the great sayings of the Sdstras), attend to thyself or soul only. 
(Consider the objective soul in thy subjective self). 


80. It is not proper that you should plunge yourself, into a sea of intolerable 
cares and troubles, for the sake of your impure and frail body, which is but a 
trifle in comparison with the inestimable soul. 


81. The body which is the production of one thing, (i.e., the product of past 
deeds), and is possessed by another, (i.e., the demon of egoism); which puts 
another one, (i.e., the mind), to the pain of its supportance, and affords its 
enjoyment to a fourth one, (i.e., the living soul), as a complicate machinery of 
many powers to the ignorant. (The human frame is a mechanism of the body 
and mind, its egoism and living principle). 


82. As solidity is the only property of the stone, so the soul has the single 
property of its entity alone; and its existence being common in all objects, it is 
impossible for anything else to subsist beside it. (The soul being the only ens, 
it is of its nature the all in all; the minds, etc., being but its attributes). 


83. As thickness is the property of stone, so are the mind and others but 
properties of the soul; and there being nothing which is distinct from the 
common entity of the soul, it is impossible for anything to have a separate 
existence. 


84. As density relates to the stone, and dimension bears its relation to the pot; 
so the mind and other are not distinct from one common existence of the soul; 
(which pervades and constitutes the whole). 


85. Hear now of another view of spiritual light, for dispelling the darkness of 
delusion; as it was revealed to me of yore, in a cavern of mount Kaildsa. (The 
former seat of my devotion). 


86. There is a mountain peak, bright as the collected mass of moon-beams, 
and penetrating the vault of heaven, where the god with the semi-circular 
moon on his forehead, delivered this doctrine to me for appeasing the miseries 
of the world. 


87. This mountain peak is famed by the name of Kailasa, on which the god 
Hara, — the consort of Gouri, wearing the crescent moon on his head, holds 
his residence. 


88. It was to worship this great god, that I had once dwelt on that mountain 
long ago; and constructed my hermit-cell on the bank of the holy stream of 
Ganges. (Which ran down by its side). 


89. I remained there in the practice of ascetic austereties, for the performance 
of my holy devotion; and was beset by bodies of adepts, discoursing on 
subjects of the sacred Sdstras. 


90. I made baskets for filling them with flowers for my worship, and for 
keeping the collection of my books in them; and was employed in such other 
sacred tasks, in the forest groves of the Kailasa mountain. 


91. While thus I had been passing my time, in discharging the austereties of 
my devotion; it happened to turn out once on the eighth day of the dark side of 
the moon of the month of srdvana. 


92. And after its evening twilight was over, and the sun light had faded in the 
face of the four quarters of the sky, that all objects became invisible to sight, 
and stood rapt in their saint like silence. 


93. It was then after half of the first watch of the night had fled away, there 
spread a thick darkness over the groves and wood lands, and required a sharp 
sword to sever it. (Asich' hedyd tami-srd-tenebra ensis encesibelia). 


94. My intense meditation was broken at this instant, and my trance gave way 
to the sight of outward objects, which I kept looking upon for some time; 
when I observed a flaming fire suddenly rising in the forest to my view. 


95. It was as bright as a big white cloud, and as brilliant as the shining orb of 
the moon; It illumed the groves on all sides, and struck with amazement at the 
vision. 


96. As I viewed it by the sight of my understanding, or the mental vision 
which was glowing in my mind; I came to see the god Siva with the crescent 
of the moon on his forehead, standing on the table-land and manifest to view. 


97. With his hand clasping the hand of Gauri, he was led on ward by his brace 
attendant Nandi walking before him; when I after informing my pupils about 
it, proceeded forward with the due honorarium in my hand. 


98. Led by the sight, I came to the presence of the god with a gladsome mind; 
and then I offered handfuls of flowers to the three eyed-god from a distance, 
in token of my reverence to him. 


99. After giving the honor, (Arghya), which was worthy of him, I bowed 
down before the god, and accosted him; when he cast his kind look upon me, 
from his moon-bright and clear-sighted eyes. 


100. Being blest by his benign look, which took away all my pain and sin 
from me; I did my homage to the god that was seated on the flowery level 
land, and viewed the three worlds lying open before him. 


101. Then advancing forward, I offered unto him the honorarium flowers and 
water that I had with me, and scattered before him heaps of manddra flowers, 
that grew there abouts. 


102. I then worshipped the god with repeated obeisances and various 
eulogiums; and next adored the goddess Gauri with the same kind of homage 
together with her attendant goddesses and demi-gods. 


103. After my adoration was over, the god having the crescent moon on his 
head, spoke to me that was seated by him, with his speech as mild as the 
cooling beams of the full-moon. 


104. Say, O Brahman, whether thy affections are at peace within thyself, and 
have found their rest in supreme spirit, and whether your felicitous feelings 
are settled in the true object of divine essence. 


105. Whether your devotion is spading unobstructed by the demons of your 
passions, and whether felicity attends on you. 


106. Have you obtained the obtainable one, that is alone to be obtained, and 
are you set above the fears, that incessantly hunt after all mankind? 


107. After the Lord of gods and the sole cause of all created beings, had 
spoken in this manner; I replied to him submissively in the following words. 


108. O Lord! there is nothing unattainable, nor is there anything to be feared 
by anyone, who remembers the three eyed god at all times in his mind; and 
whose hearts are filled with rapture by their constant remembrance of thee. 


109. There is no one in the womb of this world, in any country or quarter, or 
in the mountains or forests, that does not bow down his head before thee. 


110. Those whose minds are entirely devoted to their remembrance of thee, 
get the rewards of the meritorious acts of their past lives; and water the trees 
of their present lives, in order to produce their manifold fruit in future births 
and lives. 


111. Lord! thy remembrance expands the seed of our desire, thou art the jar of 
the nectar of our knowledge, and thou art the reservoir of patience, as the 
moon is the receptacle of cooling beams. 


112. Thy remembrance, Lord! is the gate way to the city of salvation, and it is 
thy remembrance which I deem as the invaluable gem of my thoughts. 


113. O Lord of creation! thy remembrance sets its foot on the head of all our 
calamities; (i.e., tramples over them). (Because Siva is called Sankara for his 
doing good to all, by removal of their misfortunes). 


114. I said thus far, and then bowing down lowly before the complacent deity, 
I addressed him, O Rama, in the manner as you shall hear from me. 


115. Lord! it is by thy favour that I have the fulness of my heart's content on 
every side; yet as there is one doubt lurking in my mind, I will request thee to 
explain it fully to me. 


116. Say with your clear understanding, and without hesitation and weariness, 
regarding the manner of the adoration of gods, which removes all our sins and 
confers all good unto us. (The query was quite appropriate as the Tantras of 
Siva treat principally of such formularies). 


117. The god replied: — Hear me, O Brahman, that art best acquainted with 
the knowledge of Brahma; tell you about the best mode of worshipping the 
gods, and the performance of which is sure to set the worshipper free. (From 
the bonds of the world all at once). 


118. Tell me first, O great armed Brahman, if you know at all who is that god, 
whom you make the object of your worship, if it be not the lotus-eyed Vishnu 
or the three-eyed Siva neither. 


119. It is not the god born of the lotus Brahma, nor he who is the lord of the 


thirteen classes of god, — the great Indra himself; it is not the god of winds, 
— Pavana, nor the god of fire, nor the regents of the sun and moon. 


120. The Brahman, (called an earthly god bhudeva) is no god at all, nor the 
king called the shadow of god, is any god likewise, neither I or thou, — the 
ego and tu, (or the subjective self and objective unself) are gods; nor the body 
or any embodied being, or the mind or any conception or creation of the mind 
is the true god also. 


121. Neither Laxmi the goddess of fortune, nor Saraswati the goddess of 
intelligence are true goddesses, nor is there any one that may be called a god, 
except the one unfictitious god, who is without beginning and end, that is the 
true god. (The Viswasaratantra of Siva treats of the one infinite and eternal 
God). 


122. How can a body measured by a form and its dimensions, or having a 
definite measure be the immeasurable deity! it is the inartificial and unlimited 
Intellect, that is known as the Siva or the felicitous one. 


123. It is that which is meant by the word God, — Deva, — Deus, and that is 
the object of adoration; that is the only ens or on, est or Esteor Esten, out of 
which all other beings have proceeded, and in which they have their existence, 
and wherein they subsist with their formal parts. 


124. Those unacquainted with the true nature of the felicitous Siva, worship 
the formal idols and images; as a weary traveller thinks the distance of a mile, 
to be as long as the length of a league. 


125. It is possible to have the reward of one's adoration of the Rudras and 
other gods; but the reward of the meditation of the true God, is the unbounded 
felicity of the soul. 


126. He who forsakes the reward of true felicity, for that of fictitious 
pleasures; is like one who quits a garden of mandara flower, and repairs to a 
furze of thorny karanja plants. 


127. The true worshippers know the purely intellectual and felicitous Siva, to 
be the only adorable god; to whom the understanding and tranquillity and 
equanimity of the soul are, the most acceptable offerings than wreaths of 
flowers. 


128. Know that to be the true worship of God, when the Deity of the spirit (or 
spiritual Divinity), is worshipped with the flowers of the understanding and 
tranquillity of the spirit. (Worship God in spirit and with the contriteness of 


thy spirit). 


129. The soul is of the form of consciousness (and is to be worshipped as 
such) by forsaking the adoration of idols; Those that are devoted to any form 
of fictitious cult, are subject to endless misery. 


130. Those knowing the knowable one are called as saints; but those who 
slighting the meditation of the soul, betake themselves to the adoration of 
idols, are said to liken little boys playing with their dolls. 


131. The Lord Siva is the spiritual god, and the supreme cause of all; He is to 
be worshipped always and without fail, with the understanding only. (So the 
sruti: — The vipras adore him in their knowledge, but others worship him 
with sacrifices, etc.) 


132. You should know the soul as the intellectual and living spirit, undecaying 
as the very nature herself; there is no other that is to be worshipped, the true 
puja is the worship of the spirit. (God is to be worshipped in spirit only). 


133. Vasishtha said: — The soul being of the nature of intellectual void, as 
this world is an empty void also; please tell me, my lord, how the Intellect 
could become the living soul, etc., as you have declared. 


134. The god replied: — There being an only vacuous Intellect in existence, 
which is beyond all limit; it is impossible for an intelligible object to exist 
anywhere which may continue to all eternity. (The subjective only is self- 
existent, and the objective is a nullity; it being impossible for two self-existent 
things to co-exist together). 


135. That which shines of itself, is the self-shining Being; and it is the self or 
spontaneous agitation of that Being, which has stretched out the universe. 


136. Thus the world appears as a city in dream before the intellectual soul, 
and this soul is only a form of the inane intellect, and this world is but a 
baseless fabric. 


137. It is altogether impossible for aught of the thinkables and visibles, to 
exist anywhere except in the empty sphere of the intellect, and whatever 
shone forth in the beginning in the plenitude of the Divine intellect, the same 
is called its creation or the world from the first. 


138. Therefore, this world which shows itself in the form of a fairy land in 
dream, is only an appearance in the empty sphere of the intellect; and cannot 
be any other in reality. 


139. The Intellect is the human speech, and the firmament that supports the 
world; the intellect becomes the soul and the living principle, and it is this 
which forms the chain of created beings. (The seeming appearances being null 
and void; the Intellect is all and everything). 


140. Tell me, what other thing is there that could know all things in the 
beginning and before creation of the universe, except it were the Intellect 
which saw and exhibited everything, in heaven and earth as contained in 
itself. 


141. The words sky, firmament, and the vacuum of Brahma and the world, are 
all applicable to the Intellect, as the words arbour and tree are but 
synonymous expressions for the same thing. 


142. And as both our dreams and desires arise in us by our delusion, so it is 
our illusion only which makes us perceive the existence of the outer world; in 
the empty space of the intellect. 


143. And as it is our empty consciousness, that shows the sight of the external 
world in our dream; so it is that very thing that shows us the same, in the 
waking dream of ourselves. 


144. As it is not possible for the city in a dream, to be represented anywhere 
except in the hollow space of our intellect; so it is impossible for the waking 
dream of the world, to be shown elsewhere except in the emptiness of the 
same. 


145. As it is not possible for anything that is thinkable to exist anywhere 
except in the thinking mind, so it is impossible for this thinkable world to 
exist any other place beside the divine mind. 


146. The triple world rose of itself at the will and in the empty space of the 
supreme Intellect, as it was a dream rising and setting in the self-same mind, 
and not as anything other than it, or a duality beside itself. 


147. As one sees the diverse appearances of ghatas and patas, pots and 
painting in his dream, and all lying within the hollowness of his mind; so the 
world appears of itself, in the vacuity of the Divine Intellect, at the beginning 
of creation. 


As there is no substantiality of anything in the fairy land of one's dream, 
except his pure consciousness of the objects; so there is no substantiality of 
the things which are seen in this triple world, except our consciousness of 
them. 


148. Whatever is visible to sight, and all that is existent and inexistent, in the 
three times of the present, past and future; and all space, time and mind, are 
no other than appearances of vacuous intellect (of Brahma). 


149. He is verily the god of whom I have told you, who is supreme in the 
highest degree. (lit. in its transcendental sense). Who is all and unbounded and 
includes me, thee and the endless world in Himself. 


150. The bodies of all created beings, of thine, mine, and others, and of all in 
this world, are all full with the intellectuality of the supreme soul and no 
other. 


151. As there is nothing, O sage, except the bodies that are produced from the 
vacuous intellect or intellectual vacuity of Brahma, and resembling the images 
produced in the fairy land of one's dream; so there is no form or figure in this 
world, other than what was made in the beginning of creation. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


Inquiry into the Nature of the Intellect. 


Argument. — Description of the Pervasion and Supervision of the Intellect; 
and its transformation into the mind in living beings. Or Intellect as universal 
soul and mind of living beings. 


The god said: — Thus the Intellect is all this plenum, it is the sole supreme 
soul (of all); it is Brahma, the Immense and the transcendent vacuum, and it 
said to be the supreme god. 


2. Therefore, its worship is of the greatest good, and confers all blessings to 
men; it is source of creation, and all this world is situated on it. (The Divine 
Mind or omniscience). 


3. It is unmade and increate, and without its beginning and end; it is boundless 
and without a second, it is to be served without external service, (i.e., by 
spiritual adoration), and all felicity is obtained thereby. (Hence Solomon's 
choice of Wisdom). 


4. You are enlightened, O chief of sages! and there I tell you this; that the 
worship of gods is not worthy to the wise, and offering of flowers and 
frankincense is of no use to them. 


5. Those who are unlearned, and have their minds as simple as those of boys, 
are the persons that are mostly addicted to false worship, and devoted to the 
adoration of gods. 


6. These being devoid of the quietness of their understandings, are led to 
ceremonious observances, and to the false attribution of a soul, to the images 
of their own making. 


7. It is for boys only to remain contented with their act of offering flowers and 
incense to gods, whom they honour in the modes of worship, which they have 
adopted of their own hobby-choice. 


8. It is in vain that men worship the gods for gaining the objects of their 
desire, for nothing that is false of itself, can ever give the required fruit. 


9. Adoration with flowers and incense, is inculcated to childish 
understandings (and not for the wise). I will tell you now, the worship that is 
worthy of men enlightened like yourself. 


10. Know, O most intelligent sage, that the god whom we adore is the true 
god, who is the receptacle of the three worlds, the supreme spirit and no other. 


11. He is Siva, — the felicity, who is above the ranks of all other gods, and 
beyond all fictions and fictitious images of men. He is accompanied with all 
desires (will or volition), and is neither the enjoyer of all or any part of the 
production of his will. He is full with the imaginations of all things, but is 
neither the all or any one of the objects in his mind. 


12. He encompasses all space and time, and is neither divided nor 
circumscribed by either of them. He is the manifester of all events and things, 
and is nothing except the image of pure Intellect Himself. 


13. He is consciousness without parts, and situated in the heart of everything. 
He is the producer of everything, and their absorber also in himself. 


14. Know Brahma to be situated between existence and inexistence and it is 
He who styled the God, the supreme soul, the transcendental, the Tat-sat-Id 
Est, and the syllable Om, — on or ens. 


15. By his nature of immensity, he spreads alike in all space, and being the 
great Intellect himself, he is said to be transcendent and supreme being. 


16. He remains as all in all places, as the sap circulates through the bodies of 
plants; thus the great soul of the supreme being, extends alike as the common 
entity of all things. 


17. It is He who abides in the heart of your spouse Arundhati as in yours, the 
same also dwells in the heart of Parvati as in those of her attendants. 


18. That intellection which is one and in every one in all the three worlds is 
verily the god, by the best knowing among philosophers; (that god is the 
universal mind). 


19. Tell me O Brahman! how they may be called as gods, who having their 
hands and feet, are yet devoid of their consciousness; which is the pith of the 
body. (This is said of idols and images). 


20. The Intellect is the pith and marrow of the world, and contains the sap 
which it supplies to everything in it. It is the one and all-ego-sarvam, and, 
therefore, all things are obtained from it. (The god Siva is also called the all to 
pan-sarva and Ego, that is I am the universal ego and giver of all gifts to all). 


21. He is not situated at a distance, O Brahman! nor is He unobtainable by 
anybody; He resides always in all bodies, and abides alike in all places, as 
also in all empty space and sky. (This omnipresence of the divine spirit, sets 
aside the belief of a swarga-heaven or bihesht as the special seat of God). 


22. He does, he eats, he supports all, and moves everywhere; He breathes and 
feels and knows every member of the body. (This is according to the sruti, — 
He fills and directs every part of the body to the end of the nails, — 
dnakhdgrat. [Sanskrit: puryydmdste | sa eva pravishta dnakhdgrebhyah)). 


23. Know him, O chief of sages! to be seated in the city of the body; and 
directing the various functions that are manifest by it, under his direct 
appointment. 


24. He is the lord of the cavity of the heart, and the several hidden sheaths, — 
Koshas, which are contained within the cavity of the body; which is made by 
his moving abodes and moves as he pleases to move it. 


25. The immaculate soul is beyond the essence and actions of the mind, and 
the six organs of sense; it is for our use and understanding only, the word chit, 
— intellect, is applied to him. 


26. That intellectual spirit is too minute and subtle, immaculate and all- 
pervading; and it is his option and volition, to manifest this visible 
representation of himself or not. 


27. This intellect is too fine and pure, and yet manages the whole machinery 
for beautifying the world, as the subtle and intelligent season of spring, 
beautifies the vegetable world with freshness and moisture. 


28. The beautiful and wonderous properties that reside in the divine Intellect, 
are astonishing to behold in their display into the various form as the sky. 


29. Some of these take the name of the living soul, and some others assume 
the title of the mind; some take the general name of space, and others are 
known as its parts and divisions. (These are but parts of one stupendous 
whole, etc. — Popes Moral Essays). 


30. Some of these pass under the name of substance, and others of their 


action; and some under the different categories of mode and condition, genus, 
species and adjuncts. 


31. Some of them shine as light, and others stand as mountains and hills; some 
brighten as the sun and moon and the gods above, and others are as the dark 
Yakshas below. 


32. All these continue in their own states, without any option on their parts; 
and they evolve of their own nature, and causation of the divine spirit, as the 
sprouts of trees grow of their own accord, under the influence of the vernal 
spring, (season). 


33. It is the intellect alone which extends over all the works of nature, and fills 
all bodies which overspread the vast ocean of the world, as the aquatic plants 
swim over the surface of waters. 


34. The deluded mind wanders like a roving bee, and collects the sweets of its 
desire from the lotus of the body, and the intellect sitting as its Mistress, 
relishes their essence from within. (Spiritual substances can taste the essence 
of sweets. — Milton). 


35. The world with all the gods and gandharvas, and the seas and hills that are 
situated in it; rolls about in the circuit of the Intellect, as the waters whirl in a 
whirlpool. 


36. Human minds resembling the spokes of a wheel, are bound to the axles of 
their worldly affairs; and turn about in the rotatory wheel of the ever- 
revolving world, within the circumference of the Intellect. 


37. It was the Intellect which in the form of the four-armed Vishnu, destroys 
the whole host of the demoniac asuras; as the rainy season dispels the solar 
heat, with its thundering clouds and rainbows. 


38. It is the Intellect, which in the form of the three-eyed Siva, accompanied 
by his ensigns of the bull and the crescent of the moon, continues to dote like 
a fond bee, on the lotus-like lovely face of Gauri, (his consort). 


39. It was the intellect which was born as a bee in the lotus-like navel of 
Vishnu in the form of Brahma, and was settled in his meditation upon the 
lotus of the triple vedas; (revealed to the sage afterwards). 


40. In this manner the Intellect appears in various forms, like the unnumbered 
leaves of trees, and the different kind of ornaments made of the same metal of 
gold. 


41. The Intellect assumes of its own pleasure, the paramount dignity of Indra; 
who is the crown jewel over the three worlds, and whose feet are honoured by 
the whole body of gods. 


42. The Intellect expands, rises and falls, and circulates everywhere in the 
womb of the triple world; as the waters of the deep overflow and recede and 
move about in itself. 


43. The full moon beams of intellect, scatter their widespread brightness on all 
sides; and display to the full view the lotus lake of all created beings in the 
world. 


44. The translucent brightness of the mirror of the Intellect, shows the 
reflexions of the world in it, and receives benignantly the images of all things 
in its bosom; as if it were pregnant with them. 


45. The Intellect gives existence to the circles of the fourteen great regions (of 
creation) above and below; and it plants them in the watery expanse of the sea 
on earth, and in the ethereal expanse of the waters in heaven. (The fourteen 
regions are the seven continents, — sapta dwipas, beset by the seven watery 
oceans, sapta-samudras, on earth; and the seven planets revolving in the 
ethereal ocean of the skies. Manu says the god Brahma planted his seed in the 
waters; and the Bible says, — God divided the waters above from the waters 
below by the midway sky). 


46. Intellect spreads itself like a creeper in the vacuous field of air, and 
became fruitful with multitudes of created beings; it blossomed in the variety 
of the different peoples; and shooted forth in the leaves of its dense desires. 


47. These throngs of living beings are its farina flying about, and their desires 
are as the juice which gives them their different colours; their understandings 
are their covering cuticles and the efforts of their minds are buds that unfold 
with flowers and fruits of their desire. 


48. The lightsome pistils of these florets are countless in the three worlds, and 
their incessant undulation in the air, expressed their gaysome dance with the 
sweet smiling of the opening buds. 


49. It is the Intellect which stretches out all these real and unreal bodies, 
which expand like the gentle and good looking flowers for a time, but never 
endure forever. (The body like a fading flower is soon blown away.) 


50. It produces men like moon bright flowers in all places, and these flush and 
blush, and sing and dance about, deeming themselves as real bodies. 


51. It is by the power of this great Intellect, that the sun and other luminous 
bodies shining over the sky as the two bodies in a couple, are attracted to one 
another to taste the fruit of their enjoyment as that of gross bodies. 


52. All other visible bodies that are seen to move about in this phenomenal 
world, are as flakes of dust dancing about on eddy. (i.e., All things move 
about and tend towards their central point the Intellect). 


53. The Intellect is like a luminary of the universe, and manifests unto us all 
the phenomena of the three worlds, as the flame of a lamp shows us the 
various colours of things, (which are reflected by light on dark and opaque 
matter). 


54. All worldly things exhibit their beauty to our sight, by their being 
immerged in the light of the Intellect, as the dark spot on the disk of the moon, 
becomes fully apparent to view by its immersion in the lunar beams. (The 
black spot on the moon's surface, becomes white by the brightness of the 
moon-beams, so the dark world becomes illumined by the presence of the 
Intellect in it). 


55. It is by receiving the gilding of the Intellect, that all material bodies are 
tinctured in their various hues; as the different trees receive their freshness, 
foliage and fruitage from the influence of the rainy weather. 


56. It is the shadow (or absence of intellect), which causes the dullness of an 
object; and all bodies are inanimate without it, as a house becomes dark in 
absence of light or a lamp. (Intellect gives life to dull matter). 


57. The wondrous powers of the intellect (which gives a shape and form to 
everything), are wanting in anything; it becomes a shapeless thing, and cannot 
possibly have any form or figure in the world, over its dull materiality. (Even 
inanimate nature of all forms and kinds, receives its figure from the power of 
intellect). 


58. The intellect is as the skylight, wherein its active power or energy 
resembling its consort, resides with her offspring of desire in the abode of the 
body, and is ever restless and busy in her actions. (This active power is 
personified as the goddess sakti or Energy, and her offspring, —desire, is the 
personification of Brahma). 


59. Without the presence of the Intellect, it is no way possible for anyone to 
perceive the taste of any flavour though it is set on the tip of his tongue, or see 
it with his eyes? (Intellect is the cause of all perception). 


60. Hear me and say, how can this arboretum of the body subsist, with its 
branching arms and hairy filaments, without being supplied with the sap of the 
intellect. 


61. Know hence the intellect to be the cause of all moving and immovable 
things in nature, by its growing and feeding and supporting them all; and 
know also that the intellect is the only thing in existence, and all else is 
inexistent without it. 


62. Vasishtha said: — Rama! after the moon-bright and three-eyed god had 
spoken to me in his perspicuous speech, I interrogated again the moon-bright 
god in a clear and audible voice and said: — 


63. O lord! If the intellect alone is all pervading and the soul of all, then I 
have not yet been able to know this visible earth in its true light. 


64. Say why is it that people call a living person, to be endowed with intellect 
so long as he is alive, and why they say him to be devoid of intellect, when he 
is layed down as a dead and lifeless mass. 


65. The god replied: — Hear me tell you all, O Brahman, about what you 
have asked me; it is a question of great importance, and requires, O greatest of 
theists! a long explication. 


66. The intellect resides in every body, as also in all things as their inherent 
soul; the one is viewed (by shallow understandings) as the individual and 
active spirit, and the other is known (to comprehensive minds) as unchanging 
and universal soul. 


67. The mind that is misled by its desires, views the inward spirit as another 
or the living soul, as the cupidinous person takes his (or her) consort for 
another, in the state of sleep or dreaming. (The unsettled mind takes every 
individual soul for the universal one). 


68. And as the same man seems to be changed to another, during his fit of 
anger; so the sober intellect is transformed to a changeable spirit, by one's 
mistake of its true nature. (The nirvi kalpa or immutable spirit, is changed to a 
savi kalpa or mutable one). 


69. The intellect being attributed with many variable qualities and desires, is 
made to lose its state of purity; and by thinking constantly of its gross nature, 
it is at last converted to the very gross object of thought. 


70. Then the subjective intellect, chit, becomes itself the chetya or object of 


thought, and having assumed the subtle form of a minute ethereal atom, 
becomes the element of sound; and is afterwards transformed to the 
rudimental particle of air, vata tan matra. 


71. This aerial particle then bearing relation to the parts of time and place, 
becomes the vital principle (as existing somewhere for a certain period of 
time); which next turns to the understanding and finally to the mind. 


72. The intellect being thus transformed into the mind, dwells on its thoughts 
of the world, and is then amalgamated with it, in the same manner as a 
Brahman is changed to chandala, by constantly thinking himself as such. 
(Thus this creation is a display of the divine mind and identic with it). 


73. Thus the divine Intellect forgets its universality by its thoughts of 
particulars; and assumes the gross forms of the objects of its thoughts and 
desires. (Hence we say a man to be of such and such a mind, according to the 
thought or desire that he entertains in it, i.e., the whole being taken for a part 
and the part for the whole). 


74. The Intellect being thus replete with its endless thoughts and desires, 
grows as dull as the gross objects it dwells upon; till at last the subtle intellect 
grows as stony dull, as the pure water is converted to massive stones and 
hails. 


75. So the stolid intellect takes the names of the mind and sense, and becomes 
subject to ignorance and illusion; by contracting a gross stolidity restrained 
from its flight upwards, and have to grovel forever in the regions of sense. 


76. Being subjected to ignorance at first, it is fast bound to the fetters of its 
cupidity afterwards, and then being pinched by its hankerings and angry 
frettings, it is tormented alike by the pleasure of affluence and the pains of 
penury. 


77. By forsaking the endless felicity (of spirituality), it is subjected to the 
incessant vicissitudes of mortality, it now sets dejected in despair, and 
lamenting over its griefs and sorrow, and then burns amidst the conflagration 
of its woes and misery. 


78. See how it is harassed with the vain thought of its personality, — that [am 
such a one; and look at the miseries to which it is exposed, by its reliance on 
the frail and false body. 


79. See how it is worried by its being hushed to and fro, in the alternate 
swinging beds of prosperity and adversity; and see how it is plunged in the 


deep and muddy puddle of misery, like a worn out elephant sinking in the 
mire. 


80. Look at this deep and unfordable ocean of the world, all hollow within and 
rolling with the eventful waves of casualties; it emits the sub-marine fire from 
within its bosom, as the human heart flashes forth with its hidden fire of 
passions and affections. 


81. The human heart staggers between hope and fear, like a stray deer in the 
forest; and is alternately cheered and depressed at the prospects of affluence 
and want. 


82. The mind that is led by its desire, is always apprehensive of 
disappointment; and it coils back for fear of a reverse, as a timorous girl flies 
afar from the sight of a spectre. 


83. Man encounters all pains for a certain pleasure in prospect, as the camel 
browses the thorny furze in expectation of honey at a honey comb in it; but 
happening to slip from his intermediate standpoint, he is hurled headlong to 
the bottom. 


84. One meeting with a reverse falls from one danger to another; and so he 
meets with fresh calamities, as if one evil invited or was the harbinger of the 
other. 


85. The mind that is captivated by its desires, and led onward by its exertions, 
meets with one difficulty after another, and has cause to repent and grieve at 
every step (or is the cause of remorse and grief). (All toil and moil, tend to the 
vexation of the spirit). 


86. As a man advances in life, so he improves in his learning; but alas! all his 
worldly knowledge serves at best, but to bind down the soul fast to the earth. 


87. Cowards are in constant fear of everything, until they die away in their 
fear; as the little shrimp being afraid of the waterfall, falls on dry land, and 
there perishes with flouncing. 


88. The helplessness of childhood, the anxieties of manhood, the 
miserableness of old age; are preliminaries to the sad demise of men engaged 
in busy life. (The last catastrophe of human life). 


89. The propensities of past life cause some to be born as celestial nymphs in 
heaven, and others as venomous serpents in subterranean cells; while some 
become as fierce demons, and many are reborn as men and women on earth. 


90. The past actions of men make to be born again as Rdkshas among savages, 
and others as monkeys in forests; while some become as Kinnaras on 
mountains, and many as lions on mountain tops. (All these are depraved races 
of men, viz; the anthropophagi cannibals, the pigmy apes, — banars, the ugly 
mountaneers Kinnaras and the leonine men, narasinhas). 


91. The Vidydadharas of the Devagiri mountains, and the Nagas of the forest 
caves (are degenerations of men); and so are the fowls of air, the quadrupeds 
of wood lands, the trees and plants of forests, and the bushes on hills and 
orchides on trees; (are all but transformation of the perverted intellect). 


92. It is self-same intellect which causes Narayana to float on the surface of 
the sea, and makes the lotus born Brahma to remain in his meditation; It keeps 
Hara in the company of his consort Uma, and places Hari over the gods in 
heaven. 


93. It is this which makes the sun to make the day and the clouds to give the 
rain (or pour in rains); It makes the sea to breathe out in waves, and the 
volcanic mountains to blow out in fire and flame. 


94. It makes the curricle of time to revolve continually in the circle of the 
seasons; and causes the day and night to rotate in their cycles of light and 
darkness. 


95. Here it causes the seeds to vegetate with the juice contained in them; and 
there it makes the stones and minerals lie down in mute silence. 


96. Sometimes it blooms in fruits ripened by the solar heat, and at others 
maturated by the burning fuel; somewhere it gives us the cold and icy water; 
and at others the spring water which cannot be lasted. 


97. Here it glows in luminous bodies, and there it shows itself of impenetrable 
thickets and in accessible rocks; It shines as bright and white in one place, and 
is as dark and blue in another. It sparkles in the fire and dwindles in the earth, 
it blows in the air and spreads in the water. 


98. Being the all-pervading, omnipresent and omnipotent power itself, it is the 
one in all and the whole plenum. It is, therefore, more subtle and transparent, 
than the rarefied and translucent air. 


99. As the intellect spreads out and contracts itself, in any manner in any place 
or time; so it conceives and produces the same within and without itself, as 
the agitation of waters produces both the little billows and huge surges of the 
sea. (The intellect is the immanent cause of all phenomena). 


100. The intellect stretches itself in the various forms of ducks and geese, of 
cranes and crows, of storks, wolves and horses also; it becomes the heron and 
partridge, the parrot, the dog, the stag, the ape and Kinnara likewise. 


101. It is the abstract quality of the understanding, beauty and modesty, and of 
love and affections also; it is the power of illusion and the shadow and 
brightness of night and of moonlight likewise. 


102. It stretches itself in these and all other forms of bodies, and is born and 
reborn in all kinds and species of things. It roves and rolls all about the 


revolving world, in the manner of a straw whirling in a whirlpool. 


103. It is afraid of its own desires, as the she-ass is seen to shudder at its own 
brayings; and it has no one like itself. ([Sanskrit: mugva bald-cald-vald)]). 


104. I have told you already, O great sage! how this principle of the living 
spirit, becomes vitiated by its animal propensities, and is afterwards debased 
to the nature and condition of brute creatures. 


105. The supreme soul receiving the appellation of the living soul or principle 
of action, becomes a pitiable object, when it becomes subject to error and 
illusion, and is subjected to endless pains and miseries. 


106. The deluded soul is then overpowered by its connate sin, which causes it 
to choose the wrong unreality, — asat, for itself, which being frail and 
perishable, makes the active soul to perish with itself. (This passage appears 
to allude to the original sin of man, which became the cause of the death and 
woes of human life. The connate sin is compared to the husk which is born 
with the rice, and not coming from without. It is otherwise called the inborn 
sinfulness or frailty of human nature, — Man is to err, efc.). 


107. The soul being thus degraded from its state of endless felicity, to the 
miserable condition of mortal life, laments over its fallen state, as a widow 
wails over her fate. 


108. Look on the deplorable condition of intellect, — chit; which having 
forgotten its original state (of purity), is subjected to the impotent Ignorance, 
which has been casting it to the miseries of degradation, as they cast a bucket 
in the well by a string, which lowers it lower and lower till it sinks in the 
bottom of the pit. (This string araghatta is said to be the action of human life, 
which the more it is lengthened, the more it tends to our degradation, unless 
we prevent by our good action. So the sruti! [Sanskrit: yathakdri yathachari 
tatha bhalati | séghukdri sédhurbhabati | prapakdri papibhavati | punyo bai 
punyema karmmana bhavati | pdpah pdapereti)). 


CHAPTER XXXI 


Identity of the Mind and Living Soul. 


Argument — The pure Intellect shown to be without vitality; and the mind to 
consist in the vital power in connection with the sensations and external 
Perceptions. 


The god continued: — When the intellect collects (takes) the vanities of the 
world to itself (and relies on them) and thinks to be a miserable being, it is 
said to have fallen into error, (by forgetting the reality and its true nature); it 
then resembles a man that is deluded to think himself for another, in his dream 
or ebriety. (The living soul is forgetful of its spiritual nature). 


2. Though immortal, yet it is deceived to believe itself as mortal by its 
infatuated understanding; as a sick man weeps to think himself dead when he 
is still alive. 


3. As the ignorant man views the revolving spheres to be at a stand-still, so 
the deluded intellect sees the world and thinks its personality as sober 
realities. 


4. The mind alone is said to be the cause of the perception of the exterior 
world in the intellect; but the mind can be no such cause of it, from the 
impossibility of its separate existence independent of the intellect. (The 
intellect is the cause of guiding and informing the mind, and not this of that). 


5. Thus, there being no causality of the mind, there cannot be its causations of 
the thinkable world also. Therefore, the intellect only is the cause of thought, 
and neither the mind nor the thinkable world (which produces or impresses 
the thought). The gloss says that, “the intellect whereby the mind thinks, is not 
the mind nor its dependent or the objective thinkable world; but it is the pure 
subjective self-same intellect only.” 


6. There is no spectacle, spectator (or sight of) of anything anywhere, unless it 


be a delusion, as that which appears oiliness in a stone; and there is no matter, 
making or work of any kind; unless it be a mistake like that of blackness in 
the moon. (The oily glossiness of the marble and the shade in the moon, are 
no other but the inherent properties of those things). 


7. The terms measure, measurer, and measurable are as negative in nature, as 
the privation of forest plants in the sky; and the words intellect, intellection 
and intelligible are as meaningless in themselves, as the absence of thorns and 
thistles in the garden of Paradise. (Gloss. — The intellect chit is the subjective 
intellection, chetana is chitta vritti, — the property of chit, is the attribute, and 
the intelligible chetya is the object of thought. The meaning is that, there is no 
separate subject, object or attribute in nature, but they all blend in the 
essentiality of God, who is all in all. The words subjective, objective and 
attributive, are, therefore, mere human inventions, and so are the words 
thinker, thinking and the thought; ({[Sanskrit: mantri, mati, mantavya]), and 
knower, knowing and knowledge, ({Sanskrit: viha, vuhvi, vihavya]), and the 
ego, egoism and egotist ([Sanskrit: ahamkdra, ahamkarttd, ahamkdryya}) all 
which refer to the same individual soul). 


8. The personalities of egoism, tuism and illism; [Sanskrit: ahantvam 
tvantvam, tatvam], are as false as mountains in the firmament; and the 
difference of persons (as this is my body and that another's), is as untrue as to 
find whiteness in ink. 


9. The Divine spirit is neither the same nor different in all bodies; because it is 
as impossible for the universal soul to be confined in any body, as it is 
impracticable for the mount Meru to be contained in an atom of dust. And it is 
as impossible to express it in words and their senses as it is incapable for the 
sandy soil to grow the tender herbs. 


10. The dictum netineti. — It is neither this nor any other, is as untrue as the 
belief of the darkness of night subsisting in company with the day-light; and 
substantiality and unsubstantiality are both as wanting in the supreme spirit, as 
heat is wanting in ice. 


11. It is as wrong to call it either as empty or solid, as it is to say a tree 
growing in the womb of a stone to call it either the one or the other; is to have 
it for the infinite vacuum or the full plenum. 


12. It is the sole unity that remains in its state of pure transparency forever; 
and being unborn from the thought or mind of any body, it is not subject to 
the misrepresentation of any body. (The gloss says: — Not being born from 
the mind of Brahma as this creation, the Intellect is free from the 


imperfections of both). 


13. It is however imputed with many faults and failings, in the thoughts and 
opinions of men; but all these imputations and false attributes, vanish before 
one knowing its true nature. 


14. The learned devoid of indifference, are employed in many other thoughts 
and things; though not a straw of all this vast world, is under the command of 
any body. 


15. It is in the power of everybody to get rid of his thoughts, but very difficult 
to get the object of his thought. How then is it possible for one to have what it 
is impracticable for him to try for? (i.e., The full object of desire). 


16. The one sole and immutable Intellect which pervades all nature, is the 
supreme one and without an equal, and is more pellucid than the translucent 
light of a lamp and all other lights. 


17. It is this intellectual light which enlightens everything, it is ubiquious and 
ever translucent; it is ever shining without a shade, and immutable in its 
nature and mind. 


18. It is situated everywhere and in all things, as in pots and pictures, in trees 
and huts, and houses in quadrupeds, demons and devils, in men and beasts, in 
the sea, earth and air. 


19. It remains as the all witnessing spirit, without any oscillation or motion of 
its own to any place; and enlightens all objects, without flickering or doing 
any action by itself. 


20. It remains unsullied with by its connection with the impure body, and 
continues unchangeable in its relation with the changeful mind. It does not 
become dull by being joined with the dull body, and is never changed to 
anything by its extension over all things. 


21. The extremely minute and immutable intellect, retains its consciousness in 
itself; and by rolling itself like a rundle of thread, enters the body in the form 
of a particle of air (or the vital breath or air, prdndydma). 


22. It is then accompanied with the powers of vision and reflexion, which are 
wakeful in the waking state and lie dormant in sleep; whence it is said to be 
existent and inexistent by turns. 


23. The clear and pure intellect, comes then to think of many things in its 
waking state, and is thus perverted from its purity; as an honest man turns to 


dishonesty in the company of the dishonest. (The perversion of the intellect is 
owing to its attachment to the flesh, and its entertaining to worldly thoughts). 


24. As the pure gold is converted to copper by its alloy, and is again restored 
to its purity by removal of the base metal; such is the case of the intellect 
owing to its contracting and distracting of vicious thoughts. 


25. As a good looking glass being cleansed of its dirt, shows the countenance 
in a clear light; so the intellect being born in the human body, attains its divine 
nature by means of its good understanding. 


26. Its want of the knowledge of itself as the all, presents the sight of the false 
world to it as a true reality; but upon coming to know its true nature, it attains 
the divine state. 


27. When the mind thinks of itself of its difference (from the intellect), and the 
existence of the unrealities (in nature), it gets the sense of its egoism, and then 
it perishes though it originally imperishable in its nature. (The sruti [Sanskrit: 
tasya bhayam, bhavati], “it then fears to die,” because the personal soul is 
subject to death, and not the impersonal or universal soul which never dies. So 
the phrase: — “Forget yourself and you'll never fear to die’). 


28. As a slight wind scatters the fruits of trees growing on the sides of 
mountain, so the consciousness of self, drops down at the gust of a slight 
disease, like a large tree. 


29. The existence of the qualities of form and colour and others, is owing to 
that of intellect; as the position of subalterns, — adhyasta, is dependent on the 
station of the superior, — adhishthata. And the pure intellect, — infinite and 
indefinite in itself, is designated as a unity, duality and plurality by want of 
right understanding. 


30. It is from the essence of the intellect only, that the mind and senses derive 
their faculties of thinking and perception; as it is presence of day light, which 
gives rise to the routine of daily business. 


31. It is the action of the vital air, which gives pulsation to the pupils of the 
eye, and whose light is called the sight, which is the instrument of perceiving 
the forms and colours of things that are placed without it, but the perception 
belongs to the power and action of the intellect. 


32. The air and skin are both of them contemptible and insensible things, yet 
their union gives the perception of touch or feeling; the mind becomes 
conscious of that feeling, but its consciousness is dependent on and caused by 


the intellect. 


33. The particles of scent being carried by the particles of air to the nostrils, 
give the sense of smelling to the mind; but it is intellect which has the 
consciousness of smelling. 


34. The particles of sound are conveyed by the particles of air to the organ of 
hearing for the perception of the mind, and the intellect is conscious of this as 
in its sleep. (And as a silent witness of the same). 


35. The mind is the volitive principle of action from some desire or to some 
end and aim of its own, and the thoughts of the mind are all mixed with 
foulness, while the nature of the intellectual soul is quite pure and simple. 
(The difference between the sensuous mind and the conscious intellect, is that 
the one is the volitive and active agents of its actions, the other is the passive 
and neutral witness of all and everything that is and comes to take place, 
without its interference in any). 


36. The intellect is manifest by itself, and is situated of itself in itself; it 
contains the world within itself, as the crystalline stone retains the images of 
all things in its bosom. (The subjective soul bears in it the objective world, 
which is not different but self-same with itself. Hence the nullity of the 
objective duality, which is identic with the subjective unity). 


37. It is the single and sole intellect which contains the whole, without 
dividing or transforming itself to parts or forms other than itself. It neither 
rises or sets, nor moves nor grows at any place or time (but occupies all space 
and time, in its infinity and eternity). 


38. It becomes the living soul by fostering its desires, and remains as the pure 
intellect by forsaking them forever; and then seated in itself, it reflects on its 
two gross and pure states. (The two gross states are the gross world, and the 
gross mind that dwells only on gross bodies of the world). 


39. The intellect has the living soul for its vehicle, and egoism is the vehicle 
of the living principle; the understanding is the car of egotism and the mind 
the seat of the understanding. 


40. The mind again has the vital breath for its curricle, and the senses are 
vehicles of the vital airs; the body is the carriage of the senses, and the organs 
of action are the wheels of the body. 


41. The motion of these curricles forms the course of this world, (which is 
hence called karma Kshetra or world of activity); and the continued rotation 


of the body, (called the cage of bird of life); until its old age and demise, 
which is the dispensation of the Almighty power. (That man must toil and 
moil till he is worn out and goes to his grave). 


42. The world is shown unto us as a phantasmagoria of the supreme soul, or 
as a scene in our dream; it is a pseudoscope and wholly untrue as the water in 
a mirage. 


43. Know, O sage, that the vital breath is called the vehicle of the mind by 
fiction only; because wherever there is the breath of vitality, there is also the 
process of thinking carried on along with it. 


44. Wherever the breath of life circulates like a thread, and acts as spring, 
there the body is made to shake with it; as the forms and colours of bodies, 
present themselves to view at the appearance of light. 


45. The mind being employed with its desires, perturbs the vital breath and 
body as a tempest shakes the forest; but being confined in the cavity of the 
heart, it stops their motion as when the winds are confined in the upper skies. 
(The mind being fixed to some particular object of meditation, stops the 
course of life and gives longevity to man). 


46. Again, the confinement of the vital breath in the vacuity of the heart, stops 
the course of the mind, (thoughts); as the hiding of a light, removes the sight 
of the objects from view. (No thought without breathing, and no sight without 
light). 


47. As the dusts cease to fly after the winds are over; so the mind, (thought), 
ceases to move, when the breath is pent up in the heart. (These are subjects of 
Prdndydma or restraint of breath, treated at large in chapter XXV of this 
book). 


48. As the carriage is driven wherever the driver wishes to drive it; so the 
mind being driven by the vital breath, runs from country to country in a 
moment. 


49. As the stone flung from a fling is lost forever, so the thoughts of the mind 
are dispersed in the air, unless they are fixed upon some object. The thoughts 
are accompaniments of the mind and vitality, as fragrance is attendant on 
flowers and heat upon fire. 


50. Wherever there is vital breath breathing (in any animal being), there is the 
principle of the mind with its train of thoughts likewise; as whenever the 
moon appears to view, it is accompanied with its beams also. Our 


consciousness is the result of the vibrations of the vital air, like our perception 
of the perceptibles; and this air is the sustainer of the body also, by supplying 
the juice of the food to all the nerves and arteries. 


51. The mind and consciousness both belong to the body, the one residing in 
the hollow of the vital air, and the other is as clear as the intellect, and resides 
alike in all gross and subtle bodies, like the all-pervading and transparent 
vacuum. 


52. It remains in the form of conscious self-existence in dull inanimate bodies; 
and appears to be afraid of the vibrations of animal life. (i.e., The vegetables 
and minerals are conscious of their own existence, without having their vital 
and animal actions of breathing and locomotion). 


53. The dull body being enlivened by the vital breath, is recognized by the 
mind as belonging to itself; and plays many parts and frolics with it, as in its 
prior state of existence. 


54. The mind vibrates no longer, after the extinction of breathing; and then, O 
sage! the pure intellect is reflected in the eight-fold receptacle of vacuum. 
(These are termed the puryashtakas and consist of the mind, life, knowledge, 
the organs of action, illusion, desire, activity and the subtle body). 


55. As it is the mirror only that can reflect an image, and no other stone; so it 
is the mind alone these as their octuple receptacle, — puryashtaka, and which 
is the agent of all actions, and is termed by different names according to the 
views of different divine teachers. 


56. That which gives rise to the network of our imaginary visible world, and 
that in which it appears to be situated, and whereby the mind is made to 
revolve in various bodies, know that supreme substance to be the Immensity 
of Brahma, and source of all this world, (or as diffused as all in all which is 
thence called the visvam, — the all to pan). 


CHAPTER XXXII 


On the Sustentation and Dissolution of the Body. 


Argument. — Exposition of the animation of the complicate Body, and its 
ultimate decomposition at death. 


The god continued: — Hear me, holy sage! now relate to you, how the active 
and oscillating principle of the intellect, acts on the human body and actuates 
it to all its actions, whereby it receives the noble title of its active agent. (The 
disembodied and nameless intellect, gets many appellations in its embodied 
state, according to its various temporal and spiritual avocations and 
occupations in life. — Gloss). 


2. But the mind of man which is impelled by its former (or pristine) 
propensities, prevails over the (good) intellect; and being hardened in its 
vicious deeds, pursues its changeful wishes and desires. (The former evil 
propensities refer to those of past lives, and allude to the original depravity of 
human nature and will). 


3. The mind being strengthened by illusion, (mdyd), the intellect becomes dull 
and stultified as stone; and this power of delusion growing stronger by divine 
dispensation, displayed the universe to view. (The mdyd is otherwise called 
Brahma Sakti, Divine omnipotence, which overpowers on the omniscience of 
God in the acts of creation, etc. Hence the neutral omniscience is called the 
Intellect, chit, and the active omnipotence is styled the mind). 


4. It is by the good grace of this power, that the intellect is allowed to perceive 
sometimes, the fallacy of the aerial city of this world, and at others to think it 
as a reality. (i.e., It comes to detect the fallacy by exercise of its intellection, 
and thinks it real by its subjection-illusion). 


5. The body remains as dumb as stone, without the presence of the intellect, 
the mind and its egoism in it; and it moves about with their presence in it, as 
when a stone is flung in the air. 


6. As the dull iron is made to move, by its contiguity to or attraction of the 
loadstone; so doth the living soul jiva act its parts, by the presence of the 
omnipresent soul in it. (The actions of the living soul are its respirations, and 
direction of the organs of action to their respective function). 


7. It is by the power of the all-pervading soul, that the living principle shoots 
out in infinity forever, as the germs of trees sprout forth the seed in all places. 
And as the recipient mirror receives the reflexion of objects situated at a 
distance from it, so the living soul gets the reflex or image of the distant 
supreme spirit in itself. (God made man in his own image). 


8. It is by forgetfulness of its own and real nature, that the living soul 
contracts its foul gross object, as a legitimate twice-born man mistakes 
himself for a sudra by forgetting his birth by such error or illusion. 


9. It is by unmindfulness of its own essence, that the intellect is transformed to 
the sensuous mind; as some great souls are deceived to believe their 
miserableness in the distractedness of their intellect percipience. (Men are 
often misled to believe themselves otherwise than what they are, as it was the 
case with the princes Lavana, Gadhi, and Harischandra, mentioned before and 
as it turns out with all miserable mortals, who forget their immortal and 
celestial natures). 


10. It is the intellect which moves the dull and inert body, as the force of the 
winds shakes the waters of the deep to roll and range about in chains and 
trains of waves. 


11. The active mind which is always prone to action, leads the machine of the 
body together, with the passive and helpless living soul at random, as the 
winds drive about in different directions, together with the inert stones, 
(ballast), contained in it. (i.e., The mind is the mover of both the body and 
soul, but the intellect is the primum mobile of all). 


12. The body is the vehicle, and God has employed the mind and the vital 
breath, as the two horses or bullocks for driving it. (The mind is said also to 
be its driver, the soul its rider, and the breaths are its coursers). 


13. Others say, that the rarefied intellect assumes a compact form, which 
becomes the living soul; and this riding on the car of the mind, drives it by the 
vital airs as its racers. (Hence the course of the mind and its thoughts, are 
stopped with the stoppage of respiratory breaths). 


14. Sometimes the intellect seems as something born and to be in being, as in 


its state of waking and witnessing the objects all around; at others it seems to 
be dead and lost as in the state of its profound sleep. Again, it appears as 
many, as in its dreaming state; and at last, it comes to know itself as one and a 
unit, when it comes to the knowledge of truth and of its identity with the sole 
unity. 


15. Sometimes it seems to be of a different form, without forsaking its own 
nature; as the milk becomes the butter and curd, efc., and as the water appears 
in the shape of a billow or wave or of its foam or froth. (That changed in all, 
yet in all the same, etc. — Pope). 


16. As all things depend upon light, to show their different forms and colours 
to view, so the mental powers and faculties, do all of them depend upon the 
intellectual soul for their several actions. (The intellect in the form of the soul, 
directs and exhibits the actions of the mind). 


17. Again, the Supreme Spirit being situated in the mind within the body, the 
animal soul has its life and action; as all things appear to sight, while the 
lighted lamp shines inside the room. (As the silent soul directs the mind, so 
the active mind keeps the soul alive). 


18. The ungoverned mind gives rise to all diseases and difficulties, that rise as 
fastly and thickly, as the perturbed waters rise in waves, which foam out with 
thickening froth. 


19. The living soul dwelling like the bee in the lotus-bed of the body, is also 
subject to diseases and difficulties as the bee to the rains and flood; and it is as 
disturbed by the casualties of life, as the calm sea-water are perturbed to 
waves by the blowing winds. 


20. The dubitation that, “the divine soul is omnipotent, and the living soul is 
impotent and limited in its powers; and, therefore, the human soul is not the 
same with the Divine”; is the cause of our woe, and serves to darken the 
understanding; as the clouds raised by the sunlight, serve to obscure the solar 
disk; (this doubt leading to dualism, cuts us from God and exposes us to all 
the calamities of life). 


21. The sentient soul passes under many transmigrations in its insensibility, 
and in utter want of its self-consciousness; like one subdued to dull obtuseness 
by some morphia drug, which makes him insensible of the pain inflicted upon 
his own person. (This drug is some anaesthetic agent as opium, chloroform 
and the like). 


22. But as it comes to know itself afterwards by some means or other, it 
recovers from its dull insensibility, and regains its state of original purity; as a 
drunken or deluded person turns to his duty, after he comes to remember 
himself. (So the lost and stray sheep, returns to its fold and master). 


23. The sentient soul that fills the body, and is employed in enlivening all its 
members, does not strive to know the cause of its consciousness; as a leper 
never attempts to make use of any part of his body, which he is incapable to 
raise. (So the soul that is drowned in ignorance and dead in its sin, will never 
rise to reclaim its redemption by reproving itself). 


24. When the soul is devoid of its consciousness, it does not enable the tube of 
the lotus-like heart to beat and vibrate with the breath of respiration; but 
makes it as motionless as a sacrificial vessel unhandled by the priest. 


25. The action of the lotiform heart having ceased, the motion of the vital 
breaths is stopped also; as the fanning of the palm-leaf fan being over, there is 
no more the current of the outer air. 


26. The cessation of the vital air in the body, and its flight to some other form, 
sets the life to silence and sink in the original soul; just as the suspension of 
the blowing winds, sets the flying dusts to rest on the ground. 


27. At this time, O sage, the mind alone remains on its unsullied state and 
without its support; until it gets another body, wherein it rests as the 
embryonic seed lies in the earth and water. 


28. Thus the causes of life being deranged on all sides, and the eight 
principles of the body inert and extinct (in their actions), the body droops 
down and becomes defunct and motionless. (The eight principles called the 
puryashtakas). 


29. Forgetfulness of the intellect, the intelligible (truth) and intelligence, 
produces the desires of them to vibrate; these give to remembrances of the 
past, and their want buries them to oblivion. 


30. The expansion of the lotus-like heart, causes the puryashtaka body to 
expand also; but when the organ of the heart ceases to blow and breathe, the 
body ceases to move. 


31. As long as the puryashtaka elements remain in the body, so long it lives 
and breathes; but these elementary powers being quiet and still, the body 
becomes inert and is said to be dead. 


32. When the contrary humours, the feelings and passions and sensible 
perceptions, and the outward wounds and strokes, cause the inward action of 
the organic heart to stop: — 


33. Then the puryashtaka forces are pent up in the cavity of the heart, as the 
force of the blowing winds, is lost in the hollow of a pair of blowing bellows. 


34. When a living body has its inward consciousness, and becomes inert and 
motionless in its outer parts and members, it is still alive by the action of 
breathing in the inner organ of the heart. 


35. Those whose pure and holy desires never forsake their hearts, they live in 
one quiet and even state of life, and are known as the living liberated and long 
living seers. (The pure desires are free from the influence of passions, and 
tendency to earthly enjoyments; which cause holy life and give longevity to 
man). (An unperturbed mind is the best preservative of health). 


36. When the action of the lotus like machine of the heart has ceased, and the 
breath ceases to circulate in the body, it loses its steadiness, and falls 
unsupported on the ground as a block of wood or stone. 


37. As the octuple body mixes with the air in the vacuum of the sky, so is the 
mind also absorbed in it at the same time. 


38. But being accompanied with the thoughts, to which it has been long 
accustomed, it continues to wander about in the air, and amidst the regions of 
heaven and hell, which it has long believed to await on its exit from the body. 


39. The body becomes a dead corpse, after the mind has fled from it in the air; 
and it remains as an empty house, after its occupant has departed from it. 


40. The all-pervading intellect, becomes by its power of intellection both the 
living soul as well as the mind; and after passing from its embodied form (of 
puryashtaka), it assumes its spiritual, (dtivahika), nature afterwards. 


41. It fosters in its bosom the quintessence, (pancha tan mdtram), of the subtle 
elemental mind, which assumes a grosser form afterwards, as the thoughts of 
things appear in dream. 


42. Then as the intensity of its thoughts, makes the unreal world and all its 
unrealities, appear as real before it, it comes to forget and forsake its spiritual 
nature, and transform itself to a gross body. 


43. It thinks by mistake the unreal body as substantial, and believes the unreal 
as real and the real as unreal. (i.e., It takes the unreal material as real; and the 


real spiritual as nothing). 


44. It is but a particle of the all-pervading Intellect, that makes the living soul, 
which reflects itself afterwards in the form of the intelligent mind. (The 
understanding is a partial reflection of the Intellect. — Gloss). The mind then 
ascends on the vehicle of the octuple body, and surveys the phenomenal world 
as a sober reality. (i.e., The senses of the body, represent the universe as real). 


45. The intellect is the prime mobile power, that gives force to the octuple 
material (puryashtaka) body to move itself; and the action of the breath in the 
heart which is called life, resembles the spiritual force of a ghost raising an 
inert body. (The power of spirits entering and moving inert bodies, forms a 
firm belief in India). 


46. When the aerial mind flies into the vacuous air, after the material frame is 
weakened and worn out; then the lifeless body remains as a block of wood or 
stone, and is called a dead mass by those that are living. 


47. As the living soul forgets its spiritual nature, and becomes decayed in 
course of time and according to the frail nature of material things; so it fades 
and falls away in the manner of the withered leaves of trees. 


48. When the vital power forsakes the body, and the action of the pericardium 
is stopped; the breath of life becomes extinct, and the animated being is said 
to die away. 


49. As all beings that are born and have come to life, fade away in time like 
all created things in the world; so do human bodies also fade and fall away in 
time, like the withered leaves of trees. 


50. The bodies of all embodied beings, are equally doomed to be born and die 
also in their time; as the leaves of trees, are seen to be incessantly growing 
and falling off at all seasons; why then should we lament at the loss of what is 
surely to be lost. 


51. Look at these chains of living bodies, which are indiscriminately and 
incessantly rising and falling like bubbles and billows, in the vast ocean of the 
divine Intellect, and there is no difference of any one of them from another; 
why then should the wise make any distinction between objects that are 
equally frail in their nature, and proceed from and return to the same source. 


52. The all-pervading intellect reflects itself only in the mind of man, and 
nowhere else; as it is the mirror only that receives the reflexions of objects, 
and no other opaque substance besides. 


53. The acts and fates of men are all imprinted in the spacious and clear page 
of the Divine intellect, and yet are all embodied beings loud in their cries and 
complaints against the decrees of Heaven which is owing to their ignorance, 
and tending to their bitter grief and vain lamentation. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


Resolution of Duality into Unity. 


Argument. — Unity, the source, substance, and ultimum of plurality, which is 
resolved to unity. The Doctrine of monotheism. One in all and all into one. 


VASISHTHA said: — Tell me, my lord, that bearest the crescent of the moon 
on thy forehead, how the pure and simple essence of the intellect, which is an 
infinite unity and ever uniform and immutable in its nature, is transmuted to 
the finite dualities of the variable and impure soul and mind. (Moreover, the 
whole equal to a part is quite absurd and impossible). 


2. Tell me, O great god! how this uncaused prime cause, becomes diffused in 
endless Varieties, and how can we get rid of the plurality of our creeds by our 
wisdom, for putting an end to our miseries. (By means of our belief in the true 
unity). 


3. The god replied: — When the omnipotent God (sad), remains as one unity 
of immensity (Eka Brahma); it is then of course absurd, to speak of his duality 
or plurality, and of the manifestation of a part or minim of himself. (The 
whole cannot be a part). 


4. Taking the monad for a duad, is to ascribe duality to unity; and the 
imputation of dualism or bipartition to the simple intellect, is wholly futile 
from its nature of indivisibility. (So says the sruti: — The one is no dual nor a 
bipartite thing. In Him there is no plurality, diversity or any particularity 
whatever. [Sanskrit: natu taddvitiyamasti tati-nya hvibhaktam | nanuneha 
ndndstikincana.]) 


5. The want of the number one, causes the absence both of unity, duality; 
because there can be no dual without the singular, nor a single one unless 
there be the number two above it. (i.e., There can be no duality without the 
prime and preceding unity; nor even the unity unless it is followed by duality; 
because the prime number would be indefinite and indetermined without the 


succeeding ones). 


6. The cause and its effect being of one nature (or essence), they are both of 
the same kind, as the fruit and the seed contained in it. The difference which is 
attributed to them from the change of one thing to the other, is a mere fiction 
of imagination. 


7. The mind itself evolves in its thoughts at its own will; the changes 
occurring in itself, are no way different from its own nature; as the mutual 
productions of seed and fruit, are of the same nature, the same fruit produces 
the same seeds, and these again bring forth the same fruits, etc. (So the mind 
and its thoughts, are the same things and of the self-same nature). 


8. Many modifications incessantly rise in the infinite mind of the almighty 
Maker as its eternal will, and these taking place in actu in positive existences, 
and substantive forms bear the relation of causes and their effects in this 
world. 


9. These productions are likened to the waves of waters in the sea, and mirage 
to the progeny of a barren woman, and the horns of a hare, — all which are nil 
and not in being. They are all as negative as the water on the mountain-top, 
and as the barley corn growing on the head of a hare. (In all these instances 
the producer or container is a reality; but the produced or contained waves 
etc., are false; and so is Brahma the producer and container of all as positive 
entity, but the production of the world is null and void). 


10. Herein enquiring into the real truth, we must refrain from logomachy; and 
find that though all things tend to stablish the unity, yet it is difficult even in 
thought to do away with the difference of things, as that of words and their 
senses. (that is to say, though unity is the result of right reason, yet duality is 
inseparable from common sense). 


11. The essence of divine omnipotence, is not divisible into portions or their 
fractions, like the waves of the sea, that are broken into bubbles and particles 
of waters. 


12. As the leaves and stalks and branches and flowers of trees, are no other 
than the same substance; so unity and duality, meity and tuity and the 
objectivity of the phenomenal world, are not different from the essence of the 
subjective intellect, which contains and puts forth itself in all these forms. 


13. All time and place and variety of figures and forms, being but 
modifications of the intellect, it is improper for us to question the reality of 


those, and assert the certainty of this intellect. 


14. The entities of time and space, and the powers of action and destiny, 
(divine ordinance), are all derived from and directed by the intellect and bear 
their intellectual natures also. 


15. As the power of thinking, the thought and its object, jointly compose the 
principle of mind; so the whole universe and everything that bears a name, are 
all included under the term chit or intellect; as the water and its rise and fall, 
are all included under the word wave. 


16. The thoughts which continually rise and fall, in the great ocean of the 
intellect; are like the waves which heave and set down, on the surface of the 
boisterous sea. 


17. It is this supreme intellect which is known by the various appellations of 
the Lord, God, Truth, Siva and others; as also by the various names of 
vacuum, unity and the supreme spirit. 


18. Such is the nature of God, whom no words can express; and who is styled 
the Ego or the subjective, “I am that I am,” and whom it is beyond the power 
of speech to describe. 


19. All that is seen all around, are but the leaves, fruits, flowers and branches 
of the all-creeping plant of the intellect; which being diffused in all, leaves 
nothing that is different from it. 


20. The divine intellect, [Sanskrit: chit], being omniscient, [Sanskrit: 
mahdvidyd], has the great nescience or ignorance, [Sanskrit: mahd avidyd] 
underlying it (as the lighted lamp is accompanied by the shadow under it); and 
then looking at this side of itself it takes the name of the living soul, and 
beholds this shadowy world stretched outside the divine mind, as we see 
another moon in the reflexion of that luminary, cast upon a nebular circle 
beyond it. 


21. Then thinking itself as another or a living being, Jiva, and other wise than 
what it is, (i.e., the immortal spirit paramdtma); it becomes just of the same 
nature, as it thinks and forms itself by its own will. 


22. Being thus transformed from its perfect and immaculate state, to that of an 
imperfect and impure nature; it is made to wade amidst the stream of this 
world, without ever thinking (of its fall from the state of original purity). 


23. The intellectual form being then assimilated with the elemental 


(puryashtaka) body, receives its vital or mortal life and living soul, which 
lives by reflexion of the essence of the supreme intellect. 


24. The spiritual body is also transformed to the frail living body, which being 
joined with quintessence of quintuple elements, comes to know itself as 
material substance (dravymas miti). 


25. This substance being next infused with the vital breath, receives soon after 
its vigor and strength like the seed of a plant; and then it feels itself to be 
endued with life, and to be conceived in the uterus in its own conception. 


26. The same erroneous conception of its gross materiality, misleads to the 
belief of its own egoism and personality. It conceives also its state of a 
moving or unmoving being, and this conception of it converts it instantly into 
the like form. (We have the forms, as we picture to ourselves in our minds). 


27. Again, the simultaneous meeting of former reminiscence with the later 
desire of a person, changes its former habitual and meaner form, to that of a 
larger and grosser kind. (Thus, one that had been a contemptible gnat in its 
previous state of existence, is come to a big elephant in its next birth, not from 
its remembrance of its former state of life, but from its settled desire of 
becoming the would be being in the next. So it is the will, [Sanskrit: vaésand], 
that supersedes the former impression, [Sanskrit: samskdra], of what one had 
been before, and transforms it to what it wishes to be afterwards. Hence the 
will is the parent of thoughts). 


28. The difference and duality of one from its identity and unity, are results of 
one's thinking himself otherwise than what he really is; as a man becomes a 
devil by thinking himself possessed by a ghost. 


29. The thought of the duality of one self-same soul, in its two aspects of the 
supreme and human souls; is driven away by the persuasion that I do nothing, 
and the agency of all actions rests in the great God himself. 


30. The unity is considered as a duality, by the dualistic opinions of men; 
while on the other hand the belief in unity, destroys the conviction of dualism 
and plurality from the minds of men. 


31. There is no duality or secondary being in the soul, which may be regarded 
as the supreme soul, because there is but one soul only, which is 
unchangeable and unperishable at all times and everywhere. (All other 
changing and finite beings, are but reflexions of the supreme). 


32. All works of imagination are dispersed, with the dispersion of the fumes 


of fancy; as one's aerial castle and the fairy city, vanish after the flight of the 
phrenzy and the visionary dream. 


33. It is painful to raise a fabric of imagination, but there is no pain whatever 
in breaking it down; because the chimera of imagination is well skilled in 
building the aerial cities, and not in demolishing them. (Which belongs to the 
province of reason only). 


34. If the fullness of one's desires and fancies, is fraught with the pains and 
troubles of life, it must be the want of such wishes and views, that will serve 
to set him free from these pains forever. 


35. If even a slight desire is enough to expose a man to many cares in life, 
then its utter privation must afford him complete rest and quiet, in his transient 
state of being. 


36. When your mind has got loose, from the manifold folds of your serpentine 
desires; you will then come to enjoy the sweets of the garden of paradise. 
(Had it not been for the serpent's insinuation to taste the fatal fruit, our first 
parents would be left to enjoy all the sweets of Paradise). 


37. Drive away and disperse the clouds of your desire, by the breeze of your 
reason; and come and enjoy your rest, under the calm and clear autumnal sky 
of your indifference, — non-chalance. 


38. Dry the impetuous current of your rapid desires, by the charms of amulets 
and mantras; and then restrain yourself from being borne away by the flood, 
and restrict your mind to its dead inaction. 


39. Rely thy trust in the intellectual soul, chiddtmd, seated in the cavity of thy 
heart, and look on mankind driven to and fro by the gusts of their desire, like 
fragments of straw flying at random in the perturbed air. 


40. Wash out the dirt of thy desires from thy mind, by the pure water of thy 
spiritual knowledge; and after securing the perfect tranquillity of thy soul, 
continue to enjoy the highest bliss of a holy life. 


41. God is all powerful and omnipresent, and displays himself in all forms 
everywhere. (He is seen in the same manner as one desires to behold him in a 
temporal or spiritual light. [Sanskrit: vrashma kdranena bhogmakdranena bd 
yatha bhdvayate tatha pashyati)). 


42. It is the thought or imagination, that makes the false world appear as true; 
and it depends upon the thought also, that the world vanishes into nothing. 


(The existence and inexistence of the world; depend alike on the thoughts of 
divine and human minds; the positive and negative are all creations of the 
mind). 


43. It is the network of our thoughts and desires, that is interwoven with the 
threads of our repeated births; but the winds of our apathy and indifference 
blow off this web, and settle us in the state of supreme felicity. 


44. Avarice is a thorny plant, that has taken deep root in the human heart; it is 
fostered under the shade of the arbor of desire, root out this tree of desire, and 
the thorny bush of avarice will fade away of itself. 


45. The world is a shadow and a pseudoscope, and rises to view and 
disappears by turns; it is an error of the brain that presents the sight of the 
course of nature, (sansriti), like that of the fairy land presented to us in a 
dream. 


46. The king that forgets his nature of the Lord, mistakes himself for a prince, 
or that he is born or become the ruler of the land; this concept of his which 
springs from ignorance of his divine nature, vanishes soon after he comes to 
the real knowledge of himself. 


47. The king in possession of his present royalty, has no reminiscence of his 
past and former state; as we do not recollect the foulness of the past rainy 
weather, in the serenity of the present autumn. 


48. The thought that is predominant in the mind, naturally prevails over the 
fainter and weaker ones, as the highest pitch in music suppresses the bass 
tones, and takes possession of the ear. 


49. Think in yourself that you are one, (unit or the unity), and that you are the 
soul (or supreme soul); keep this single reflection before you, and holding fast 
to it, you will become the object of your meditation. (This is called [Sanskrit: 
dtmapuja], spiritual adoration, or assimilating one's self to the supreme soul). 


50. Such is the spiritual meditation of spiritualists like yourself, who aspire to 
the highest felicity of the supreme Being; while the external form of worship, 
is fit only for ungoverned minds, that rapt only for their temporal welfare. In 
formal worship composed of the worshipper, the formalities of the ritual and 
the articles of offerings, are symbolical of ignorant minds, and too 
insignificant to the wise. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Sermon of Siva on the same subject. 


Argument. — The divine state, above the quadruple conditions of waking, 
sleeping, dreaming and profound sleep. 


The god continued: — Such is the constitution of this world, composed of 
reality and unreality, and bearing the stamp of the almighty; it is composed 
both of unity and duality, and yet it is free from both. (To the ignorant it 
appears as a duality, composed of the mind and matter; but the wise take it 
neither as the one or the other, but the whole to pan, — the root of pantheism). 


2. It is the disfigurement of the intellect by foul ignorance, that views the outer 
world as distinct from its maker; but to the clear sighted there is no separate 
outer world, but both blend together in the unity. 


3. The perverted intellect which considers itself as the body, is verily confined 
in it; but when it considers itself to be a particle of and identic with the divine, 
it is liberated from its confinement. (In the mortal and material frame). 


4. The intellect loses its entity, by considering the duality of its form and 
sense; and be combined with pleasure and pain, it retains no longer its real 
essence. 


5. Its true nature is free from all designation, and application of any significant 
term or its sense to it; and the words pure, undivided, real or unreal, bear no 
relation to what is an all-pervasive vacuity. 


6. Brahma the all and full (to pans plenum), who is perfect tranquillity, and 
without a second, equal or comparison, expands himself by his own power as 
the infinite and empty air; and stretches his mind in three different directions 
of the three triplicates. (Namely, 1 of creation, preservation and destruction of 
the universe; — 2 the three states of waking, sleeping, and dreaming; — 3 the 
union of the three powers, — the supernal, natural and material agencies. 


7. The mind being curbed with all its senses and organs in the great soul, there 
appears a dazzling light before it, and the false world flies away from it, as the 
shade of night disappears before the sunlight. (This verse is explained in the 
gloss to refer both to the supreme spirit before creation, as also to the Yogi 
who distracts his mind and senses from the outer world, and sees a blazing 
light stretched over his soul). 


8. The imaginary world recedes from view, and falls down like a withered 
leaf; and the living soul remains like a fried grain, without its power of 
vegetation or reproduction. 


9. The intellect being cleared from the cloud of illusion, overhanging the 
deluded mind, shines as clearly as the vault of the autumnal sky; and is then 
called pashyanti or seeing from its sight of the supernatural, and utsrijanti 
also from its renunciation of all worldly impressions. (This is called also the 
cognoscent soul, from its cognition of recondite and mysterious truths). 


10. The Intellect being settled in its original, pure and sedate state, after it has 
passed under the commotions of worldly thoughts; and when it views all 
things in an equal and indifferent light, it is said to have crossed over the 
ocean of the world. (The course of worldly life is compared to a perilous sea 
voyage, and perfect apathy and indifference to the world, is said to secure the 
salvation of the soul). 


11. When the intellect is strong in its knowledge of perfect susupti or 
somnolence over worldly matters; it is said to have obtained its rest in the 
state of supreme felicity, and to be freed from the doom of transmigration in 
future births. (The perfect rest of the next world, is begun with one's ecstasis 
in this). 


12. I have now told you, O great Vipra, all about the curbing and weakening 
of the mind, which is the first step towards the beatification of the soul by 
Yoga; now attend to me to tell you, concerning the second step of the 
edification and strengthening of the intellect. 


13. That is called the unrestricted power of the intellect, which is fraught with 
perfect peace and tranquillity; which is full of light, clear of the darkness of 
ignorance, and as wide stretched as the clear vault of heaven. 


14. It is as deep as our consciousness in profound sleep, as hidden as a mark 
in the heart of a stone; as sweet as the flavour in salt, and as the breath of wind 
after a storm. (All these examples show the strength of the soul, to consist in 
its close compactness). 


15. When the living principle comes to its end at any place, in course of time; 
the intellect takes it flight like some invisible force in open air, and mixes with 
the transcendent vacuum. 


16. It gets freed from all its thoughts and thinkables, as when the calm sea is 
freed from its fluctuation; it becomes as sedate as when the winds are still, and 
as imperceptible as when the flower-cup emits its fragrance. 


17. It is liberated from the bonds and ideas of time and place (by its 
assimilation to infinity and immortality); it is freed from the thought of its 
appertaining to or being a part of anything in the world; it is neither a gross or 
subtle substance, and becomes a nameless essence. (The intellect or soul bears 
distinctive mark or peculiarity of its own, except that it is something which 
has nothing in common with anything in the world). 


18. It is not limited by time and space, and is of the nature of the unlimited 
essence of God; it is a form and fragment of the quadruple state of Brahma or 
Virdj, (Sanskrit: tiryya turyyamdsa], and is without any stain, disease or 
decay. 


19. It is something witnessing all things with its far-seeing sight, it is the all at 
all times and places, it is full light in itself, and sweeter far than the sweetest 
thing in the world. (Nothing sweeter than one's self). 


20. This is what I told you the second stage of Yoga meditation, attend now, O 
sage! that art true to your vows, and dost well understand the process of Yoga, 
to what I will relate to you regarding its third stage. 


21. This sight of intellect is without a name, because it contains like the 
Divine Intellect, all the thinkables (or objects of thought) within its ample 
sphere, as the great ocean of the world, grasps all parts of the globe within its 
spacious circumference. It extends beyond the meaning of the word 
Brahmdtma or the ample spirit of the god Brahma in its extension ad 
infinitum. (It resembles the comprehensive mind of God). 


22. It is by great enduring patience, that the soul attains in course of a long 
time, this steady and unsullied state of its perfection, purushdrtha; and it is 
after passing this and the fourth stage, that the soul reaches to its supreme and 
ultimate state of felicity. 


23. After passing the successive grades and until reaching the ultimate state, 
one must practice his Yoga in the manner of Siva the greatest of the Yogis; 
and then he will obtain in himself the unremitting holy composure of the third 


stage. 


24. By long continuance in this course, the pilgrim is led to a great distance, 
which transcends all my description, but may be felt by the holy devotee who 
advances in his course. 


25. I have told you already of the state, which is beyond these three stages; 
and do you, O divine sage! ever remain in that state, if you wish to arrive to 
the state of the eternal God. 


26. This world which seems as material, will appear to be infused with the 
spirit of God when it is viewed in its spiritual light, but upon right observation 
of it, it is neither the one nor the other (but a reflexion of divine mind). 


27. This what neither springs into being nor ceases to exist; but is ever calm 
and quiet and of one uniform lustre, and swells and extends as the embryo in 
the womb. (The embryo is to be understood in a spiritual sense from God's 
conception of the world in his mind). 


28. The undualistic unity of God, his motionlessness and the solidity of his 
intelligence, together with the unchangeableness of his nature, prove the 
eternity of the world, although appearing as instantaneous and evanescent. 
(The solid intelligence is shown in the instances of solidified water in ice and 
snow, and in the froth and salt of sea water). 


29. The solidity of the intellect produces the worlds in the same manner as the 
congealed water causes the hail-stones, and there is no difference between the 
existent and non-existent, since all things are ever existent in the divine mind. 
(Though appearing now and then to me or you as something new). 


30. All is good (siva or solus) and quiet, and perfect beyond the power of 
description; the syllable om is the symbol of the whole, and its components 
compose the four stages for our salvation. (All is good. And God pronounced 
all was good. See the quadruple stages comprised in the letter om, in our 
introduction to the first volume of this work). 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


Adoration of the great God Maha-deva. 


Argument. — Of Mahadeva, the father of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva and the 
manner of his worship. 


VASISHTHA said: — Then Hara, who is the lake of the lotus of Gauri, (i.e., 
her husband), being desirous of my enlightenment, glanced on me for a 
minute, and gave utterance to his lecture. 


2. His eyes flashed with light under his heavenly forehead, and were as two 
caskets of his understanding, which scattered its rays about us. (The eyes are 
the indexes of men's understanding in Physiognomy). 


3. The god said: — O sage, call your thoughts home, and employ them soon 
to think of your own essence; and to bring about your ends, as the breezes of 
heaven convey the fragrance to the nostrils. (The mind is usually compared in 
its fleetness with the winds, and therefore, the task of the breezes is imposed 
upon the thoughts, which are as vagaries unless they answer one's purposes). 


4. When the object long sought for is got in one's possession, what else is 
there for one to desire any more. I who have known and come to the truth, 
have nothing to expect as desirable nor anything to reject as despicable. 
(When one is possessed of his sole object, he is indifferent about all others, 
whether they be good or bad). 


5. When you have got your mastery over yourself, both in the states of your 
peace and disquiet; you should apply yourself to the investigation of yourself 
or soul, without attending to anything besides. (Nothing better than self- 
culture, and the advancement and salvation of one's own soul). 


6. You may at first depend on your observations of the phenomenal, (as 
preparatory to your knowledge of the noumenal), which you will now learn 
from my lecture, if you will attend to it with diligence. 


7. After saying in this manner, the holder of the trident told me, not to rely on 
my knowledge of the externals, but to attend to the internal breathings, which 
move this abode of the body, as the physical forces move a machine. 


8. The lifeless body being without its breathing, becomes dull and dull and 
dumb as a block; its power of movement being derived from the air of breath, 
but its powers of thought and knowledge are attributed to the intellect. 


9. This intellect has a form more rare and transparent than the vacuous air, it 
is an ens which is the cause of all entities; and is not destroyed by destruction 
of the living body for want of vital breath. 


10. The intellectual is more rarefied and translucent than the ethereal air, and 
never perishes with the body; because it remains as the power of intellection, 
in the mental (percipient) and living body. (The sruti says: — it is the life of 
life, and mind of the mind). 


11. As the clear shining mirror, receives the reflexion of external things; so 
the mind of God reflects all images from within itself, and from nothing 
situated without. 


12. As the soiled glass receives no reflexion of outward things, so the lifeless 
body has no reflexion of anything, though it is preserved to our view. (And so 
are all thoughtless persons considered as dead bodies). 


13. The all-pervasive intellect, though it is formless itself, is yet prone 
towards the movement of sensible objects owing to its sensuous perceptions; 
but coming to the pure understanding of its spiritual nature, it becomes the 
supreme Siva again. 


14. The sages then called this immaculate intellect by the several names of 
Hari, Siva, Brahma, and Indra, who are the givers of the objects of desire to 
all living beings. 


15. It is also styled the fire and air, the sun and moon, and the supreme Lord; 
and it is this which is known as the ubiquious soul and the intellect, which is 
the mine of all intelligence. 


16. It is the lord of gods, the source of celestials, the Dhata or Brahma, the 
lord of gods, and the lord of heaven. Anybody who feels the influence of this 
great intellect in himself, is never subject to illusion. 


17. Those great souls that are known in this world, under the names of 
Brahma, Vishnu, Hara and others, are all but offspring of the supreme 


Intellect, and endowed with a greater portion of it. 


18. They are all as sparks of hot iron, and as particles of water in the immense 
ocean of creation; so all those that are mistaken for gods, have sprung from 
the source of the supreme Intellect. 


19. As long as there exist the seeds of error, and the sources of endless 
networks of imagination; so long the arbour of gross illusion does not cease, 
to sprout in endless ramifications. 


20. The veda, its exposition and the vedic literature, are but tufts of the tree of 
ignorance for the bondage of men; and these again produce many other 
clumps, to hold men fast in their ignorance. 


21. Who can describe the productions of nature, in the course of time and 
place; the gods Hari, Hara, and Brahma are among the number, and have all 
their origin in the supreme Being, — their common father. (So says the 
Atharva Sera Sruti: — [Sanskrit: sarvvamidram brahmdvishnurudrendrdste 
sampamiuyate sarvvani cindrdydnisahamiteh sakdranam kdrandndma.}) 


22. Mahadeva the great god is the root of all, as the seed is the source of the 
branches of trees; He is called the All, (sarva), because He is the essence of 
all things, and the sole cause of our knowledge of all existence. (The Purana 
says to the same effect). [Sanskrit: trayaste kdrandtmdadnah jdtah 
mdhdamaheshvarat | tapasd topathitva tam pitaram parameshvaram |] 


23. He is the giver of strength to all beings, he is self-manifest in all, and is 
adorable and hallowed by all. He is the object of perception to them that know 
him, and is ever present in all places. (The word Mahadeva commonly applied 
to Siva, originally meant the great god, as in the definition of the term in the 
gloss. [Sanskrit: mahatyaparicchinne dtmajndna yogaishvartye mahiyate 
pujyate iti mahddevah.] So the sruti also: — [Sanskrit: yo dtmajndna 
yogaishvaryye mahati mahivate tasmdducyate mahddevah.}) 


24. There is no need of addressing invocatory mantras unto the Lord, who 
being omniscient and omnipresent, knows and sees all things as present before 
him at all places and times. 


25. But being always invoked (or prayed unto) in the mind, this god who 
resides in everything is attainable by us in every place; and in whatever form 
doth one's intellect appear to him, it is all for his good. (This passage means 
the visible form in which the deity makes his manifestation to the devotee). 


26. He takes upon him the visible form, according to the thought in the mind 


of the worshipper, and this form is to be worshipped first of all with proper 
homage, as the most adorable Lord of gods. 


27. Know this as the ultimate of the knowables of the greatest minds; and 
whoso has beheld this self-same soul, is freed from fears and sorrows and the 
complaints of old age, and is released from future transmigration, like a fried 
grain which vegetates no more. 


28. By worshipping this well known and unborn first cause in one's self and at 
ease, (i.e., without the formal rite); everyone is freed from his fears, and 
attains his supreme felicity, why then do you bewilder yourselves amidst the 
visible vanities of the world. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Description of the Supreme Deity Parameswara. 


Argument. — Description of god as the Producer of all, and present in every 
form; his purity from his intangibleness and his great grandeur. 


The god added: — Know now the lord god Rudra, who in the form of one 
self-same intellect, is situated within every form of being, as is of the nature 
of self-conscious (Swanubhiati) in everyone. 


2. He is the seed of seeds, and the pith and marrow of the course of nature; 
know it also as the agent of all actions, and the pure gist of the intellect also. 


3. He is the pure cause of all causes, without any cause of himself; he is the 
producer and sustainer of all, without being produced or supported himself by 
another. 


4. He is the sensation of all sensible beings, and the sense of all sensitive 
things; he is the sensibility of all sensuous objects, and the highest object of 
our sensuousness, and the source of endless varieties. 


5. He is the pure light of all lights (of the sight, luminaries efc.), and yet, 
invisible by all of them. He is the increate and supernatural light, the source of 
all sources of light and the great mass of the light of Intellect. 


6. He is no positive (or material) existence, but the real (or essential) entity; he 
is all quiet and beyond the common acceptations of reality and unreality, 
(Being no absolute or relative entity or non-entity). And among the positive 
ideas of the great entity, etc., (mahdsattwddi), know him as the Intellect alone 
and no other. (Many kinds of Entities are enumerated in Indian philosophy, 
such as: — [Sanskrit: matyena chdvahdrikena | satyena_prdtibha 
sikendbasthdtva yena.] Again, [Sanskrit: mahdsatta, jagat satta, ddisattda 
karana vydktatasattd.]) 


7. He becomes the colour, colouring and colouror; He becomes as high as the 


lofty sky, and as low as the lowly hut. (The colour, — rdga, means the 
passion and feelings also; and the sky and hut mean the empty space and 
decorated cottage). 


8. There are in the expanded mind of this Intellect millions of worlds like 
sands in the desert, likewise many of these like blossoms of trees, have blown 
away, others are full-blown, and many more will come to blow here after. 


9. It is ever burning, as an inextinguishable flame by its own inherent fire; and 
though it is ever emitting innumerable sparks of its essence all about, yet there 
is no end of its light and heat and fire. 


10. It contains in its bowels the great mountains, likening the particles of dust 
(or rather as the roes of a fish); it covers also the highest mountains, as the 
lofty sky hides the dusts on earth. So the sruti: — Greater than the greatest 
and smaller than the smallest. [Sanskrit: aniraniyan mahatimahiyat] 


11. It comprehends the great, — mahdkalpa millennium, like a twinkling of 
the eye; and is also contained in a Kalpa age, in its quick motion of a 
twinkling. (i.e., He is eternity as well as jot of time). 


12. Though minuter than the point of a hair, yet it encompasses the whole 
earth (as its boundary line); and the seven oceans that encircle the earth with 
their vests, cannot gird the great Infinity. 


13. He is called the great creator of the universe, though he creates nothing, 
(Like the makers of other things); and though he does all actions, yet he 
remains as doing nothing (by his calm quietness). 


14. Though the deity is included under the category of substance, yet he is no 
substance at all; and though there be no substantiality in him, yet his spirit is 
the substratum of all things. (All along he is the figure of vaiparitya or 
opposition, which well applies to Brahma who is all and nil or the omnium et 
nullum, Sarvamasarvam. (Though bodiless, he is the great body of the 
universe corpus mundi, — viswartpa or Virdj.)) 


15. He is adya, — (hodie) today, and prdtar, — practer tomorrow, and though 
the preter and future, yet he is always present. Wherefore he is neither now or 
then, but sempiternal and forever. 


16. He is not in the babbling and prattling of babes and boys, nor in the 
bawling of beasts and brutes, nor in the jargon of savages; but equally 
understood by all in their peculiar modes of speech. (This is the interpretation 
of the gloss; but the words of the text are unintelligible and meaningless). 


17. These words are meaningless and are yet true, like the obsolete words 
occurring in the vedas. Therefore, no words can truly express what is God, 
because they are not what he is (but mere emblems). These difficult passages 
are not explained in the gloss and left out in the Calcutta edition. 


18. I bow down to him who is all, in whom all reside and from whom they all 
proceed, and who is in all place and time, and who is diffused through all and 
called the one and all, — to pan. 


19. In this verbiology of obscure words, there will be found some fully 
expressive of the meaning, as in a forest of thick wood we happen to fragrant 
flowers, which we pluck and bear with us in handfuls. (The entangled 
phraseology of the stanza will bear no literal translation). 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


The stage play and Dance of Destiny. 


Argument. — Of the endless powers or saktis of Siva, among whom the 
power of Destiny is described in this. 


The God rejoined: — The beauty of the words said before is palpable, and 
their senses all allude to the truth, that the Lord of all is the rich chest of gems 
of all things in existence. (The gloss is too verbose in the explanation of this 


passage). 


2. How very bright are the rays of the gems contained in the receptacle of the 
supreme Intellect, that shines forth with the collected light of all the luminous 
worlds in it. (It means to say, that the Divine intellect must be brighter far 
than all the orbs of light contained in it). 


3. The essence of the intellect flies in the air in the form of the granular farina, 
and becomes the embryotic corpuscula; which in the manner of the vegetable 
seed, sprouts forth into the germ in its proper time, soil, moisture and 
temperature. (The gloss explains the essence satta to mean the energy, — 
sakti, which is represented as the female attribute of the Divinity). 


4. This power of the intellect, moves in the forms of froth and foam, and 
eddies and whirl pools in the sea; and rolls its waters against the hard stones 
of the beach. (The liquid waters are moving things that are hard to touch). 


5. It is settled in the form of flavour in the clusters of flowers; it makes them 
full-blown, and carries their fragrance to the nostrils. 


6. Seated on bodies of stone (stony rocks), it makes them produce un-stone- 
like substances; (as the trees and their foliage and flowers of various hues); 
and makes the mountains to support the earth without their actually upholding 
it. (The mountains are called bhudharas or supports of the earth.) 


7. The intellect takes the form of the air, which is the source of all vibrations, 


and touches the organ of touch (skin); with as much tenderness as a father 
touches the body of his child. 


8. As the divine power extends itself in everything, so it contracts the essences 
of all things in a mass within itself; and having absorbed the whole in the 
divine entity, makes all nature a vacuous nullity. 


9. It casts the reflexion of its own clear image, in the transparent mirror of 
vacuum; and takes upon itself the pellucid body of eternity, containing all 
divisions of time. 


10. Then there issues the power of Destiny, which predominates over the five 
principal divinities; and determines the ultimate fate of all that, “this is to be 
so, and this otherwise.” 


11. It is in the presence of the bright light of the all witnessing eye of the great 
God, that the picture of the universe presents itself to our sight; as the 
presence of the lighted lamp in the room, shows us the lights of the things 
contained in it. 


12. The universal vacuum contains the great theatre of the universe, wherein 
the Divine powers and energies are continually playing their parts, and the 
spirit of God is the witness thereof. 


13. Vasishtha asked: — What are the powers of that Siva, (Jove), my lord! 
who are they and where are they situated; what is number, and how are they 
employed and who is their witness. 


14. The god replied: — The god Siva is the benignant, incomprehensible and 
tranquil supreme soul; He is gracious and formless and of the nature of the 
pure intellect only. 


15. His essences are volition, vacuity, duration and destiny; and also the 
qualities of infinity and fulness. 


16. Beside these he has the properties of intelligence and action, as also of 
causality and quietude; and there are many other powers in the spirit of Siva, 
of which there is no reckoning nor end. 


17. Vasishtha rejoined: — Whence came these powers to him, and how had 
they their variety and plurality; tell me, my lord! whence they arose, and how 
they were separated (from omnipotence which comprehends them all). 


18. The god replied: — The god Siva who is intellect only of himself, has 
endless forms also (according to his endless attributes), and the powers that I 


have said to belong to him, are little and no way different essentiality. (The 
properties that are predicated of god, belong to his intrinsical nature and not 
derived from without). 


19. It is the discrimination of the powers of intelligence, action, passion, 
vision and others; that the powers of God are said to be many and different 
from one another, like the waves of the sea (which appears in the different 
shapes of billows, surges, etc.). 


20. Thus do those different powers act their several parts for ever, in the grand 
stage of the universe; as the ages, years, months and weeks and days, play 
their parts under direction of time, — the manager of the stage. 


21. That power which appears as the one or another, is called the divine 
powers of destiny; and is distinguished by the several appellations of action, 
energy or will of God, or the dispensation of his Time. (Time is said to be the 
producer, sustainer and leveller of all things. [Sanskrit: kali prabhavati 
dharyyte, praliyate sarvvam tasmdt kdli hi valavattarah)). 


22. That power which determines the states of gods, and those of the great 
Rudras as so and so, and what regulates the conduct of all things from a mean 
straw to the great Brahma, is called the predominant doom or destiny. 


23. This destiny continues to dance about the great arena of the universe, until 
the mind is cleared of her bugbear and freed from anxiety by the knowledge 
of truth (that it is the Divine will which destines the destiny). 


24. The play of destiny is very pleasing to behold, owing to the variety of its 
characters and contrivances, and the quick changes of the scenes, and the 
repeated entrances and exits of its players and actors. It is conducted all along 
with the music of the drums and trumpets of the roaring clouds of the 
Kalpanta-doomsday. (i.e., On the last day of universal dissolution, when the 
dance of destiny and her play are over). 


25. The vault of heaven is the canopy over this stage, the season flowers are 
its decorations, and the showers of rain serve for the sprinkling of rose waters 
in it. 


26. The dark clouds hung about the heavens are, the blue hanging screens 
around this stage, and the sexcenti as of the earth with the shining gems in 
their bosom, serve for the ornamented pits and galleries of this playhouse. 


27. The shining sky with its sight of the days and watches, and its eyes of the 
twinkling stars; is witnessing the continual rise and fall of all being, and the 


plunging and up heaving of mountaintops at the great deluge. 


28. The revolving luminaries of the sun and moon, and the rolling currents of 
the Ganges, appear as the pearly jewels on the person of this actress, and the 
lustre of the twilight seems as the red red-dye of her palms. 


29. The incessant motion of the upper and nether worlds, with the continued 
gingling of their peoples, resemble the footsteps of this dancing destiny, with 
the ringing trinkets and anklets fastened to her feet. 


30. The sunshine and moonbeams, represent the lustre of her smiling face; and 
the twinkling stars in the sky, resemble the drops of sweat trickling on her 
face. 


31. These very many worlds are supposed as so many apartments of this great 
theatre. 


32. The two states of pleasure and pain or joy and grief, which are destined to 
the lot of all living beings, show the different shows of comic and tragic 
representations. 


33. The changing scenes, that are always seen to take place in the play of 
destiny, at the great stage of this world; are continually witnessed by the great 
God himself, who is neither distant, or distinct from this, nor is this so from 
that. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


On the External Worship of the Deity. 


Argument. — The External worship of God in his outward temple, with 
bodily acts and service. And also of Internal adoration in spirit or the Way to 
Liberation. 


The god continued: — This god who is the supreme Lord, is the adorable one 
of the wise; in the form of the intellect and conscious soul, and as all- 
pervading and support of all. 


2. He is situated alike in the pot and painting, in the tree and hut, in the 
vehicle and in all men and brute animals; under the several names of Siva, 
Hara, and Hari, as also of Brahma, Indra, Agni, and Yama. 


3. He is in the inside and outside of all as the universal soul, and always 
dwells in spirit and in the soul of every wise person. This Lord is worshipped 
in various forms by different people in the many modes as described below. 


4. Hear me first relate to you, O great sage! how this god is worshipped in the 
outward form and formulas; and you will next hear me relate unto you, the 
inward form in which he is worshipped in spirit. 


5. In all forms of worship you must cease to think of your body, and separate 
your mind from your person, however purified it may be; (By your ablution 
and the like). You must then apply your mind diligently to think of the pure 
and bodiless soul, which witnesseth the operations of the body from its inside. 


6. His worship consists in his inward meditation only, and in no other mode of 
outward worshipping. Therefore, apply your mind in the adoration of the 
universal soul, in its meditation in your soul only. 


7. He is of the form of the intellect, the source of all light and glorious as 
millions of suns; He is the light of the inward intellect, and the receptacle 
(origin) of egoism and tuism. (i.e., of the subjective and objective). 


8. His head and shoulders reach above the heaven of heavens, and lotus-like 
feet descend far below the lowest abyss of vacuity. 


9. His arms extend to the endless bounds of all sides and space; and hold in 
them the many worlds in the infinite firmament as their wielding weapons and 
arms. 


10. The worlds rolling over one another, rest in a corner of his capacious 
bosom; His effulgence passes beyond the limit of the unlimited vacuum, and 
his person stretches beyond all imaginable bounds. (Extends through all 
extent. — Pope). 


11. Above, below, in all four quarters and in all sides of the compass, he 
extends unspent and without end; and is beset in all sides by the host of gods, 
Brahma, Rudra, Hari and Indra, and the demi gods also. 


12. These series of creatures are to be considered as the rows of hairs on his 
body; and the different courses of their actions, are as the strings binding the 
machines of the world together. 


13. His will and destiny are powers proceeding from his person, as his active 
agencies in nature, such is the Lord, — the supreme one, who is always to be 
worshipped by the best of men. 


14. He is the intellect only and the conscious soul, the all-pervading and the 
all supporting spirit; and resides alike in the pot and painting, as in the moving 
car as also in living animals. 


15. He is Siva, Hari, and Hara, Brahma, Indra, Fire, and Yama; He is the 
receptacle of endless beings, and the aggregate body of all essences or the sole 
entity of entities. 


16. He contains this mundane sphere, together with all the worlds with their 
mountains and all other contents in himself; and the all-powerful time which 
hurls them ever onward, is the warder at the doorway of his eternity. 


17. The great god Mahadeva, is to be thought upon as dwelling in some part 
of this body of eternity and infinity, with his body and its members, and with a 
thousand ears and eyes. (This is same with the macrocosm of Virdj in the 
vedas). 


18. This figure has moreover a thousand heads and a thousand hands with 
their decorations. It has as many eyes all over its body with their powers of 
sight and so many ears also with their power of hearing. 


19. It has the powers of feeling or touch and taste all over its person, as also, 
the power of hearing in the whole body, and that of thinking in its mind 
within. 


20. It is however wholly beyond all conception, and is perfectly good and 
gracious to all. It is always the doer of all things that are done, and the 
bestower of every blessing on all beings. 


21. It is always situated in the inside of all beings; and is the giver of strength 
and energy to all. Having thought upon the Lord of Gods in this manner, the 
devotee is to worship him in the usual method of the ritual. 


22. Now hear me tell you, that are best acquainted with Brahma, of the mode 
of worshipping him in spirit; which consists only in adoring him in the 
conscious soul, and not in presenting offerings unto him. 


23. It requires no illumination nor fumigation of incense; It has no need of 
flowers or decorations, nor does require the oblations of rice or sprinkling of 
perfumes or sandal paste. 


24. It needs no exhalation of saffron or camphor, nor any painting or other 
things, (as chouri-flappers and the like); nor has it any need of pouring the 
water, which is easily obtainable everywhere. 


25. It is only by effusion of the nectareous juice of the understanding, that the 
god is worshipped; and this is styled the best kind of meditation and adoration 
of deity by the wise. 


26. The pure intellect which is known to be always present within one's self, is 
to be constantly looked into and sought after, heard about, and felt both when 
one is sleeping or sitting or moving about. 


27. By constantly talking on the subject, and resuming the inquiry after 
leaving it off, one becomes fully conscious of himself; and then he should 
worship his lord the self-same soul in his meditation of it. 


28. The offering of the heart in meditation of the Lord, is more delectable to 
him than the sweetest articles of food, offered with the choices and most 
fragrant flowers. 


29. Meditation joined with self-consciousness or contriteness of soul, is the 
best pddya and arghya water and offering that is worthy of the Lord; because 
the best meditation is that which is accompanied with the flower, — self- 
offering to the Lord. (For naught avails the most intense meditation of the 


mind, when the heart and soul are not devoted to the service of the Lord). 


30. Without this kind of meditation, it is impossible the supreme soul in one's 
self; and therefore, spiritual meditation is said to abound with the grace of 
God and the greatest enjoyment of happiness and prosperity. (So the sruti: — 
Meditation in spirit is attended with all enjoyment and felicity). 


31. As the animal or irrational soul enjoys all its pleasures, in the abode of its 
body; so the rational and spiritual soul derives all its happiness from 
meditation. (Because the Lord being full of felicity, pours out the same into 
the spirit of his devotee). 


32. The ignorant man that meditates on the Lord, for a hundred twinklings of 
the eye; obtains in reward thereof, the merit of making the gift of a milch-cow 
to a Brahman. 


33. The man who worships the Lord in his soul, for half an hour in this 
manner; reaps the reward of making a horse sacrifice (according to law). 


34. He who meditates on the Lord in spirit and in his own spirit, and presents 
the offering of his reflections unto him, is entitled to the merit of making a 
thousand horse sacrifices. 


35. Whoso worships the Lord in this manner for a full hour, receives the 
reward of making the Raj sacrifice; and by worshipping him in this form in 
the midday; he obtains the merit of making many thousands sacrifices of such 
kind. 


36. The man who worships him in this way for a whole day, settles in the 
abode of the deity. 


37. This is called the superior Yoga meditation, and the best service of the 
Lord, as also the external adoration of the soul. 


38. This mode of holy adoration destroys all sins; and whoso practices it for a 
minute with a steady mind, he is certainly entitled to the venerations of gods 
and demi-gods, and placed in the rank of emancipated spirits like myself. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


Mode of the Internal Worship of the Deity. 


Argument. — The inward form in which, He is worshipped in spirit. 


The God resumed: — I will now relate to you, the form of the inward worship 
of the spirit in spirit; which is reckoned as the holy of holies, and dispeller of 
all darkness. 


2. This mode of worship depends also on mental meditation, and is conducted 
in every state of life, whether when one is sitting or walking, or waking or 
sleeping. 


3. It requires the supreme Siva, who is always situated in the body of man; 
and who is the cause of the perception of all things, to be worshipped in spirit 
and in the spirit of man. 


4. Whether you think him, as sleeping or rising, walking or sitting; or whether 
conceive him touching or intangible contact with anything, or quite 
unconnected and aloof from everything about him. 


5. Or whether you take him as enjoying the gross objects, or shunning them 
all by his spiritual nature; or as the maker of all outward objects, and the 
ordainer of all forms of action. — 


6. Or whether you consider him as remaining quiescent in all material bodies, 
or that he is quite apart from all substantial forms; you may worship him in 
whatever form your understanding presents him to you, or what you can best 
conceive of him in your consciousness. 


7. Whoever has fallen in and is carried away by the current of his desires and 
who is purified from his worldliness by the sacred ablution of his good sense; 
should worship the Siva lingam as the emblem of understanding with the 
offering of his knowledge of it. (The Lingam is the type of unity, represented 
by the figure, as the syllable om is the type of trinity expressed by its three 


letters). 


8. He may be contemplated in the form of the sun, shining brightly in the sky; 
as also in that of the moon, which cools the sky with its benign moon beams. 
(Because the sun and moon are included under the eight forms of [God] as we 
see in the Prologue to Sakuntala. [Sanskrit: ye he kdlah vidharttah], etc.). 


9. He is always conscious in himself of all sensible objects, which are ever 
brought under his cognizance by means of his senses, as the breath brings 
fragrance to the nostrils. 


10. He gives flavour to all sweets, and enjoys the sweetness of his felicity, 
(dnanda), in himself; and employs the breathings as his horses, and borne in 
the car of respiration, sleeps in the cell of the heart. 


11. Siva is the witness of all sights, and actor of all actions; he enjoys all 
enjoyments, and remembers all what is known. 


12. He is well acquainted with all the members of his body, and knows all that 
is in existence and inexistence; he is brighter than all luminous objects, and is 
to be thought upon as the all-pervading spirit. 


13. He is without parts and the totality of all parts, and being situated in the 
body, he resides in the vacuity of the heart; he is colourless himself and yet 
paints all things in their variegated colours, and is the sensation of every 
member of the body. 


14. He dwells in the faculty of the mind, and breathes in the respirations of the 
beings; he resides within the heart, throat and palate of the mouth, and has his 
seat amidst the eyebrows and nostrils (as intelligence and breath of life). 


15. He is situated beyond the limit of the thirty-six categories of the saiva 
sdstras, as also of the ten saktis, ([Sanskrit: dashamahdvidyd]), that are known 
to the saktas; he moves the heart and gives articulation to sounds, and makes 
the mind to fly about as a bird of the air. 


16. He resides both in equivocal and alterative words, and is situated in all 
things as the oil in sesame seeds. 


17. He is without the blemish of parts, (being a complete whole in himself), 
and is compact with all the parts of the world taken together. He is situated 
alike in a part of the lotus-like heart of the wise, as well as in all bodies in 
general. 


18. He is as clear as the pure and spotless intellect, and the imputation of parts 


to him is the work of mere imagination only. He is as palpably seen in 
everything at all places, as he is perceptible to us in our inward perception of 
him. 


19. Though originally of the nature of universal intelligence yet he appears in 
the form of the individual soul according to the desire of men; and residing in 
every individual, he is divided into endless dualities (of universal and 
particular souls). 


20. Then this God, (the intelligent individual soul), thinks himself as an 
embodied being, endued with hands and legs, and the other parts and 
members of the body, with its hairs, nails, and teeth. 


21. He thinks of being possessed of manifold and various powers and 
faculties, and is employed in a variety of actions according to the desires of 
the mind. He feels glad on being served by his wives and servants (and 
thinking himself as their master). 


22. He thinks the mind as a porter at the gate, and conductor of the 
information of the three worlds unto him; and his thoughts are as the 
chambermaids, waiting at his door with their pure attires. 


23. He believes his knowledge of egoism as his greatest power and consort, 
(sakti), and his power of action as his mistress; he thinks his knowledge of 
various lores to be his decorations only. 


24. He knows his organs of sense and action to be the doors of the abode of 
his body, and is conscious of his being the infinite soul and inseparable from 
the same. 


25. He knows himself to be full of the universal spirit; filled by and filling 
others with the same; and bears his admirable figure of the body, by his 
dependance on the Divine spirit. 


26. That he is filled with the god-head within him, and is therefore, no 
contemptible soul himself. He never rises nor sets nor is he glad or displeased 
at any time. (But enjoys the serenity of the Eternal soul). 


27. He never feels himself satiate or hungry, nor longs after nor forsakes 
anything; he is ever the same and of an even tenor, temper and conduct and 
form at all times. 


28. He retains the gracefulness of his person, the clearness of his mind, and 
the calmness of his views at all times; he is ever the same since his birth, and 


the equanimity of his soul never forsakes him at any time. 


29. He is devoted to the adoration of his God, for longsome days and nights, 
and the mind abstracted from his body, becomes the object of his worship. 
(The gloss explains it otherwise, and makes the mindless body the worshipped 
object). 


30. This God is worshipped with whatever offerings are available by the 
devotee, and with all the powers of the understanding, employed in the 
adoration of the sole Intellectual spirit. 


31. He is to be worshipped with all things agreeably to the received ritual, and 
no attempt is to be made to make any offering, which was never made at any 
time before. 


32. Man being endued with the body, should worship the Lord with his bodily 
actions, (as prostration, genuflexion, efc.); and with all things that conduce to 
bodily enjoyment. 


33. So is Siva to be worshipped with eatables and victuals, food and drink of 
the best and richest kind; and with beddings and seats and vehicles as one may 
afford to offer. 


34. Men must also entertain their souls, which are the abodes of the Divine 
spirit in their bodies; with all kinds of things that they think pleasurable to 
themselves; such as excellent food and drink and all things affording 
enjoyment and pleasure. 


35. They must diligently serve the supreme soul in their souls, under any 
calamity, difficulty, danger or disease that may befall on them, as also when 
they are overtaken by illusions of their understandings. 


36. The ends of all the attempts of mankind in this world, being no more than 
life, death and sleep, they are all to be employed in the service of the soul of 
nature. 


37. Whether reduced to poverty or elevated to royalty, or carried by the 
currents of casualty; men must always serve their souls, with the flowers of 
their best endeavours. 


38. Whether overwhelmed by broils, or buffeting in the waves of mishaps, 
whether undergoing the troubles or enjoying the comforts of domestic life, 
men must serve their souls at all times. 


39. When the gentle beams of fellow feeling, overspread the breast of kind 


hearted men, and when the sweet influence of sympathy melts the heart, it is 
then must meet to serve the soul seated in it. 


40. When a man has restrained the turbulent passions of his breast, by the 
power of his right judgment; and spread the vest of soft tenderness and sweet 
content over his heart and mind; let him then worship in its serene aspect 
within himself. 


41. Let men worship the soul, on the sudden changes of their fortunes; both 
when they come to the possession, or loss of their enjoyments. (Because the 
Lord gave and the Lord hath taken them away). 


42. The soul should be adhered to and adored, both when you lose or abandon 
your legal or illegal possession and enjoyment, of anything on earth. 


43. Isha, — the lord of wealth, is to be worshipped with relinquishment of all 
wealth, which one may have got by his own exertion or otherwise. (Give your 
all to the giver of all). 


44. Regret not for what is lost, and make use of what you have got; and adore 
the supreme soul without any inconstancy in your mind and soul. 


45. Retain your constancy amidst the scene of the wicked pursuits of men, and 
maintain your vow of the holy devotion of the supreme spirit at all times. 


46. Everything appears as good in the sight of the Godly, who view all things 
in God; and they all seem to be mixed with good and evil to the worshipper of 
God and Mammon. Therefore, look on all things as situated in the divine 
spirit, and continue in your vow of the adoration of the supreme soul. 


47. Things which appear as pleasant or unpleasant at first sight, are all to be 
taken in an equal light, by those that are firm in their vow of the adoration of 
the one universal soul. 


48. Give up thinking yourself as such or not such a one, forsake all 
particularities, and knowing that all is the universal One, continue in your vow 
of adoring the supreme soul. 


49. Worship the supreme spirit as it always resides in all things, in their 
various forms and multifarious changes, and that it is all and all in their 
modifications also. 


50. Forsake both your pursuit after or avoidance of anything, and remaining in 
your indifference of both extremes, continue in your adoration of the soul at 
all times. 


51. Neither seek nor forsake anything, but receive what comes to thee of itself 
or by thy own lot; and enjoy all things as the sea does the streams of water, 
which fall to it of their own accord. 


52. Fallen (placed) in this wide world of misery, man should take no heed of 
the lesser or greater sights of woe, that incessantly present themselves to his 
view. They are as the fleeting tincts and hues that paint the vacuous vault of 
the skies, and soon vanish into nothing. 


53. All good and evil betide us by turns at the junction of their proper time, 
place and action; therefore, take them with unconcern to you, and serve your 
own soul. (Which is same with the soul of souls). 


54. Whatever things are mentioned as fit offerings of the service of the 
supreme spirit, it is the equanimity of your soul which is deemed the best and 
fittest offering. (A contrite spirit is most acceptable unto the Lord). 


55. Things of different tastes, as the sour, bitter, acid, sharp and pungent, are 
useless in the service of the spirit; it is the calm and sweet composure of the 
soul, which is delectable to the holy spirit. 


56. Equanimity is sweet to taste, and has the supernatural power of 
transforming everything to ambrosia. (The man of an even mind, enjoys the 
sweetness of contentment in every state of life). 


57. Whatever a man thinks upon with the ambrosial sweetness of his 
disposition, the same is immediately changed to ambrosia, as the nectarious 
dew drops under the moon beams. 


58. Equanimity expands the soul, and gladdens the minds, as the sunlight fills 
the vault of heaven; and it is the unchangeable sedateness of the mind, which 
is reckoned as the highest devotion. 


59. The mind of man must shine with an even lustre, as the bright moon 
beams in their fullness, and it must blaze with the transparent light of the 
intellect, as a bright crystal in the sunlight. 


60. He who is employed in his outward actions of life, with his mind as bright 
as the clear sky; and which is freed from the mist of worldly affections, is said 
to be the full knowing devotee. 


61. The true devotee shines as brightly, as the clear autumnal sky, when the 
worldly impressions are quite effaced from the heart, and are not seen even in 
dream, when the cloud of ignorance is cleared away, and the fog of egoism is 


utterly scattered. 


62. Let your mind be as clear as the moon, and as spotless as the blazing sun; 
let it hide the thoughts, of the measurer and measured, (i.e., of the creator and 
created) in it; let it have the simple consciousness of itself, like a newborn 
child (without its innate ideas); and perceiving only the steady light of the 
intellect the seed of all intelligence; you will then come to attain the state of 
highest perfection in your life time. 


63. Living amidst the fluctuations of pain and pleasure, attending on the lot of 
all living beings, and occurring at their fixed times and places and actions of 
man, do you remain in the steady service of your soul, — the leader of your 
body, by tranquilizing all the passions and desires of your heart and mind. 


CHAPTER XL. 


Inquiry into the nature of the Deity. 


Argument — That the God Siva is beyond his formular adoration and his 
nature as that of the pure Intellectual soul. 


The god continued: — It is of no consequence, whether the spiritualist 
observe formal adoration in its proper time and manner or not; it is enough if 
he adore Siva in his form of the intellect within himself, which is equivalent 
to the worship of the dtmd or soul. (i.e., Worshipping the spirit in spirit). 


2. This is attended with a delight, which becomes manifest within himself; 
and thus full of spiritual light and delight, the devotee is assimilated to and 
self-same with his God. (This is the state of ecstacy, in which the adept loses 
himself in his God). 


3. The meanings of the words affection and hatred, do not belong to the holy 
soul as separate properties of it; but they blend together and die in it as sparks 
in fire. 


4. The knowledge that the dignity and poverty of men, as also the happiness 
and misery of one's self or others, proceed from God, is deemed as the 
worship of the supreme spirit, which ordains them all. (The gloss explains, 
that the attribution of all accidents of life to God, in his adoration also, as it is 
done by the offering of flowers unto him). 


5. The consciousness of the world as manifestation of the Divine spirit, is 
reckoned as his devotion also, as a pot or other taken for the spirit of God, 
owing to its residence in it, forms his worship also. 


6. The quiet and lightless spirit of Siva, being manifest in his works of 
creation, the whole sensible world is believed to be the form of the supreme 
spirit. 


7. It is astonishing that every soul should forget its own nature, and think itself 


as a living soul residing in the body, as they believe the supreme soul to be 
confined in a pot or painting. 


8. It is astonishing also, how they should attribute false ideas of worship, 
worshipper and the worshipped to the god Siva, who is the infinite soul of all 
and a pure spirit. 


9. The ritual of worship and adoration, which applies to the finite forms of 
gods, (their idols); cannot be applied to the worship of the infinite spirit of 
God. 


10. The pure spirit of the eternal, infinite and all powerful, cannot be the 
object of ritualistic worship, which relates to finite gods or idols. 


11. Know, O Brahman! that the spirit of God, which pervades the three 
worlds, and is of the nature of pure intellect, is not to be circumscribed by any 
form or figure. (As that of an idol or any natural object). 


12. Know, O wisest of the wise! that those that have their god, as 
circumscribed by time and place, (i.e., represented as limited and finite 
beings), are not regarded by us among the wise. 


13. Therefore, O sage! retract your sight from idols and idolatrous worship, 
and adopt your view to spiritual adoration; and be of an even, cool and clear 
mind, be dispassionate and freed from decay and disease. 


14. Do you continue to worship the supreme spirit with an unshaken mind, by 
making him offerings of your desires, and all the good and evil that occur to 
you at any time. (i.e., submit to the dispensations of Providence). 


15. O sage, that art acquainted with the sole unity, in the one uniform tenor of 
thy soul and mind, thou art thereby set above the reach of the miseries 
attending his frail life, as the pure crystal is clear of the shade and dross of all 
worldly things. 


CHAPTER XLI. 


Vanity of World and Worldly Things. 


Argument. — Refutation of Received Doctrines. 


VASISHTHA asked: — What is called the god Siva, and is meant by supreme 
Brahma; and what is the meaning of soul, and what is its difference from the 
supreme soul? 


2. That the tat sat-Id. est is the true entity, and all else is non entity; what is 
vacuum that is nothing, and what is philosophy that knows everything. 
Explain to me these differences, for thou lord! knowest them all. 


3. The god replied: — There exist a sat ens, which is without beginning and 
end; and without any appearance, or reflexion of its own; and this entity 
appears as a non-entity, owing to its imperceptibility by the senses. 


4. Vasishtha rejoined: — If this entity, lord! is not perceptible by the organs of 
sense, and unknowable by the understanding, how then, O Isana! is it to be 
known at all. 


5. The god replied: — The man that desires his salvation, and yet sticks to his 
ignorance, is a sage by name only; and such men are subjected to greater 
ignorance, by the Sdstras they are guided by. 


6. Let one ignorance remove another, as washerman cleanses one dirt by 
another. (i.e., Let the erroneous and mutually discordant theories of the 
Sdstras, refute the errors of one another). 


7. When the error of ignorance, are removed by the opposition to each other; 
it is then that the soul appears of itself to view as a matter of course. 


8. As a child daubs his fingers by rubbing one piece of coat against another, 
(so is a man darkened the more by the tenets of contradictory Sdstras); but 
gets them cleansed by washing off his hands from both of them. 


9. As they examine both sides of a question in a learned discussion, and the 
truth comes out from amidst them both, so the knowledge of the soul, appears 
from midst of the mist of ignorance. 


10. When the soul perceives the soul, and scans it by itself, and as it comes to 
know it in itself, it is said to get rid of its ignorance, which is then said to be 
utterly destroyed. 


11. The paths of learning and the lectures of a preceptor, are not the proper 
means to the knowledge of the soul, until one comes to know the unity of this 
thing by his own intuition. 


12. All the preceptors of Sdstras, place the soul amidst the bodily senses; but 
Brahma is situated beyond the senses, and is known after subjection of 
sensible organs. So the thing which is obtainable in absence of something, is 
never to be had in the presence of that thing; (such is the antipathy of the soul 
and senses against one another). 


13. It is seen however, that many things are used as causes of what they are no 
causes at all; as they make use of the lectures of the preceptor and the like, as 
means for the attainment of spiritual knowledge. 


14. A course of lectures is of course calculated, to throw light on the student's 
knowledge of the knowables; but in matters of abstract knowledge and 
invisible soul, it is the soul itself that must throw its own light. 


15. No explanation of the Sdstras, nor the lectures of the preceptor, are 
calculated to give light on spiritual knowledge, unless it is understood by the 
intuitive knowledge of the spirit itself. 


16. Again, the soul is never to be known without learning and lectures, and 
therefore, both of them must combine with our inquiry to bring us to the light 
of the soul. 


17. It is therefore, the combination of bookish knowledge with the instruction 
of the preceptor, joined with the investigation of the inquirer, that is calculated 
to enlighten us on spiritual knowledge, as the appearance of the day with the 
rising sun and waking world, gives an impetus to the rise of duties of the 
rising world. 


18. After subsidence of the senses and actions of bodily organs, together with 
the imperceptibility of our sensations of pain and pleasure; that we come to 
the knowledge of Siva, otherwise known as the soul, the tat sat, He that is, 
and under many other designations. 


19. When there was not this plenum of the world, or it existed in its spiritual 
or ideal forms; it is since then that this infinite entity has existed, in its 
vacuous form which is rarer than the ether. 


20. Who is continually meditated upon by the nice discernment of the seekers 
of salvation, and is variously represented by the pure minded and those of 
vitiated minds. 


21. There are others who are situated in the sight of, and not far from the path 
of living liberation, who are employed in leading others to salvation, and in 
the exposition of the Sdstras in their works. 


22. There have been many thinking and learned men, who have used the 
words Brahma, Indra, Rudra, and the names of the regents of worlds (for 
God), in order to justify the doctrines of the Puranas, Vedas and Siddhantas. 


23. Others have applied the fictitious titles of chit or intellect, Brahma, Siva, 
Atmé the soul or spirit, [sha, — the Lord, the supreme spirit and [shvara-god, 
to the nameless god head that is apart and aloof from all. 


24. Such is the truth of nature and of thyself also, which is styled the siva of 
felicitous; and which always confers all felicity to the world and to thyself 
also. (The word siva means jovus or solas and is meant to express the joviality 
and soliety which always attends on all beings). 


25. The words siva, soul, supreme Brahma and some others, have been coined 
by the ancients to express the supreme being; and though they differ in sound, 
there is no difference of them in sense and signification. 


26. Know, O chief of sages! that wise men always adore this god whom we 
serve also, and unto when we return as the best and ultimate states of all. 
(Siva is a hypostasis of the infinite deity). 


27. Vasishtha said: — Please Lord! explain to me in short, how the ever- 
existent Deity remains as non-existent, and could it come to existence from its 
prior state of nihility? 


28. The god replied: — Know the meaning of the words Brahma, etc., to bear 
relation to our consciousness only, and this though it is as clear as the sky, and 
as minute as an atom, has the great bulk of the mount Meru contained in it. 


29. Although this is unintelligible to us, and far beyond our conception and 
comprehension of it; yet it becomes intelligible to us when we take it the form 
of our intellect. 


30. By taking it objectively, it becomes intelligible to us in the manner of our 
Egoism; and by thinking on its personality we have the same idea of it, as one 
has of a wild elephant from its sight in a dream. 


31. These ideas of its egoism and personality, being limited by time and 
space, give rise to many aerial forms as attendants upon it. (These aerial forms 
are the different attributes of God). 


32. Accompanied with these, there proceeds the entity called the Jiva or living 
spirit, which is conversant with its oscillation and respiration, in the form of a 
pencil of air. 


33. After the power of vitality is established and has come in force; there 
follows the faculty of understanding; which remains in utter ignorance at first. 


34. It is followed by the faculties of bearing, action and perceptions; all of 
which operate inward by without their development in outward organs. 


35. All these powers uniting together, conduce to the excitement of memory, 
which exhibits itself soon in the form of the mind; which is the tree of desires. 


36. Hear now what is called the spiritual body by the learned, it is the inward 
power of God of the form of the conscious soul, and seeing the divine soul in 
itself. 


37. There rise afterwards the following powers in the mind; which develop 
themselves in the outer organs, although their powers may be wanting in 
them. (Such as the blind eyes, deaf ears, etc.). 


38. These are the essences of air and motion, and of feeling also, together with 
the senses of touch and heat emitted by the eyes. 


39. There are the essences of colour, water and taste also, and likewise, the 
essences of smell and flavour too. 


40. There are the essences of earth and gold, and the essences of thick mass; 
and also the essences of time and space, all of which are without form and 
shape. 


41. The spiritual body contains all these essences in itself as its component 
parts, as the seed of a fruit contains the leaves and germ of the future tree in 
its cell. 


42. Know this to be ativahika or spiritual body, and containing the eight 
elementary senses, wherefore it is called the puryashtaka also; and these are 


developed afterwards in the organs of sense. 


43. The primary or spiritual body which is formed in this manner, is actually 
no body at all; since it is devoid of understanding, intellect, senses and 
sensibility. 


44. It is the supreme Being only, which contains the essence of the soul, as it 
is the sea which contains the limpid waters. 


45. The soul is that which is possessed of its consciousness and knowledge, 
all besides this is dull and insensible matter; and which is viewed by the soul, 
as the sight of a fairy land in the dream. 


46. It is therefore, by consciousness and knowledge that Siva can be known, 
and what is not to be known by these can be nothing at all. 


47. The supreme soul sees all things within itself, as parts of itself (produced 
from its will of becoming or dividing itself into many); and beholds particles 
of his atomic self, formed into innumerable bodies. 


48. These soon increased in bulk and became big bodies, and bore the marks 
of the organs upon them. 


49. Then it became of the form of a man, from his thought of being so; and 
this soon grew up in its size of a full-grown man. 


50. So do our bodies appear to us in our living state, as the fairyland appears 
to one in his dream. 


51. Vasishtha said: — I see the appearance of the human body to resemble the 
vision of the fairyland in the dream; and I see also the miseries awaiting on 
human life in this world. Now tell me, my Lord! how all this misery is to be 
removed from it. 


52. The god replied: — All human woe is owing to their desires, and belief of 
the reality of the world; but it must be known to be all as unreal, as waves of 
water seen in a sea in the mirage. 


53. There why such desire, and for what good and use, and why should the 
dreaming man be deluded to drink the show of water in the mirage? 


54. The viewer of truth, who is freed from his views of egoism and tuism, and 
has got off from the deluded and its delusive thoughts, doth verily behold the 
true entity of God in his presence, in the utter absence of all worldly thoughts 
from his mind. 


55. Where there is no desirer or desire or the desired object, but the only 
thought of the one unity, there is an end of all error and misery. 


56. He whose mind is freed from the true and false bugbears of common and 
imaginary error, and is settled in the thought of one unity alone, sees nothing 
but the unity before him. 


57. The desires of the mind, rise as goblins in the midway sky; and the 
thoughts of the world rove about the sphere of the mind, as the numerous 
worlds revolve in the sky hence there is no peace of the soul, unless these 
subside to rest. 


58. It is useless to advise the man to wisdom, who is elated by his egoism, and 
is deluded by the waters of the mirage of this evanescent world. 


59. Wise men should advise the prudent only, and throw away their 
instruction to boys that are wandering in error, and are shunned by good 
people. To give good counsel to the ignorant, is as offering a fair daughter in 
marriage to the spectre of man seen in a dream. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


The Supreme soul and its Phases and Names 


Argument. — The various Processes whereby the supreme soul becomes the 
animal soul; and this again extending in all beings. 


VASISHTHA said: — Tell me Lord! what is the state of the living soul, after 
its situation in the open air, and its observation of the vanity of the elemental 
and material body on its first creation. 


2. The god replied: — The living soul having sprung from the supreme, and 
being situated in the open firmament, views the body formed in the aforesaid 
manner, as a man sees a vision in his dream. 


3. The living soul being ubiquitous, enters and acts in every part of this body, 
according to the behest of the embodied intellect, as a sleeping man acts his 
parts in a dream, and bears his body still. 


4. It was the indiscrete infinite soul before, and then became the discrete spirit 
called the first male, and this spirit was the primary cause of creation in itself. 


5. Thus, this animated spirit became as Siva, at the beginning of the first 
creation; it was called Vishnu in another, and became the lotus born Brahma 
or the great patriarch in the other. 


6. This great progenitor of one creation, became the intellect in another, this 
became the volitive male agent of creation afterwards, and at last look upon it 
a male form according to its volition. 


7. The primary volition of ideal creation becoming compact in time, it takes 
the form of the mind; which feels itself able to effect in act, whatsoever it 
wills in itself. (This form of the Mind is called Hiranyagarbha or Brahma, — 
the creative power of God). 


8. This creation of the world by Brahma is mere visionary, as the sight of a 


spectre in the air or in a dream; but it appears as a positive reality, to the 
erroneous sight of the realist. (i.e., The world is ideal to the idealist, but a 
sober reality to the positivist). 


9. The prime male agent that becomes the beholder of his creation, retains in 
him the power of exhibiting himself (or displaying his will) in the empty air 
every moment, or to retract them in himself into time. 


10. To him a Kalpa or great Kalpa age, is a mere twinkling of his eye; and it 
is by the expansion or contraction of himself, that the world makes its 
appearance or disappearance. 


11. Worlds come to appear and disappear at his will, at each moment of time, 
in each particle of matter, and in every pore of space, and there is no end of 
this successions in all eternity. 


12. Many things are seen to occur one after another, in conformity with the 
course of our desires; but we never find anything to take place, in concurrence 
with our sight of the holy spirit. (Z.e., Nothing is both temporally as well as 
spiritually good). 


13. All things are created (and vanish) with this creation, which do not occur 
to the unchanging Siva; and these are like the shadowy appearances in empty 
air, which rise of themselves and disappear in air. 


14. All real and unreal appearances vanish of themselves, like mountains 
appearing in dreams; all these creations have no command over their 
causality, space or time. 


15. Therefore, all these phenomenals are neither real, potential or imaginary 
or temporary appearances; nor is there anything, that is produced or destroyed 
at any time. 


16. All these are the wondrous phenomena of our ideas and wishes, 
(sankalpas), exhibited by the intellect in itself; and this world is like the 
appearance of an aerial castle in the dream, and subject to its rise and fall by 
turns. 


17. The visible which appears to be moving about in time and space, has 
actually no motion whatever in either; but remains as fixed as an ideal rock in 
the mind forever. (The unreal world can have no actual motion). 


18. So also the extension of the unreal world, is no extension at all; as the 
magnitude of an ideal rock has no dimension whatever. (Things in the 


abstract, have no imaginable measure). 


19. The situation and duration of the unreal world, conform exactly with the 
ideas of its time and place, which exist in the mind of the maker of all (or the 
great Archetype). 


20. It is in this manner that he is instantly changed to a worm (from his idea of 
it), and so are all the four orders of living beings born in this world. 


21. Thus the curative power becomes all things, from the great Rudras down 
to the mean straws in a minute (from his ideas of these); and even such as are 
as minute as atoms and particles of matter; (i.e., in the forms of the protozoa 
and small animalcula). 


22. This is the course of the production of the past and present creations, and 
it is the reminiscence of the past, which is the cause of the delusion of taking 
the world for a real existence. 


23. After giving away the thought of the difference between the creator and 
the created, and by the habit of thinking all as the unity, one becomes Siva in 
a minute, and by thinking so for a longer period, one is assimilated to the 
nature of the supreme Intellect. 


24. The intellect proceeds from the original intellect (of God), and rises 
without occupying any place. It is of the nature of understanding, and resides 
in the soul in the manner of empty air in the midst of a stone. 


25. The soul which is of the manner of eternal light, is known under the 
denomination of Brahma and the intellect which seated in this (soul), becomes 
weakened as the creative power increase, and strengthens in it. (i.e., The 
power of the thinking intellect decreases in proportion, as the power of the 
creative mind is on its increase). 


26. Next, the particles of time and place, join together in the formation of 
minute atoms; which by forming the elementary bodies, have the living 
principle added to them. (These are called the protozoa or animalcules). 


27. These then become vegetables and insects, and beasts, brutes and the 
forms of gods and demi-gods; and these being stretched out in endless series, 
remain as a long chain of being, connected by the strong and lengthening line 
of the soul, (called the svtrdtmd). 


28. Thus the great god that pervades over all his works in the world, connects 
all things in being and not being, as pearls in a necklace by the thread of his 


soul. He is neither near us nor even far from us; nor is he above or below 
anything whatever. He is neither the first nor last but ever-lasting, (having 
neither his beginning nor end). He is neither the reality or unreality, nor is he 
in the midst of these. 


29. He is beyond all alternatives and antitheses, and is not to be known 
beyond our imaginary ideas of him. He has no measure or dimension, nor any 
likeness, or form to represent him. Whatever greatness and majesty are 
attributed to him by men, they are all extinguished in his glory as the fire is 
cooled in the water. 


30. Now, I have related to you all what you asked me about, and will now 
proceed to my desired place. Be you happy, O sage, and go your way; and 
rise, O Parvati, and let us take our way. 


31. Vasishtha said: — When the god with his blue throat had spoken in this 
manner, I honoured him with throwing handfuls of flowers upon him. He then 
rose with his attendants, and pierced into the vacuity of heaven. 


32. After departure of the lord of Uma, and master of the three worlds, I 
remained for some time reflecting on all I had heard from the god, and then 
having received the new doctrine with the purity of my heart, I gave up the 
external form of my worshipping the Deity. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


On Rest and Tranquillity. 


Argument. — Rama admits before Vasishtha the removal of his doubt in 
dualistic doctrine. 


VASISHTHA said: — I well understand what the god said, and you too, O 
Rama! know very well the course of the world. 


2. When the false world appears in a false light to the fallacious understanding 
of man, and all proves to be but vanity of vanities, say what thing is there that 
may be called true and good and what as untrue and bad. (There is nothing 
whatever which is really good). 


3. As the alternative of something is not that thing itself, so the optional form 
of the soul, though not the soul itself, yet it serves to convey some idea of the 
soul. (As the explanation of the gloss is: — The similitude of a thing though 
not the thing itself, yet it gives some idea of the original). 


4. As fluidity is the nature of liquids, and fluctuation is that of the winds, and 
as vacuity is the state of the sky, so is creation the condition of the spirit or 
divine soul. 


5. I have ever since (hearing the lecture of Siva), betaken myself to the 
worship of the spirit in spirit; and have since then, given up my eagerness for 
the outward adoration of gods. 


6. It is by this rule that I have passed these days of my life, though I am 
tamely employed in the observance of the prescribed and popular ritual. 


7. | have worshipped the Divine spirit, in all modes and forms and offering of 
flowers, as they presented of themselves to me; and notwithstanding the 
interruptions, I have uninterruptedly adored my god at all times, both by day 
and night. 


8. All people in general, are concerned in making their offerings acceptable to 
their receiver, (god), but it is the meditation of the Yogi, which is the true 
adoration of the spirit. 


9. Having known this, O lord of Raghu's race, do you abandon the society of 
men in your heart, and walk in your lonely path amidst the wilderness of the 
world, and thereby remain without sorrow and remorse. 


10. And when exposed or reduced to distress, or aggrieved at the loss or 
separation of friends, rely on this truth, and think on the vanity of the world. 


11. We should neither rejoice nor regret, at the acquisition or loss of friends 
and relations; because all things almost are so frail and unstable, in this 
transitory world. 


12. You well know, Rama! the precarious state of worldly possessions and 
their pernicious effects also; they come and go away of their own accord, but 
overpower on the man in both states (of prosperity and adversity). 


13. So uncertain are the favours of friends and fortune, and so unforeseen is 
their loss also, that it is no way possible for anybody to account for them. (i.e., 
to assign any plausible cause to either). 


14. O sinless Rama! such is the course of the world, that you have no 
command over it nor is it ever subject to you; if the world is so insubordinate 
to you, why is it then that you should be sorry for so unmanageable a thing? 


15. Rama! mind your spiritual nature, and know yourself as an expanded form 
of your intellect. See how you are pent up in your earthly frame, and forsake 
your joy and grief at the repeated reiterations and exits of your corporeal 
body. 


16. Know my boy, that you are of the form of your intellect only, and inherent 
throughout all nature; therefore, there is nothing that you can resume to or 
reject from you in the world. 


17. What cause of joy or grief is there in the vicissitudes of things in the 
world, which are occasioned by the revolutions of the mind on the pivot of the 
intellect; and resemble the whirling waters of the sea, caused by an eddy or 
vortex in it. 


18. Do you, O Rama! betake yourself to the fourth stage of susupta or 
hypnotism hence forth, as the even tenor of the intellect, is attended by its 
trance at the end. 


19. Be you as cold and composed with your placid countenance and expanded 
mind, as the quiet spirit of God is diffused and displayed throughout all 
nature; and remains as full as the vast ocean, in the contemplation of that soul, 
whose fulness fills the whole. 


20. You have heard all this already, Rama! and are fraught with the fulness of 
your understanding, now if you have anything else to ask with regard to your 
former question, you can propose the same. (This was a question regarding 
the observance of ceremonial rites). 


21. Rama said: — Sir, my former doubts are all dispersed at present, and I 
have nothing more to ask you regarding the same; (i.e., the dualistic doctrine 
that raised the doubts). 


22. I have known all that is to be known, and felt a heartfelt satisfaction at 
this, and now I am free from the foulness of the objective, and of dualism and 
fictions. (Knowledge of the objective being unspiritual, the dualism of matter 
and mind as unscriptual, and the fictions of the gods, etc., as mere vagaries of 
imagination). 


23. The foulness of the soul, proceeds from ignorance of the soul; and this 
ignorance (of the subjective self), which had darkened my soul, is now 
removed by the light of spirituality. 


24. I was under the error (of the mortality and materiality of the soul), which I 
have now come to understand, is neither foul matter, nor is it born or dies at 
any time. (i.e., It is immaterial, unproduced and immortal). 


25. I am now confirmed in my belief, that all this is Brahma diffused 
throughout nature (in his all-pervasive form, vivartartipd); and I have ceased 
from all doubts and questions on the subject, nor have I the desire of knowing 
anything more about it. (He desires to know nothing, who beholds the lord in 
everything). 


26. My mind is now as pure, as the purified water of filtering machine; and am 
no more in need of learning anything, from the preachings and moral lessons 
of the wise. 


27. I am unconcerned with all worldly affairs, as the mount Sumeru is 
insensible of the golden ores in its bosom and having all things about me, I am 
quite indifferent to them; because I have not what I expect to have, nor do I 
possess the object of my fond desire. 


28. I expect nothing that is desirable, nor reject anything which is 


exceptionable; nor is there a mean in the interim of the two in this world, 
because there is nothing that is really acceptable or avoidable in it, nor 
anything which is truly good or bad herein. 


29. Thus, O sage, the erroneous thought of these contraries, is entirely 
dissipated from me; wherefore I neither care for a seat in heaven, nor fear the 
terrors of the infernal regions. 


30. I am as fixed in the self-same spirit, as the mount Mandara is firmly seated 
amidst the sea, and which scatters its particles throughout the three worlds, as 
that mountain splashed the particles of water in its state of churning the ocean. 


31. I am as firm as the fixed Mandara, while others are wandering in their 
errors of discriminating the positive and negative and the true and false, in 
their wrong estimation. 


32. The heart of that man must be entangled with the weeds of doubts, who 
thinks in his mind the world to be one thing, and the Divine spirit as another. 
(This duality is the root of doubts in the one ultimate unity). 


33. He that seeks for his real good in anything in this world, never finds the 
same in the unsubstantial material world, which is full of the confused waves 
of the eternity. 


34. It is by your favour, O venerable Sir, that I have got over the boisterous 
ocean of this world; and having the limits of its perilous coasts, have come to 
the shore of safety and found the path of my future prosperity. 


35. I am no more wanting in that supreme felicity, which is the summum 
bonum of all things; and am full in myself as the lord of all. And I am quite 
indomitable by anybody, since I have defeated the wild elephant of my 
covetousness. 


36. Being loosened from the chain of desire, and freed from the fetters of 
option, I am rich and blest with the best of all things, and this is the internal 
satisfaction of my soul and mind, which gives me a cheerful appearance in all 
the triple world. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


Inquiry into the Essence of the Mind. 


Argument. — On the means of forsaking all connections and desires, and the 
subjection of the mind by spiritual knowledge. 


VASISHTHA said: — Rama! whatever acts you do with your organs of 
action and without application of the mind to the work in hand, know such 
work to be no doing of yours. (An involuntary action is not accounted as the 
act of one, in absence of his will in it). 


2. Who does not feel a pleasure at the time of his achieving an action, which 
he did not feel a moment before, nor is likely to perceive the next moment 
after he has done the work. (Therefore, it is the attention of the mind which 
gives pleasure to an action, and which is not to be felt in absence of that 
attention, both before and after completion of the act). 


3. The pleasure of a thing is accompanied only with the desire of its passion, 
and not either prior or posterior to the same; therefore, it is boyish and not 
manliness to take any delight in a momentary pleasure. (All pleasure and pain 
are concomitant with their thoughts only; and these being fleeting there is no 
lasting pleasure or pain in anything). 


4. Whatever is pleasant during its desire, has that desire only for the cause of 
its pleasantness; hence the pleasurableness of a thing lasting till its 
unpleasurableness is no real pleasure; wherefore this frail pleasure must be 
forsaken together with its temporary cause of desire by the wise. 


5. If you have arrived to that high state (of knowing the universality of the 
soul); then be careful for the future, and merge yourself no more in the narrow 
pit of your personality. 


6. You who have now found your rest and repose, in being seated in the 
highest pinnacle of spiritual knowledge (by cognoscence of yourself); must 


not allow your soul any more, to plunge in the deep and dark cave of your 
egoistic individuality. 


7. Thus seated on the pitch of your knowledge, as on the top of the Meru 
mountain; and remembering the glorious prospect all around you; you cannot 
choose to fall down into the hell-pit of this earth, and to be reborn in the 
darksome cave of a mother's womb. (Because the living soul is doomed to 
transmigration and regeneration until its final liberation). 


8. It appears to me, O Rama! that you are of an even temperament, and have 
the quality of truth, (satyaguna), full in your nature; I understand you have 
weakened your desires, and have entirely got over your ignorance. 


9. You appear to be settled in your nature of purity, and the temperament of 
your mind appears to me to be as calm and quiet as the sea, when it is full and 
untroubled by the rude and rough winds of heaven. 


10. May your expectations set at ease, and your wants terminate in 
contentment, let your dementation turn to rightmindedness, and _ live 
unconnected with and aloof from all. 


11. Whatever objects you come to see placed before you, know the same as 
full of the Divine intellect, which is consolidated and extended through all, as 
their common essence. (The solid intellect forming the body, and its rarity the 
mind. “That extended through all yet in all the same; great in the earth as in 
the ethereal frame.” — Pope). 


12. One ignorant of the soul, is fast bound to his ignorance; and one 
acquainted with the soul, is liberated from his bondage. Hence, O Rama! learn 
to meditate constantly and intensely, the supreme soul in your own soul. 


13. It is indifference which wants to enjoy nothing, nor yet refuses the 
enjoyment of whatever presents of itself to anybody; and know inappetency to 
consist in the cool calmness of the mind, resembling the serenity of the sky. 
(Insouciance is the want of desire and renunciation of prurience and not the 
abdication of enjoyment). 


14. Preserve the cold listlessness of your mind, and discharge your duties with 
the cool application of your organs of action; and this unconcernedness of 
your mind, will render you as steady as the sky at all accidents of life. 


15. If you can combine the knower, knowable and the knowledge, (i.e., all the 
three states of the subjective, objective and the intermediate percipience), in 
your soul alone; you will then feel the tranquillity of your spirit and shall have 


no more to feel the troubles of sublunary life. 


16. It is the expansion and contraction of the mind, that causes the display and 
dissolution of the world; try therefore, to stop the action of thy mind, by 
restraining the breaths of thy desire in thyself. 


17. So it is the breath of life, which conducts and stops the business of the 
world, by its respiration and rest; restrain therefore, the breathing of the vital 
air, by thy practice of the regulation of thy breathing (as dictated before). 


18. So also it is the act of ignorance to give rise to ceremonious works, as it is 
that of knowledge to repress them; Do you therefore, boldly put them down 
by your own forbearance, and the instructions you derive from the Sdstras and 
your preceptors. 


19. As the winds flying with dust, darken the fair face of the sky; so the 
intellect being daubed with the intelligibles, (the subjective soiled with the 
objective), obscure the clear visage of the soul. 


20. The action of the relation between the vision and visibles, (i.e., the mutual 
of the eyesight and outward objects on one another), causes the appearance of 
the world and its course; as the relation that there exists between the solar rays 
and formations of things, makes them appear in various colours to the eye. 
(Neither the course of the world, nor the appearance of colour is in real being, 
but is owing to the relative combination of things). 


21. But the want of this relativity removes the phenomenals from sight, as the 
want of light takes away the colours of things. (The former is an instance of 
the affirmative kind, (anvayi); and the latter a vyatireki or negative one). 


22. The oscillation of the mind causes the illusions, as the palpitation of the 
heart raises the affections, and they are all at a stop at the suspension of the 
actions of these organs. So the waves raised by motion of waters and action of 
the winds, subside in the deep, by cessation of the actions of these elements. 
(The question is whether the affections are not causes of the palpitation of the 
heart?). 


23. The abandonment of every jot of desire, the suspension of respiration, and 
the exercise of intellection, will contract the actions of the heart and mind, and 
thereby prevent the rise of the passions and affections and of illusions also. 
(Entire dispassionateness is the perfection of Yoga asceticism). 


24. The unconsciousness which follows the inaction of the heart and mind, in 
consequence of the suspension of the vital breath is the highest perfection (of 


Yoga philosophy). 


25. There is a pleasure in respect to the vision of visibles, which is common to 
all living beings; but this being felt spiritually, amounts to holy pleasure 
paramdnanda. But the sight of God in one's consciousness, which is beyond 
the province of the mind, transcends the mental pleasure, and affords a divine 
ecstacy, called the Brahmdananda. 


26. The mind being dormant and insensible, affords the true rapture of the 
soul; and such as it is not to be had even in heaven, as it is not possible to 
have a refrigeratory or cooling bath in the sandy desert. 


27. The inertness of the heart and mind is attended with a delight, which is felt 
in the inmost soul and cannot be uttered in words; it is an everlasting joy that 
has neither its rise nor fall, nor its increase or decrease. (It is the lasting 
sunshine and unchanging moonlight of the soul). 


28. Right understanding weakens the sensuous mind (by the blaze of 
rationality), but wrong understanding serves to increase its irrational 
sensuousness only. It then sees the thickening mists of error, rising as spectres 
and apparitions before the sight of boys. 


29. Though the sensational mind is existent in us, yet it seems as quite 
inexistent and extinct before the light of our rationality, as the substance of 
copper appears to disappear by being melted with gold. (The carnal mind is 
converted to the rational understanding by its association with it). 


30. The mind of the wise is not the sensuous mind, because the wise mind is 
an essence of purity by itself; thus the sensible mind is changed in its name 
and nature to that of the understanding, as the copper is converted to the name 
and nature of gold. 


31. But it is not possible for the mind to be absorbed at once in the intellect, 
its errors only are moved by right understanding, but its essence is never 
annihilated. (As the alloy of copper in gold). 


32. Things taken as symbols of the soul, are all unsubstantial as the mind and 
vital principle; all which are as unreal as the horns of a hare (which are never 
known to grow). They are but reflexions of the soul, and vanish from view 
after the soul is known. (The mind is said to be an expansion of the soul; 
[Sanskrit: dtmanivivartta ripam|)). 


33. The mind has its being for a short time only, during its continuance in the 
world; but after it has passed its fourth stage of insensibility, it arrives to the 


state of comatosity which is beyond the fourth stage. 


34. Brahma is all even and one, though appearing as many amidst the errors 
that reign over the world; He is the soul of all and has no partial or particular 
form of any kind. He is not the mind or anything else, nor is He situated in the 
heart (as a finite being). (Gloss: — The Divine Soul like the human mind has 
conceptions of endless things, which are neither situated in it nor parts of 
itself, but are as empty phantoms in the air). 


CHAPTER XLV. 


Story of the vilva or Belfruit. 


Argument. — God represented as the Belfruit or Wood apple; containing the 
Worlds as its seeds. 


VASISHTHA said: — Attend now, O Rama! to a pleasant story, which was 
never told before, and which I will briefly narrate to you for your instruction 
and wondrous amusement. 


2. There is a big and beautiful bilva or bel fruit, as large as the distance of 
many myriads of miles, and as solid as not to ripen or rot in the course of as 
many many ages. 


3. It bears a lasting flavour as that of sweet honey or celestial ambrosia; and 
though grown old, yet it increases day by day like the crescent new moon, 
with its fresh and beautiful foliage. 


4. This tree is situated in the midst of the universe, as the great Meru is placed 
in the middle of the earth; it is as firm and fixed as the Mandara mountain, and 
is immovable even by the force of the diluvian winds. 


5. Its root is the basis of the world, and it stretches to the distance of 
immeasurable extent on all sides. 


6. There were millions of worlds all within this fruit as its un-countable seeds; 
and they were as minute in respect to the great bulk of the fruit, that they 
appeared as particles of dust at foot of a mountain. 


7. It is filled and fraught with all kinds of delicacies, that are tasteful and 
delicious to the six organs of sense; and there is not one even of the six kinds 
of savoury articles, that is wanting in this fruit. 


8. The fruit is never found in its green or unripe state, nor is it ever known to 
fall down ever over-ripened on the ground; it is ever ripe of itself, and is never 


rotten or dried or decayed at any time by age or accident. 


9. The gods Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra, are not sempiternal with this tree in 
their age, nor do they know aught of the origin and root of this tree, nor 
anything about its extent and dimensions. 


10. None knows the germ and sprout of this tree, and its buds and flowers are 
invisible to all. There is no stem or trunk or bough or branch, of the tree that 
bears this great fruit. 


11. This fruit is a solid mass of great bulk, and there is nobody that has seen 
its growth, change or fall. (It is ever ripe without ripening or rotting at any 
time). 


12. This is the best and largest of all fruits, and having no pith nor seed, is 
always sound and unsoiled. 


13. It is as dense as the inside of a stone in its fullness, and as effluent of bliss 
as the disk of the moon, drizzling with its cooling beams; it is full of flavour 
and distils its ambrosial draughts to the conscious souls of men. 


14. It is source of delight in all beings, and it is the cause of the cooling moon- 
beams by its own brightness. It is the solid rock of all security, the stupendous 
body of felicity, and contains the pith and marrow that support and sustain all 
living souls, which are the fruits of the prior acts of people. (i.e., The souls of 
all beings are as fruits formed according to the nature and merit of their 
previous acts, — karma, and all these souls are filled with delight by the great 
soul of God). 


15. Therefore, that transcendent pith which is the wonder of souls, is 
contained in the Infinite spirit of God, and deposited and preserved in that 
auspicious fruit, — sriphala, — the bel or wood apple. 


16. It is deposited with its wondrous power in that small bel fruit, which 
represents the human as well as the divine soul, without losing its properties 
of thinness and thickness and freshness forever. (i.e., All the divine powers — 
of evolution are lodged in the soul). 


17. The thought that, 'I am this’, clothes the unreality with a gross form (as the 
thought of a devil gives the unreal phantom a foul figure); and though it is 
absurd to attribute differences to nullities, yet the mind makes them of itself 
and then believes its fictitious creatures as real ones. 


18. The Divine ego contains in itself the essential parts of all things set in their 


proper order, as the vacuity of the sky is filled with the minute atoms, out of 
which the three worlds did burst forth with all their varieties. (So the 
substance of the bel fruit, contains the seeds of the future trees and all their 
several parts in it). 


19. In this manner there grew the power of consciousness in its proper form, 
and yet the essence of the soul retains its former state without exhausting 
itself. (It means that notwithstanding the endless evolutions of the Divine 
soul, its substance ever continues the same and is never exhausted). 


20. The power of consciousness being thus stretched about, (from its 
concentration in itself), makes it perceive the fabric of the world and its great 
bustle in its tranquil self. (It means how the subjective consciousness is 
changed to the objective). 


21. It views the great vacuum on all sides, and counts the parts of time as they 
pass away; it conceives a destiny which directs all things, and comes to know 
what is action by its operation. 


22. It finds the world stretching as the wish of one, and the sides of heaven 
extending as far as the desires of men; it comes to know the feelings of love 
and hatred, and the objects of its liking and dislike. 


23. It understands its egoism and non-egoism or tuism, or the subjective and 
objective and views itself in an objective light, by forgetting its subjectivity. It 
views the worlds above and being itself as high as any one of them, finds itself 
far below them. (The human soul though as elevated as the stars of heaven, 
becomes as low as a sublunary being by its baseness). 


24. It perceives one thing to be placed before, and another to be situated 
beside it; it finds something to be behind, and others to be near or afar from it; 
and then it comes to know some things as present and others as past or yet to 
come before it. (The soul losing its omniscience has a partial view of things). 


25. Thus the whole world is seen to be situated as a play house in it, with 
various imaginary figures brightening as lotuses in a lake. 


26. Our consciousness is seated in the pericarp of the lotus of our hearts, with 
the knowledge of our endless desires budding about it, and viewing the 
countless worlds turning round like a rosary of lotus seeds. 


27. Its hollow cell like the firmaments is filled with the great Rudras, who 
rove about in the distant paths of the midway sky, like comets falling from 
above with their flaming tails. (The vedas describe the Rudras as blue necked, 


etc. (nilagrivah). These worshipful gods of the vedas are found to be no other 
than wondrous phenomena of the vacuity which are deified in the Elementary 
religion of the ancients). 


28. It has the great mount of Meru situated in its midst, like the bright pericarp 
amidst the cell of the lotus flower. The moon capt summit of this mount is 
frequented by the immortals, who wander about it like wanton bees in quest of 
the ambrosial honey distilled by the moon beams on high. (The gloss places 
the Meru in the northern region of the distant pole, while the Puranas place it 
in the midst of the earth). It was the resort of the gods as also the early cradle 
of the pristine Aryans, who are represented as gods. 


29. Here is the tree of the garden of Paradise with its clusters of beautiful 
flowers, diffusing their fragrance all around; and there is the deadly tree of the 
old world, scattering its pernicious farina for culling us to death and hell. (The 
gloss explains rajas or flower dust as our worldly acts, which lead us to the 
hell torments of repeated transmigrations). 


30. Here the stars are shining, like the bright filaments of flowery arbors, 
growing on the banks of the wide ocean of Brahma; and there is the pleasant 
lake of the milky path, in the boundless space of vacuity. 


31. Here roll the uncontrolled waves of the ceremonial acts, fraught with 
frightful sharks in their midst, and there are the dreadful whirlpools of worldly 
acts, that whirl mankind in endless births for ever more. 


32. Here runs the lake of time in its meandering course for ever, with the 
broad expanse of heaven for its blooming blossom; and having the moments 
and ages for its leaves and petals, and the luminaries of sun, moon and stars 
for its bright pistils and filaments. 


33. Here it sees the bodies of living beings fraught with health and disease, 
and teeming with old age, decay and the torments of death; and there it 
beholds the jarring expositions of the Sdstras, some delighting in their 
knowledge of spiritual Vidya, and others rambling in the gloom of Ignorance, 
— Avidyd, (which leads them from error to error). 


34. In this manner doth our inner consciousness, represent the wonders 
contained in the pulp of the bilva fruit; which is full of the unsubstantial 
substance of our desires and wishes, and the pithless marrow of our false 
imagination. 


35. It sees many that are tranquil, calm, cool and dispassionate, and who are 


free from their restraints and desires; they are heedless of both their activity 
and inactivity, and do not care for works whether done or left undone by 
them. 


36. Thus this single consciousness presents her various aspects, though she is 
neither alone nor many of herself, except that she is what she is. She has in 
reality but one form of peaceful tranquillity; though she is possessed of the 
vast capacity of conceiving in herself all the manifold forms of things at 
liberty. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


Parable of the Stony sheath of the Soul. 


Argument. — The divine mind is the substratum of the totality of existence. 


Rama said: — Venerable Sir, that knowest the substance of all truths; I 
understand the parable of bel fruit which you have just related to me to bear 
relation to the essence of the compact intellect, which is the only unit and 
identic with itself. 


2. The whole plenitude of existence together with the personalities of I, thou, 
this, and that form the plenum (or substance), of the intellect; and there is not 
the least difference between them, as this is one thing and that another. (All 
this is but one undivided whole, whose body nature is and God the soul. — 
Pope). 


3. Vasishtha answered: — As this mundane egg or universe is likened to a 
gourd fruit, containing the mountains and all other things as its inner 
substance; so doth the intellect resemble the bel fruit or the grand substratum, 
that contains even the universe as the kernel inside it. 


4. But though the world has no other receptacle beside the Divine intellect, yet 
it is not literally the kernel inside that crust; (i.e., the substance of that 
substratum in its literal sense). Because the world has its decay, decline and 
dissolution also in time, but none of these belong to the nature of the 
everlasting mind of God. 


5. The intellect resembles the hard coating of the pepper seed, containing the 
soft substance of its pith inside it, and is likened also to block of stone, 
bearing the sculptured figures peacefully sleeping in it. (All things are 
engraven in the divine mind). 


6. Here me relate to you, O moon faced Rama! another pleasant story in this 
place which will appear equally charming as well as wondrous to you. (It is 


the story of stone like Brahma). 


7. There is a huge block of stone somewhere, which is as big as it is thick and 
solid; it is bright and glossy, and cold and smooth to touch; it never wastes or 
wears out, nor becomes dark and dim. 


8. There are many full-blown lotuses, and unnumbered buds of water lilies, 
growing amidst the limpid lake of water, contained within the bosom of this 
wondrous stone. (It means that the mind of God has all these images of things 
engraved in it as in a stone). 


9. There are many other plants growing also in that lake, some with their long 
and broad caves and others with their alternate and joint foliums likewise. 


10. There are many flowers with their up lifted and down cast heads, and 
others with their petals hanging before them; some having a combined or 
common footstalk, and others growing separate and apart from one another; 
some are concealed and others manifest to view. 


11. Some have their roots formed of the fibres of the pericarp, and some have 
their pericarps growing upon the roots (as orchids), some have their roots on 
the tops and others at the foot of trees, while there are many without their 
roots at all; (as the parasite plants). 


12. There are a great many conch shells about these, and unnumbered diseases 
also strewn all about. 


13. Rama said: — All this is true, and I have seen this large stone of sdlgrdma 
in my travels; and I remember it to be placed in the shrine of Vishnu, amidst a 
bed of lotus flowers. (The sdlgrdma stone is perforated by the vajra-kita, and 
contains many marks inside it, resembled to the map of the world in the 
mundane egg of the divine mind. See vajra-kita in the works of Sir William 
Jones). 


14. Vasishtha replied: — You say truly, that you have seen that great stone 
and know its inside also; but do you know the unperforated and hollowless 
stone of the divine mind, that contains the universe in its concavity, and is the 
life of all living beings (and not the dull, lifeless and hollow sdlagrdma stone 
which they worship as an emblem of the divine mind). 


15. The stone of which I have been speaking to you, is of a marvelous and 
supernatural kind; and contains in its voidless bosom all things as nothing. 
(i.e., the ideas and not substances of things). 


16. It is the stone-like intellect of which I have spoken to you, and which 
contains all these massive worlds within its spacious sphere. It is figuratively 
called a stone from its solidity, cohesive impenetrability and indivisibility like 
those of a block. 


17. This solid substance of the intellect, notwithstanding its density and 
unporousness, contains all the worlds in itself, as the infinite space of heaven 
is filled with the subtle and atmospheric air. (The divine mind, like external 
nature, is devoid of a vacuity in it, according to the common adage: — 
“Nature abhors a vacuum’’). 


18. The mind is occupied with all its various thoughts, as the world is filled by 
the earth and sky, the air and atmosphere, and the mountains and rivers on all 
sides, there is not hole or hollow, which is not occupied by some thing or 
other in it. 


19. The solid soul of God which resembles this massive stone, contains in it 
all these worlds which are displayed (to our deluded sight), as so many beds 
of lotuses in their blooming beauty; and yet there is nothing so very pure and 
unsullied as this solid crystalline soul. (The soul like a crystal, reflects its light 
in various forms). 


20. As it is the practice of men to paint blocks of stones, with the figures of 
lotuses, conch shells and the like images; so it is the tendency of the fanciful 
mind, to picture many fantastic of all times in the solid rock of the soul. (The 
soul like a crystal stone is wholly blank in itself, it is only the imaginative 
mind, that tinges it in different shades and colours). 


21. All things in the world appear to be situated exactly in the same state, as 
the various figures carved on the breast of a stone, seem to be separate though 
they are bellied in the same relief. (All distinctions blend in the same 
receptacle). 


22. As the carved lotus is not distinct from the body of the stone, so no part of 
existence is set apart from the substantiality of the divine intellect; which 
represents its subtle ideas in their condensed forms. 


23. This formal creation is as inseparable from the formless intellect of God, 
as the circular forms of lotus flowers which are carved in a stone, are not 
separate from the great body of the shapeless stone. 


24. These endless chains of worlds, are all linked up in the boundless intellect 
of the Deity; in the same manner as the clusters of lotus flowers are carved 


together in a stone; and as a great many seeds, are set together in the inside of 
a long pepper. 


25. These revolving worlds have neither their rise nor fall in the sphere of the 
infinite intellect, but they remain as firm as the kernel of a bel fruit, and as 
fixed as the fidelity of a faithful wife. 


26. The revolution of worlds and their changing scenes, that are seen to take 
place in their situation in the Divine Intellect, do not prove the changeableness 
of the all containing Infinite Mind, because its contents of finite things are so 
changeable in their nature. (The container is not necessarily of the nature of its 
contents). 


27. All these changes and varieties subside at last in the divine intellect, as the 
waves and drops of water sink down in the Sea; and the only change which is 
observable in the Supreme Intellect, is its absorption of all finite changes into 
its infinity. (All finite forms and their temporary transformations, terminate 
finally into infinity). 


28. The word (Fiat) that has produced this all, causes their changes and 
dissolutions also in itself. Know then that Brahma from whom this fiat and 
these changes have sprung, and all these being accompanied with Brahma and 
the original fiat, the word change is altogether meaningless. (There is no new 
change from what is ordained from the beginning). 


29. Brahma being both the mainspring as well as the main stay of all changes 
in nature, He is neither excluded from or included under any change, which 
occur in the sphere of his immensity. (ie, the spirit of God being the 
unchanging source of all phenomenal changes, is not exempted from the 
mutations that occur in his infinity. So says the poet: — “These as they 
change are but the varied God, etc.” — Thompson). 


30. And know this in one or other of the two senses, that the change of the 
divine spirit in the works of creation, resembles the change or development of 
the seed into its stem, fruits and flowers and other parts; or that it is a display 
of delusion, mdyd, like the appearance of water in the mirage. (Here the 
changing scenes of nature, are viewed in both lights of evolution and illusion). 


31. As the substance of seed goes on gradually transforming itself into the 
various states of its development, so the density of the divine intellect (or 
spirit) condenses itself the more and more in its production of solid and 
compact world, and this is the course of the formation of the cosmos by slow 
degrees. 


32. The union of the seed with the process of its development forms the 
duality, that is destroyed by the loss of either of these. It is imagination only 
that paints the world as a dull material thing, when there is no such grossness 
in the pure intellect. (The gloss explains this passage to mean that, It is the 
doctrine of dualists to maintain the union of the productive seed or spirit of 
God, with the act of producing the material world to be coeternal, and the one 
becomes null without the other, but this tenet is refuted on the ground of the 
impossibility of the Combination of the immaterial with the material, whence 
the material world is proved to be a nullity and mere illusion). 


33. The intellect and dull matter cannot both combine together, nor can the 
one be included under the other, therefore, the ideal world resembles the 
marks inscribed in the stone and no way different in their natures. 


34. As the pith and marrow of a fruit, is no other than the fruit itself; so the 
cosmos forms the gist of the solid intellect, and no way separable from the 
same; which is like a thick stone containing marks, undermarks, underlined 
under one another. 


35. So we see the three worlds lying under one another, in the womb of the 
unity of God; as we behold the sleeping and silent marks of lotuses and conch 
shells, inscribed in the hollow of a stone. 


36. There is no rising nor setting, (i.e., the beginning or end), of the course of 
the world (in the mind of God); but everything is as fixed and immovable in it, 
as the inscription carved in a stone. 


37. It is the pith and marrow of the divine intellect, that causes the creative 
power and the act of creation; as it is the substance of the stone, that produces 
and reduces the figures in the stone. 


38. As the figures in the stone, have no action or motion of their own; so the 
agents of the world have no action of theirs, nor is this world ever created or 
destroyed at any time, (but it continues for ever as carved in the mind of God). 


39. Everything stands as fixed in the mind of God, as if they were the firm and 
immovable rocks; and all have their forms and positions in the same manner 
as they are ordained and situated in the Divine Mind. 


40. All things are filled with the essence of God, and remain as somnolent in 
the Divine mind; the various changes and conditions of things that appear to 
us in this world, are the mere vagaries of our erroneous fancy; for everything 
is as fixed and unchanged in the mind of God, as the dormant images on a 


stone. 


41. All actions and motions of things are as motionless in mind of God, as the 
carved lie asleep in the hollow of a stone. It is the wrong superfluous view of 
things, that presents to us all these varieties and changes; but considered in the 
true and spiritual light, there is neither body nor any change that presents itself 
to our sight. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


Lecture on the Density of the Intellect. 


Argument. — Interpretation of the Intellect compared with the Belfruit and 
carved stone and its further comparison with the Egg of a Peahen. 


VASISHTHA continued: — The great category of the Intellect which is 
compared with the bel fruit or wood apple, contains the universe as its own 
matter and marrow within itself; and it broods upon the same; as in its dream 
(by forgetfulness of its own nature of omniscience before which everything is 
present). 


2. All space and time and action and motion being but forms of itself, there 
can be no distinction of them in the intellect. (Hence every part of creation 
and all created things, are but composite parts of the intellect). 


3. All words and their senses, and all acts of volition, imagination and 
perception, being actions of the intellect, they cannot be unrealities in any 
respect. (Nothing proceeding from the real one is ever unreal). 


4. As the substance contained in a fruit, passes under the several names of the 
kernel, pith and marrow and seeds; so the pith and marrow of the solid 
intellect being but one and the same thing, takes many names according to 
their multifarious forms. 


5. A thing though the same, has yet different names according to its different 
states and changes of form; and as it is with the contents of a fruit, so it is with 
the subjects included under the intellect. 


6. The intellect reflects its image in the mirror of the world, as these 
sculptured images are expressed in a slab of stone. 


7. The brilliant gem of the supreme intellects produces myriads of worlds in 
itself; as the gem of your minds casts the reflection of every object of our 
desire and imagination. 


8. The casket of the intellect contains the spacious world, which is set in it as 
a big pearl of vast size; it is but a part of the other, though appearing as 
distinct and different from the other. 


9. The intellect is situated as the shining sun, to illumine all things in the 
world; it brings on the days and nights by turns, to show and hide them to and 
from our view. 


10. As the waters of an eddy whirl and hurl down into the vortex of the sea, so 
do these worlds roll and revolve in the cavity of the intellect; and though its 
contents are of the same kind, yet they appear as different from one another as 
the pulps and seeds of fruits. 


11. The body of the stone-like intellect contains the marks of whatever is 
existent in present creation; as also of all that is inexistent at present; (i.e., the 
marks of all past and future creation. The omniscience of the divine intellect 
has all thing present before it, whether they are past and gone or to come to 
being hereafter). 


12. All real essence is the substance of the apple-like Intellect, whether it is in 
being or not being and all objects whether in esse or non esse, obtain their 
form and figure according to the pith and marrow of that intellectual fruit. (All 
outward forms are the types of the intellectual archetype). 


13. As the lotus loses its own and separate entity by its being embodied in the 
stone, so do all these varieties of existence lose their difference by their being 
engrossed into the unity of the intellectual substance. 


14. As the diversity of the lotus changes to the identity of the stone, by its 
union with and entrance into its cavity; so the varieties of creation, become all 
one in the solid mass of the Divine Intellect. 


15. As the mirage appears to be a sheet of water to the thirsty deer, while it is 
known to the intelligence to be the reflexion of the solar rays on the sandy 
desert; so does the reality appear as unreal and the unreal as real to the 
ignorant; while in truth there is neither the one nor the other here, except the 
images of the Divine Mind. 


16. As the body of waters fluctuates itself, (owing to the fluidity of the 
element); so is there oscillation in the solidity of the Divine Intellect, (owing 
to its spiritual nature). 


17. The lotuses and conch-shells are of the same substance, as the stone in 
which they are carved and engraved; but the world and all its contents that 


contained in the intellect, are neither of the same substance nor of the same 
nature (because of their perishableness). 


18. Again, the big block of stone which serves for the comparison of the 
divine Intellect, is itself contained in the same; and while the figures of the 
former are carved out of its body, those of the latter are eternally inherent in 
it. 


19. This creation of God is as bright as the autumnal sky, and it is as fair as 
the liquid beams of the moon. (It means to say, says the gloss, that God shines 
in his form of the world jagat-Brahma or God identified with the world which 
is the doctrine of cosmotheism). 


20. The world is eternally situated in God, as the figures in the stone which 
are never effaced; the world is as inseparably connected with the Deity, as the 
god head of god with himself. 


21. There is no difference of these, as there is none between the tree and its 
plant; all the worlds that are seen all about, are not disjoined from Divine 
Intellect. 


22. These as well as the Intellect have neither their production nor destruction 
at any time, because of their subsistence in the spirit of God, which shows 
them in their various forms, as the heat of the sun exhibits a sheet of water in 
the sandy desert. 


23. The world with all its solid rocks, trees and plants, dissolves into the 
Divine Intellect at the sight of the intelligent, as the hard hail stones are seen 
to melt into the liquid and pure water. (All solids vanish into subtle air). 


24. As the water vanishes into the air, and that again into vacuum, so do all 
things pass away to the supreme spirit; and again, it is the consolidation of the 
Intellect, that forms the solid substances of hills, plants and all tangible things. 
(Condensation as well as rarefaction, are both of them but acts of the great 
mind of God). 


25. The pith that is hidden in the minute substance, becomes the marrow in its 
enlarged state; so the flavor of things which is concealed in the atoms, 
becomes perceptible in their density with their growth. 


26. The power of God resides in the same manner in all corporeal things, as 
the properties of flavours and moisture are inherent in the vegetable creation. 
(Hence Brahma is said to be the pith or moisture of all, — rasovaitata). 


27. The same power of God manifests itself in many forms in things, as the 
self-same light of the sun shows itself in variegated colours of things, 
according to the constitution of their component particles. 


28. The supreme soul shows itself in various ways in the substance and 
properties of things, as the Divine Intellect represents the forms of mountains 
and all other things in the changeful mind. 


29. As the soft and liquid yolk of the egg of a peahen, contains in it the 
toughness and various colours of the future quills and feathers; so there are 
varieties of all kinds inhering in the Divine Intellect, and requiring to be 
developed in time. 


30. As the versicolour feathers of a peacock's train, are contained in the 
moisture within the egg; so the diversity of creation is ingrained in the Divine 
mind (as it is said in the parable of the Peahen's egg). 


31. The judicious observer will find the one self-same Brahma, to be present 
everywhere before his sight; and will perceive his unity amidst all diversity, 
as in the yolk of the peahen. 


32. The knowledge of the unity and duality of God, and that of his containing 
the world in himself; is also as erroneous as the belief in the entity and non- 
entity of things. Therefore, all these are to be considered as the one and same 
thing and identic with one another. (This is cosmotheism). 


33. Know him as the supreme, who is the source of all entity and non-entity, 
and on whose entity they depend; whose unity comprises all varieties, which 
appear as virtual and are no real existences. (Hence the gloss deduces the 
corollary, that the unreal or negative is subordinate to the positive, and the 
variety to the unity). 


34. Know the world to be compressed under the category of the Intellect, as 
the Intellect also is assimilated with the works of creation; in the same manner 
as is the relation of the feather and moisture, the one being the production and 
the other the producer of one another. 


35. The mundane egg resembles the peahen's egg, and the spirit of God is as 
the yolk of that egg; it abounds with many things like the variegated feathers 
of the peacocks, all which serve but to mislead us to error. Know therefore, 
there is no difference in outward form and internal spirit of the world, as there 
is none in the outer peacock and the inner-yolk. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


On the Unity and Identity of Brahma and the World. 


Argument. — He whose essence is the source of all our enjoyments; is 
ascertained as the Sachchiddnanda or Entity of the Felicitous Intellect or the 
blissful spirit of God. 


VASISHTHA continued: — That which contains this wide extended universe 
within itself, and without manifesting its form unto us, is very like the egg of 
the peahen and contains all space and individual bodies in its yolk. (The mind 
of God contains the mundane egg). 


2. That which has nothing in reality in it, appears yet to contain everything in 
itself; as the spotless mirror reflects the image of the moon, and the hollow 
egg bears the figure of the future peacock. 


3. It is in this manner that the gods and sages, saints and holy-men, the 
Siddhas and great Rishis, meditate on the true and self-subsistent form of God, 
as find themselves seated in their fourth state of bliss above the third heaven. 


4. These devout personages sit with their half-shut eyes, and without the 
twinkling of their eyelids; and continue to view in their inward souls, the 
visible glory of God shining in its full light. 


5. Thus enrapt in their conscious presence of God, they are unconscious of 
any other thought in their minds; though when employed in the acts of life, 
remain without the respiration of their vital breath. 


6. They sit quiet as figures in a painting, without respiration of their breath, 
and remain as silent as sculptured statues, without the action of their minds. 
(They forget themselves to stones in their excess of devotion). 


7. They remain in their state of holy rapture, without the employment of their 
minds in their fleeting thoughts, and whenever they have any agitation they 
can effect anything, as the Lord God works all things at the slightest nod. 


8. Even when their minds are employed in meditative thoughts, they are 
usually attended with a charming gladness, like that of the charming 
moonbeams falling on and gladding the leafy branches of trees. 


9. The soul is as enraptured with the view of the holy light of God, as the 
mind is delighted at the sight of the cooling moonbeams, emitted afar from the 
lunar disc. (The gloss explains the distant moonlight to be less dazzling than 
the bright disc of that luminary). 


10. The aspect of pure conscience is as clear, as the fair face of the bright 
moon; it is neither visible nor in need of admonition, nor is it too near nor far 
from us. (The gloss is silent on the inappropriateness of the simile). 


11. It is by one's self cogitation alone that the pure intellect can be known, and 
not by the bodily organs, or living spirit or mind, or by our desire of knowing 
it. 


12. It is not the living soul nor its consciousness, nor the vibrations of the 
body, mind, or breath. It is not the world nor its reality or unreality, or its 
vacuity or solidity, or the centre of anything. 


13. It is not time or space or any substance at all, nor is it a god or any other 
being, whatever is quite free from all these and unconfined in the heart or any 
of the sheaths inside the body. 


14. That is called the soul in which all things are moving, and which is neither 
the beginning nor end of anything, but exists from eternity to eternity, and is 
not characterised by any of the elementary bodies of air and the rest. 


15. The soul is an entity that is never annihilated in this or the next world, 
though the sentient bodies may be born and die away a thousand times like 
earthen pots here below. 


16. There is no removal of this vacuous spirit from its seat, both in the inside 
and outside of everybody; for know, O thou best of spiritualists, all bodies to 
be equally situated in the all-pervading spirit. 


17. It is the imperfection of our understanding, that creates the difference 
between the spirit and the body; but it shows the perfection of our judgement, 
when we believe the universal soul, to be diffused throughout the universe. 


18. Though warmly engaged in business, yet remain unaddicted to worldliness 
by your indifference to the world, and to all moving and unmoving things that 
there exists on earth. 


19. Know all those as the great Brahma, — the immaculate soul, that is 
without the properties and attributes of mortal beings; it is without change and 
beginning and end, and is always tranquil and in the same state. 


20. Now Rama! as you have known by your spiritual vision, (clairvoyance), 
all things including time and action, and all causality, causation and its effect, 
together with the production, sustentation and dissolution of all, to be 
composed of the spirit of God, you are freed from your wanderings in the 
world in your bodily form. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


Contemplation of the course of the World. 


Argument. — Consideration of the changes in the state of things; and their 
origination from Ignorance and extinction in the true knowledge of their 
nature. 

Rama said: — Sir, if there is no change in the immutable spirit of God; say 


how do these various changes constantly appear to occur in the state of things 
in this world. (Because it is the change of cause that produces a change in the 
effect, as also a change in the state of anything, argues a change in its cause 
likewise). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear Rama! that it is the alteration of a thing that 
does not revert to its former state, that is called its change, as it occurs in the 
instance of milk, and its conversion to curd and butter, which never become 
the pure milk again. 


3. The milk is converted to curd, but the curd never reverts to its former state 
of milk, such is the nature of change in the state of things; but it can never 
affect the great God, who remains alike all along the first, intermediate and 
last states of things. 


4. There is no such change as that of milk or any other things in the 
immutable Brahma, who having no beginning nor end, can neither have any 
age or stage of life assigned to him. (ie., The Infinite God is neither young 
nor old as any finite being). 


5. The states of beginning and end which are attributed to eternal God, are the 
false imputations of ignorance and error, as there can be no change of 
changeless one. (To say therefore, that God is the first and last, the alpha and 
omega of all, means that the beginning and end of all things, are comprised in 
his everlasting existence). 


6. Brahma is not our consciousness, nor the object of our consciousness. He is 
as unconnected with us as our soul and intellect, and is only known to us by 
the word. 


7. A thing is said to be the same, with what it is in the beginning and end; the 
difference that takes place in the form is only a mist of error, and is taken into 
no account by the wise. (The identity of a thing consists in its unalterable 


part). 


8. It is the soul only that remains self-same with itself, both in the beginning, 
middle and end of it, and in all places and times, and never changes with the 
change of the body or mind and therefore, forms the identity of the person. 


9. The soul which is formless and self-same with itself, forms the personality 
and individuality of a being, and because it is not subject to any modality or 
mutation at any time, it constitutes the essential identity of everybody. 


10. Rama rejoined: — If the divine soul is always the same and perfectly pure 
in itself, when proceeds our error of its changeableness, and what is the cause 
of the avidyd or ignorance that shows these changes unto us? 


11. Vasishtha replied: — The category of Brahma implies that, He is all what 
is, what was, and what will be in future; that He is without change and 
without beginning and end, and there is no avidyd ignorance in him. 


12. The signification that is meant to be expressed by the significant term 
Brahma, does not include any other thing as what is inexistent, or the negative 
idea of ignorance under it. (i.e., God is what is and not what is not). 


13. Thyself and myself, this earth and sky, the world and all its sides, together 
with the elementary of fire and others, are all the everlasting and infinite 
Brahma, and there is not the least misunderstanding in it. 


14. Avidyd or Ignorance is a mere name and Error, and is but another word for 
unreality; nor can you Rama, ever call that a reality, which is never existent of 
itself. (The words ignorance and error are both of them but negative terms). 


15. Rama said: — Why Sir, you have said yourself of Ignorance in the chapter 
on Upasama or Tranquillity, and told me to know all these as products of 
error. 


16. Vasishtha answered: — Rama! you had been all this time immerged in 
your ignorance, and have at last come to your right understanding by your 
own reasoning. 


17. It is the practice of glossologists and men of letters, to adopt the use of the 
word ignorance, living soul and the like, for awakening the unenlightened to 
their enlightenment only. 


18. So long as the mind is not awakened to the knowledge of truth, it remains 
in the darkness of error forever; and is not to its right understanding; even by 
its traversing a hundred miles. 


19. When the living soul is awakened to its right sense by the force of reason, 
it learns to unite itself to the supreme soul, but being led without the guidance 
of reason, it is successful in nothing with all its endeavours. 


20. He who tells the unenlightened vile man, that all this world is the great 
Brahma himself, does no more than communicate his sorrows to the headless 
trunk of a tree. (A lecture to the listless man, is not listened to). 


21. The fool is brought to sense by reasoning, and the wise man knows the 
truth from the nature of the subject; but the ignorant never learn wisdom, 
without the persuasion of reason. (The wise learn by intuition, but the unwise 
by no instruction). 


22. You had been unwise so long as you depended on your own reasoning, 
(judgment); but being guided by me, you are now awakened to truth. (Nobody 
is wise of his own conceit without the guidance of his preceptor). 


23. That I am Brahma, thou art Brahma, and so the visible world is Brahma 
himself; know this truth and naught otherwise, and do as you please. (All 
inventions and imaginations of Him are false). 


24. Inconceivable is the conception of God, and the visible world is all that is 
known of him; know him as one, and the infinite, and you will not be misled 
into error. 


25. Rama, think in yourself whether when you are sitting or walking, or 
waking or sleeping, that you are this supreme spirit, which is of the form of 
light and intelligence, and pervades all things. 


26. Rama! if you are without your egoism and meity or selfishness, and if you 
are intelligent and honest, then be as oecumenical and tranquil as Brahma 
himself, who is equally situated in all things. 


27. Know yourself as the pure consciousness, which is situated as one in all; 
which is without beginning and end, and is the essence of light and the most 
transcendent of all being. 


28. What you call, Brahma the universal soul and the fourth or transcendent 
state; know the same to be materia or matter and natura or nature also. It is 
the inseparable one in all, as the mud is the essential substance of a thousand 
water pots. 


29. Nature is not different from the nature of the soul, as the clay is no other 
than the pot itself; the Divine essence is as the intrinsic clay, and the divine 
spirit extends as the inward matter of all things. 


30. The soul has its pulsation like the whirling of the whirlpool, and this is 
termed Prakriti force or matter, which is no other than an effort of the spirit. 


31. As pulsation and ventilation, mean the same thing under different names; 
so the soul and nature express the same substance, which are not different in 
their essence. 


32. It is mere ignorance which makes their difference, and which is removed 
by their knowledge; as it is sheer ignorance which represents a snake in the 
rope, and which is soon removed by knowledge of their nature. 


33. As the seed of imagination falls in the field of the intellect, it shoots forth 
in the sprout of the mind, which becomes the germ of the wide spreading 
arbor of the universe. 


34. The seed of false imagination (of avidyd or personified Ignorance), being 
scorched by the flames of spiritual knowledge, will be able to vegetate no 
more, though it is sprinkled with the water of fond desire. (i.e., Fancy is fed 
by desire, but fly away at the appearance of reason). 


35. If you do not sow the seed of imagination in the soil of your intellect, you 
will stop the germination of the plants of pain and pleasure in the field of your 
mind. (Pain and pleasure are imaginary ideas and not really so in their nature). 


36. Rama! as you have come to know the truth, you must forsake your false 
conception of such a thing as ignorance or error existing in the world; and 
know that there is no duality in the unity of God. Being thus full with the 
knowledge of one supreme soul, you must repudiate your ideas of pain and 
pleasure in anything here below. Pain turns to pleasure, and pleasure to pain, 
know them both as unreal, as they are vain. 


CHAPTER L. 


On sensations and the objects of senses. 


Argument. — The production of the eight signs or senses in the vital soul, and 
their development into the External organs for the perception of outward 
objects. 


Rama said: — Sir, I have known whatever is to be known, and seen all that is 
to be seen; I am filled with the ambrosial draught of divine knowledge, which 
you have kindly imparted to me. 


2. I see the world full with the fulness of Brahma, I know the plenitude of God 
that has produced this plenary creation; it is the fulness of God that fills the 
universe, and all its amplitude depends on the plenum of the all-pervading 
Deity. 


3. It is now with much fondness that I like to propose to you another question, 
for the improvement of my understanding; and hope you will not be enraged 
at it, but communicate to me the instruction as a kind father does to his 
fondling boy. 


4. We see the organs of sense, as the ears, nose, eyes, mouth and touch, 
existing alike in all animals, (whether when they are alive or dead). 


5. Why is it then that the dead do not perceive the objects of their sense, as 
well as the living who know the objects in their right manner? 


6. How is it that the dull organs perceive the outward objects, as a pot and 
other objects of sense which are imperceptible to the inward heart, 
notwithstanding its natural sensibility and sensitiveness. 


7. The relation between outward objects and the organs, is as that of the 
magnet and iron, which attract one another without their coming in contact 
together. But how is it that the small cavities of the organs could let into the 
mind such prodigious objects that surround us on all sides. 


8. If you well know these secrets of nature, then please to communicate them 
to me in a hundred ways, in order to satisfy my curiosity regarding them. 


9. Vasishtha answered: — Now Rama, I tell you in short, that neither the 
organs nor the heart and mind, nor the pots and pictures, are the things in 
reality; because it is impossible for anything to exist apart and independent of 
the pure and intelligent spirit of God. 


10. The Divine Intellect which is purer than air, takes the form of the mind by 
itself; which then assumes its elemental form of the organic body, and 
exhibits all things agreeably to the ideas which are engraven in the mind. 


11. The same elements being afterwards stretched out into matter or mdayd and 
nature or prakriti, exhibit the whole universe as its ensemble, and the organs 
and their objects as its parts. (This passage rests on the authority of the sruti 
which says, — [Sanskrit: mdydntu prakritim vidyd4namdyinantu maheshvaram 
| ashdbayavabhutestu va4ptamsarvva midamjagat]). 


12. The mind which takes the elemental form of its own nature, reflects itself 
in all the parts of nature in the forms of pots and all the rest of things. (It is 
repeatedly said that the mind is the maker of all things by reminiscence of the 


past). 


13. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, what is the form of that elementary body, 
which reflects itself in a thousand shapes on the face of the puryastaka or 
elemental world, as it were on the surface of a mirror. 


14. Vasishtha replied: — This elementary body which is the seed of the 
world, is the undecaying Brahma, who is without beginning and end, and of 
the form of pure light and intellect, and devoid of parts and attributes. 


15. The same being disposed to its desires, becomes the living soul; and this 
being desirous of collecting all its desires and the parts of the body together, 
becomes the palpitating heart in the midst of it. (The word heart, hrid, is 
derived from its harana or receiving the blood and all bodily sensations into 
it; it, is called the chitta also, from its chinoti or collecting and distributing 
these in itself and to all parts of the body). 


16. It becomes the ego from its thought of its egoism, and is called the mind 
from its minding, — manana of many things in itself; it takes the name of 
buddhi or understanding from its bodha or understanding and ascertainment 
of things, and that of sense also from its sensation of external objects. 


17. It thinks of taking a body and becomes the very body, as a potter having 


the idea of a pot forms it in the same manner. Such being the nature of the 
soul of being and doing all what it likes, it is thence styled the puryashtaka or 
manifest in its said eight different forms. 


18. The Intellect is also called the puryashtaka or octuple soul, from its 
presiding over the eight-fold functions of a person; as those of perception, 
action and passion and inspection or witnessing of all things and the like; as 
also from its inward consciousness and the power of vitality. (The gloss gives 
the following explanations of these words, viz., — Perception of what is 
derived by the organs of sense. Action of what is done by the organs of action. 
[Sanskrit: karmendriya]. Passion or the feelings of pleasure or pain that is so 
derived. Inspection or the silent witnessing of all things by the isolated soul; 
And so on). 


19. The living soul takes upon it different forms at different times, according 
as it is employed in any one of these octuple functions; and also as it is 
actuated by the various desires, that rise in it by turns. 


20. The octuple nature of the soul causes it to put forth itself, in the same 
form, as it is led to by its varying desire at any time; in the same manner as a 
seed shoots forth in its leaves, according to the quantity of water with which it 
is watered. 


21. The soul forgets its intellectual nature, and thinks it's a mortal and material 
being, embodied in the form of a living creature or some inanimate being, and 
ever remains insensible of itself under the influence of its erroneous belief. 


22. Thus the living soul wanders about in the world, as it is dragged to and fro 
by the halter of desire tied about its neck; now it soars high and then it 
plunges below like a plank, rising up and sinking below the waves and 
currents of the sea. 


23. There is someone, who after being released from his imprisonment in this 
world, comes to know the supreme soul, and attains to that state which has 
neither its beginning nor end. 


24. There are others also, who being weary and worried by their 
transmigrations in multitudinous births, come after the lapse of a long period 
to their knowledge of the soul, and obtain thereby their state of final bliss at 
last. 


25. It is in this manner, O intelligent Rama, that the living soul passes through 
many bodily forms, and you shall hear now, how it comes to perceive the 


outward objects of the pots, efc., by means of the external organs of 
perception, — the vision and others. 


26. After the intellect has taken the form of the living soul, and the same has 
received its vitality; the action of the heart sends its feelings to the mind, 
which forms the sixth organ of the body. 


27. As the living soul passes into the air, through the organs of the body, it 
comes in contact with the external objects of the senses; and then joining with 
the intellect it perceives the external sensations within itself. (The gloss says, 
— The organs of sense like canals of water, carry the sensations to the seat of 
the mind). 


28. It is the union of the living soul with the outward objects, that causes and 
carries the sensations to the mind; but the soul being defunct and the mind 
being dormant, there is no more any perception of the externals. 


29. Whatever outward object which is set in the open air, casts its reflexion on 
the subtle senses of living beings, the same comes intact with the living soul 
which feels the sensation; but the soul being departed, the dead body has 
neither its life nor feeling of aught in existence. 


30. When the form of the outward object, comes in contact with the gemming 
eye sight of a person; it casts its picture on the same, which is instantly 
conveyed to the inward soul. 


31. The image that is cast on the retina of the eye, is reflected thence to the 
clearer mirror of the soul, which perceives it by contact with the same; and it 
is thus that outer things come to the knowledge of the living soul. 


32. Even babes can know whatever comes in taction with them, and so do 
brutes and vegetables have the power of feeling the objects of their touch; 
how then is it possible for the sensuous soul to be ignorant of its tangible 
objects? 


33. The clear rays of the eyesight which surround the soul, present to it the 
pictures of visible objects which they bear in their bosom, and whereby the 
soul comes to know him. 


34. There is the same relation of sensuous contact between the perceptive soul 
and the perceptible objects of the other senses also; the taste, smell, sound, the 
touch of things, are all the effects of their contact with the soul. 


35. The sound remaining in its receptacle of the air, passes in a moment in the 


cavity of the ear; and thence entering into the hollow space of the soul, gives 
it the sensation of its nature. 


36. Rama said: — I see that the reflexions of things are cast in the mirror of 
the mind, like the images of things carved on wooden tablets and slabs of 
stone; but tell me Sir, how the reflexion of the image of God is cast on the 
mirror of the mind. 


37. Vasishtha replied: — know, O best of gnostics that know the knowable, 
that the gross images of the universal and particular souls, which are reflected 
in the mirror of the mind, are as false as the images of God and deities which 
are carved in stones and wood. 


38. Never rely, O Rama, in the substantiality of this false world; know it as a 
great vortex of whirling waters, and ourselves as the waves rolling upon it. 


39. There is no limitation of space or time or any action, in the boundless 
ocean of the infinity and eternity of the Deity; and you must know your soul 
to be identic with the Supreme, which is ubiquitous and omnipresent. 


40. Remain always with a calm and quiet mind, unaddicted to anything in this 
world; know the vanity of worldly pleasures and pains, and go on with a 
contented mind where ever you will. Preserve your equality, and commit 
yourself to an indifferent apathy to everything. 


CHAPTER LI. 


On the Perception of the sensible objects. 


Argument. — Erroneous Belief in the Reality of the Body and Mind; instead 
of believing the unity and Entity of Brahma as All in All. 


VASISHTHA resumed: — Rama, you have heard me relate unto you that, 
even the lotus-born Brahma who was born long before you, had been without 
his organs of sense at first. (.e., Brahma the creative power of God, was 
purely a spiritual Being, and had necessarily neither a gross body nor any of 
its organs as we possess). 


2. As Brahma, — the collective agents of creation was endued only with his 
consciousness, — Samvid, for the performance of all his functions; so are all 
individual personalities endowed with their self-consciousness only, for the 
discharge of all their necessary duties. 


3. Know that as the living soul, dwelling in its body in the mother's womb, 
comes to reflect on the actions of the senses, it finds their proper organ 
supplied to its body immediately. 


4. Know the senses and the organs of sense to be the forms of consciousness 
itself, and this I have fully explained to you in the case of Brahma, who 
represents the collective body of all individual souls. 


5. At first there was the pure consciousness in its collective-form in the Divine 
Intellect, and this afterwards came to be diffused in millions of individual 
souls from its sense of egoism. At first was the Divine soul, “the I am all that I 
am,” and afterwards became many as expressed in the Vedic text, “aham 
bahusyam.” 


6. It is no stain to the pure universal, undivided and subjective Divine spirit, to 
be divided into the infinity of individual and objective souls; since the 
universal and subjective unity comprises in it the innumerable objective 


individualities which it evolves of itself; (in its self-manifestation in the 
universe). 


7. The objectivity of God does not imply his becoming either the thinking 
mind or the living soul; nor his assuming upon him the organic body or any 
elemental form. (Because the Lord becomes the object of our meditation and 
adoration in his spirit only). 


8. He does not become the Vidyd or Avidyd, — the intelligible or 
unintelligible, and is ever existent as appearing non-existent to the ignorant; 
this is called the supreme soul, which is beyond the comprehension of the 
mind and apprehension of the senses. 


9. From Him rises the living soul as well as the thinking mind; which are 
resembled for the instruction of mankind, as sparks emitted from fire. 


10. From whatever source ignorance, (Avidyd), may have sprung, you have no 
need of inquiring into the cause thereof; but taking ignorance as a malady, you 
should seek the remedy of reasoning for its removal. 


11. After all forms of things and the erroneous knowledge of particulars, are 
removed from your mind; there remains that knowledge of the unity, in which 
the whole firmament is lost, as a mountain is concealed in an atom. (The 
infinity of Deity, envelopes all existence in it). 


12. That in which all the actions and commotions of the world, remain still 
and motionless; as if they were buried in dead silence and nihility, is the 
surest rock of your rest and resort, after feeling from the bustle of all worldly 
business. 


13. The unreal or negative idea of ignorance, has also a form, as inane as it is 
nothing; look at her and she becomes a nullity, touch her and she perishes and 
vanishes from sight. (Avidyd like Ignorantia is of the feminine gender, and 
delusive and fleeting as a female). 


14. Seek after her, and what can you find but her nothingness; and if by your 
endeavour you can get anything of her, it is as the water in the mirage, (which 
kills by decoying the unwary traveller). 


15. As it is ignorance alone that creates her reality, her unreality appears as a 
reality, and destroys the seeming reality at once. (Avidyd or Ignorance is the 
Goddess of the agnostic sdktas, who worship her, under the name of Mdyd or 
Illusion also). 


16. Agnosticism imputes false attributes to the nature of the Deity, and it is 
the doctrine of the agnostics to misrepresent the universal spirit, under the 
forms of the living soul and the perishable body. (from their ignorance of the 
supreme). 


17. Now hear me attentively to tell you the Sdstras that they have invented, in 
order to propagate their agnostic religion or belief in this avidyd, by setting up 
the living soul and others in lieu of the supreme spirit. 


18. Being fond of representing the Divine Intellect in a visible form, they have 
stained the pure spirit with many gross forms, such as the elemental and 
organic body, which is enlivened by the vital spirit dwelling in it. 


19. Whatever they think a thing to be, they believe in the same; they make 
truth of an untruth, and its reverse likewise; as children make a devil of a doll, 
and afterwards break it to nothing. 


20. They take the frail body formed of the five elements as a reality, and 
believe its holes of the organs as the seats of the sensuous soul. 


21. They employ these five-fold organs in the perception of the pentuple 
objects of the senses; which serve at best to represent their objects in different 
light than what they are, as the germ of a seed produces its leaves of various 
colours. (This means the false appearances which are shown by the deceptive 
senses). 


22. They reckon some as the internal senses, as the faculties of the mind and 
the feelings of the heart, and others as external, as the outward organs of 
action and sensation; and place their belief in whatever their souls and minds 
suggest to them either as false or true. 


23. They believe the moonlight to be hot or cold, according as they feel by 
their outward perception. (i.e., Though the moon-beams appear cooling to the 
weary, yet they seem to be warm to the love lorn amorosa). 


24. The pungency of the pepper and the vacuity of the firmament, are all 
according to one's knowledge and perception of them, and do not belong to 
the nature of things. For sweet is sour to some, and sour is sweet to others; 
and the firmament is thought to be a void by many, but is found to be full of 
air by others, who assert the dogma of natures abhorrence of vacuum. 


25. They have also ascertained certain actions and rituals, which are in 
common practice, as the articles of their creed, and built their faith of a future 
heaven, on the observance of those usages. 


26. The living soul which is full of its desires, is led by two different 
principles of action through life; the one is its natural tendency to some 
particular action, and the other is the direction of some particular law or other. 
It is however the natural propensity of one, that gets the better of the other. 


27. It is the soul which has produced all the objective duality from the 
subjective unity only; as it is the sweet sap of the sugarcane that produces the 
sugar-candy; and the serum of the earth, that forms and fashions the water pot. 
(The objective is the production of the subjective.) 


28. In these, as well as in all other cases, the changes that take place in the 
forms of things, are all the results of time and place and other circumstances; 
but none of these has any relation in the nature of God, in his production of 
the universe. 


29. As the sugarcane produces its leaves and flowers from its own sap, so the 
living soul produces the dualities from sap of its own unity, which is the 
supreme soul itself. (The spirit of God that dwells in all souls. (Swdtmani 
Brahmasatwa), produces all these varieties in them.) 


30. It is the God that is seated in all souls, that views the dualities of a pot, 
picture, a cot and its egoism in itself; and so they appear to every individual 
soul in the world. 


31. The living soul appears to assume to itself, the different forms of 
childhood, youth, and age at different times; as a cloud in the sky appears as 
an exhalation, a watery cloud and the sap of the earth and all its plants, at the 
different times of the hot and rainy seasons of the year. 


32. The living soul perceives all these changes, as they are exhibited before it 
by the supreme soul in which they are all present; and there is no being in the 
world, that is able to alter this order of nature. 


33. Even the sky which is as clear as the looking glass, and is spread all about 
and within everybody, is not able to represent unto us, all the various forms 
which are presented to the soul by the great soul of souls (in which they 
appear to be imprinted). Here Vasishtha is no more an dkdsa-vddi, — vacuist, 
in as much as he finds a difference in the nature and capacity of the one from 
those of the other or the supreme soul. 


34. The soul which is situated in the universal soul of Brahma, shines as the 
living soul, (Jiva), of living beings; but it amounts to a duality, to impute even 
an incorporeal idea of Avidyd or Ignorance to it; because the nature of God is 


pure Intelligence, and cannot admit an ignorant spirit in it, (as the good spirit 
of God cannot admit the evil spirit of a demon in itself). 


35. Whatever thing is ordained to manifest itself in any manner, the same is its 
nature and stamp, (swabhdva and neyati); and though such appearance is no 
reality, yet you can never undo what is ordained from the beginning. 


36. As a golden ornament presents to you the joint features of its reality and 
unreality at the same time, (in that it is gold and jewelry, the one being real 
and the other changeable and, therefore, unreal); so are all things but 
combinations of the real and unreal, in their substantial essence and outward 
appearance. But both of these dissolve at last to the Divine spirit, as the gold 
ornament is melted down to liquid gold in the crucible. 


37. The Divine Intellect being all-pervasive by reason of its intellectuality, it 
diffuses also over the human mind; as the gold of the jewel settles and remains 
dull in the crucible. 


38. The heart having the passive nature of dull intellectuality, receives the 
fleeting impressions of the active mind, and takes upon it the form that it feels 
strongly impressed upon it at any time. (The heart is the passive receptacle of 
the impression of the active mind and reverberates to the tone of its thoughts). 


39. The soul also assumes many shapes to itself at different times, according 
to the ever-changing prospects, which various desires always present before it. 


40. The body likewise, takes different forms upon it, according to its inward 
thoughts and feelings; as a city seen in a dream varies considerably from what 
is seen with naked eyes. So we shape our future forms by the tenor of our 
minds, (because our life is but a dream and our bodies but its shadows, — 
prathibas). 


41. As a dream presents us the shadows of things, that disappear on our 
waking, so these living bodies that we see all about, must vanish into nothing 
upon their demise. 


42. What is unreal is doomed to perish, and those that die are destined to be 
born again, and the living soul takes another form in another body, as it sees 
itself in its dream. 


43. This body does not become otherwise, though it may change from youth 
to age in course of time; because the natural form of a person retains its 
identity in every stage of life through which it has to pass. 


44. A man sees in his dream all that he has seen or heard or thought of at any 
time, and the whole world being comprised in the state of dreaming, the living 
soul becomes the knower of all that is knowable in his dream. (The sruti says, 
the soul comprises the three worlds in itself, which it sees expanded before in 
its dream). 


45. That which is not seen in the sight of a waking man, but is known to him 
only by name, (as the indefinite form of Brahma); can never be seen in dream 
also, as the pure soul and the intellect of God. (Abstract thoughts are not 
subjects of dream). 


46. As the living soul sees in its dream the objects that it has seen before, so 
the intellectual part of the soul sees also many things, which were unknown to 
it. 


47. Subdue your former desires and propensities, by your manly efforts at 
present; and exert your utmost to change your habitual misconduct to your 
good behaviour for the future. 


48. You can never subdue your senses, nor prevent your transmigrations, 
without gaining your liberation; but must continue to rise and plunge in the 
stream of life forever more and in all places. 


49. The imagination of your mind, causes the body to grasp your soul as a 
shark, and the desire of your soul is as a ghost, that lays hold on children in 
the dark. 


50. It is the mind, the understanding and egoism, joined with the five elements 
or tanmdtras, that form the puryastaka or ativahika body, composed of the 
octuple subtle properties. 


51. The bodiless or intellectual soul, is finer than the vacuous air; the air is its 
great arbor, and the body is as its mountain. (i.e., It is more subtle than the 
empty air and sky). 


52. One devoid of his passions and affections, and exempt from all the 
conditions of life, is entitled to his liberation; he remains in a state of 
profound sleep, (hypnotism), wherein the gross objects and desires of life, lie 
embosomed and buried forever. 


53. The state of dreaming is one in which the dreamer is conscious of his body 
and self-existence; and has to rove about or remain fixed in some place, until 
his attainment of final liberation. Such is the state of living beings and 
vegetables, (both of which are conscious of their lives). 


54. Sometimes the sleeping and often the dreaming person, have both to bear 
and carry with them their ativahika or moveable bodies, until they obtain their 
final emancipation from life. 


55. When the sleeping soul does not rise of itself, (by its intellectual 
knowledge), but is raised from the torpor of its sleep by some ominous dream, 
it then wakes to the fire of a conflagration from its misery only. (Here waking 
to a conflagration is opposed to the waking to a sea of woes of Dr. Young. 
The gloss says, that it is a structure on the unintelligent waking of the 
Nydyikas). 


56. The state of the unmoving minerals, including even that of the fixed arbor 
of the Kalpa tree, (that is in its torpid hypnotism of susupti), exhibits no sign 
of intelligence except gross dullness. 


57. The dull sleep of susupta being dispelled by some dream, leads the waker 
to the miseries of life in this world; but he that awakes from his trance with 
full intelligence, finds the perfect felicity of the fourth (turya) states open fully 
to his view. 


58. The living soul finds liberation by means of its intelligence, and it is by 
this means that it gets its spirituality also; just as copper being cleansed of its 
rust by some acid, assumes the brightness of pure gold. 


59. The liberation that the living soul has by means of its intelligence, is again 
of two kinds, namely: — the one is termed emancipation from life or Jivan 
mukta, and the other is known as the release from the burden of the body or 
deha mukta. 


60. Emancipation from life means the attainment of the fourth state of 
perfection, and intelligence signifies the enlightenment of the soul, and this is 
obtainable by cultivation of the understanding. 


61. The soul that is acquainted with Sdstra, and knows the supreme spirit in 
itself, becomes full of the Deity; but the unintelligent soul sees only horrors 
rising before it, like spectres of his troublesome dreams. 


62. The horrors rising in the heart of man, serve only to disturb the rest of the 
breast; or else there is nothing in the heart of man, except a particle of the 
Divine Intellect. 


63. Men are verily subjected to misery, by looking at the Deity in any other 
light, than the Divine light which shines in the soul of man, and beside which 
there is no other light in it. 


64. Look at the world whenever you will, and you will find it full of illusion 
everywhere; as you find nothing in a pot full of foul water except the 
sediments of dirt. 


65. In the same manner you see the atoms of human souls, full with the 
vanities of this world; it is by the fetters of its worldly desires, and gets its 
release by the breaking off those bonds of its desire. 


66. The soul sleeps under the spell of its desires, and sees those objects in its 
dream, it wakes after their dispersion to the state of turya-felicity. The spell of 
gross desire, extends over all animate as well as in-animate creation. 


67. The desire of superior beings is of a pure nature, and that of intermediate 
natures is of less pure form. The desires of inferior beings are of a gross 
nature, and there are others without them as the pots and blocks. 


68. The living soul (passing through the doors of bodily organs) becomes 
united with the outward object, when the one becomes the percipient and the 
other the object of its percipience; and then the entity of both of these, namely 
of the inward soul and the outward object being pervaded by the all-pervasive 
Intellect of God, they both become one and the same with the common 
receptacle of all. (Ie. All things blend in the Divine unity). 


69. Hence the belief of the receiver, received and reception, are as false as the 
water in the mirage; and there is nothing that we can shun or lay hold upon as 
desirable or disgusting, when they are all the same in the sight of God. 


70. All things whether internal or external, are manifested to us as parts of the 
one universal and intellectual soul; and all the worlds being but manifestations 
of the Divine Intellect, it is in vain to attribute any difference to them. All of 
us are displayed in the Intellect, which contains the inner and outer worlds 
forever. 


71. As the ocean is an even expanse of water, after the subsidence of all its 
various waves and billows, and shows itself as clear as sky with its pure 
watery expanse to view; so the whole universe appears as the reflexion of one 
glorious and ever-lasting Deity, after we lose sight of the diversities that are 
presented to our superficial view. 


CHAPTER LIL. 


Story of Arjuna, as the Incarnation of Nara-Narayana. 


Argument. — The Narrative of Arjuna given in Illustration of the truth, that 
the world is a dream and unworthy of our reliance. 


VASISHTHA said: — Know Rama, this world to be as a dream, which is 
common to all living beings, and is fraught with many agreeable scenes, so as 
to form the daily romance of their lives, which is neither true nor entirely 
false. 


2. But as it is not likely that the living souls of men should be always asleep; 
therefore, their waking state is to be accounted as one of dreaming also. (Life 
is a dream. — Addison). 


3. Life is a longer dream than the short-lived ones in our sleep; and know it, 
intelligent Rama, to be as untrue as it is unsubstantial and airy in its nature. 


4. The living souls of the living world, continually pass from dream to dream, 
and they view the unrealities of the world as positive realities in their nature. 
(The unreal is thought as real by the Realists). 


5. They ascribe solidity to the subtle, and subtilty to what is solid; they see the 
unreal as real, and think the unliving as living in their ignorance. 


6. They consider the revolution of all worlds, to be confined in the solar 
system; and rove about like somnambulists and fleeting bees about the living 
soul, which they differentiate from the supreme. 


7. They consider and meditate in their minds, the living soul as a separate 
reality, owing to its ubiquity and immortality, and as the source of their own 
lives. (This is the living liberation, — Jivanmukti of Buddhists, who consider 
their living souls as absolute agent of themselves). 


8. Hear me to relate to you the best lesson of indifference, (i.e., the 


unattachment to the world and life), which the lotus-eyed lord, (Krishna), 
taught to Arjuna, and whereby that sagely prince became liberated in his life 
time. (Here is an anachronism of antedating Krishnarjuna prior to Rama). 


9. Thus Arjuna, the son of Pandu, will happily pass his life, and which I hope 
you will imitate, if you want to pass your days without any grief or sorrow. 


10. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, when will this Arjuna the son of Pandu, come 
to be born on earth, and who is this Hari of his, that is to deliver this lesson of 
indifference to the world to him? 


11. Vasishtha replied: — There is only the entity of one soul, to whom this 
appellation is applied by fiction only. He remains in himself from time 
without beginning and end, as the sky is situated in a vacuum. 


12. We behold in him the phantasmagoria of this extended world, as we see 
the different ornaments in gold, and the waves and billows in the sea. (Identity 
of the cause and effect of the producer and produced). 


13. The fourteen kinds of created beings display themselves in him; and in 
him is the network of this universe, wherein all these worlds are suspended, as 
birds hanging in the net in which they are caught. 


14. In him reside the deities Indra and Yama and the sun and moon, who are 
renowned and hallowed in the scriptures; and in him abide the five elemental 
creation, and they that have become the regents (of heaven and earth). 


15. That the one thing is virtue and therefore expedient, and the other is vice 
and therefore improper, are both placed in him as his ordinances (or eternal 
laws); and depending on the free agency, (sankalpa), of men, to accept or 
reject the one or the other for good or evil. (Hence there is no positive virtue 
or vice, nor God the author of good and evil; but it is the obedience or 
disobedience to his fixed laws, that amounts to the one or other). 


16. It is obedience to the Divine ordinance, that the gods are still employed in 
their fixed charges with their steady minds. 


17. The lord Yama is accustomed to make his penance, at the end of every 
four Yugas, (or Kalpa age), on account of his greatness in destruction of the 
creatures of God. (Yama, the Indian Pluto and god of death.) 


18. Sometimes he sat penitent for eight years, and all others for a dozen of 
years, often times he made his penance for five or seven years, and many 
times for full sixteen years. 


19. On a certain occasion as Yama sat observant of his austerity, and 
indifferent to his duty, death ceased to hunt after living beings in all the 
worlds. 


20. Hence the multitude of living beings filled the surface of the earth, and 
made ground pathless and impassable by others. They multiplied like the filth- 
born gnats in the rainy weather, that obstruct the passage of elephants. 


21. Then the gods sat together in council, and after various deliberations came 
to determine the extirpation of all living beings, for relieving the over 
burdened earth. (This was to be done by the Bharata war celebrated in the 
great epic of the Mahabharata). 


22. In this way many ages have passed away, and many changes have taken 
place in the usages of the people, and unnumbered living beings have passed 
and gone with the revolutions of the worlds. 


23. Now it will come to pass, that this Yama, — the son of the sun and the 
lord of the regions of the dead; will again perform his penance in the aforesaid 
manner after the expiration of many ages to come. 


24. He will again resume his penitence for a dozen of years, for the atonement 
of his sin of destroying the living; when he will abstain from his wonted 
conduct of destroying the lives of human beings. 


25. At that time, will the earth be filled with deathless mortals, so as this 
wretched earth will be covered and overburthened with them, as with dense 
forest trees. 


26. The earth groaning under her burden, and oppressed by tyranny and 
lawlessness, will have recourse to Hari for her redress, as when a virtuous 
wife resorts to her husband from the aggression of Dasyus. 


27. For this reason, Hari will be incarnate in two bodies, joined with the 
powers of all the gods, and will appear on earth in two persons of Nara and 
Narayana, the one a man and the other the lord Hari himself. 


28. With one body, Hari will become the son of Vasudeva, and will thence be 
called Vasudeva; and with the other he will be the son of Pandu, and will 
thereby be named the Pandava Arjuna or Arjuna the Pandava. 


29. Pandu will have another son by name of Yudhisthira, who will adopt the 
title of the son of Dharma, or righteousness, for his acquaintance with politics, 
and he will reign over the earth to its utmost limit of the ocean. 


30. He will have his rival with Duryodhana his cousin by his paternal uncle, 
and there will be a dreadful war between them as between a snake and weasel. 


31. The belligerent princes will wage a furious war for the possession of the 
earth, with forces of eighteen legions on both sides. (Those of Duryodhana 
were eleven legions, and Yudhisthira were seven). 


32. The God Vishnu will cause Arjuna to slay them all by his great bow of 
Gdndiva, and thereby relieve the earth of her burden of riotous peoples. 


33. The incarnation of Vishnu in the form of Arjuna, will comprise all the 
qualities incident to humanity; and will be fraught with the feelings of joy and 
vengeance, which are connatural with mankind. 


34. Seeing the battle array on both sides, and friends and kinsmen ready to 
meet their fate, pity and grief will seize the heart of Arjuna, and he will cease 
from engaging in the war. 


35. Hari will then with his intelligent form of Krishna, persuade his insensible 
person of Arjuna, to perform his part of a hero for crowning his valour with 
success. 


36. He taught him the immortality of the soul by telling him that, the soul is 
never born nor does it die at any time, nor had it a prior birth, nor is it new 
born to be born again on earth, it is unborn and ever-lasting, and is 
indestructible with the destruction of the body. 


37. He who thinks the soul to be the slayer of or slain by anybody, is equally 
ignorant of its nature, never kills nor is ever killed by anybody. 


38. It is immortal and uniform with itself, and more rare and subtle than the 
air and vacuity; the soul which is the form of the great God himself, is never 
and in no way destroyed by anybody. 


39. O Rama, that art conscious of yourself, know your soul to be immortal 
and unknown, and without its beginning, middle and end; it is of the form of 
consciousness and clear without any soil, so by thinking yourself as such, you 
become the unborn, eternal and undecaying soul yourself. 


CHAPTER LIII. 


Admonition of Arjuna. 


Argument. — Abandonment of Egoism, knowledge of the Adorable one and 
its different stages. 


The Lord said: — Arjuna, you are not the killer (of any soul), it is a false 
conceit of yours which you must shun; the soul is ever-lasting and free from 
death and decay. 


2. He who has no egoism in him, and whose mind is not moved (by joy or 
grief), is neither the killer of nor killed by anybody, though he may kill 
everyone in the world. (This is an attribute of the supreme soul). 


3. Whatever is known in our consciousness, the same is felt within us; shun 
therefore, your inward consciousness of egoism and meity, as this is I and 
these are mine, and these are others and theirs. 


4. The thought that you are connected with such and such persons and things, 
and that of your being deprived of them, and the joy and grief to which you 
are subjected thereby, must affect your soul in a great measure. 


5. He who does his works with the parts or members of his body, and 
connects the least attention of his soul therewith; becomes infatuated by his 
egoism and believes himself as the doer of his action. (here is a lesson of 
perfect indifference enjoined to any act or thought that a man does by or 
entertains in himself). 


6. Let the eyes see, the ears hear, and your touch feel their objects, let your 
tongue also taste the relish of a thing, but why take them to your soul and 
where is your egoism situated in these? 


7. The minds of even the great, are verily employed in the works that they 
have undertaken to perform, but where is your egoism or soul in these, that 
you should be sorry for its pains. (The soul is aloof from pain). 


8. Your assumption to yourself to any action, which has been done by the 
combination of many, amounts only to a conceit of your vanity, and exposes 
you not only to ridicule, but to frustrate the merit of your act. (So is the 
assuming of a joint action of all the organs and members of the mind, and the 
achievement of a whole army to one's self. So also many masters arrogate to 
themselves the merit of the deeds of their servants). 


9. The Yogis and hermits do their ritual and ordinary actions with attention of 
their minds and senses, and oftentimes with the application of the members 
and organs of their bodies only, in order to acquire and preserve the purity of 
their souls. 


10. Those who have not subdued their bodies with the morphia of 
indifference, are employed in the repetition of their actions, without ever 
being healed of their disease (of anxiety). 


11. No person is graceful whose mind is tinged with his selfishness, as no man 
however learned and wise is held in honour, whose conduct is blemished with 
unpoliteness and misbehaviours. 


12. He who is devoid of his selfishness and egotism, and is alike patient both 
in prosperity and adversity, is neither affected nor dejected, whether he does 
his business or not. 


13. Know this, O son of Pandu, as the best field for your martial action, which 
is worthy of your great good, glory and ultimate happiness. (War in a just 
cause is attended with glory). 


14. Though you reckon it as heinous on the one hand and unrighteous on the 
other; yet you must acknowledge the super excellence and imperiousness of 
the duties required of your martial race, so do your duty and immortalize 
yourself. 


15. Seeing even the ignorant stick fast to the proper duties of their race, no 
intelligent person can neglect or set them at naught; and the mind that is 
devoid of vanity, cannot be ashamed or dejected, even if one fails or falls in 
the discharge of his duty. 


16. Do your duty, O Arjuna, with your Yoga or fixed attention to it, and avoid 
all company, (in order to keep company with the object of your pursuit only). 
If you do your works as they come to you by yourself alone, you will never 
fail nor be foiled in any. i.e., thy object thou canst never gain, unless from all 
others you refrain. 


17. Be as quiet as the person of Brahma, and do your works as quietly as 
Brahma does leave his result, (whether good or bad), to Brahma, (because you 
can have no command over the consequence), and by doing so, assimilate 
thyself into the nature of Brahma (who is all in all). 


18. Commit yourself and all your actions and objects to God, remain as 
unaltered as God himself, and know him as the soul of all, and be thus the 
decoration of the world. (The gloss says, it is no blasphemy to think one's self 
as God, when there is no other personality besides that of Deity). 


19. If you can lay down all your desires, and become as even and cool mind as 
a muni, — monk; if you can join your soul to the Yoga of sannyasa or 
contemplative coldness, you can do all your actions with a mind unattached to 
any. 


20. Arjuna said: — Please lord, explain to me fully, what is meant by the 
renunciation of all connections, commitment of our actions to Brahma; 
dedication of ourselves to God and abdication of all concerns. 


21. Tell me also about the acquisition of true knowledge and divisions of 
Yoga meditation, all which I require to know in their proper order, for the 
removal of my gross ignorance on those subjects. 


22. The Lord replied: — The learned know that as the true form of Brahma, of 
which we can form no idea or conception, but which may be known after the 
restraining of our imagination, and the pacification of our desires. 


23. Promptitude after these things constitutes our wisdom or knowledge, and 
perseverance in these practices is what is called Yoga. Self-dedication to 
Brahma rests on the belief that Brahma is all this world and myself also. 


24. As a stone statue is all hollow both in its inside and outside, so is Brahma 
as empty, tranquil and transparent as the sky, which is neither to be seen by us 
nor is it beyond our sight. 


25. It then bulges out a little from itself, and appears as something, other than 
what it is. It is this reflexion of the universe, but all as empty as this inane 
vacuity. 


26. What is again this idea of your egoism, when everything is evolved out of 
the Supreme Intellect, of what account is the personality of anybody, which is 
but an infinitesimal part of the universal soul. 


27. The Egoism of the individual soul, is not apart from the universal spirit, 


although it seems to be separate from the same; because there is no possibility 
of exclusion or separation of anything from the Omnipresent and all 
comprehensive soul of God, and therefore, a distinct egoism is a nullity. 


28. As it is the case with our egoism, so is it with the individuality of a pot 
and of a monkey also. (i.e., of all insensible and brute creatures too), none of 
which is separate from the universal whole. All existences being as drops of 
water in the sea, it is absurd to presume an egoism to anybody. 


29. Things appearing as different to the conscious soul, are to be considered as 
the various imageries represented in the self-same soul, (like the sundry 
scenes shown in the soul in a dream). 


30. So also is the knowledge of the particulars and species, lost in the idea of 
the general and the summum genus. Now by sannydsa or renunciation of the 
world is meant, the resignation of the fruition of the fruits of our actions. (The 
main teaching of Krishna to Arjuna in the Bhagavad-gita, tends to the 
renunciation of the fruits of our actions). 


31. Unattachment signifies the renunciation of all our worldly desires, and the 
intense application of the mind to the one sole God of the multifarious 
creation, and the variety of his imaginary representations. 


32. The want of all dualism in the belief of his self-existence as distinct from 
that of God, constitutes his dedication of himself to God; it is ignorance that 
creates the distinction, by applying various names and attributes to the one 
intellectual soul. 


33. The meaning of the word intelligent soul, is undoubtedly that it is one with 
the universe; and that the Ego is the same with all space, and its contents of 
the worlds and their motions. 


34. The Ego is the unity of Eternity, and the Ego is duality and plurality in the 
world, and the variety of its multifarious productions. Therefore, be devoted 
to the sole Ego, and drown your own egoism in the universal Ego. (Here the 
purport is given instead of the literal version of the too verbose tetrastich 
verse). 


35. Arjuna said: — There being two forms of the Deity, the one transcendent 
or spiritual and the other transpicuous or material; tell me to which of these I 
shall resort for my ultimate perfection. 


36. The lord replied: — There are verily two forms of the all-pervading 
Vishnu, the exoteric and the other esoteric; that having a body and hands 


holding the conch-shell, the discus, and the mace and lotus, is the common 
form for public worship. 


37. The other is the esoteric or spiritual form, which is undefined and without 
its beginning and end; and is usually expressed by the term Brahma, — great. 


38. As long as you are unacquainted with the nature of the supreme soul, and 
are not awakened to the light of the spirit; so long should you continue to 
adore the form of the God with its four arms. (or the form of the four-armed 
God). 


39. By this means you will be awakened to light, by your knowledge of the 
supreme; and when you come to comprehend the Infinite in yourself, you 
shall have no more to be born in any mortal form. 


40. When you are acquainted with the knowledge of the knowable soul, then 
will your soul find its refuge in eternal soul of Hari, who absorbs all souls in 
him. 


41. When I tell you that this is I and I am that, mind that I mean to say that, 
this and that is the Ego of the supreme soul, which I assume to myself for 
your instruction. 


42. I understand you to be enlightened to truth, and to rest in the state of 
supreme felicity; and now that you are freed from all your temporal desires, I 
wish you to be one with the true and holy spirit. 


43. View in yourself the soul of all beings and those beings themselves; think 
your own self or soul as the microcosm of the great universe, and be tolerant 
and broad sighted in your practice of Yoga. (The word Sama darsi, here 
rendered broad sighted, means one who sees everyone in one and the same 
light; whence it is synonymous with universal benevolence and fellow 
feeling). 


44. He who worships the universal soul that resides in all beings, as the one 
self-same and undivided spirit, is released from the doom of repeated births, 
whether he leads a secular or holy life in this world. 


45. The meaning of the word, “all,” is unity (in its collective sense), and the 
meaning of the word, “one,” is the unity of the soul; as in the phrase, “All is 
one,” it is meant to say that the whole universe is collectively but one soul. 
(The soul also is neither a positive entity, nor a negative non-entity, but it is as 
it is known in the spirit (of the form of ineffable light and delight)). 


46. He who shines as light within the minds of all persons, and dwells in the 
inward consciousness or percipience of every being, is no other than the very 
soul that dwells within myself also. 


47. That which is settled in shape of savour in the waters all over the three 
worlds. (i.e., in the earth, heaven, and underneath the ground); and what gives 
flavour to the milk, curd and the butter of the bovine kind, and dwells as 
sapidity in the marine salt and other saline substances, and imparts its 
sweetness to saccharine articles, the same is this savoury soul, which gives a 
gust to our lives, and a good taste to all the objects of our enjoyment. 


48. Know your soul to be that percipience, which is situated in the hearts of 
all corporeal beings, whose rarity eludes our perception of it, and which is 
quite removed from all perceptibles; and is therefore, ubiquitous in everything 
and omnipresent everywhere. 


49. As the butter is inbred in all kinds of milk, and the sap of all sappy 
substances is inborn in them, so the supreme soul is intrinsical and immanent 
in everything. 


50. As all the gems and pearls of the sea, have a lustre inherent in them, and 
which shines forth both in their inside and outside; so the soul shines in and 
out of every body without being seated in any part of it, whether in or out or 
where about it. 


51. As the air pervades both in the inside and outside of all empty pots, so the 
spirit of God is diffused in and about all bodies in all the three worlds. (This is 
the meaning of omnipresence). 


52. As hundreds of pearls are strung together by a thread in the necklace, so 
the soul of God extends through and connects these millions of beings, 
without its being known by any. (This all connecting attribute of God, is 
known as siitrdtma in the Vedanta). 


53. He who dwells in the hearts of every body in the world, commencing from 
Brahma to the object grass that grows on the earth; the essence which is 
common in all of them, is the Brahma the unborn and undying. 


54. Brahma is a slightly developed form of Brahma, and resides in the spirit of 
the great Brahma, and the same dwelling in us, makes us conceive of our 
egoism by mistake of the true Ego. 


55. The divine soul being manifest in the form of the world, say what can it be 
that destroys or is destroyed in it; and tell me, Arjuna, what can it be that is 


subject to or involved in pleasure or pain. 


56. The divine soul is as a large mirror, showing the images of things upon its 
surface, like reflexions on the glass; and though these reflexions disappear and 
vanish in time, yet the mirror of the soul is never destroyed, but looks as it 
looked before. 


57. When I say I am this and not the other (of my many reflexions in a 
prismatic glass, or of my many images in many pots of water), I am quite 
wrong and inconsistent with myself; so is it to say, that the human soul is the 
spirit or image of God, and not that of any other being, when the self-same 
Divine spirit is present and immanent in all. (The catholic spirit of the Hindu 
religion, views all beings to partake of the Divine spirit, which is in all as ina 
prismatic glass). 


58. The revolutions of creation, sustentation and final dissolution, take place 
in an unvaried and unceasing course in the spirit of God, and so the feelings 
on surface of the waters of the sea. (Egoistic feelings rising from the 
boisterous mind, subside in the calmness of the soul). 


59. As the stone is the constituent essence of rocks, the wood of trees and the 
water of waves; so is the soul the constituent element of all existence. 


60. He who sees the soul (as inherent) in all substances, and every substance 
(to be contained) in the soul; and views both as the component of one another, 
sees the uncreating God as the reflector and reflexion of Himself. 


61. Know Arjuna, the soul to be the integrant part of everything, and the 
constituent element of the different forms and changes of things; as the water 
is of the waves, and the gold is of jewelleries. (The spirit of God is believed as 
the material cause of all). 


62. As the boisterous waves are let loose in the waters, and the jewels are 
made of gold; so are all things existent in and composed of the spirit of God. 


63. All material beings of every species, are forms of the Great Brahma 
himself; know this one as all, and there is nothing apart or distinct from him. 


64. How can there be an independent existence, or voluntary change of 
anything in the world; where can they or the world be, except in the essence 
and omnipresence of God, and wherefore do you think of them in vain? 


65. By knowing all this as I have told you, the saints live fearless in this world 
by reflecting on the supreme Being in themselves; they move about as 


liberated in their lifetime, with the equanimity of their souls. 


66. The enlightened saints attain to their imperishable states, by being 
invincible to the errors of fiction, and unsubdued by the evils of worldly 
attachment; they remain always in their spiritual and holy states, by being 
freed from temporal desires, and the conflicts of jarring passions, doubts and 
dualities. 


CHAPTER LIV. 


Admonition of Arjuna in spiritual knowledge. 


Arguments — The causes of the feelings of Pleasure and Pain, and Happiness 
and Misery in this world, and the modes and means of their prevention and 
avoidance. 


The lord continued: — Listen moreover, O mighty armed Arjuna, to the 
edifying speech, which I am about to deliver unto you, for the sake of your 
lasting good and welfare. 


2. Know, O progeny of Kunti, that the perception of the senses, or the feelings 
conveyed to our minds by the organic sense, such as those of cold and heat 
and the like, are the causes of our bodily pleasure and pain; but as these are 
transitory, and come to us and pass away by turns, you must remain patient 
under them. 


3. Knowing neither the one nor the other to be uniform and monotonous, what 
is it thou call-est as real pleasure or pain? A thing having no form or figure of 
its own, can have no increase or decrease in it. 


4. Those who have suppressed the feelings of their senses, by knowing the 
illusory nature of sensible perceptions; are content to remain quiet with an 
even tenor of their minds, both in their prosperity and adversity; are verily the 
men that are thought to taste the ambrosial draught of immortality in their 
mortal state. 


5. Knowing the soul to be the same in all states, and alike in all places and 
times; they view all differences and accidents of life with indifference, and 
being sure of the unreality of unrealities, they retain their endurance under all 
the varying circumstances of life. 


6. Never can joy or grief take possession of the common soul, which being 
ecumenical in its nature, can never be exceptional or otherwise. 


7. The unreal has no existence, nor is the positive a negative at any time; so 
there can be nothing as a positive felicity or infelicity either in any place, 
when God himself is present in his person everywhere. (They are all alike to 
God and Godly soul). 


8. Abandon the thoughts of felicity or infelicity of the world, (nor be like the 
laughing or crying philosopher with your one-sided view of either the 
happiness or misery of life), and seeing there is no such difference in the mind 
of God, stick fast in this last state of indifference to both. 


9. Though the intelligent soul, and the external phenomena, are closely 
situated in the inside and outside of the body; Yet the internal soul is neither 
delighted nor depressed, by the pleasure or pain which environ the external 
body. 


10. All pleasure and pain relating the material body, touch the mind which is 
situated in it; but no bodily hurt or debility affects the soul, which is seated 
beyond it. 


11. Should the soul be supposed to participate in the pleasure or pain which 
affect the gross body, it is to be understood as caused by the error, rising from 
our ignorance only. 


12. The gross is no reality, and its feelings of pain or pleasure are never real 
ones, as to touch the intangible soul; for who is so senseless, as not to 
perceive the wide separation of the soul from the body? 


13. What I tell you here, O progeny of Bharata, will surely destroy the error 
arising from ignorance, by the full understanding of my lectures. 


14. As knowledge removes the error and fear of the snake, arising from one's 
ignorance in a rope; so our misconception of the reality of our bodies and their 
pleasures and pains, is dispelled by our knowledge of truth. 


15. Know the whole universe to be identic with increate Brahma, and is 
neither produced nor dissolved by itself, knowing this as a certain truth, 
believe in Brahma only, as the most supreme source of all tree knowledge. 


16. You are but a little billow in the sea of Brahma's essence; you rise and roll 
for a little while, and then subside to rest. You foam and froth in the whirlpool 
of Brahma's existence, and art no other than a drop of water in the endless 
ocean of Brahma. 


17. As long as we are in action under the command of our general, we act our 


parts like soldiers in the field; we all live and move in Brahma alone, and 
there is no mistake of right or wrong in this. (Act well our part and there all 
honour lies). 


18. Abandon your pride and haughtiness, your sorrow and fear, and your 
desire of pain or pleasure; it is bad to have any duality or doubt in you, be 
good with your oneness or integrity at all times. 


19. Think this in yourself from the destruction of these myriads of forces 
under your arms, that all these are evolved out of Brahma, and you do more 
than evolve or reduce them to Brahma himself. 


20. Do not care for your pleasure or pain, your gain or loss, and your victory 
or defeat; but resort only to the unity of Brahma, and know the world as the 
vast ocean of Brahma's entity. 


21. Being alike in or unchanged by your loss or gain, and thinking yourself as 
nobody; and go on in your proper course of action, as a gust of wind takes its 
own course. 


22. Whatever you do or take to your food, whatever sacrifices you make or 
any gift that you give to anyone, commit them all to Brahma, and remain quiet 
in yourself. (With an assurance of their happy termination by the help of 
God). 


23. Whoever thinks in his mind, of becoming anything in earnest; he 
undoubtedly becomes the same in process of time; if therefore, you wish to 
become as Brahma himself, learn betimes to assimilate yourself to the nature 
of Brahma, in all your thoughts and deeds. (It is imitation of perfection, that 
gives perfection to man). 


24. Let one who knows the great Brahma, be employed in doing his duties as 
occur unto him, without any expectation and any reward; and as God does his 
works without any aim, so should the Godly do their works without any 
object. 


25. He who sees the inactive God in all his active duties, and sees also all his 
works in the inactive Gods; that man is called the most intelligent among men, 
and he is said the readiest discharger of his deeds and duties. 


26. Do not do thy works in expectation of their rewards, nor engage thyself to 
do anything that is not thy duty or improper for thee. Go on doing thy duties 
as in thy Yoga or fixed meditation, and not in connection with other's or their 
rewards. 


27. Neither be addicted to active duties, nor recline in your inactivity either; 
never remain ignorant or negligent of thy duties in life, but continue in thy 
work with an even temper at all times. 


28. That man, though employed in business, is said to be doing nothing at all; 
who does not foster the hope of a reward of his acts, and is ever contented in 
himself, even without a patron or refuge. 


29. It is the addictedness of one's mind to anything, that makes it his action, 
and not the action itself without such addiction; it is ignorance which is the 
cause of such tendency, therefore, ignorance is to be avoided by all means. 


30. The great soul that is settled in divine knowledge; and is freed from its 
wont or bent to anything, may be employed in all sorts of works, without 
being reckoned as the doer of any. (One is named by the work of his 
profession, and not by his attendance to a thousand other callings in life). 


31. He who does nothing, is indifferent about its result (whether of good or 
evil), this indifference amounts to his equanimity, which leads to his endless 
felicity, which is next to the state of God-head. (The sentence is climacteric 
rising from inactivity to the felicity of the Deity). 


32. By avoiding the dirt of duality and plurality (of beliefs), betake yourself to 
your belief in the unity of the supreme spirit, and then whether you do or not 
do your ceremonial acts, you will not be accounted as the doer. 


33. He is called a wise man by the learned, whose acts in life are free from 
desire or some object of desire; and whose ceremonial acts are burnt away by 
the fire of spiritual knowledge. (It is said that the merit of ceremonial 
observances, leads a man only to reward in repeated births; but divine 
knowledge removes the doom of transmigration, by leading the soul at once to 
divine felicity, from which no one has to return to revisit the earth.) 


34. He who remains with a peaceful, calm, quiet and tranquil equanimity of 
the soul, and without any desire or avarice for anything in this world, may be 
doing his duties here, without any disturbance or anxiety of his mind. 


35. The man who has no dispute with any one, but is ever settled with calm 
and quiet rest of his soul; which is united with the supreme soul, without its 
Yoga or Ceremonial observance, and is satisfied with whatever is obtained of 
itself; such a man is deemed as a decoration of this earth. 


36. They are called ignorant hypocrites, who having repressed their organs of 
actions, still indulge themselves in dwelling upon sensible pleasures, by 


recalling their thoughts in this mind. 


37. He who has governed his outward and inward senses, by the power of his 
sapient mind; and employs his organs of action, in the performance of his 
bodily functions and discharges of his ceremonial observances without his 
addictedness to them, is quite different from the one described before. 


38. As the overflowing waters of rivers, fall into the profound and motionless 
body of waters in the sea; so the souls of holy men enter into the ocean of 
eternal God, where they are attended with a peaceful bliss, which is never to 
be obtained by avaricious worldlings. 


CHAPTER LV. 


Lecture on the living soul or Jivatatwa. 


Arguments. — The unity and reality is the causal subjective, and the duality 
and unreality is the objective worlds; and the situation of God between the 
two, means his witnessing both of these without being either of them, because 
the conditions of the cause and the caused do not apply to God who is beyond 
all attributes. 


The Lord said: — Neither relinquish or abstain from your enjoyments, nor 
employ your minds about them or in the acquisition of the object thereof. 
Remain with an even tenor of your mind, and be content with what comes to 
thee. 


2. Never be so intimately related to thy body, that is not intimately related 
with thee; but remain intimately connected with thyself, which is thy increate 
and imperishable soul. 


3. We suffer no loss by the loss of our bodies, (which are but adscititious 
garments of our souls); but we lose everything by the loss of our souls which 
last forever and never perish. 


4. The soul is not weakened like the sentient mind, by the loss of the sensible 
objects of enjoyment, and incessantly employed in action, yet it does nothing 
by itself. 


5. It is one's addictedness to an action that makes it his act, and this even when 
one is no actor of the same; it is ignorance only that incites the mind to action, 
and therefore, this ignorance is required to be removed from it by all means. 


6. The great minded man that is acquainted with the superior knowledge of 
spirituality, forsakes his tendency to action, and does everything that comes to 
him without his being the actor thereof. 


7. Know thy soul to be without its beginning and end, and undecaying and 


imperishable in its nature; the ignorant think it perishable, and you must not 
fall into this sad error like them. 


8. The best of men that are blest with spiritual knowledge, do not look the 
soul in the same light as the ignorant vulgar; who either believe the soulless 
matter as the soul, or think themselves as incorporate souls by their egoistic 
vanity. 


9. Arjuna said: — If it is so, O lord of worlds! then I ween that the loss of the 
body is attended with no loss or gain to the ignorant (because they have 
nothing to care for an immortal soul like the learned). 


10. The lord replied: — so it is, O mighty armed Arjuna! they lose nothing by 
the loss of the perishable body, but they know that the soul is imperishable, 
and its loss is the greatest of all losses. 


11. How be it, I see no greater mistake of men in this world, than when they 
say that they have lost anything or gained something that never belongs to 
them. It appears like the crying of a barren woman for her child, which she 
never had, nor is expected to have at any time. 


12. That it is axiomatic truth established by the learned, and well known to all 
men of common sense, though the ignorant may not perceive it verily, that an 
unreality cannot come to reality, nor a reality go to nothing at any time. (This 
equivalent to the definite propositions, “what is, is; and what is not, is naught; 
or that, positive cannot be the negative, not the negative an affirmative.’’) 


13. Now know that to be imperishable, that has spread out this perishable and 
frail world; and there is no one that can destroy the indestructible (or the 
entity of the immortal soul). 


14. The finite bodies are said to be the abode of the infinite soul, and yet the 
destruction of the finite and frail, entails no loss upon the infinite and 
imperishable soul. Know, therefore, the difference between the two. 


15. The soul is a unity without a duality, and there is no possibility of its 
nihility. (because the unity is certain reality, and duality is a nullity). The 
eternal and infinite reality of the soul, can never be destroyed with the 
destruction of the body. 


16. Leaving aside the unity and duality, take that which remains, and know 
that state of tranquillity which is situated between the reality and unreality, to 
be the state of the transcendental Deity. 


17. Arjuna rejoined: — such being the nature of the soul, then tell me, O lord, 
what is the cause of this certainty in man that he is dying, and what makes 
him think, that he is either going to heaven above or to the hell below. (What 
is the cause of heavenly bliss and the torments of hell). 


18. The lord replied: — know, Arjuna! There is a living soul dwelling in the 
body, and composed of the elements of earth, air, water, fire and vacuum, as 
also of the mind and understanding; (all of which being destructible in their 
nature, cause the destructibility of the living principle, and its subjection to 
pain and pleasure in this life and in the next. — Gloss). 


19. The embodied and living soul is led by its desire, as the young of a beast 
is carried about tied by a rope on its neck; and it dwells in the recess of the 
body, like a bird in the cage. (Both states of its living and moving about in the 
body, are as troublesome as they are compulsory to it). 


20. Then, as the body is worn out and becomes infirm in course of time, the 
living soul leaves it like the moisture of a dried leaf, and flies to where it is led 
by its inborn desire. (The difference of desire causes the difference of new 
births and bodies. — Gloss). 


21. It carries with it the senses of hearing, seeing, feeling, taste, touch and 
smell from its body, as the breeze wafts the fragrance from the cells of flowers 
(or as a wayfarer carries his valuables with him). 


22. The body is the production of one's desire, and has no other assignable 
cause to it; it weakens by the weakening of its desire, and being altogether 
weak and wasted, it becomes extinct in its final absorption in the god-head 
(because the want of desire and dislike, makes a man to become like his god; 
or as perfect as god, who has nothing to desire and dislike). 


23. The avaricious man, being stanch with his concupiscence, passes through 
many wombs into many births; like a magician is skilled in leaping up and 
down in earth and air. (The magician mdyd, purusha, means also a juggler or 
athlete who shows his feats in air as an aeronaut). 


24. The parting soul carries with her the properties of the senses from the 
sensible organs of the body; just as the flying breeze bears with him the 
fragrance of flowers, in his flight through the sky. 


25. The body becomes motionless, after the soul has fled from it; just as the 
leaves and branches of trees, remain unruffled after the winds are still. (i.e., As 
the breeze shakes the tree, so the vital breath moves the body, and this being 


stopped, the body becomes quiescent which is called its death). 


26. When the body becomes inactive, and insensible to the incision and 
wounds that are inflicted upon it, it is then called to be dead, or to have 
become lifeless. 


27. As this soul resides in any part of the sky, in its form of the vital air, it 
beholds the very same form of things manifested before it, as it was wont to 
desire when living. (The departed soul dwells either in spiritual or elemental 
sphere of the sky, and views itself and all other things in the same state as 
they are imprest in it, in their relation to time, place and form. — Gloss. This 
passage will clear Locke's and Parker's question, as to the form which the soul 
is to have after its resurrection). 


28. The soul comes to find all these forms and bodies, to be as unreal as those 
it has left behind; and so must you reckon all bodies after they are destroyed, 
unless you be so profoundly asleep as to see and know nothing. 


29. Brahma, — the lord of creation, has created all beings according to the 
images, that were impressed in his mind in the beginning. He sees them still to 
continue and die in the same forms. (So the soul gets its body as it thinks 
upon, and then lives and dies in the same form). 


30. Whatever form or body the soul finds on itself, on its first and 
instantaneous springing to life; the same is invariably impressed in its 
consciousness, until its last moment of death. (This fixed impression of the 
past, produces its reminiscence in the future, which forms and frames the 
being according to its own model). 


31. The pristine desire of a man, is the root of his present manliness, which 
becomes the cause of his future success. So also the present exertion of one, is 
able to correct and make up not only his past mistakes and deficits; but also to 
edify upon his rugged hut of old. (i.e., that is to improve his dilapidated state 
and build the fabric of his future fame and fortune). 


32. Whatever is pursued with ardent exertion and diligence for a while, the 
same in particular is gained among all other objects of one's former and future 
pursuit (which are reckoned under the four predicaments (Chaturvarga) of 
wealth and pleasure for this life, and virtue and salvation for the next). 


33. Whether a man is exposed on the barren rock of Vindhya, or blown and 
borne away by the winds, he is yet supported by his manhood; therefore, the 
wise man should never decline to discharge the legal duties, that are required 


of him at all times. 


34. Know the heaven and hell of which you ask, to be creatures of the old 
prejudices of men; they are the productions of human wish, and exist in the 
customary bias of the populace. 


35. Arjuna said: — Tell me, O lord of the world! what is that cause, which 
gave rise to the prejudice of a heaven and hell. (A future state of reward and 
retribution, is a common belief of all mankind on earth). 


36. The Lord replied: — These prejudices are as false as airy dreams, and 
have their rise from our desire (of future retribution); which waxing strong by 
our constant habit of thinking them as true, make us believe them as such, as 
they mislead us to rely on the reality of the unreal world. Therefore, we must 
shun our desires for our real good. 


37. The Lord replied: — Ignorance is the source of our desires, as it is the 
main spring of our error of taking the unself for the true self; it is the 
knowledge of the self therefore, combined with right understanding, that can 
dispel the error of our desires. (i.e., Ignorance of the nature of a thing, excites 
our desire for it, as our knowledge of the same, serves to suppress it). 


38. You are best acquainted with the self, O Arjuna! and well know the truth 
also; therefore, try to get off your error of yourself and not yourself, as this I 
and that another, as also of your desires for yourself and other. 


39. Arjuna said: — But I ween that the living soul dies away, with the death 
of its desires; because the desire is the support of the soul, which must 
languish and droop down for want of a desire. (So says Sir Hamilton: — Give 
me something to do and desire, and so I live or else I pine away and die). 


40. Tell me moreover, what thing is it that is subject to future births and 
deaths, after the living soul perishes with its body at any time or place (or 
after it has fled from it to some other region). 


41. The Lord replied: — Know the wistful soul, O intelligent Arjuna! to be of 
the form of the desire of the heart, as also of the form that anyone has framed 
for himself in his imagination. (i.e., The form of individual soul, is according 
to the figure that one has of himself in his mind and heart). 


42. The soul that is self-same with itself, and unaltered in all circumstances; 
that is never subject to body or any desire on earth, but is freed from all 
desires by its own discretion, is said to be liberated in this life. 


43. Living in this manner (or self-independence), you must always look to and 
be in search of truth; and being released from the snare of worldly cares, you 
are said to be liberated in this life. 


44. The soul that is not freed from its desires, is said to be pent up as a bird in 
its cage; and though a man may be very learned, and observant of all his 
religious rites and duties, yet he is not said to be liberated, as long as he 
labours in the chains of his desires. 


45. The man who sees the train of desires, glimmering in the recess of his 
heart and mind, is like a purblind man who sees the bespangled train of 
peacocks tail in the spotless sky. He is said to be liberated whose mind is not 
bound to the chain of desire, and it is one's release from this chain that is 
called his liberation in this life and in the next. 


CHAPTER LVI. 


Description of the mind. 


Argument: — On the liberation of the living soul, and description of the mind 
as the miniature of the world. 


The Lord continued: — Now, Arjuna, forsake your sympathy for your friends, 
by the cold-heartedness that you have acquired from the abandonment of your 
desires and cares, and the liberation that you have attained to in this your 
living state. 


2. Be dispassionate, O sinless Arjuna! by forsaking your fear of death and 
decay of the body; and be as clear as the unclouded sky in your mind, by 
driving away the clouds of your cares from it, and dispelling all your aims and 
attempts either of good or evil for yourself or others. 


3. Discharge your duties as they come to you in the course of your life, and do 
well whatever is proper to be done, that no action of yours may go for 
nothing. (i.e., Do well or do nothing). 


4. Whoso does any work that comes to him of itself in the course of his life, 
that man is called to be liberated in his lifetime; and the discharge of such 
deeds, belongs to the condition of living liberation. 


5. That I will do this and not that, or accept of this one and refuse the other, 
are the conceits of foolishness; but they are all alike to the wise (who have no 
choice in what is fit and proper for them). 


6. Those who do the works which occur to them, with the cool calmness of 
their minds, are said to be the living liberated; and they continue in their 
living state, as if they are in their profound sleep. 


7. He who has contracted the members of his body, and curbed the organs of 
his senses in himself, from their respective outward objects, resembles a 
tortoise, that rests in quiet by contracting its limbs within itself. 


8. The universe resides in the universal soul, and continues therein in all the 
three present, past and future times, as the painting-master of the mind, draws 
the picture of the world in the aerial canvas. 


9. The variegated picture of the world, which is drawn by the painter of the 
mind in the empty air, is as void as the vacant air itself, and yet appearing as 
prominent as a figure in relief, and as plain as a pikestaff. 


10. Though the formless world rests on the plane of vacuity, yet the 
wonderous error of our imagination shows it as conspicuous to view; as a 
magician shows his aerial cottage to our deluded sight. 


11. As there is no difference in the plane surface of the canvas, which shows 
the swelling and depression of the figures in the picture to our sight; so there 
is no convexity or concavity in the dead flat of the spirit, which presents the 
uneven world to view. (i.e., All things are even in the spirit of God, however 
uneven they may appear to us). 


12. Know, O red eyed Arjuna! the picture of the world in the empty vacuum is 
as void as the vacuity itself; it rises and sets in the mind, as the temporary 
scenes which appear in imagination at the fit of a delirium. 


13. So is this world all hollow, both in the inside and outside of it, though it 
appears as real as an air drawn city of our imagination, by our prejudice or 
long habit of thinking it so. (A deep rooted prejudice cannot soon be 
removed). 


14. Without cogitation the truth appears as false, and the false as true as in a 
delirium; but by excogitation of it, the truth comes to light, and the error or 
untruth vanishes in nubila. 


15. As the autumnal sky, though it appears bright and clear to the naked eye, 
has yet the flimsy clouds flying over it, so the picture drawn over the plane of 
the inane mind, presents the figures of our fancied objects in it. (Such is the 
appearance of our imaginary world and our fancied friends in the perspective 
of the mind). 


16. The baseless and unsubstantial world which appears on the outside, is but 
a phantasy and has no reality in it; and when there is nothing as you or I or 
any one in real existence, say who can destroy one or be destroyed by another. 


17. Drive away your false conception of the slayer and slain from your mind, 
and rest in the pure and bright sphere of the Divine spirit; because there is no 
stir or motion in the intellectual sphere of God, which is ever calm and quiet. 


All commotions appertain to the mental sphere, and the action of the restless 
mind. 


18. Know the mind to contain everything in its clear sphere, such as time and 
space, the clear sky, and all actions and motions and positions of things; as the 
area of a map presents the sites of all places upon its surface. 


19. Know the mind to be more inane and rarefied than the empty air, and it is 
upon that basis the painter of the intellect, has drawn the picture of this 
immense universe. 


20. But the infinite vacuum being wholly inane, it has not that diversity and 
divisibility in it, as they exhibit themselves in the mind, in the rearing up and 
breaking down of its aerial castle. (The imagination of the mind raises and 
erases its fabrics; but those of vacuum are fixed and firm for ever). 


21. So the earthly mortals seem to be born and die away every moment, as the 
chargeful thoughts of the all-engrossing mind, are ever rising and subsiding in 
it. 


22. Though the erroneous thoughts of the mind, are so instantaneous and 
temporary; yet it has the power of stretching out the ideas of the length and 
duration of the world, as it has of producing new ideas of all things from 
nothing. (So God created everything out of nothing). 


23. The mind has moreover the power of prolonging a moment to a Kalpa 
age; as of enlarging a minim to a mountain, and of increasing a little to a 
multitude. 


24. It has the power also of producing a thing from nothing, and of converting 
one to another in a trice; it is this capacity of it, which gives rise to the 
erroneous conception of the world, in the same manner, as it raises the airy 
castle and fairy lands of its own nature in a moment. 


25. It has likewise brought this wonderous world into existence, which rose 
out in the twinkling of an eye, as a reflexion and not creation of it. (Because 
the disembodied mind cannot create any material thing). 


26. All these are but ideal forms and shadowy shapes of imagination, though 
they appear as hard and solid as adamant; they are the mistaken ideas of some 
unknown form and substance. 


27. Whether you desire or dislike your worldly interests, show me where lies 
its solidity, both in your solicitude as well as indifference about it; the mind 


being itself situated in the intellect of the Divine contriver, the picture of the 
world, cannot have its place anywhere else. (The world being in the mind, and 
this again in the Divine intellect, the world must be situated also in the same, 
which is the main receptacle of the world also). 


28. O how very wonderous bright is this prominent picture, which is drawn on 
no base or coating, and which is so conspicuous before us, in various pieces 
without any paint or color whereof it is made. 


29. O how pleasant is this perspicuous picture of the world, and how very 
attractive to our sight. It was drawn on the inky coating of chaotic darkness, 
and exhibited to the full blaze of various lights (of the sun, moon, stars and 
primeval light). 


30. It is fraught in diverse colors, and filled with various objects of our desire 
in all its different parts; it exhibits many shows which are pleasant to sight, 
and presents all things to view of which have the notions in our minds. 


31. It presents many planets and stars before us, shining in their different 
shapes and spheres all about. The blue vault of heaven resembling a cerulean 
lake, brightens with the shining sun, moon and stars liking its blooming and 
blossoming lotuses. 


32. There are the bodies of variegated clouds, pendant as the many coloured 
leaves of trees on the azure sky; and appearing as pictures of men, gods and 
demons, drawn over the domes of the three regions (of earth, heaven and hell 
below, in their various appearances of white, bright and dark). 


33. The fickle and playful painter of the mind, has sketched and stretched out 
the picture of the sky, as an arena for the exhibition of the three worlds, as its 
three different stages; where all deluded peoples are portrayed as joyful 
players, acting their parts under the encircling light of the supreme Intellect. 
(The world is a stage, and all men and women its players. — Shakespeare). 


34. Here is the actress with her sedate body of golden hue, and her thick 
braids of hair; her eyes glancing on the people with flashes of sunshine and 
moon-beams, the rising ground is her back and her feet reaching the infernal 
regions; and being, clothed with the robe of the Sdstra, she acts the plays of 
morality, opulence and the farce of enjoyments. 


35. The Gods Brahma, Indra, Hari and Hara, form her four arms of action, the 
property of goodness is her bodice, and the two virtues of discretion and 
apathy, are her prominent breasts. The earth resting on the head of the infernal 


Serpent, is her lotus like foot-stool upheld by its stalk. She is decorated on the 
face and forehead with the paints of mineral mountains, whose valleys and 
caves form belly and bowels. 


36. The fleeting glances of her eyes dispelling the gloom of night, and the 
twinkling of stars are as the erection of hairs on her body; the two rows of her 
teeth emitted the rays of flashing lightnings, and all earthly beings are as the 
hairs on her person, and rising as piles about the bulb of a Kadamba flower. 


37. This earth is filled with living souls, subsisting in the spacious vacuum of 
the Universal soul, and appearing as figures in painting drawn in it. This the 
skilful artist of the mind, that has displayed this illusive actress of the 
Universe, to show her various features as in a puppet show. 


CHAPTER LVILI. 


On Abandonment of desire and its result of Tranquillity. 


Argument: — The final lecture to Arjuna on the Peace of mind resulting from 
its want of desire. 


The Lord said: — Look here, O Arjuna! The great wonder which is manifest 
in this subject; it is the appearance of the picture, prior to that of the plane of 
the plan upon which it is drawn. (The appearance of the mind or painting, 
before that of Viraj or the spirit of God which exhibits the painting. — Gloss). 


2. The prominence of the painting and the non-appearance of its basis, must 
be as wonderous as the buoyancy of a block of stone, and the sinking down of 
gourd shell as is shown in a magic play. 


3. The Universe resting in the vacuity of the Divine spirit, appears as a picture 
on the tablet of the mind; say then how does this egoism or self-knowledge of 
your substantiality, arise from the bosom of the vacuous nullity? (i.e., How 
can substantial spring from the unsubstantial, or something come out of 
nothing?) 


4. All these being the vacant production of vacuum, are swallowed up 
likewise in the vacuous womb of an infinite vacuity; they are no more than 
hollow shadows of emptiness, and stretched out in empty air. 


5. This empty air is spread over with the snare of our desires, stretching as 
wide as the sphere of these outstretched worlds; it is the band of our desire 
that encircles the worlds as their great belt. 


6. The world is situated in Brahma as a reflexion in the mirror, and is not 
subject to partition or obliteration; owing to its inherence in its receptacle, and 
its identity with the same. 


7. The indissoluble vacuum being the nature of Brahma, is inseparable from 
his essence; for nobody is ever able to divide the empty air in twain or remove 


it from its place. 


8. It is owing to your ignorance of this, that your concupiscence has become 
congenial with your nature; which it is hard for it to get rid of, 
notwithstanding its being fraught with every virtue. 


9. He who has sown the smallest seed of desire in the soul of his heart, is 
confined as a lion in the cage, though he may be very wise and learned in all 
things. 


10. The desire which is habitual to one, grows as rank as a thick wood in his 
breast; unless it is burnt away in the seed by the knowledge of truth, when it 
cannot vegetate any more. 


11. This mind is no more inclined to anything, who has burnt away the seed of 
his desire at once; he remains untouched by pleasure and pain, like the lotus- 
leaf amidst the water. 


12. Now therefore, O Arjuna! do you remain calm and quiet in your spirit, be 
undaunted and devoid of all desire in your mind; melt down the mist of your 
mental delusion by the heat of your nirvdna devotion, and from all that you 
have learnt from my holy lecture to you, remain in perfect tranquillity with 
your reliance in the Supreme spirit. 


CHAPTER LVIII. 


Arjuna's satisfaction at the Sermon. 


Argument: — The knowledge of truth dispels the doubts, and leads to display 
his valorous deeds in warfare. 


ARJUNA said: — Lord! it is by thy kindness, that I am freed from my 
delusion, and have come to the reminiscence of myself. I am now placed 
above all doubts, and will act as you have said. 


2. The Lord replied: — when you find the feelings and faculties of your heart 
and mind, to be fully pacified by means of your knowledge; then understand 
your soul to have attained its tranquillity, and the property of goodness or 
purity of its nature. (Sattwa Swabhava). 


3. In this state, the soul becomes insensible of all mental thoughts, and full of 
intelligence in itself; and being freed from all inward and outward 
perceptions, it perceives in itself the one Brahma who is all and everywhere. 


4. No worldly being can observe this elevated state of the soul, as nobody can 
see the bird that has fled from the earth into the upper sky. 


5. The pure soul which is devoid of desire, becomes full of intelligence and 
spiritual light; and it is not to be perceived by even the foresighted observer. 
(It is the soul's approximation to the Divine state). 


6. Nobody can perceive this transcendental and transparent state of the soul, 
without purifying his desires at first; it is a state as imperceptible to the 
impure, as the minutest particle of an atom, is unperceivable by the naked eye. 


7. Attainment of this state, drives away the knowledge of all sensible objects 
as of pots, plates, and others. What thing therefore, is so desirable, as to be 
worth desiring before the Divine presence. 


8. As the frost and ice melt away before a volcanic mountain, so doth our 


ignorance fly afar, from the knowledge of the intellectual soul. (ie., 
Intellectual knowledge drives away all ignorance before it). 


9. What are these mean desires of ours, that blow away like the dust of the 
earth, and what are our possessions and enjoyments but snares to entangle our 
souls? 


10. So long doth our ignorance, (avidyd), flaunt herself in her various shapes, 
as we remain ignorant of the pure and modest nature of our inmost souls in 
ourselves. (Self-knowledge is shy and modest, while ignorance is full of 
vanity and boast). 


11. All outward appearances fade away and faint (before the naked eye), and 
appear in their pellucid forms in the inmost soul, which grasps the whole in 
itself, as the vacuum contains the plenum in it. 


12. That which shows all forms in it, without having or showing any form of 
itself; is that transcendent substance which is beyond description, and 
transcends our comprehension of it. 


13. Now get rid of the poisonous and cholic pain of your desire of gain, as 
also of the permanence of your own existence; mutter to yourself the mantra 
of your resignation of desirables, and thus prosper in the world without fear 
for anything. 


14. Vasishtha said: — After the Lord of the three worlds had spoken the 
words, Arjuna remained silent for a moment before him; and then like a bee 
sitting beside a blue lotus, uttered the following words to the sable bodied 
Krishna. 


15. Arjuna said: — Lord! Thy words have dispelled all grief from my heart, 
and the light of truth is rising in my mind; as when the sun rises to awaken the 
closed and sleeping lotus. 


16. Vasishtha said: — After saying so, Arjuna being cleared of all his doubts, 
laid hold on his Gdndiva bow, and rose with Hari for his charioteer, in order 
to proceed to his warlike exploits. 


17. He will transform the face of the earth to a sea of blood, gushing out of the 
bodies of combatants, their charioteers and horses and elephants that will be 
wounded by him; the flights of his arrows and thickening darts, will hide the 
disk of the sun in the sky, and darken the face of the earth with flying dust. 


CHAPTER LIX. 


Knowledge of the Latent and Inscrutable Soul. 


Argument: — The incomprehensible nature of God, expressed by indefinite 
predicates, and his Latency in the works of creation. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Keep this lesson in view, O Rama! and know it 
as the purifier of all sins; remain in your resignation of all attachments, and 
resign yourself to God. 


2. Know the Supreme soul, in which all things reside, from which everything 
has issued, and which is everything itself on all sides of us; it is changed 
through all, and is ever the same in itself. 


3. It seems to be afar though it is nearest to us, it appears to be ubiquitous 
though ever situated in everything. It is by that essence thou livest, and it is 
undoubtedly what thou art thyself. (There is but one unity pervading over all 
varieties). 


4. Know that to be the highest predicament, which is above the knowables, 
and is knowledge or intelligence by itself; which is beyond our thoughts and 
thinkables, and is the thinking principle or intellect itself. (Beyond thought 
Divine. — Milton). 


5. It is preeminent consciousness and that supreme felicity, and passing 
wonder of our sight; which surpasses the majesty of majesties, and is the most 
venerable of venerables. 


6. This thing is the soul and its cognition, it is vacuum which is the immensity 
of the supreme Brahma; it is the chief good (summum Bonum) which is 
felicity and tranquillity itself; and it is full knowledge or omniscience, and the 
highest of all states. 


7. The soul that abides in the intellect, and is of the form of the conception of 
all things, that which feels and perceives everything, and remains by its own 


essence. 


8. It is the soul of the universe, like the oil of the sesame seed; it is the pith of 
the arbor of the world, its light and life of all its animal beings. 


9. It is the thread connecting all beings together like pearls in a necklace, 
which is suspended on the breast of empty air; (the sutrdtma that connects all 
nature). It is the flavour of all things like the pungency of pepper. 


10. It is the essence of all substance, (ens entium), and a verity which is the 
most excellent of all the truth of truths; it is the goodness of whatever is good, 
and the great or greatest good in itself. 


11. Which by its omniscience becomes the all that is present in its knowledge, 
and which we take by our misjudgment for real entities in this world (when 
our ignorance mistakes the manifest world for its latent cause). 


12. We take ourselves the world in mistake of the soul, but all these mistaken 
entities vanish away before the light of reason. 


13. The vacuum of Brahma or the space occupied by the Divine spirit, is 
without its beginning and end, and cannot be comprehended within the limited 
space of our souls; knowing this for certain, the wise are employed in their 
outward duties. 


14. That man is freed from his rising and setting (ups and downs), who rests 
always in the equanimity of his soul, and whose mind is never elated nor 
dejected at any event, but ever retains the evenness of its tenor. 


15. He whose mind is as vacant as the empty air, is called a mahdtmad or great 
soul, and his mind resting in the state of unity, remains with the body in a 
state of sound sleep. (But this evenness is inadmissible in business and 
behaviour to a preceptor. So it is said, [Sanskrit: [mostly illegible]].) 


16. The man of business also who preserves the evenness of his mind, remains 
as undisturbed under the press of his duties, as the reflexion of one in a mirror. 
They are both the same, being but shadows of reality. 


17. He who retains the impression in his mind, in their even and unvaried 
state, like images in a mirror, is himself as a reflexion in the Divine Intellect. 
(All beings live and move inseparably in the intellect of God. — Gloss). 


18. So let a man discharge the customary duties of life as they occur to him, 
with the pure transparent of his mind; as all the creatures of God perform their 
several parts, like images imprinted in the divine intellect. 


19. There is no unity nor duality in the divine intellect, (where the images are 
neither inseparably attached to nor detached from it); the application of the 
words, I, and thou, to one or the other, is all relate to the same, and they have 
come to use from the instruction of our elders. (Human language is learned by 
imitation). 


20. The intellect which of itself is tranquil in itself, (.e., in its own nature), 
acts its wonders in itself, (i.e., displays or develops itself in the very intellect); 
it is the pulsation of intellect which displays the universe, as its vivarta or 
development, and this pulsation is the Omnipotence of God. 


21. The pulsation of the Divine Intellect being put to a stop, there ensues a 
cessation of the course of the universe, and as it with the supreme Intellect, so 
it is with its parts of individual intellects, whose action and inaction spread out 
and curb the sphere of their thoughts. 


22. What is called consciousness or its action, is a non-entity in nature; and 
that which is a mere vacuum, is said to be the subtle body of the Intellect. 
(i.e., The intellectual powers have no material forms). 


23. The world appears as an entity, by our thinking it as such; but it vanishes 
upon our ceasing to think as such, like the disappearance of figures in a 
picture, when it is burnt down to ashes. 


24. The world appears as one with the Deity, to one who sees the unity only in 
himself; it is the vibration of the intellect only, that caused the revolution of 
worlds, as the turning of a potters wheel (is caused by the rotatory motion 
given to it). 


25. As the measure, shape and form of the ornament are not different from the 
gold, so the action of the intellect, is not separate from it; and it is this which 
forms the world, as the gold, becomes the ornament and the world and 
intellect are the same thing, as the ornament and its gold. 


26. The mind is the pulsation of the intellect, and it is want of this knowledge 
that frames a separate world; as it is ignorance of the gold work, that makes 
the jewel appear as another thing. 


27. The mind being wholly absorbed in the intellect, there remains this pure 
intellect alone; as the nature of one's self or soul being known, there is an end 
of worldly enjoyments. (He that has known the intellectual world, is not 
deluded by his sensuous mind; and whoever has tasted his spiritual bliss, does 
not thirst for sensual pleasures). 


28. Disregard of enjoyments is an education of the highest wisdom; hence no 
kind of enjoyments is acceptable to the wise; (cursed are they that hunger and 
thirst for enjoyments of this world). 


29. Know this to be another indication of wisdom, that no man that has eaten 
to satiety has ever a zest for any bad food that is offered to him. (Ze., No 
sensual pleasure is delectable before spiritual bliss). 


30. Another sign of wisdom is our natural aversion, to enjoyments, and is the 
sense of one's perception of all pleasures, in the vibrations of his intellect; 
(i.e., the mind is the store house of all pleasures). 


31. He is known as a wise man, who has this good habit of his deeply rooted 
in his mind, and he is said to be an intelligent man, who refrains from 
enjoying whatever is enjoyable in this world. (For thy shall hunger hereafter, 
who stuff themselves with plenty here below. — St. Mathew Ch. v). 


32. Again, whoso pursues after his perfection, in pursuance of the examples of 
others, doth strike the air with a stick, or beat the bush in vain in search of the 
same, because it requires sincerity of purpose to be successful in anything 
(and not the bodily practices of the ignorant, as they do in Hatha Yoga). 


33. Sometimes they emaciate and torture the body in order to have a full view 
of the inner soul, (because they think to be an envelope of the soul, and an 
obstruction to its full sight); but the intellectual soul, being settled in a 
thousand objects of its intelligence, it sees only errors instead of the light of 
the soul. (So the hermits, ascetics, monks, and friars emaciate their bodies, 
and the religious fanatics torture their persons in vain). 


34. So long doth the unconscious spirit flutter in its fickleness, and goes on 
roving from one object to another; as the light of the understanding do not rise 
and shine within it. (The ignorant are strangers to rest and quiet). 


35. But no sooner doth the light of the tranquil intellect, appear in its 
brightness within the inward soul; than the flattering of the fickle spirit is put 
to flight, like the flickering of a lamp after it is extinguished. 


36. There is no such thing as vibration nor suspension of the tranquil spirit; 
because the quiescent soul neither moves forward or backward, nor has its 
motion in any direction. 


37. The soul that is neither unconscious of itself, nor has any vibration in it, is 
said to be calm and quiet; and as it remains in the state of its indifference to 
vibrations, and gains its forms of pure transparence, it is no more liable to its 


bondage in life, nor inquires its moksha liberation to set it free from 
regeneration. 


38. The soul that is settled in itself (or the supreme soul), has no fear of 
bondage nor need of its liberation also; and the intellect being without its 
intellection, or having no object to dwell upon, becomes unconscious both of 
its Existence as well as extinction. (One that is absorbed in his self- 
meditation, is unconscious of everything in-esse et non-esse). 


39. He that is full in himself with the spirit of God, is equally ignorant both of 
his bondage and liberation; because the desire of being liberated, indicates 
want of one's self sufficiency and perfection (or rather the sense of his 
bondage, from which he wants to be liberated). 


40. “Let me then have my equanimity and not my liberation.” This desire is 
also a bondage in itself; and it is the unconsciousness of these, which is 
reckoned as our chief good. For know the Supreme state to be that, which is 
pure intelligence and without a shadow. 


41. The restoration of the intellect to its proper form consists in divesting it of 
all its intelligibles; and that form of it (which is marked by desire or the 
prurient soul), is no more than the oscillation of the great Intellect. (All animal 
souls are vibrations of the Divine spirit). 


42. That only is subject to bondage and liberation, which is seen and 
destructible in its nature; (i.e., the visible and perishable body); and not the 
invisible soul, which take the name of ego, and has no position nor form or 
figure of itself. 


43. We know not what thing it is, that is brought under or loosened from 
bondage by anyone. It is not the pure desire which the wise form for 
themselves, and does not affect the body. (It is the vibration of mind acting 
upon the body, and causing its actions that subjects to Bondage). 


44. It is therefore, that the wise practise the restraint of their respiring breath, 
in order to restraint their desires and actions; and being devoid of these, they 
become as the pure Intellect. 


45. These being suppressed, the idea of the world is lost in the density of the 
intellect; because the thoughts of the mind, are caused by the vibration of the 
intellect only (and set in also in the same). 


46. Thus there remains nothing, nor any action of the body or mind, except 
the vibration of the intellect; and the phenomenal world is no other, than a 


protracted dream from one sight to another. The learned are not deluded by 
these appearances, which they know to be exhibitions of their own minds. 


47. Know in thy meditation within thyself that recondite soul, which gives rise 
to our consciousness of the essences of things, appearing incessantly before 
us; and in which all these phantasms of our brain, dissolve as dirt in the water; 
and in which all our perceptions and conceptions of the passing world are 
flowing on as in a perpetual stream. 


CHAPTER LX. 


Of the Majesty and Grandeur of God. 


Argument. — Manifestation of mysterious magic of the one, uniform and 
pure Monad in multiform shapes, as a display of his all Comprehensive 
plenitude fullness. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Such is the first great truth concerning the 
solidity or of the Divine Intellect, that contains the gigantic forms of Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva in it. 


2. It is by means of the greatness of God, that all people are as gaudy as great 
princes in their several spheres; and are ever exulting in their power of 
floating and traversing in the regions of open air. (This means both the flight 
of birds, as well as aerial rambles of Yogis). 


The Taittiriya Upanishad says: — God has filled the world with joy, and the 
minute insect is as joyous as the victorious prince, meaning hereby, that God 
has given to every being its particular share of happiness. 


3. It is by their dwelling in the spirit of God, that the earth born mortals are as 
happy as the inhabitants of heaven; (That have nothing to desire); nay they are 
free from the pain of sorrow and released from the pangs of death, that have 
come unto the Lord, — (O death where is thy sting, O grave where thy 
victory? — Pope). 


4. Yes, they live in Him that have found him, and are not to be restrained by 
anybody; provided they have but taken their refuge under the overspreading 
umbrage of the supreme spirit. 


5. He who meditates for a moment, on the universal essence of all, (as the ens 
entium); he becomes liberated in an instant, and lives as a liberal minded sage 
or muni on earth. (The sage that sees his God in all and everywhere 
throughout all nature). 


6. He does what are his duties in this world, and never grieves in discharging 
them. 


Rama said: — How is it possible, Sir, to meditate on the universal soul in all 
things, when the sage has buried his mind, understanding and his egoism and 
himself in the unity of God? And how can the soul be viewed in the plurality, 
when all things have been absorbed in the unity? 


7. Vashistha replied: — The God that dwells in all bodies, moves them to 
their actions, and receives their food and drink in himself, that produces all 
things and annihilates them at last, is of course unknowable to our 
consciousness (which is conscious of itself only). 


8. Now it is this indwelling principle in everything, that is without beginning 
and end, and inherent in the nature of all; is called the common essence of all, 
because it constitutes the fattwa identity (or essential nature or the abstract 
property) of everything in the world. 


9. It dwells as vacuity in the vacuum, and as sonorousness in sound; it is 
situated as feeling in whatever is felt, and as taction in the objects of touch. 


10. It is the taste of all tastables, and the tasting of the tongue; it is the light of 
all objects of sight, and vision of the organs of seeing. 


11. It is the sense of smell in the act of smelling, and the odour in all odorous 
substance; it is the plumpness of the body, and the solidity and stability of the 
earth. 


12. It is the fluidity of liquids and the flatulence of air; it is the flame and flash 
of fire, and the cogitation of the understanding. 


13. It is the thinking principle of the thoughtful mind, and the ego of our 
egoism; it is the consciousness of the conscious soul, and the sensible heart. 


14. It is the power of vegetation in vegetables, and the perspective in all 
pictures and paintings; it is the capacity of all pots and vessels, and the 
tallness of stately trees. 


15. It is the immobility of immovables, and the mobility of movable bodies; it 
is the dull insensibility of stones and blocks, and the intelligence of intelligent 
beings. 


16. It is the immortality and god-head of the immortal gods, and humanity of 
human beings; it is the curvedness of crooked beasts, and the supine 
proneness of crawling and creeping insects. 


17. It is the current in the course of time, and the revolution and aspects of the 
seasons; it is the fugacity of fleeting moments, and the endless duration of 
eternity. 


18. It is the whiteness of whatever is white, and blackness of all that is black; 
it is activity in all actions, and it is stern fixity in the doings of destiny. 


19. The supreme spirit is quiescent in all that is sedate, and lasting and 
evanescent in whatever is passing and perishing; and he shows his 
productiveness in the production of things. 


20. He is the childhood of children, and the youth of young men; he shows 
himself as fading in the decay and decline of beings, and as his extinction in 
their death and demise. 


21. Thus the all-pervading soul, is not apart from anything, as the waves and 
froths of the foaming sea, are no way distinct from its body of waters. 


22. These multiformities of things are all unrealities, and taken for true in our 
ignorance of the unity; which multiplies itself in our imagination, as children 
create and produce false apparitions from their unsound understandings. 
(These as they change are not the varied god as it is generally supposed to be, 
but various workings of the intellect). 


23. It is I, says the lord, that am situated everywhere, and it is I that pervade 
the whole; and fill it with all varieties at pleasure; know therefore, O high- 
minded Rama! that all these varieties are but creatures of imagination in the 
mind of God, and are thence reflected into the mirror of our minds. Knowing 
this, rest in the calm tranquillity of your soul, and enjoy the undisturbed 
solace and happiness of your high mind. 


24. Valmiki said: — As the sage was saying these things, the day passed away 
under its evening shade; the sun sank down in its evening devotion, and the 
assembly broke with mutual salutations to the performance of their eventide 
ablutions, until they reassembled on the next morning. 


CHAPTER LXI. 


Description of the world as a passing dream. 


Argument: — How our firm faith arises over this entity, and its answer. 


Rama said: — As we are, Oh sage! a dream drawn house, the body of the 
lotus-born Brahma, — the first progenitor, is the same no doubt. 


2. And if this world is a non-entity, — asat, we must know our existence the 
same, then how is it possible to arise the firm faith over this entity, — sat. 


3. Vasishtha responded: — We are shining here as a created being by the 
previous birth of Brahma, but in fact, the reflexion of soul shines forever, 
nothing besides. 


4. Owing to the omnipresence of consciousness, all beings exist as reality 
everywhere, and if she rises from unreal knowledge, she as real knowledge 
destroys the unreal one. (vice-versa). 


5. Therefore, whatever comes from these five elements, is but transitory, but 
owing to the firm belief on ego, we enjoy a firm faith for the same. 


6. In a dream, we see good many things as reality; but as soon the dream is 
over, we do not find the things dreamt of; so we see the reality of the world; as 
long we remain in ignorance. 


7. Oh Rama! as the dreaming man counts his dream as reality, owing to his 
faith on it; so this world appears a reality, like the supreme God who has no 
beginning and end. 


8. That which is to be created by the dreaming man, is to be called his own; as 
we can say by guessing knowledge, what is in the seed, is in the fruit. 


9. Whatever comes from non-entity, is to be called non-entity; and that which 
is unreal though it can be workable, is not reasonable to think good. 


10. As the thinking result of unreality is to be given up, so the firm faith which 
is arising by the dreaming man; is to be given up likewise. 


11. Whatever soul creates in dream is our firm belief, but that remains only for 
a time being, (hence it is asat, — non-entity). 


12. Brahma's long drawn portion is this entity, hence we think also the same, 
but in fact, this entity is a moment to Brahma. 


13. Consciousness is the creator of all elements, she creates everything 
according to her model, hence creator and creation are one and the same. 


14. As the backward and forward whirling motion of water, makes the deep to 
swell, and as also fairy comes near in a dream, so all these are in reality 
nothing. 


15. So this entity with its change (of creation, sustentation and destruction) is 
nothing. In whatever manner we look at the object, that will appear in return 
in the same manner. 


16. The rule of the erroneous dream is not to reproduce (in waking state, what 
it produces in sleeping state, though it has a power to create something out of 
nothing) as the production is not in the world, but owing to ignorance it 
appears so. 


17. In the three worlds we see wondrous objects, as we see fire burning in the 
water like a sub-marine fire. 


18. Good many cities exist in vacuity, as birds and stars remain in the sky. We 
find lotus in a stone like trees growing without an earth. 


19. One country gives every kind of object to the seeker, like a tree that gives 
all objects to the seeker, (Kalpa taru), and also we see in a stone and rows of 
jewels (that is counting beads) giving fruits like fruitful trees. 


20. Life exists within a stone, (Sdlgram), as frog exists. Stone gives water as 
moon-stone gives. 


21. In a dream, within a minute, a good many things can be made and 
unmade, which in fact, are unreal like one's death in a dream. 


22. The natural water of the elements remains in the sky, (that is, in the 
cloud), when the heavenly river Mandakini remains in vacuity. 


23. The heavy stone flies in the air, when the winged mountain does so. 


Everything to be got in stone, when everything can be secured from the 
philosopher's stone. 


24. In the garden of bliss of Indra, every desired object is to be got, but in 
salvation such kind of desired object is wanting. 


25. Even dull matter acts like a machine, hence every object acts like 
wonderful erroneous magic. 


26. By magical art, (that is, Gandharva vidyd), we see even impossible objects 
such as two moons, Kavandhas, mantras, drugs, and pishachas. All these are 
the works of wonderful erroneous magic, which are in fact nothing. 


27. We see impossibility as real as we see possibility, hence impossibility 
becomes real by our erroneous ideas only. 


28. The erroneous dream though it appears as real is in fact unreal, as that 
which is not real does not exist, which is real does exist; (unity is real, duality 
is unreal, hence existence and non-existence are one and the same). 


29. So this dreaming creation is looked by all worldly being here as real, as 
dreamer takes his dream a reality. 


30. By passing from one error to another error, from one dream to another, 
one firm faithful being comes out. 


31. As a stray deer falls into the pit repeatedly for green grass, so ignorant 
man repeatedly falls into the pit of this world, owing to his ignorance. 


CHAPTER LXII. 


In the narration of Jivata an example of domestic and mendicant life 


Argument: — Narration of the mendicant Jivata, in illustration of the 
transmigration of the soul in various births, according to the variety of its 
insatiable Desire. 


VASISHTHA resumed: — Hear me relate to you, Rama, the story of a certain 
mendicant, who fostered some desire in his mind, and wandered through 
many migrations of his soul. 


2. There lived a great mendicant at one time, who devoted his life to holy 
devotion, and passed his days in the observance of the rules of his 
mendicancy. (The state of mendicancy is the third stage of life of a Brahman, 
which is devoted to devotion, and supported by begging of the simple 
subsistence of life. This story applies to all men, who are in some way or 
other devoted to some profession for acquiring the necessaries of life and the 
more so, as all men have some ultimate object of desire, which is an 
obstruction to their Nirvana or final extinction in the Deity. For the lord says 
in the Gospel, He that loveth anything more than me, is not worthy of me). 


3. In the intensity of his Samddhi devotion, his mind was purged of all its 
desires; and it became assimilated to the object of its meditation, as the sea 
water, is changed to the form of waves. (Samddhi is defined by Patanjali, as 
the forgetting of one's self in the object of his meditation). 


4. Once as he was sitting on his seat after termination of his meditation, and 
was intent upon discharging some sacred functions of his order, there chanced 
to pass a thought over his clear mind, (like the shadow of cloud over the 
midday sky). 


5. He looked into the reflexion of the thought, that rose of itself in his mind; 
that he should reflect for his pleasure, upon the various conditions of common 
people, and the different modes of their life. (The proper study of man is man, 


and the manner of each rightly). 


6. All this thought, his mind passed from the reflexion of himself and his God, 
to that of another person; and he lost the calm composure of his mind, as 
when the quiet sea is disturbed by whirlpool or whirl wind. (This desire of the 
sage disturbed his breast, like the doubt of Parnell's Hermit). 


7. Then he thought in himself to become an ideal man of his own accord, and 
became in an instant the imagined person Jivata by name. (Imagination shapes 
one to what he imagines himself to be). 


8. Jivata, the ideal man, now roved about like a dreaming person, through the 
walks of the imaginary city, which he had raised to himself, as a sleeping 
man, builds his aerial abodes in dream. (So every man thinks himself as 
someone, and moves about in his air built city). 


9. He drank his fill at pleasure, as a giddy bee sips the honey from lotus cups; 
he became plump and hearty with his sports, and enjoyed sound sleep from 
his want of care. 


10. He saw himself in the form of a Brahman in his dream, who was pleased 
with his studies and the discharge of his religious duties; and as he reflected 
himself as such he was transformed to the same state, as a man is transplanted 
from one place to another at a thought. (He makes the man, and places him in 
every state and place). 


11. The good Brahman, who was observant of his daily ritual, fell asleep one 
day into a deep trance, and dreamt himself doing the duties of the day, as the 
seed hid in shell, performs inwardly its act of vegetation. 


12. The same Brahman saw himself changed to a chieftain in his dream, and 
the same chief ate and drank and slept as any other man in general. 


13. The chief again thought himself as a king in his dream, who ruled over the 
earth extending to the horizon; and was beset by all kinds of enjoyments, as a 
creeper is studded with flowers. 


14. Once as this prince felt himself at ease, he fell into a sound sleep free from 
all cares, and saw the future consequences of his actions, as the effect is 
attached to the cause, or the flowers are the forth-comings of the tree. 


15. He saw his soul assuming the form of a heavenly maid, as the pith of a 
plant puts forth itself in its flowers and fruits, (what is at the bottom, comes 
out on the top; and what is the root, sprouts forth in the tree). 


16. As this heavenly maid was lulled to sleep by her weariness and fatigue, 
she beheld herself turn into a deer, as the calm ocean finds itself disturbed into 
eddies and waves (by its inner caves and outward winds). 


17. As this timorous fawn with her fickle eyes, fell into a sound sleep at one 
time; she beheld herself transformed to a creeping plant, (which she likes to 
browse upon so fondly in her pasture). 


18. The crooked beasts of the field and the creeping plants of forest, have also 
their sleep and dream of their own nature; the dreams being caused by what 
they saw and heard and felt in their waking states. 


19. This creeper came to be beautified in times, with its beautiful fruits, 
flowers and leaves, and formed a bower for the seat of the floral goddess of 
the woods. 


20. It hid in its heart the wishes that grew in it, in the same manner as the seed 
conceals in its embryo the germ of the would-be tree; and at last saw itself in 
its inward consciousness, to be full of frailty and failings. 


21. It had remained long in its sleep and rest, but being disgusted with its 
drowsy dullness, it thought of being the fleeting bee its constant guest, and 
found itself to be immediately changed to a fluttering bee (which it had fed 
with its farinaceous food). 


22. The bee roved at pleasure over the tender and blossoming creepers in the 
forest, and let on the petals of blooming lotuses, as a fond lover courts his 
mistresses. 


23. It roved about the blossoms, blooming as brightening pearls in the air; and 
drank the nectarious juice from the flower cups, as a lover sips the nectar from 
the rubied lips of the beloved. 


24. He became enamoured of the lotus of the lake, and sat silent upon its 
thorny stalk on the water; for such is the fondness of fools, even for what is 
painful to them. 


25. The lake was often infested by elephants, who tore and trampled over the 
beds of lotus bushes; because it is a pleasure to the malignant base, to lay 
waste the fair works of God. (The black big and bulky elephants, are said to 
be invidious of the fair and pretty lotuses; hence the elephant is used as 
symbolical of the devil, the destroyer of all good). 


26. The fond bee meets the fate of its fondling lotus, and is crushed under the 


tusk of the elephant, as the rice is ground under the teeth. (Such is the fate of 
overfondness for the fair). 


27. The little bee seeing the big body and might of the mighty elephant, took a 
fancy of being as such; and by his imagining himself as so, he was instantly 
converted to one of the like kind; (not in its person but in the mind). (Thus is a 
lesson, that no one is content with himself, but wishes to be the envied or 
desired being). 


28. At last the elephant fell down into a hollow pit, which was as deep and dry 
as the dried bed of a gulf; as a man falls into the profound and inane ocean of 
this world, which is overcast by an impervious darkness around. (The 
troublesome world is always compared with a turbulent and darksome ocean). 


29. The elephant was a favourite of the prince for his defeating the forces of 
his adversaries; and he routed about at random with his giddy might, as the 
lawless Daitya robbers wander about at night. 


30. He fell afterwards under the sword of the enemy, and pierced all over his 
body by their deadly darts; as the haughty egoism of the living body, drops 
down in the soul under the wound of right reason. 


31. The dying elephant having been accustomed to see swarms of bees, 
fluttering over the proboscis of elephants, and sipping the ichor exuding from 
them, had long cherished the desire of becoming a bee, which he now came to 
be in reality. 


32. The bee rambled at large amidst the flowery creepers of the forest, and 
resorted again to the bed of lotuses in the lake; because it is hard for fools to 
get rid of their fond desire, though it is attended with danger and peril. 


33. At last the sportive bee was trampled down and crushed under the feet of 
an elephant, and became a goose, by its long association with one in the lake. 


34. The goose passed through many lives, till it became gander at last, and 
sported with the geese in the lake. 


35. Here it came to bear the name of the gander that served as the vehicle of 
Brahma, and thenceforth fostered the idea of his being so, as the yolk of an 
egg fosters a feathered fowl in it. 


36. As it was fostering this strong desire in itself, it grew old and decayed by 
disease, as a piece of wood is eaten up by inbred worms; then as he died with 
his consciousness of being the bird of Brahma, he was born as the great stork 


of that God in his next birth. 


37. The stork lived there in the company of the wise, he became enlightened 
from the views of worldly beings; he continued for ages in his disembodied 
liberation, and cared for nothing in future. (The soul that rests in the spirit of 
God, has nothing better to desire). 


CHAPTER LXIII. 


Dream of Jivata. 


Arguments: — All living souls are occupied with the thought of their present 
state, forgetful of the past, and altogether heedless of the future. 


VASISHTHA continued: — This bird that sported beside the stalk of the lotus 
seat of Brahma, once went to the city of Rudra with his god on his back, and 
there beheld the God Rudra, face to face. (The inferior Gods waited upon the 
superior deities). 


2. Seeing the God Rudra, he thought himself to be so, and the figure of the 
God was immediately imprest upon his mind, like the reflexion of an outward 
object in the mirror. 


3. Being full of Rudra in himself, he quitted his body of the bird, as the 
fragrance of a flower forsakes the calyx, as it mixes with the breeze and flies 
in the open air. 


4. He passed his time happily at that place, in the company with the attendants 
and different classes of the dependent divinities of Rudra. 


5. This Rudra being then full of the best knowledge of divinity and 
spirituality; looked back in his understanding into the passed accounts of his 
prior lives, that were almost incalculable. 


6. Being then gifted with clear sightedness and clairvoyance, he was 
astonished at the view of naked truths, that appeared to him as sights in a 
dream, which he recounted to him as follows. 


7. O! how wonderful is this over spreading illusion, which is stretched all 
about us, and fascinates the world by its magic wand; it exhibits the palpable 
untruth as positive truth, as the dreary desert presents the appearance of 
limpid waters, in the sun beams spreading over its sterile sands. 


8. I well remember my primary state of the pure intellect, and its conversion 
to the state of the mind; and how it was changed from its supremacy and 
omniscience, to the bondage of the limited body. 


9. It was by its own desire that the living soul assumed to itself a material 
body, formed and fashioned agreeably to its fancy, like a picture drawn in a 
painting; and became a mendicant in my person in one of its prior births, 
when it was unattached to the objects exposed to view all around. 


10. The same mendicant sat in his devotion, by controlling the actions of the 
members of his body, and began to reflect on outward objects, with great 
pleasure in his mind. 


11. He buried all his former thoughts in oblivion, and thought only of the 
object that he was employed to reflect upon; and this thought so engrossed 
and worked upon his mind, that it prevented the rise of any other thought in it. 


12. The phenomenon which appears in the mind, offers itself solely to the 
view also (by supplanting the traces of the past); as the brownness of fading 
autumn, supercedes the vernal verdure of leaves and plants, so the man 
coming to his maturity, forgets the helpless state of his boyhood, and is 
thoughtless of his approaching decay and decline. 


13. Thus the mendicant became the Brahman Jivata by his fallible and fickle 
desire, which laid him to wander from one body to another, as little ants enter 
into the holes of houses and things. 


14. Being fond of Brahmahood and reverential to Brahmans in his mind, he 
became the wished for person in his own body; because the reality and 
unreality have the power of mutually displacing one another, according to the 
greater influence of either. (The weaker yields and makes room to the 
stronger, like the survival of the fittest). 


15. The Brahman next obtained the chieftainship, from his strong predilection 
for the same; just as the tree becomes fruitful by its continuous suction of the 
moisture of earth. (The common mother of all). 


16. Being desirous of dispensing justice, and discharging all legal affairs, the 
general wished for royalty, and had his wishes fulfilled by this becoming a 
prince; but as the prince was over fond of his courtesans, he was transformed 
to a heavenly nymph that he prized above all in his heart. 


17. But as the celestial dame prized the tremulous eye sight of the timorous 
deer, above her heavenly form and station; she was soon metamorphosed to 


an antelope in the woods, and destined to graze as a miserable beast for her 
foolish choice. 


18. The fawn that was very fond of browzing the tender blades and leaves, 
became at last the very creeping plant, that had crept into the crevice of her 
lickerish mind. 


19. The creeper being long accustomed to dote on the bee, that used to be in 
its company; found in its consciousness to be that insect, after the destruction 
of its vegetable form. 


20. Though well aware of its being crushed under the elephant, together with 
the lotus flower in which it dwelt, yet it was foolish to take the form of the 
bee, for its pleasure of roving about the world. (So the living soul enters into 
various births and bodies only to perish with them). 


21. Being thus led into a hundred different forms, said he, I am at last become 
the self-same Rudra; and it is because of the capriciousness of my erratic 
mind in this changeful world. 


22. Thus have I wandered through the variegated paths of life, in this 
wilderness of the world; and I have roamed in many aerial regions, as if I trod 
on solid and substantial ground. 


23. In some one of my several births under the name of Jivata, and in another 
I became a great and respectable Brahman, I became quite another person 
again, and then found myself as a ruler and lord of the earth. (So every man 
thinks and acts himself, now as one person and in the stage of his life. — 
Shakespeare). 


24. I had been a drake in the lotus-bush; and an elephant in the vales of 
Vindhya; I then became a stag in the form of my body, and fleetness of my 
limbs (and in the formation of mind also). 


25. After I had deviated at first from my state of godliness, I was still settled 
in the state of a devotee with devotedness to divine knowledge; and practicing 
the rites befitting my position (such as listening to holy lectures, meditating on 
the mysteries of nature and so forth). 


26. In this state, I passed very many years and ages, and many a day and night 
and season and century, glided on imperceptibly in their courses over me. (It 
is said that the sedate and meditative are generally long living men, as we 
learn in the accounts of the ancient patriarchs, and in those of the Yogis and 
lamas in our own times). 


27. But I deviated again and again from my wonted course, and was as often 
subjected to new births and forms; until at last I was changed to Brahmé's 
vehicles of the hansa, — or anser, and this was by virtue of my former good 
conduct and company. 


28. The firm or wonted habit of a living being, must come out unobstructed by 
any hindrance whatsoever; and though it may be retarded in many 
intermediate births for even a millennium; yet it must come and lay hold on 
the person some time or other. (Habit is second nature, and is inbred in every 
being; and what is bred in the bone, must run in the blood). 


29. It is by accident only, that one has the blessing of some good company in 
his life; and then his inborn want may be restrained for a time, but it is sure to 
break out with violence in the end, in utter defiance of every check and rule. 


30. But he who betakes himself to good society only, and strives always for 
his edification in what is good and great, is able to destroy the evil 
propensities which are inbred in him; because the desire to be good, is what 
actually makes one so. (Discipline conquers nature). 


31. Whatever a man is accustomed to do or think upon constantly, in this life 
or in the next state of his being; the same appears as a reality to him in his 
waking state of day-dream, as unreality appears as real in the sleeping or 
night-dream of a man. (It is the imagination that figures unrealities in divers 
forms both in the day as also in the night-dreams of men). 


32. Now the thoughts that employ our minds, appoint our bodies also to do 
their wished for works; and as these works are attended with some temporary 
good as well as evil also; it is better therefore, to restrain and repress the rise 
of those tumultuous thoughts, than cherish them for our pleasure or pain. 


33. It is only the thought in our minds, that makes us to take our bodies for 
ourselves or souls; and that stretches wide this world of unrealities, as the 
incased seed sprouts forth and spreads itself into a bush. (The thought bears 
the world in it, as the will brings it to view). 


34. The world is but the thought in sight or a visible form of their visible 
thought, and nothing more in reality besides this phantasm of it, and an 
illusion of our sight. 


35. The illusive appearance of the world, presents itself to our sight, like the 
variegated hues of the sky, it is therefore, by our ignoring of it, that we may 
be enabled to wipe off those tinges from our minds. 


36. It is an unreal appearance, displayed by the supreme Essence (of God or 
His intelligence); as a real existence at his pleasure only, and cannot therefore, 
do any harm to anybody. 


37. I rise now and then to look into all these varieties in nature, for the sake of 
my pleasure and curiosity; but I have the true light of reason in me, whereby I 
discern the one unity quite apart from all varieties. 


38. After all these recapitulations, the incarnate Rudra returned to his former 
state, and reflected on this condition of the mendicant, whose body was now 
lying as a dead corpse on the barren ground. 


39. He awakened the mendicant and raised his prostrate body, by infusing his 
intelligence into it; when the resuscitated Bhikshu came to understand, that all 
his wanderings were but hallucinations of his mind. 


40. The mendicant finding himself the same with Rudra standing in his 
presence, as also with the bygone ones that he recollected in his 
remembrance; was astonished to think how he could be one and so many, 
though it is no wonder to the intelligent, who well know that one man acts 
many parts in life. 


41. Afterwards, both Rudra and the mendicant got up from their seats, and 
proceeded to the abode of the Jivata, situated in corner of the intellectual 
sphere; (i.e., the mundane world which lies in the divine intellect). 


42. They then passed over many Continents, Islands, provinces and districts, 
until they arrived at the abode of Jivata, where they found him lying down 
with a sword in hand. 


43. They saw Jivata lying asleep and insensible as a dead body, when Rudra 
laid aside his bright celestial form, in order to enter into the earthly abode of 
the deceased. (The Gods are said to assume human shapes in order to mix 
with mankind). 


44. They brought him back to life and intelligence, by imparting to him 
portion of their spirit and intellect; and thus was this one soul exhibited in the 
triple forms of Rudra, Jivata and the mendicant. 


45. They, with all their intelligence, remained ignorant of one another, and 
they marvelled to look on each other in mute astonishment, as if they were the 
figures in painting. 


46. Then the three went together in their aerial course, to the air-built abode of 


the Brahman; who had erected his baseless fabric in empty air, and which 
resounded with empty sounds all around. (The open air being the receptacle of 
sounds, the aerial abodes of celestials are incessantly infested by the sounds 
and cries of peoples rising upwards from the nether world). 


47. They passed through many aerial regions, and barren and populous tracts 
of air; until they found out at last the heavenly residence of the Brahman. 


48. They saw him sleeping in his house; beset by the members of his family 
about him; while his Brahmani folded her arms about his neck, as if unwilling 
to part with her deceased husband. (The Brahman in heaven, was seen in the 
state of his parting life). 


49. They awakened his drowsy intelligence, by means of their own 
intelligence, as a waking man raises a sleeping soul, by means of his own 
sensibility. 


50. Thence they went on in their pleasant journey to the realms of the chief 
and the prince mentioned before; and these were situated in the bright regions 
of their intellectual sphere, and illumined by their effulgence of the intellect. 
(It means to say, that all these journeys, places and persons, were but reveries 
of the mind, and creations of fancy). 


51. Having arrived at that region and that very spot, they observed the 
haughty chief lying on his lotus like bed. 


52. He lay with his gold coloured body, in company with the partner of his 
bed of golden hue; as the honey sucking bee lies in the lotus cell, enfolded in 
the embrace of his mate. 


53. He was beset by his mistresses, hanging about him, like the tender stalks 
and tufts of flowers pendent upon a tree; and was encircled by a belt of lighted 
lamps, as when a golden plate is studded about by brilliant gems. 


54. They awakened him shortly by infusing their own spirit and intelligence in 
his body and mind, and then they sat together marvelling at each other, as the 
self-same man in so many forms (or the self-same person in so many bodies). 


55. They next repaired to the palace of the prince, and after awakening him 
with their intelligence, they all roamed about the different parts of the world. 


56. They came at last to the hansa of Brahma, and being all transformed to 
that form in their minds, (i.e., having come to know the ahamsa, I am he or 
their self-identity); They all became the one Rudra Personality in a hundred 


persons. 


57. Thus the one intellect is represented in different forms and shapes, 
according to the various inclinations of their minds, like so many figures in a 
painting. Such is the unity of the deity represented as different personalities, 
according to the various tendencies of individual minds. (There is the same 
intellect and soul in all living beings, that differ from one another in their 
minds only). 


58. There a hundred Rudras, who are the forms of the uncovered intellect; 
(i.e., unclouded by mists of error); and they are acquainted with the truths of 
all things in the world, and the secrets of all hearts, (antarydmin). 


59. There are a hundred and some hundreds of Rudras, who are known as very 
great beings in the world; among whom there are eleven only, (Ekadasa 
Rudras), that are situated in so many worlds, (Ekadasa Bhubanas). (The Vedas 
have thousands and thousands of Rudras in their hymns as to them, as, 
[Sanskrit: sahashrena sahashrasah ye rudra adhibhimya)). 


60. All living beings that are not awakened to reason, are ignorant of the 
identity of one another; and view them in different and not in the same light; 
they are not far-sighted to see any other world. That which is the most 
proximate to them. 


61. Wise men see the minds of others and all things to rise in their minds, like 
the wave rising in the sea; but unenlightened minds remain dormant in 
themselves, like the inert stones and blocks. (Another explanation of it is, that 
all wise men are of the same mind as Birbal said to Akbar: — Sao Siyane 
ekmatd). 


62. As the waves mix with themselves, by the fluidity of their waters; so the 
minds of wise unite with one another, by the solubility of their 
understandings, like elastic fluids and liquids. (So says Mrityunjaya: — the 
oily or serous understanding ({Sanskrit: tailavat vunvih]) readily penetrates 
into the minds of others). 


63. Now in all these multitudes of living beings, that are presented to our sight 
in this world; we find the one invariable element of the intellect to be diffused 
in all of them, and making unreal appear as real ones to view. 


64. This real but invisible entity of the Divine intellect remains forever, after 
all the unreal but visible appearances disappear into nothing; as there remains 
an empty space or hollow vacuity, after the removal of a thing from its place, 


and the excavation of the ground by digging it. (This empty vacuum with the 
chit or Intellect in it, is the universal God of the vacuist Vasishtha). 


65. As you can well conceive the idea of existence, of the quintuple elemental 
principles in nature; so you can comprehend also the notion of the 
Omnipresence of the Divine intellect, which is the substratum of the elemental 
principles. 


66. As you see various statues and images, carved in stone and woods, and set 
in the hollows of rocks and trees; so should you see all these figures in the 
hollow space of the universe, to be situated in the self-same intellect of the 
Omnipresent Deity. 


67. The knowledge of the known and the visible world, in the pure intellect of 
the unknown and invisible deity, resembles the view of the variegated skies, 
with their uncaused and insensible figures, in the causeless substratum of 
ever-lasting and all-pervading vacuity. 


68. The knowledge of the phenomenal is the bondage of the soul, and the 
ignoring of this conduces to its liberation; do therefore, as you like, either 
towards this or that; (7.e., for your liberation and bondage). 


69. The cognition and nescience of the world, are the causes of the bondage 
and liberation of the soul, and these again are productive of the transmigration 
and final emancipation of the animal spirit. It is by your indifference to them 
that you can avoid them both, do therefore, as you may best choose for 
yourself. (Here are three things offered to view, namely, the desire of heaven 
and liberation, and the absence of all desires. [Sanskrit: svargakdma 
mokshakamau nishkdmashchatra yah)). 


70. What is lost at its disappearance (as our friends and properties), is neither 
worth seeking or searching after, nor sorrowing for when it is lost and gone 
from us. That which is gained of itself in our calm and quiet without any 
anxiety or assiduity on our part, is truly reckoned to be our best gain. (so says 
the Moha-Mudgura: — Be content with what offers of itself to thee. [Sanskrit: 
yatvabhase nijakarnmipdttam| bittam tena vinodaya chittam]]). 


71. That which is no more than our knowledge of it (as the object of our 
senses and the objective world), is no right knowledge but mere fallacy; the 
true knowledge is that of the subjective consciousness, which is always to be 
attended to. 


72. As the wave is the agitation of the water, so is this creation but an 


oscillation of the divine intellect; and this is the only difference between them, 
that the one is the production of the elements in nature, and the other is that of 
the divine will. 


73. Again, the undulation of waves occurs in conjunction with the existing 
elements at certain spots and times; but the production of the world is wholly 
without the junction of the elemental bodies, which were not in existence at its 
creation. (It means to say, that the world is only an ideal formation of the 
divine mind). 


74. The shining worlds shine with the light of the divine intellect, in which 
they are situated as the thoughts in its consciousness. It transcends the power 
of speech to define what it is, and yet it is expressed in the veda in the words 
that, “It is the supreme soul and perfect felicity” (Siva Paratma). 


75. Thus the world is the form of its consciousness in the divine intellect, and 
they are not different from one another, as words are never separable from 
their senses. It is said that the world is the undulation of the Divine spirit, and 
none but the ignorant inveigh against, by saying that the wave and water are 
two different things. (Kalidasa in the commencement of Raghuvansa, uses the 
same simile of words and their meanings, to denote the intimate union of 
Parvati and Siva, which is done to express the inseparability of the world with 
its maker; corresponding with the well-known line of Pope: — “whose body 
nature is, and God the soul’). 


CHAPTER LXIV. 


On the Attainment of Attendantship on the God Rudra. 


Argument: — The remainder of the former story; and the manner of becoming 
the attendant Rudras on Siva. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, what became of the many forms, which the 
mendicant saw in his dream; and whether the several forms of Jivata, the 
Brahman, the gander and others return to themselves, or remained as Rudras 
forever more. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — They all remained with Rudra, as parts and 
compositions of himself; and being enlightened by him, they wandered all 
about the world, and rested contented with themselves. 


3. They all beheld with Rudra, the magic scenes which were displayed before 
them; till at last they were dismissed from his company, to return to their own 
states and places. 


4. Rudra said: — Go you now to your own places, and there enjoy your fill 
with your family; and return to me after some time, having completed the 
course of your enjoyments and sufferings in the world. 


5. You will then become as parts of myself, and remain as my attendants to 
grace my residence; till at last we return to the supreme at the end of time, and 
be absorbed in last Omega of all. 


6. Vasishtha said: — So saying, the Lord Rudra vanished from their sight, and 
mixed in the midst of the Rudras, who viewed all the worlds in their 
enlightened intellects. (These are celestial and angelic beings). 


7. Then did Jivata and others return to their respective residences, where they 
have to share their shares of domestic felicity in the company of their families, 
during their allotted times. 


8. Having then wasted and shuffled off their mortal coil, at the end of their 
limited periods, they will be promoted to the rank of Rudras in heaven, and 
will appear as luminous stars in the firmament. 


9. Rama rejoined: — All those forms of Jivata and others, being but creations 
of the empty imagination of the mendicant; I cannot understand, how they 
could be beings, as there is no substantiality in imaginary things. 


10. Vasishtha replied: — The truth of the imagination lies partly in our 
consciousness, and partly in our representation of the image; though the 
imagery or giving a false shape to anything, is as untrue as any nihility in 
nature. But what we are conscious of must be true, because our consciousness 
comprehends everything in it. 


11. Thus what is seen in the dream, and represented to us by imagination, are 
all impressed in our consciousness at all times and forever. (Therefore, neither 
is our consciousness nor the images we are conscious of are untrue, though 
the imagery and the work of imagination are utterly false). 


12. As a man when going or carried from one country to another, and there 
again to some other place, has no knowledge of the distance of his journey, 
unless he is conscious of its length and duration in space and time; so we are 
ignorant of the duration of our dream, and our passing from one dream to 
another, without our consciousness of it in our sleeping state. 


13. Therefore, it is our consciousness that contains all things, that are 
represented to it by the intellect; and it is from our intellection that we have 
the knowledge of everything, because the intellect is full of knowledge and 
pervades everywhere. 


14. Imagination, desire and dream, are the one and same thing, the one 
producing the other and all lodged in the cell of the intellect. Their objects are 
obtained by our intense application to them. Desire produces imagination 
which is the cause of dream; they are the phenomena of mind, and their 
objects are the results of deep meditation. 


15. Nothing is to be had without its practice and meditation of it, and men of 
enlightened minds gain the objects by their Yoga or meditation of them alone. 
(These are the Yoga Siddhas or adepts in Yoga as Siva, etc.). 


16. These adepts view the objects of their pursuit in all places, such as the god 
Siva and others of the Siddha Yogis, such was my aim and attempt also, but it 
was not attended with success. 


17. I was unsuccessful in want of my fixed resolvedness, but failed in both for 
my attending to both sides. It is only the firm resolution of one in one point, 
that gives him success in any undertaking. 


18. As one going in southerly direction, cannot arrive at his house in the 
north, so it is the case with the pursuers after their aims; which they well 
know to be unattainable without their firm determination in it. 


19. Whoever is resolved to gain his desired objects, must fix his view on the 
object before him; the mind being fixed on the object in view, brings the 
desire into effect. (So says Hafiz: — If thou want the presence of the object, 
never be absent from it). 


20. So the mendicant having the demi-God Rudra, for the sole object in his 
view, became assimilated to the very form of his wish; because whoso is 
intent on one object, must remove all duality from before him. (So says the 
mystic Sadi: — I drove the duality from my door, in order to have the unity 
alone before my view). 


21. The other imaginary forms of the mendicant, were all different persons in 
their different spheres; and had obtained their several forms, according to their 
respective desires from one state to another (as said before). 


22. They did not know or look on one another, but had all their thoughts and 
sights fixed on Rudra alone; because those that are awakened to their spiritual 
knowledge, have their sight fixed on their final liberation, while the 
unenlightened mortals are subjected to repeated births, by the repetition of 
their wishes (to be born in some form or other). 


23. It was accordingly to the will of Rudra, that he took this one form and 
many others upon him, such as he wills to become a Vidhyadhara in one place 
and a pandit in another. 


24. This instance of Rudra serves for an example, of the efficacy of intense 
thought and practice of all men; who may become one or another or many 
more, as also learned or ignorant, agreeably to their thought and conduct. 
(One to be many, means the versatility of parts, to act as many). 


25. So one has his manhood and Godhead also, (i.e., acts as a man and a God 
likewise), by his manly and God-like actions at different times and places; and 
to be both at the one and same time, requires much greater ability and energy 
both of the mind and body (as it is seen in the persons of deified heroes). 


26. The living soul being one with the Divine, has all the powers of the same 


implanted in it; the infinite being ingrafted in the finite, It is of the same nature 
by innate nature. 


27. The living soul has its expansion and contraction in its life and death, as 
the Divine soul has its evolution and involution; in the acts of creation and 
dissolution; but the Divine soul destroys no soul, because it is the soul of 
souls and the aggregate of all souls; therefore, anyone that would be godly, 
must refrain from slaughter. 


28. So the Yogis and Yoginis continue in the discharge of their sacred rites, as 
enjoined by law and usage, and either remain in this or rove about in other 
worlds at large at the free will and liberty. 


29. A Yogi is seen in several forms at once, both in this world and in the next, 
according to his desert and the merit of his actions; as the great Yogi and 
warrior Karta Virya Arjuna, became the terror of the world as if he were 
ubiquitous, while he remained quite at home. (i.e., though confined in one 
place, yet he seemed to be present everywhere). 


30. So also doth the god Vishnu appear in human forms on earth, while he 
sleeps at ease in the milky ocean; and the yoginis of heaven hover over animal 
sacrifices on earth, while they reside in their groups in the ethereal sphere. 


31. Indra also appears on earth, to receive the oblations of men, when he is 
sitting in his heavenly seat on high, and Narayana takes the forms of a 
thousand Ramas upon him, in his conflict with the myriads of Rakhasa 
legions. 


32. So did one Krishna become a hundred, to receive the obeisance of his 
reverential princes; and he appears as a thousand in the company of many 
thousand monarchs in the Kuru assembly. 


33. So the god became incarnate in many forms, with parts and particles of his 
own spirit for the preservation of the world; and the one lord became many in 
the company of his mistresses in a moment. (This was the company of milk 
maids in the rdsalild sport of Krishna). 


34. In this manner did the forms of Jivata and others, which were the creatures 
of the mendicant's imagination, retire at the behest of Rudra, to the particular 
abodes of their own and respective desires. 


35. There they enjoyed all their delights for a long time, until they entered the 
abode of Rudra; where they became the attendants of the demi-god, and 
remained in his train for a great length of time. 


36. They remained in the company of Rudra, dwelling in the groves of the 
evergreen and ever blossoming Kalpa creepers of paradise, blooming with 
clusters of their gemming florets; and roving at pleasure to different worlds, 
and to the celestial city of Siva on the Kailasa mountain, and sporting in the 
company of heavenly nymphs, and bearing the crowns of immortality on their 
heads. (This is the description of the heaven of Hindus). 


CHAPTER LXV. 


Rama's Wonder at the Error of Men. 


Argument. — Application of the mendicant's case to all men, who are equally 
mistaken in their choice. 


VASISHTHA Continued: — As the mendicant saw this transient scene of 
error in his mind; so it is the case with all living beings, to look on their past 
lives and actions apart from themselves, and in the persons of other men. 


2. The past lives, actions and demise of all reflective souls, are as fast 
imprinted in them, as any thought is preserved in the retentive mind and 
vacuous intellect. 


3. Distant and separate things are mingled together, in the present sphere of 
one's soul; and all persons appear as distinct figures in the dream. 


4. And the human soul, though it is a form of the divine, yet being enclosed in 
its frail and mortal body, is doomed to misery until its final liberation from 
birth and body. Thus I have related to you the fate of all living souls, in the 
state and tale of the mendicant Bhikshu. 


5. Now know, O Rama! that the souls of all of us like that of the mendicant, 
are vibrated and moved by the impulse of the supreme spirit; and are yet 
fallible in their nature, and falling from error to error every moment (as we 
find in our dreams). 


6. As a stone falling from a rock, falls lower and lower to the nether ground; 
so the living soul once fallen from its height of supreme spirit, descends lower 
and lower to the lowest pit. 


7. Now it sees one dream, and then passes from it to another; and thus rolling 
forever in its dreaming sleep, it never finds any substantiality whatsoever. 


8. The soul thus obscured under the illusion of errors, happens sometimes to 


come to the light of truth, either by the guidance of some good instructor, or 
by the light of its own intuition; and then it is released from the wrong notion 
of its personality in the body, and comes to the true knowledge of itself. 


9. Rama said: — O! the impervious gloom of error that ever spreads on the 
human soul, causes it to rely in the mist of its errors, as a sleeping man enjoys 
the scenery of his dreams. 


10. It is shrouded by the thick darkness of the night of erroneous knowledge, 
and falls into the pit of illusion which over spreads the world; (mdyd or error 
is the fruit of the forbidden tree whose mortal taste brought death into the 
world, while knowledge is the fruit of the tree of immortality, which liberates 
the soul from the bonds of birth and death). 


11. O the egregious error of taking a thing for our own, which in reality 
belongs to no body but the lord and master of all. 


12. It behoves you, Sir, to explain to me, whence this error takes its rise, and 
how the mendicant with his share of good and right understanding, could fall 
into the error (of wishing himself to become another, that was as frail and 
mortal as himself). Tell me also that knowest all, whether he is still living or 
not. 


13. Vasishtha replied: — I will explore into the regions of the three worlds in 
my samddhi meditation this night, and tell you tomorrow morning, whether 
the mendicant is living or not, and where he may be at present. 


14. Valmiki said: — As the sage was saying in this manner, the royal garrison 
tolled the trumpet of the departing day with beat of drum; which filled the sky 
with the loud roar of diluvian clouds. 


15. The princes and the citizens assembled in the court, threw handfuls of 
flowers at his feet, as the trees drop down their flowers in the ground, wafted 
by the odoriferous breeze. 


16. They honoured the great sages also, and rose from their respective seats; 
and the assembly broke afterwards, with mutual salutations to one another. 


17. Then all the residents of the earth and air, went to their respective 
residences with the setting sun; and discharged their duties of the departing 
day, in obedience to the ordinance of the Sdstras. 


18. They all performed their services as prescribed in their liturgies, in which 
they placed their strong faith and veneration. (This shows the division of caste 


and creed even in the heroic age of Rama; which being more marked in later 
ages, prevented the people from participating in a common cause). 


19. All the mortals and celestials, that formed the audience of “Vasishtha,” 
began now to reflect on the lecture of the sage, and the night passed as short 
as a moment with some, and as long as an age with others. (Gloss. — They 
that took the subject for study, found time too short for their deep meditation 
of it, while those that were light minded and eager to hear more, felt time to 
roll on heavily on them. A very good lesson for lightning time by the practice 
of patient enquiry, and avoiding the troublesomeness of impatience). 


20. As the morning rose with the returning duties of men, and employed all 
beings of heaven and earth to discharge their matin in services; the court 
reopened for the reception of the audience, who assembled there with mutual 
greetings and salutations to their superiors. 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


The wanderings of the mendicant. 


Arguments: — The wanderings of men agreeably to their pursuits, described 
in the character of the mendicant. 


VALMIKI related: — After the sages Vasishtha and Viswdmitra had taken 
their seats in the court hall, there met the groups of celestials and Siddhas of 
air, and the monarch of earth and chiefs of men. 


2. Then came Rama and Lakshmana with their companions in the court; 
which shone as a clear lake of lotus-beds unshaken by the gentle breeze, and 
brightened by the moonbeams glistening amidst it. 


3. The sire of sages opened his mouth unasked by anybody, and not waiting 
for the request of anyone; because wise men are always kind hearted, and 
ready to communicate their knowledge to others of their own accord. (Here 
the sage spoke impromptu, to keep his promise of answering to Rama's query 
in the preceding chapter, on a future occasion. — Gloss). 


4. Vasishtha said: — O Rama! that art the moon in the sphere of Raghu's 
family, I have yesternight came to see the mendicant, with the all-seeing eye 
of my intellectual vision after a long time. 


5. I revolved over in my mind, and wandered wide and afar to find out where 
that man was, and so I traversed through all the continents and islands, and 
passed over all the hills and mountains on earth. 


6. I had my head running upon the search, but could not meet anywhere a 
mendicant of that description; because it is impossible to find in the outer 
world, the fictions of our air-built castle. 


7. I then ran in my mind at the last watch of the night, and passed over the 
regions on the north, as the fleet winds fly over the waves of the ocean. 


8. There I saw the extensive and populous country of Jina, (China), lying 
beyond the utmost boundaries of Valmika (Bhalika or Bulkh); where there is a 
beautiful city, called as Vihara by the inhabitants. 


9. There lives a mendicant, named Dirgha drik or foresighted, whose head 
was silvered over with age, and who continues in his close meditation 
confined in his homely and lovely cottage. 


10. He is used to sit there in his meditative mood, for three weeks together at a 
time, and keep the door of his cell quite fast, for fear of being disturbed in his 
silent devotion, by the intrusion of outsiders. 


11. His dependents are thus kept out of doors for the time, that he is absorbed 
in meditation. 


12. He thus passed his three weeks of deep meditation in seclusion, and it is 
now a thousand years, that he has been sitting in this manner, in communion 
with his own mind only. 


13. It was in olden times, that there had been a mendicant of his kind, as I 
have already related unto you; this is the living instance of that sort, and we 
know not where and when a third or another like this may be found to exist. 


14. I was long in quest like a bee in search of flowers, to find such another, in 
the womb of this lotus like earth, with all possible inquiry on my part. 


15. I passed beyond the limit of the present world, and pierced through the 
mist of future creations, and there I met with what I sought of the resemblance 
of the present one. 


16. As I looked into the world lying in the womb of futurity, and deposited in 
the intellectual sphere of Brahma; I met with a third one resembling to 
Brahma in his conduct. 


17. So passing through many worlds, one after another, I saw many things in 
futures, which are not in esse in the present world. 


18. There I beheld the sages that are now sitting in this assembly, and many 
more Brahmans also, that are of the nature of these present, as also different 
from them. 


19. There will be this Narada with his present course of life, as also differing 
from the same; so likewise, there will be many others also, with their various 
modes of life. 


20. So likewise there will appear this Vyasa and this Suka; and these Saunaka, 
Pulaha and Krutu, will reappear in future creations, with their very same 
natures and characters. (This doctrine of reappearance in a future world, is 
disbelieved in the sense of the transmigration of souls, but it is taken as strict 
article of faith by all Christians and Moslems, in the name of regeneration and 
resurrection which imply the same thing). 


21. The same Agastya and Pulastya and the self-same Bhrigu and Angirasa, 
all of them and all others, will come to re-existence, with their very forms and 
traits of character. (The dead will rise again in their very bodies, efc., — 
Gospel). 


22. They will be born and reborn sooner and later, so long as they are under 
the subjection of this delusion of regeneration and resuscitation; and will 
retain their similar births and modes of life, like all others to be reborn in this 
or the future world. (As a Brahman who is twice born on earth, retains his 
habits as before). 


23. So the souls of men revolve repeatedly in the world, like waves rolling 
forever in the waters of the sea; some of which retain their very same forms, 
while others are very nearly so in their reappearance. 


24. Some are slightly altered in their figures, and others varying entirely in 
their forms, never regain their original likeness; so doth this prevailing error 
of regeneration, delude even the wise to repeated births (from which can 
never get their liberations). (The desire of revivification or regeneration, is so 
deeply implanted in all living souls, that nobody wants to die but with desire 
to live again in some future state. “Ye shall not die.” — Gospel). 


25. But what means the long meditation, of twenty days and nights of the 
mendicant, when a moment's thought of ours, and the results of our bodily 
actions, are productive of endless births and transformations. 


26. Again, where is the reality of these forms, which are mere conceptions of 
the mind; and these ideas and reflexions, growing ripe with their 
recapitulation, appear as full-blown flowers to sight; and resemble the water 
lily at morn, beset by the busy murmur of humming bees. 


27. The gross form is produced from pure thought, (i.e., the material from the 
immaterial mind), as a pile of flaming fire is kindled by a minute spark or a 
ray of sunbeam. Such is the formation of the whole fabric of the world. 


28. All things are manifest as particles of divine reflexion, and each particle 


exhibiting in it a variety of parts (in its atoms and animalcules); nor are these 
nor those together are nothing at all, but they all exist in the universal, which 
is the cause of all cause, and the source of all sources. 


CHAPTER LXVII. 


Unity of God. 


Argument. — The liberation of the mendicant's soul and destruction of his 
body, and the application of this instance in the cases of the confinement and 
liberation of all souls in and from the bondage of their bodies. 


DASARATHA said: — O great sage, let these attendants of mine, repair 
immediately to the cells of the mendicant, and having roused him from his 
hypnotism, bring him hither in my presence. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Great king! the body of that mendicant, is now lying 
lifeless on the ground; it is now pale and cold and daubed with dirt, and has 
no jot of its vitality left in it. 


3. His life has fled from his body, like odour from the lotus of the lake; he is 
now liberated from the bond of this life, and is no more subject to the cares of 
this world. 


4. It is now a whole month that his servants have opened the latch of his door, 
and standing at a distance looking at his emaciated frame. 


5. They will afterwards take out the body and immerge it in water, and then 
having anointed it, they will place it for their adoration, as they do a deified 
idol. (The bodies of saints are sanctified by their votaries among all nations, 
and their tombs are visited with religious veneration). 


6. The mendicant being in this manner freed from his body, cannot be brought 
back to his senses, which have entirely quitted their functions in his mortal 
frame. 


7. It is hard to evade the enchanting delusion of the world, so long as one 
labours under the darkness of his ignorance; but it is easily avoided by one's 
knowledge of truth at all times. 


8. The fabrication of the world is untrue, as the making of ornaments from 
gold; it is the error of taking the form for the substance, that appears as the 
cause of creation. 


9. This delusion of the world, appears to be so situated in the supreme soul, as 
the rows of waves are seen to roll upon the surface of the calm waters of the 
sea. So it is said in the very words of the Vedas, that the moving worlds are as 
the fluctuation of the Divine Soul. 


10. The intelligent soul, taking the form of the living or human soul, sees the 
phenomenal world, as one sees one dream after another, but all these vanish 
away upon his waking to sense and right reason. 


11. As every man of understanding sees the original in its image, so the man 
of reason views the archetype of the soul in its representation of the creation; 
while the ignorant man that sees the world as a thorny bush or confused 
jungle, can have no idea of the all designing framer of his frame work of the 
universe. (Right reason points out to spiritual source of the world). 


12. The world is represented to the view of every living being, as it was seen 
in the vision of the dreaming mendicant, in the form of the undulations of the 
supreme spirit, like the fluctuation of waves on the surface of the sea. 


13. As the world appeared to be presented at first in its visionary form, before 
the view of the universal or collective mind of the creative Brahma; so does it 
rise in its shadowy form in the opacous minds of all individual persons. (The 
world appears in its unspiritual form, to the minds of the great Brahma and all 
other living beings). 


14. But to the clear mind this world appears as an evanescent dream, as it 
appeared to Brahma at first; and the multitudes of worlds that are discovered 
one after the other, are no more than the successive scenes of passing dreams 
in the continuous sleep of ignorance. 


15. So do all living beings in their various forms, are subject to the error of 
believing the unreal world as a reality, though they well know it in their 
minds, to be no better than a continuous dream or delusion. (The varieties of 
living souls are included under the unintelligible terms of universal and 
individual: — general and particular, efc.). 


16. The animal soul, though possessed of intellege (or the property of the 
intellect); is yet liable to transgress from its original nature (of holiness and 
purity); and thereby becomes subject to decay, disease and death and all kinds 


of awe. (It is the chyuty of the fall of man from his primary purity, that 
brought on him all his miseries on earth). 


17. The godly intellect frames the celestial and infernal regions in our dreams, 
by the slight vibration of the mind at its pleasure; and then takes a delight in 
rambling over and dwelling in them. 


18. It is this divine intellect, which by its own motion, takes the form of living 
soul upon itself; and wanders from itself to rummage over the false objects of 
the deceptive senses. 


19. The mind also is the supreme soul, and if it is not so it is nothing; the 
living and embodied is likewise a designation of the same, likening to the 
shadow of the substance. 


20. So the supreme Brahma is said to reside in the universal Brahma, 
according to the distinct view of men, with regard to the one Brahma, in 
whom all these attributes unite, like the water with water and the sky with air. 
(All these attributive words apply to and unite in the unity of Brahma). 


21. Men residing in this mundane form of Brahma, and yet think it otherwise 
than a reflexion of the deity; just as a child looking at its own shadow in a 
glass, startles to think it as an apparition standing before it. 


22. It is the wavering understanding that causes these differences, which 
disappear of themselves, after the mind resumes its steadiness in the unity of 
the Deity, wherein it is lost at last, as the oblation of butter is consumed in the 
sacred fire. 


23. There is no more any vacillation or dogmatism, nor the unity or duality, 
after the true knowledge of the deity is gained; when all distinctions are 
dissolved in an indistinct intellect, which is as it is and all in all. 


24. When it is known from the sum and substance of all reasoning, that it is 
the one Intellect, which is the subject of all appellations which are applied to 
it; there remains no more any difference of religious faith in the world. (That 
is one and all, is the catholic religion of all). 


25. Difference of faith, creates difference in men; but want of distinction in 
creed, destroys all difference, and brings on the union of all to one common 
faith in the supreme being. 


26. Rama, you see the variety from your want of understanding, and you will 
get rid of the same (and recognise their identity), as you come to your right 


understanding; ask this of anybody and you will find the truth of what I say 
and be fearless at any party feeling and enmity. (Confession of faith in one 
Divinity, that is acknowledged and adored by all alike, is the root of 
catholicity, and brings on unity in philosophy of religion). 


27. In that state of fearlessness, the Brahmavadi finds no difference in the 
states of waking, dreaming, sound sleep or the fourth stage of devotion; nor in 
his earthly bondage or liberation from it, all which are equal to him. (So says 
the sruti: — The Brahmavadi is ever blest and is afraid of nothing in any state 
of life, in all of which he sees the presence of his God). 


28. Tranquillity is another name of the universe, and God has given his peace 
to everything in the world; therefore, all schisms are the false creations of 
ignorance, as none of them has ever seen the invisible God. 


29. The action of the heart and the motion of the vital air, cannot move the 
contented mind to action; because the mind which is devoid of its desire, is 
indifferent about the vibrations of his breath and heart strings. 


30. The intellect which is freed from the dubitation of unity and duality, and 
got rid of its anxious cares and desires; has approached to a state, which is 
next to that of the deity. 


31. But the pure desire which subsists in the intellect, like the stain which 
sticks to the disk of the moon; is no speck upon it, but the coagulation of the 
condensed intellect. (As the fluid water is congealed in the forms of snow and 
ice). 


32. Do you, Rama! ever remain in the state of your collected intellect, because 
it concentrates (the knowledge of) everything (that is sat) in itself, and leaves 
nothing (that is not asat) beyond it. (This is the most faultless undefective 
form of faith, that I have abstracted from all religions). 


33. The moon-like disk of the intellect, having the mark of inappetency in it, 
is a vessel of ambrosia, a draught of which drowns the thoughts of all that is 
and is not (in esse, — et non-esse) into oblivion. (Contentment is the 
ambrosial draught for oblivion of all cares). 


34. Refer thy thoughts of whatever thou hast or wantest, to the province of thy 
intellect, (i.e., think of thy intellectual parts and wants only); and taste thy 
inward delight as much as thou dost like. (Pleasure of intellectual culture, is 
better than physical enjoyments). 


35. Know, Rama, that the words vibration and inaction, desire and 


inappetency and such others of the theological glossary, serve only to burden 
and mislead the mind to error; do you therefore, keep yourself from thinking 
on these, and betake yourself to your peace and quiet, whether you attain to 
your perfection or otherwise. 


CHAPTER LXVIII. 


On the virtues of Taciturnity. 


Argument: — Four kinds of Reticence, and their respective qualities. 


VASISHTHA said: — Rama! remain as taciturn as in your silent sleep, and 
shun at a distance the musings of your mind; get rid of the vagaries of your 
imagination, and remain firm in the state Brahma. 


2. Rama said: — I know what is meant by the reticence of speech, and the 
quietness of the organs, and the muteness of a block of wood; but tell me what 
is sleep like silence, which you well know by practice. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — It is said to be of two kinds, by the mute-like munis 
and the reserved sages of old; the practiced by the wood like statues of saints, 
and the other observed by those that are liberated in their life time, (jivan 
mukta). 


4. The wood like devotee is that austere ascetic, who is not meditative in his 
mind, and is firmly employed in the discharge of the rigorous rites of religion; 
he practises the painful restraints of his bodily organs, and remains speechless 
as a wooden statue. 


5. The other kind of living liberated Yogi is one, who looks at the world ever 
as before (with his usual unconcern); who delights in his meditation of the 
soul, and passes as any ordinary man without any distinctive mark of his 
religious order or secular rank. 


6. The condition of these two orders of saintly and holy men, which is the 
fixedness of their minds and sedateness of their souls, is what passes under the 
title of taciturnity and saintliness, (mauna and muni), (who hold their tongue 
and their peace, and walk sub silentio and incognito on earth). 


7. Thus the taciturn sages reckon four kinds of latitancy, which they style 
severally by the names of reservedness in speech, restriction of the organs, 


wood-like speechlessness and dead like silence as in one's sleep. 


8. Oral silence consists in keeping one's mouth and lips close, and the 
closeness of the senses implies the keeping of the members of the body under 
strict control; the rigorous muteness means the abandonment of all efforts, and 
the sleepy silence is as silent as the grave. 


9. There is a fifth kind of dead-like silence, which occurs in the austere ascetic 
in his state of insensibility; in the profound meditation of the dormant Yogi, 
and in the mental abstraction of the living liberated. 


10. All the three prior states of reticence, occur in the austere devotee, and the 
sleepy or dead silence is what betakes the living liberated only. 


11. Though speechlessness is called silence, yet it does not constitute pure 
reticence, in as much as the mute tongue may brood evil thoughts in the mind, 
which lead to the bondage of men. 


12. The austere devotee continues in his reticence, without minding his own 
egoism, or seeing the visibles or listening to the speech of others; and seeing 
nothing beside him, he sees all in himself, like living fire covered under ashes. 


13. The mind being busy in these three states of silence, and indulging its 
fancies and reveries at liberty; makes munis of course in outward appearance, 
but there is no one, who understands the nature of God. 


14. There is nothing of that blessed divine knowledge in any of these, which is 
so very desirable to all mankind; I vouch it freely that they are not knowers of 
God, be they angry at it or not as they may. (Vasishtha being a theoretic 
philosopher, finds fault with every kind of practical Yoga or pseudo 
hypnotism). 


15. But this dormant or meditative silent sage, who is liberated from all bonds 
and cares in his life time, is never to be born in any shape in this world, and it 
is interesting to know much of them as I will recite to you. 


16. He does not require to restrain his respiration, nor needs the triple restraint 
of his speech; he does not rejoice at his prosperity, nor is he depressed in 
adversity, but preserves his equanimity and the evenness of his sensibility at 
all times. (He sticks to what is natural, and does not resort to anything 
artificial). 


17. His mind is under the guidance of his reason, and is neither excited by nor 
restrained from its fancies, it is neither restless nor dormant, and exists as it 1s 


not in existence. (owing to its even-mindedness). 


18. His attention is neither divided nor pent up, but fixed in the infinite and 
eternal one, and his mind cogitates unconfined the nature of things. Such a 
one is said to be the sleeping silent sage. 


19. He who knows the world as it is, and is not led to error by its deluding 
varieties, and whoso scans everything as it is without being led to scepticism, 
is the man that is styled the sleeping silent sage. 


20. He who relies his faith and trust, on the one endless and ever felicitous 
Siva, as the aggregate of all knowledge, and the displayer of this universe, is 
the one who is known as the sleeping silent sage. 


21. He who sees the vacuum as the plenum, and views this all omnium as the 
null and nullum; and whose mind is even and tranquil, is the man who is 
called the sleeping silent sage. 


22. Again, he who views the universe as neither reality nor unreality either, 
but all an empty vacuum and without a substratum, but full of peace and 
divine wisdom, is said to be in the best state of his taciturnity. 


23. The mind that is unconscious of the effects, of the different states of its 
prosperity and adversity and of its plenty and wants, is said to rest in its 
highest state of rest and quiet. 


24. That perfect equanimity of the mind and evenness of temper, which is not 
liable to change or fluctuation; with a clear conscience and unflinching self- 
consciousness, are the source of an unimpairing reticence. 


25. The consciousness that I am nothing, nor is there anything besides; and 
that the mind and its thoughts, are no other in reality (than fictions of the 
intellect); is the real source of taciturnity. 


26. The knowledge that the ego pervades this universe, which is the 
representation of the, “one that is,” and whose essence is displayed equally in 
all things, is what is meant by the state of sleepy silence. (i.e., the man that 
has known this grand truth, remains dumb and mute and has nothing to say). 


27. Now as it is the consciousness which constitutes all and everything, how 
can you conceive your distinction from others, who are actuated by the same 
power, dwelling alike in all? It is this knowledge which is called the ever- 
lasting sleep, and forms the ground work of every kind of silence. 


28. This is the silence of profound sleep, and because it is an endless sleep in 


the ever-wakeful God, this sleep is alike to waking. Know this as the fourth 
stage of Yoga, or rather a stage above the same. 


29. This profound trance is called hypnotism or the fourth state of entranced 
meditation; and the tranquillity which is above this state, is to be had in one's 
waking state. 


30. He that is situated in his fourth stage of Yoga, has a clear conscience and 
quiet peace attending on him. This is practicable by the adept even in his 
waking state, and is obtainable by the righteous soul, both in its embodied as 
well as disembodied states. 


31. Yes, O Rama! Be you desirous to be settled in this state, and know that 
neither I or you nor any other person is any real being in this world, which 
exists only as a reflexion of our mind, and therefore, the wise man should rely 
only in the bosom of the vacuous intellect, which comprehends all things in it. 


CHAPTER LXIX. 


Union of the mind with the breath of life. 


Argument. — Willful existence of the attendants of Rudra, and the elevation 
of Yogis after their Demise. 


Rama said: — Tell me, O chief of sages, how the Rudras came to be a 
hundred in their number, and whether the attendants of Rudra, are Rudras also 
or otherwise. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The mendicant saw himself in a hundred forms in a 
hundred dreams, which he dreamt one after another; these I have told you on 
the whole before, though I have not specially mentioned them to you. 


3. All the forms that he saw in the dream, became so many Rudras, and all 
these hundred Rudras remained as so many attendants on the principal Rudra. 


4. Rama asked: — But how could the one mind of the mendicant, be divided 
into a hundred in so many bodies of the Rudras; or was it undivided like a 
lamp, that lightens a hundred lamps, without any diminution of its own light. 


5. Vasishtha answered: — Know, Rama, that disembodied or spiritual beings 
of pure natures, are capable of assuming to themselves any form of their 
fancy, from the aqueous nature of their souls, (which readily unite with other 
liquids). (The Sruti says, “the soul is a fluid,” corresponding with the psychic 
fluid of Stahl). 


6. The soul being omnipresent and all pervading (like the all-diffusive psychic 
fluid); takes upon it any form whatever, and whenever and wherever it likes, 
by virtue of its intelligence, (which the ignorant spirit is unable to do). 


7. Rama rejoined: — But tell me Sir, why the Lord Rudra or Siva wore the 
string of human skulls about his neck, daubed his body with ashes, and stark 
naked; and why he dwelt in funeral ground, and was libidinous in the greatest 
degree. 


8. Vasishtha replied: — The Gods and perfect beings as the Siddhas, etc., are 
not bound down by the laws, which the weak and ignorant men have devised 
for their own convenience. 


9. The ignorant cannot go on without the guidance of law, on account of their 
ungovernable minds; or else they are subject to every danger and fear, like 
poor fishes (which are quite helpless, and entirely at the mercy of all 
voracious animals). 


10. Intelligent people are not exposed to those evils in life, as the ignorant 
people of ungoverned minds and passions, meet with by their restless and 
vagrant habits. 


11. Wise men discharge their business as they occur to them at times, and 
never undertake to do anything of their own accord, and are therefore, 
exposed to no danger. (Graha in the text means a shark and calamities also). 


12. It was on the impulse of the occasion that the God Vishnu, engaged 
himself in action, and so did the God with the three eyes, (i.e., Siva), as also 
the God that was born of the lotus, (i.e., The great Brahma). (All of them took 
human forms on them, whenever the Daityas invaded the Brahmans, and 
never of their own will). 


13. The acts of wise men are neither to be praised or blamed nor are they 
praiseworthy or blameable; because they are never done from private or 
public motives (but on the expediency of the occasion). 


14. As light and heat are the natural properties, of fire and sun shine; so are 
the actions of Siva and the Gods, ordained as such from the beginning, as the 
caste customs of the twice born dwijas, (Aryans). 


15. Though the natures of all mankind are the same, as they are ordained in 
the beginning; yet the ignorant have created differences among them, by 
institution of the distinction of castes and customs; and as their institutions are 
of their own making, they are subjected by them to the evils of future 
retribution and transmigration. (Men are bound down by their own laws, from 
which the brute creation is entirely free). 


16. I have related to you, Rama! the quadruple reticence of embodied beings, 
and have not as yet expounded the nature of the silence of disembodied souls, 
(as those of the Gods, Siddhas and departed saints). 


17. Hear now how men are to obtain this chief good (summum bonum) of 
theirs, by their knowledge of the intellectual souls in the clear sphere of their 


own intellect, which is clearer far than the ethereal sphere of the sky. 


18. It is by the knowledge of all kinds of knowledge, and constant devotion to 
meditation; and by the study of the numerical philosophy of particulars in the 
sankhya system, that men became renowned as Sankhya Yogis or categorical 
philosopher. (The Sankhya is opposed to the Vedanta, in as much as it rises 
from particulars to general truths). 


19. The Yoga consists in the meditation of Yogis, of the form of the eternal 
and undecaying One; by suppression of their breathings, and union with that 
state, which presents itself to their mind. 


20. That unfeigned and undisguised state of felicity and tranquillity, which is 
desired as the most desirable thing by all, is obtainable by some by means of 
the Sankhya Yoga, and by the Jnana Yoga by others. 


21. The result of both these forms of Yoga, is the same, and this is known to 
anybody that has felt the same; because the state arrived at by the one, is alike 
to that of the other also. 


22. And this supreme state is one, in which the actions of the mental faculties 
and vital breath, are altogether imperceptible; and the network of desires is 
entirely dispersed. 


23. The desire constitutes the mind, which again is the cause of creation; it is 
therefore, by the destruction of both of these, that one becomes motionless 
and inactive. (Forgets himself to a stone. — Pope). 


24. The mind forgets its inward soul, and never looks towards it for a 
moment; it is solely occupied with its body, and looks at the phantom of the 
body, as a child looks at a ghost. (Thinking it a reality). 


25. The mind itself is a false apparition, and an unsubstantial appearance of 
our mistake; and shows itself as the death of some body in his dream, which is 
found to be false upon his waking. 


26. The world is the production of the mind, else what am I and who is mine 
or my offspring; it is custom and our education that have caused the bugbears 
of our bondage and liberation, which are nothing in reality. 


27. There is one thing however, on which is based the bias of both systems; 
that it is the suppression of breath, and the restriction of mind, which form the 
sum and substance of what they call their liberation. 


28. Rama rejoined: — Now Sir, if it is suppression which constitutes the 


liberation of these men; then I may as well say that all dead men are liberated, 
as well as all dead animals also. 


29. Vasishtha replied: — Of the three practices of the restriction of the breath, 
body and mind, I ween the repression of the mind and its thoughts to be the 
best; because it is easily practicable and I will tell you how it is to be done to 
our good. 


30. When the vital breaths of the liberated souls, quit this mortal frame; it 
perceives the same in itself, and flies in the shape of a particle in the open sky, 
and mixes at last with ethereal air. 


31. The parting soul accompanies with its tanmdtras or elementary principles; 
which comprise the desires of its mind, and which are closely united with 
breath, and nothing besides. 


32. As the vital breath quits one body to enter into another, so it carries with it 
the desires of the heart, with which it was in the breast of man, as the winds of 
the air bear the fragrance of flowers. These are reproduced in the future body 
for its misery only. 


33. As a water pot thrown in the sea, does not lose its water, so the vital breath 
mixing with the ethereal air, does not lose the desires of the mind, which it 
bears with it. They are as closely united with it, as the sun-beams with the sun. 


34. The mind cannot be separated from the vital breath, (i.e., the desires are 
inseparable from life), without the aid of the knowledge; and as the bird 
Titteri cannot be removed from one nest without another, (so the soul never 
passes from one body without finding and entering into another). 


35. Knowledge removes the desires, and the disappearance of desires destroys 
the mind; this produces the suppression of breath, and thence proceeds the 
tranquillity of the soul. 


36. Knowledge shows us the unreality of things, and the vanity of human 
desires. Hence know, O Rama, that the extinction of desires, brings on the 
destruction of both the mind and vitality. 


37. The mind being with its desires, which form its soul and life, it can no 
more see the body in which it took so much delight; and then the tranquil soul 
attains its holiest state. 


38. The mind is another name for desire, and this extirpated and wanting, the 
soul comes to the discrimination of truth, which leads to the knowledge of the 


supreme. 


39. In this manner, O Rama, we came to the end of our erroneous knowledge 
of the world, as it is by means of our reason, that we come to detect our error 
of the snake in the rope. 


40. Learn this one lesson, that the restraining of the mind and suppression of 
breath, mean the one and same thing; and if you succeed in restraining the 
one, you succeed in the restraint of other also. (So it is said, that our thoughts 
and respirations go together). 


41. As the waving of the palm leaved fan being stopped, there is a stop of the 
ventilation of air in the room; so the respiration of the vital breath being put to 
a stop, there ensues a total stoppage of the succession of our thoughts. (It is 
believed that our time is measured by succession of our breath and thoughts 
ajdpas, and the more are they suppressed, the greater is the duration of our life 
prolonged). 


42. The body being destroyed, the breath passes into the vacuous air; where it 
sees everything according to the desires, which it has wafted along with it, 
from the cells of the heart and mind. 


43. As the living souls find the bodies (of various animals) in which they are 
embodied, and act according to their different natures; so the departed and 
disembodied spirits, — prdnas, see many forms and figures presented before 
them, according to their several desires. They enter into the same, and act 
agreeably to the nature of that being. 


44. As the fragrance of flowers ceases to be diffused in the air, when the 
breezes have ceased to blow; so the vital breath, ceases to breathe, when the 
action of the mind is at a stop. (Hence is the concentration of the mind, to one 
object only strongly enjoyed in the Yoga practice). 


45. Hence the course of the thoughts, and respiration of all animals, is known 
too closely united with one another; as the fragrance is inseparable from the 
flower, and the oil from the oily seeds. 


46. The breath is vacillation of the mind, as the mind is the fluctuation of the 
breath; and these two go together for ever, as the chariot and its charioteer. 


47. These perish together without the assemblage of one another, as the 
container and the contained are both lost at the loss of either (like that of the 
fire and its heat). Therefore, it is better to lose them for the liberation of the 
soul, than losing the soul for the sake of the body. 


48. Keeping only one object or the unity in view will stop the course of the 
mind; and the mind being stopped, there will follow as a matter of course, an 
utter suppression of the breath as its consequence. 


49. Investigate well into the truth of the immortality of thy soul, and try to 
assimilate thyself into the eternal spirit of God; and having absorbed thy mind 
in the divine mind, be one with the same. 


50. Distinguish between thy knowledge and ignorance, and lay hold on what 
is more expedient for you; settle yourself on what remains after disappearance 
of both, and live while you live relying on the Intellect alone. 


51. Continue to meditate on the existence of all things in one firm and ever 
existent entity alone, until by your constant habit of thinking so, you find all 
outward existence disappear into non-existence, (and present the form of the 
self-existent only to view). 


52. The minds of the abstinent are mortified, with their bodies and vitality, for 
want of food and enjoyments; and then there remains the consciousness of the 
transcendent one alone. 


53. When the mind is of one even tenor, and is habituated to it by its constant 
practice; it will put an end to the thought of the endless varieties and 
particulars, which will naturally disappear of themselves. 


54. There is an end of our ignorance and delusion, (avidyd), as we attempt to 
the words of wisdom and reason; we gain our best knowledge by learning, but 
it is by practice alone, that we can have the object of our knowledge. 


55. The mirage of the world will cease to exist, after the mind has become 
calm and quiet in itself; as the darkness of the sky is dispersed, upon 
disappearance of the raining clouds. 


56. Know your mind alone as the cause of your delusion, and strive therefore, 
to weaken its force and action; but you must not Rama! weaken it so much, as 
to lose the sight of the supreme spirit, which shines as the soul of the mind. 


57. When the mind is settled with the supreme soul for a moment, know that 
to be the mature state of thy mind, and will soon yield the sweets of its 
ripeness. 


58. Whether you have your tranquillity, by the Sankhya or Vedanta Yoga; it is 
both the same if you can reduce yourself to the supreme soul; and by doing so 
for a moment, you are no more to be reborn in this nether world. 


59. The word divine essence, means the mind devoid of its ignorance; and 
which like a fried seed is unable to reproduce the arbor of the world, and has 
no interruption in its meditation of God. 


60. The mind that is devoid of ignorance, and freed from its desires, and is 
settled in its pure essence; comes to see in an instant, a full blaze of light 
filling the sphere of the firmament in which it rests and which absorbs it quite. 


61. The mind is said to be its pure essence, which is insensible of itself, and 
settled in the supreme soul; it never relapses into the foulness of its nature, as 
the copper which is mixed with gold, never becomes dirty again. 


CHAPTER LXX. 


Interrogatories of Vetdla. 


Arguments: — Conversation of a prince and a Vetala, and Dissipation of 
Error and manifestation of truth. 


VASISHTHA resumed: — Life becomes no life, (becomes immortal), and the 
mind turns to no mind, immerges in the soul, no sooner is the cloud of 
ignorance dispersed by the bright sun beams of right reason. This is the state 
which is termed moksha or liberation (from error) by the wise. 


2. The mind and its egoism and tuism, (subjectivity and objectivity), appear as 
water in the mirage, but all these unrealities vanish away, no sooner we come 
to our right reason. 


3. Attend now to the queries of a vetala, which I come to remember at present, 
concerning our erroneous and dreaming conception of the phenomenal world, 
and which will serve to example by the subject of our last lecture. 


4. There lived a gigantic vetala in the vast wilderness of the Vindhya 
mountains, who happened to come out on an excursion to the adjoining 
districts in search of his prey of human beings. 


5. He used to live before in the neighbourhood of a populous city, where he 
lived quite happy and well satisfied with the victims; which were daily offered 
to him by the good citizens. 


6. He never killed a human being without some cause or harm, although he 
roved through the city, pinched by hunger and thirst. He walked in the ways 
of the honest and equitable men in the place. 


7. It came to pass in course of time that he went out of the city, to reside in his 
woody retreat; where he never killed any man, except when pressed by 
excessive hunger, and when he thought it was equitable for him to do so. 


8. He happened to meet there once a ruler of the land, strolling about in his 
nightly round; to whom he cried out in a loud and appalling voice. 


9. The vetdla exclaimed: — Where goest thou, O prince, said he, thou art now 
caught in the clutches of a hideous monster, thou art now a dead man, and 
hast become my ration of this day. 


10. The ruler replied: — Beware, O nocturnal fiend! that I will break thy skull 
into a thousand pieces, if you will unjustly attempt to kill me by force at this 
spot, and make thy ration of me. 


11. The vetala rejoined: — I do not tell thee unjustly, and speak it rightly unto 
thee; that as thou art a ruler, it is thy duty to attend to the petition of 
everybody, (wherein if thou failest, thou surely diest before me). 


12. I request thee, O prince! to solve the questions that I propose to thee; 
because I believe thou art best able to give a full and satisfactory answer to 
every one of them. (These questions are dark enigmas, which are explained in 
the next chapter). 


13. Who is that glorious sun, the particles of whose rays, are seen to glitter in 
the surrounding worlds; and what is that wind (or force), which wafts these 
dusts of stars, in the infinite space of vacuum. 


14. What is that self-same thing, which passes from one dream to another, and 
assumes different forms by hundreds and thousands, and yet does not forsake 
its original form. 


15. Tell me what is that pithy particle in bodies, which is enveloped under a 
hundred folds or sheaths, which are laid over and under one another, like the 
coats or lamina of a plantain tree. 


16. What is that minute atom which is imperceptible to the eye, and yet 
produces this immeasurable universe, with its stupendous worlds and skies, 
and the prodigious planets on high and mountains below, which are the 
minutest of that minute particle. 


17. What is that shapeless and formless thing, atom, which remains as the pith 
and marrow under the rocks of huge mountains, and which is the substratum 
of the triple world (of heaven, earth and infernal regions). 


18. If you, O wicked soul, fail to answer to these queries, then shalt thou be a 
killer of thyself, by your being made my food this moment. And know that at 
the end, I will devour all thy people, as the regent of death destroys everybody 


in the world. 


CHAPTER LXXI. 


The prince's reply to the first question of the Vetala. 


Arguments: — Answer to the first question regarding the Prime cause of all, 
shows the infinite worlds to be the trees and fruits of that original root. 


VASISHTHA related: — The Raja smiled at hearing these questions of the 
Demon, and as he opened his mouth to give the reply, the lustre of his pearly 
teeth, shed a brightness on the white vault of the sky. (This shows how much 
the early Hindus prized their white teeth, though latterly they tinged them 
with blue vitriol). 


2. This world was at first a rudimentary granule (in the Divine mind), and was 
afterwards encrusted by a dozen of elemental sheaths as its pellicles, skin and 
bark. (Does it mean the component elements or layers Bhiita-tatwa or Bhi- 
tatwa). 


3. The tree which bears thousands of such fruits, is very high also with its 
equally out stretching branches, and very long and broad leaves likewise. 


4. This great tree is of a huge size and very astounding to sight; it has 
thousands of prodigious branches spreading wide on every side. 


5. There are thousands of such trees, and a dense forest of many other large 
trees and plants in that person. 


6. Thousands of such forests stretch over it, abounding in thousands of 
mountains with their elevated peaks. 


7. The wide extended tracts which contain these mountains, have also very 
large valleys and dales amidst in them. 


8. These wide spread tracts contain also many countries, with their adjacent 
islands and lakes and rivers too. 


9. These thousands of islands also contain many cities, with varieties of 
edifices and works of art. 


10. These thousands tracts of lands, which are sketched out as so many 
continents, are as so many earths and worlds in their extent. 


11. That which contains thousands of such worlds, as the mundane eggs, is as 
unlimited as the spacious womb of the firmament. 


12. That which contains thousands of such eggs in its bosom, bears also many 
thousands of seas and oceans resting calmly in its ample breast. 


13. That which displays the boisterous waves of seas, is the sprightly and 
sportive soul, heaving as the clear waters of the ocean. 


14. That which contains thousands of such oceans, with all their waters in his 
unconscious womb, is the God Vishnu who filled the universal ocean with his 
all-pervasive spirit. (And the spirit of God floated on the face of the waters, — 
Moses. The waters were the first abode of Narayana). 


15. That which bears thousands of such Gods, as a string of pearls about the 
neck, is the Great God Rudra. 


16. That which bears thousands of such Great Gods, Maha-devas, in the 
manner of the hairs on his person; is the supreme Lord God of all. 


17. He is that great sun that he shines in a hundred such persons of the Gods, 
all of whom are but frictions of the rays of that Great source of light and life. 


18. All things in the universe are but particles of that uncreated sun; and thus 
have I explained to you that Intellectual sun, who fills the world with his rays, 
and shows them light. 


19. The all-knowing soul is the supreme sun that enlightens the world, and 
fills all things in it with particles of its rays. (The soul is the sun, whose light 
of knowledge manifests all things unto us). 


20. It is the Omniscient soul, which is that surpassing sun, whose rays produce 
and show everything to light; and without which as in the absence of the solar 
light, nothing would grow nor be visible in the outer world. (The sun's heat 
and light are the life and shower of the sight of the world). 


21. All living beings who have their souls enlightened by the light of 
philosophy, behold the sphere of the universe to be a blaze of the gemming 
sun of the intellect; and there is not the least tinge of the erroneous 


conceptions of the material world in it. Know this and hold your peace. 


CHAPTER LXXII. 


Answers to the remaining questions. 


Argument: — The Rajah's replies to the five remaining questions of the 
Demon. 
The Rajah replied: — The essences of time, vacuum and of force, are all of 


intellectual origin; it is the pure intellect which is the source of all, as the air is 
the receptacle of odours and dusts. (The mind contains all things). 


2. The supreme soul is as the universal air, which breathes out the particles 
contained in the intellect; as the ethereal air bears the fragrance from the cells 
of flowers. (The soul is called dtmd corresponding with the Greek atmos, air, 
in which sense it is the same with the spirit). (This is the answer to the second 
question). 


3. The great Brahma of the conscious soul, passing through the dreaming 
world, (it being but a dream only, passes from one scene to another without 
changing its form). (The soul is conscious of the operations of the mind, but 
never changes with the mental phenomena). 


4. As the stem (stambha) of plantain tree, is a folding of its pellicles plaited 
over one another, and having its pith hidden in the inside; so everything in the 
world presents its exterior coats to the view, while its substance of Brahma is 
deeply hid in the interior. 


5. The words ens, soul and Brahma by which God is designated, are not 
significant of his nature, who is devoid of all designations like the empty void, 
and indescribable (avyapadesa) in any word in use. (So the sruti: — na tatra 
vak gachchhate, to Him no words can approach; i.e., no words can express 
Him). 


6. Whatever essence is perceived by one as the product of another, is like the 
upper fold or plait of the plantain tree, produced by the inner one; and all such 


coating are but developments of the Divine Intellect lying at the bottom. (As 
the essence of the cloth is the thread, which is the product of cotton produced 
by the pod of the cotton plant, which is produced from the seed grown by the 
moisture of the water, etc., the last of which has the Divine essence for its 
prime cause and source.) 


7. The supreme soul is said to be a minute atom, on account of the subtility 
and imperceptibility of its nature; and it is said also to be the base of 
mountains and all other bodies, owing to the unboundedness of its extent. 
(This is in answer to the fifth question). 


8. The endless being though likened to a minute atom, is yet as large as to 
contain all these worlds as its minutest particles; which are as evident to us as 
the very many aerial scenes appearing in our minds in the state of dreaming. 
(The small grain of the soul contains the universe, as the particle of the mind 
contains the worlds in it). 


9. This being is likened to an atom owing to its imperceptibleness, and is also 
represented as a mountain on account of its filling all space; though it is the 
figure of all formal existence, yet it is without any form or figure of its own. 
(The Sruti says: — “neti-neti, He is neither this nor that.”’) 


10. The three worlds are as the fatty bulb of that pithy intelligence; for know 
thou righteous soul! that it is that Intelligence which dwells in and acts in all 
the worlds. (The Sruti says: — the vacuity of the heart is the seat of 
intelligence, which is the pith of the mdssa or muscular body, and the vacuous 
air is the seat of the soul, whose body is the triple world). 


11. All these worlds are fraught with design of Intelligence, which is quiet in 
its nature, and exhibits endless kinds of beautiful forms of its own, know, O 
young vetdla, that irresistible power, reflect this in thyself and keep thy quiet. 


CHAPTER LXXIIl. 


End of the Story of the Vetala Demon. 


Arguments: — After part of Vetdla's tale and Preamble to the tale of 
Bhagiratha. 


VASISHTHA resumed: — After hearing these words from the mouth of the 
prince, the vetala held his peace and quiet, and remained reflecting on them in 
his mind, which was capable of reasoning. 


2. Being then quite calm in his mind, he reflected on the pure doctrines of the 
prince; and being quite absorbed in his fixed meditation, he forgot at once his 
hunger and thirst. 


3. I have thus related to you, Rama, about the questions of the vetdla, and the 
manner in which these worlds are situated in the atom of the intellect and 
nowhere else. 


4. The world residing in the cell of the atomic intellect, ceases to subsist by 
itself upon right reasoning; so the body of a ghost exists in the fancy of boys 
only, and there remains nothing at last except the everlasting one. 


5. Curb and contract thy thought and heart from everything, and enclose thy 
inward soul in itself; do what thou hast to do at any time, without desiring or 
attempting anything of thy own will, and thus have the peace of thy mind. 


6. Employ your mind, O silent sage! to keep itself as clean as the clear 
firmament, remain in one even and peaceful tenor of thy soul, and view all 
things in one and the same light (of tolerance and catholicism). 


7. A steady and dauntless mind with its promptness in action, is successful in 
most arduous undertakings, as was the prince Bhagiratha with his unswerving 
perseverance. 


8. It was by his perfectly peaceful and contended mind, and by the lasting 


felicity of the equanimity of his soul, that this prince succeeded to bring down 
the heavenly Ganges on earth, and the princes of Sagar's line were enabled to 
perform the arduous task of digging the bay of Bengal. (Where they were 
buried alive by curse of the sage Kapila, for disturbing his silent meditations). 


CHAPTER LXXIV. 


Account and admonition of Bhagiratha. 


Argument: — Conduct and character of Bhagiratha, his private reflexion and 
the Instructions of his tutor. 


Rama said: — Please Sir, to relate unto me the wonderful narrative of prince 
Bhagiratha, how he succeeded to bring down the heavenly stream of Ganga 
on the earth below. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The prince Bhagiratha was a personage of eminent 
virtues, and was distinguished as a crowning mark, (Tilaka), over all countries 
of this terraqueous earth and its seas. 


3. All his suitors received their desired boons, even without their asking; and 
their hearts were as gladdened at the sight of his moon-bright countenance, as 
were it at the sight of a precious and brilliant gem. 


4. His charities were always profusely lavished upon all good people, for their 
maintenance and supportance; while he carefully collected even straws (for 
his revenue), and prized them as they were gems unto him. (i.e., He earned as 
he gave). 


5. He was as bright in his person, as the blazing fire without its smoke, and 
was never weak even when he was tired in the discharge of his duties. He 
drove away poverty from the abodes of men, as the rising sun dispels the 
darkness of night from within their houses. 


6. He spread all around him the effulgence of his valour, as the burning fire 
scatters about its sparks; and he burned as the blazing midday sun, among all 
his hostile bands. 


7. Yet he was gentle and soft in the society of wise men, and cooled their 
hearts with his cooling speech. He shone amidst the learned, as the moon- 
stone glistens under the moon light. 


8. He decorated the world with its triple cord of the sacrificial thread, by 
stretching out the three streams of the Ganges, along the three regions of 
heaven, earth and infernal regions. (Hence Ganga is called the tripathaga or 
running in the trivium in heaven, earth and hell). 


9. He filled the ocean that had been dried up by the sage Agastya, with the 
waters of Ganges; as the bounteous man fills the greedy beggar with his 
unbounded bounty. 


10. This benefactor of mankind, redeemed his ancestral kinsmen from the 
infernal region (in which they were accursed by the indignant sage); and led 
them to the heaven of Brahma, by the passage of the sacred Ganga, (which ran 
through the three worlds of heaven, earth and hell). 


11. He overcame by his resolute perseverance, all his manifold obstacles and 
troubles, in his alternate propitiations of the god Brahma and Siva and the 
sage Jahnu, for their discharging the course of the stream. (The holy Ganga 
was first confined in Brahma's water pot, and then restricted in Hara's crown, 
and lastly locked up under Jahnu's seat, whence the river has the nickname of 
Jahnavit). 


12. Though he was yet in the vigour of his youth, he seemed even then to feel 
the decay of age coming fastly upon him, at his incessant thoughts on the 
miseries of human life. 


13. His excogitation of the vanities of the world, produced in him a 
philosophical apathy to them; and this sang froid or cold heartedness of his in 
the prime of his youth, was like the shooting forth of a tender sprout on a 
sudden in a barren desert. (So great was the early abstractedness from the 
world, prized by the ancient Aryans, that many monarchs are mentioned to 
have become religious recluses in their youth). 


14. The prince thought in his retired moments on the impropriety of his 
worldly conduct, and made the following reflections, on the daily duties of life 
in his silent soliloquy. 


15. I see the return of day and night, in endless succession after one another; 
and I find the repetition of the same acts of giving and taking, (receipts and 
disbursements), and lasting the same enjoyments, to have grown tedious and 
insipid to me. (So it was with Rasselas, the prince of Abyssinia, who felt 
disgusted at the daily rotation of the same pleasures and enjoyments and one 
unvaried course of life). 


16. I think that only to be worth my seeking and doing, which being obtained 
and done, there is nothing else to desire or do in this transitory life of troubles 
and cares. 


17. Is it not shameful for a sensible being, to be employed in the same circuit 
of business every day, and is it not laughable to be doing and undoing the 
same thing, like silly boys day by day? 


18. Being thus vexed with the world, and afraid of the consequence of his 
worldly course, Bhagiratha repaired in silence to the solitary cell of his 
preceptor Tritala, and bespoke to him in the following manner. 


19. Bhagiratha said: — My Lord! I am entirely tired and disgusted with the 
long course of my worldly career, which I find to be all hollow and empty 
within it, and presenting a vast wilderness without. 


20. Tell me lord, how can I get over the miseries of this world, and get freed 
from my fear of death and disease and from the fetters of errors and passions, 
to which I am so fast enchained. (The Hindu mind is most sensible of the 
baneful effects of the primeval curse pronounced on man, and _ the 
accursedness of his posterity and of this earth for his sake; and is always in 
eager search of salvation, redemption or liberation from the same by mukti, 
moksha, and paritrdna). 


21. Tritala replied: — It is to be effected by means of the continued evenness 
of one's disposition, (obtained by his quadruple practice of devotion sddhana); 
the uninterrupted joyousness of his soul (arising from its communion with the 
Holy spirit); by his knowledge of the knowable true one, and by his self- 
sufficiency in everything (tending to his perfection). (The quadruple devotion 
consists in one's attendance to holy lectures and in his understanding, 
reflection and practice of the same lessons, called the sédhana chatushtaya). 


22. By these means, the man is released from misery, his worldly bonds are 
relaxed, his doubts are dissipated, and all his actions tend to his well-being in 
both worlds. 


23. That which is called the knowable, is the pure soul of the nature of 
intelligence; it is always present in everything in all places and is eternal, — 
having neither its rising or setting; (7.e., its beginning or end). The animating 
soul of the world, is identified with the supreme and universal soul of God. 
The vedanta knows no duality of the animal and animating souls. 


24. Bhagiratha rejoined: — I know, O great sage! the pure intelligent soul to 


be perfectly calm and tranquil, undecaying and devoid of all attributes and 
qualities; and neither the embodied spirit, nor the animal soul, nor the 
indwelling principle of material bodies. 


25. I cannot understand Sir, how I can be that intelligence, when I am so full 
of errors, or if I be the self-same soul, why is it not so manifest in me as the 
pure divine soul itself. 


26. Tritala replied: — It is by means of knowledge only, that the mind can 
know the truly knowable one in the sphere of one's own intellect, and then the 
animal soul finding itself as the all-pervading spirit, is released from future 
birth and transmigration. (The belief of the difference of one's soul from the 
eternal one, is the cause of his regeneration). 


27. It is our unattachment to earthly relations, and unaccompaniment of our 
wives, children and other domestic concerns, together with the equanimity of 
our minds, in whatsoever is either advantageous or disadvantageous to us, that 
serve to widen the sphere of our souls and cause their universality. 


28. It is also the union of our souls with the supreme spirit, and our continual 
communion with God; as also our seclusion from society and remaining in 
retirement that widen the scope of our souls. 


29. It is the continued knowledge of spirituality, and insight into the sense of 
the unity and identity of God, which are said to constitute our true knowledge; 
all besides is mere ignorance and false knowledge. 


30. It is the abatement of our love and hatred, that is the only remedy for our 
malady of worldliness; and it is the extinction of our egoistic feelings, that 
leads to the knowledge of truth. 


31. Bhagiratha responded: — Tell me, O reverend Sir, how is it possible for 
anybody to get rid of his egoism, which is deep rooted in our constitution, and 
has grown as big with our bodies as lofty trees on mountain tops. 


32. Tritala replied: — All egoistic feelings subside of themselves under the 
abandonment of worldly desires, which is to be done by the very great efforts 
of fortitude, in our exercise of the virtues of self-abnegation and self- 
command, and by the expansion of our souls to universal benevolence. 


33. We are so long subjected to the reign of our egoism, as we have not the 
courage to break down the painful prison house of shame at our poverty, and 
the fear at our exposure to the indignity of others. (Poverty is shameful to 
worldly people, but graceful to holy men). 


34. If you can therefore, renounce all your worldly possessions and remain 
unmoved in your mind, (although in actual possession of them); you may then 
get rid of your egoism, and attain to the state of supreme bliss. 


35. Bereft of all titular honors, and freed from the fear of falling into poverty 
(and its consequent indignity); being devoid of every endeavour of rising, and 
remaining as poor and powerless among invidious enemies; and rather living 
in contemptible beggary among them, without the egoistic pride of mind and 
vanity of the body; if you can thus remain in utter destitution of all, you are 
then greater than the greatest. 


CHAPTER LXXV. 


Supineness of Bhagiratha. 


Argument: — Great bounty of Bhagiratha and his indigence in consequence; 
and his recourse to asceticism with his tutor. 


VASISHTHA related: — Having heard these monitions from the mouth of his 
religious monitor, he determined in his mind what he was about to do, and set 
about the execution of his purpose. 


2. He passed a few days in devising his project, and then commenced his 
agnishtoma sacrifice to the sacred fire, for consecrating his all to it, for the 
sake of obtaining his sole object (of Nirvana or being extinct in the essence of 
God). 


3. He gave away his kine and lands, his horses and jewels, and his monies 
without number, to the twice born classes of men and his relatives, without 
distinction of their merit or demerit. 


4. During three days he gave away profusely all what he had, till at last he had 
nothing for himself, except his life and flesh and bones. 


5. When his exhaustless treasures were all exhausted, he gave up his great 
realm like a straw to his neighbouring enemies, to the great mortification of 
his subjects and citizens, (paurakas). 


6. As the enemy overran his territories and kingdom, and seized his royal 
palace and properties; he girt himself in his undergarb, and went away beyond 
the limits of his kingdom. 


7. He wandered afar through distant villages and desert lands, till at last he 
settled himself where he was quite unknown to all, and nobody knew his 
person or face or his name and title. 


8. Remaining there retired for some time, he became quite composed and 


blunt to all feelings from within and without himself; and he obtained his rest 
and repose in the serene tranquillity of his soul. 


9. He then roved about different countries and went to distant islands (to see 
the various manners of men); till at last he turned unawares to his natal land 
and city, which was in the grasp of his enemies. 


10. There while he was wandering from door to door, as he was led about by 
the current of time; he was observed by the citizens and ministers to be 
begging their alms. 


11. All the citizens and ministers recognized their ex-king Bhagiratha, whom 
they honoured with their due homage, and whom they were very sorry to 
behold in that miserable plight. 


12. His enemy, (the reigning prince), came out to meet him, and implored him 
to receive back his neglected estate and self-abandoned kingdom; but he 
slighted all their offers as trifling straws, except taking his slender repast at 
their hands. 


13. He passed a few days there and then bent his course to another way, when 
the people loudly lamented at his sad condition saying: — “Ah! what has 
become of the unfortunate Bhagiratha.” 


14. Then the prince walked about with the calmness of his soul, and with his 
contended mind and placid countenance; and he amused himself with his 
wandering habits and thoughts, until he came to meet his tutor, Tritala, on the 
way. 


15. They welcomed one another, and then joining together, they both began to 
wander about the localities of men, and to pass over hills and deserts in their 
holy peregrinations. 


16. Once on a time as both the dispassionate pupil and his preceptor, were 
sitting together in the cool calmness of their dispositions, their conversations 
turned on the interesting subject of human life. 


17. What good is there in our bearing the frail body, and what do we lose by 
our loss of it. (Since neither reap nor lose any real advantage, either by our 
having or losing of it at any time, yet we should bear with it as it is, in the 
discharge of the duties that have come down unto us by the custom of the 
country). 


18. They remained quiet with this conclusion, and passed their time in passing 


from one forest to another; without feeling any joy above their inward bliss, or 
knowing any sorrow or the intermediate state of joy and grief, (which is the 
general lot of humanity), and the rotatory course of pleasure and pain in this 
world. 


19. They spurned all riches and properties, the possession of horses and cattle, 
and even the eight kinds of supernatural powers, (Siddhis), as rotten straws 
before the contentedness of their minds. 


20. This body which is the result of our past acts, must be borne with 
fortitude, whether we wish it or not, as long as it lasts; with his continued 
conviction in the discharge of their duties (of asceticism). 


21. They, like silent sages, hailed with complaisance, whatever of good or 
evil, or desirable or undesirable befell to their lot, as the unavoidable results 
of their prior deeds; and had their repose in the heavenly felicity, to which 
they had assimilated themselves. (So the sruti: — The Divine are one with 
Divine felicity). 


CHAPTER LXXVI 


The descent of Ganga on earth. 


Argument: — Reinstatement of Bhagiratha in his Kingdom, and his bringing 
down the heavenly stream by means of his austere Devotion. 


VASISHTHA continued: — It came to pass at one time, as Bhagiratha was 
passing through a large metropolis, he beheld the ruler of that province, who 
was childless, to be snatched away by the hand of death, as a shark seizes a 
fish for its prey. 


2. The people being afraid of anarchy and lawlessness for want of a ruler, 
were in search of a proper person joined with noble endowments and signs to 
be made their future king. 


3. They met with the silent and patient prince in the act of begging alms, and 
knowing him as the king Bhagiratha himself, they took him with them 
escorted by their own regiments, to install him on the throne as their king. 


4. Bhagiratha instantly mounted on an elephant, and was led by a large body 
of troops, who assembled about him as thickly, as the drops of rain water fall 
into and fill a lake. 


5. The people then shouted aloud, “Here is Bhagiratha our lord; may he be 
victorious forever,” and the noise thereof reached to the furthest mountains, 
and filled their hollow caves (which reached to the sound). 


6. Then as Bhagiratha remained to reign over that realm, the subjects of his 
own and former kingdom came reverently to him, and thus prayed unto their 
king saying: — 


7. The people said: — Great king! the person who thou didst appoint to rule 
over us, is lately devoured by death as a little fish by a large one. 


8. Therefore, deign to rule over thy realm, nor refuse to accept an offer which 


comes unasked to thee. (So it is said: — It is not right to slight even a mite, 
that comes of itself to anybody, but it is to be deemed as a God-sent blessing). 


9. Vasishtha said: — The king being so besought accepted their prayer, and 
thus became the sole manager of the earth, bounded by the seven seas on all 
sides. 


10. He continued to discharge the duties of royalty without the least dismay or 
disquietude, though he was quite calm and serene in his mind, quiet in his 
speech, and devoid of passions and envy or selfishness. 


11. He then thought of the redemption of his ancestors, who excavated the 
coast of the sea, (and made this bay of Bengal); and were burned alive 
underneath the ground (by the curse of sage Kapila); by laving their bones and 
dead bodies with the waves of Ganges, which he heard, had the merit of purity 
and saving all souls and bodies. (The ancestors of Bhagiratha were the 
thousand sons of sagara, who were masters of Saugar islands in the bay of 
Bengal). 


12. The heavenly stream of the Ganges did not till then run over the land, it 
was Bhagiratha that brought it down, and first washed his ancestral remains 
with its holy waters. The stream was thence forth known by his name as 
Bhagiratha. 


13. The king Bhagiratha was thenceforward resolved, to bring down the holy 
Ganga of heaven to the nether world. (The triple Ganges is called the 
Tripathaga or fluvium trivium or running in three directions). 


14. The pious prince then resigned his kingdom to the charge of his ministers, 
and went to the solitary forest with the resolution of making his austere 
devotion, for the success of his undertaking. 


15. He remained there for many years and under many rains, and worshipped 
the Gods Brahma and Siva and the sage Jahnu by turns, until he succeeded to 
bring down the holy stream on the earth below. (It is said that Ganga was 
pent-up at first in the water pot of Brahma, and then in the crown of Siva, and 
lastly, under the thighs of Jahnu, all which are allegorical of the fall of the 
stream from the cascade of Gangotri in Haridwar). 


16. It was then that the crystal wave of the Ganges, gushed out of the basin of 
Brahma the lord of the world and rushed into the moony crest of Hara; and 
falling on earth below it took a triple course, like the meritorious acts of great 
men (which were lauded in all three worlds of their past, present and future 


lives). 


17. It was thus the trivium river of Ganga, came to flow over this earth, as the 
channel to bear the glory of Bhagiratha to distant lands. Behold her running 
fast with her upheaving waves, and smiling all along with her foaming froths; 
she sprinkles purity all along with the drizzling drops of her breakers, and 
scatters plenty over the land as the reward of the best deserts of men. 


CHAPTER LXXVII. 


Narrative of Chuidala and Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — Story of the Princess Chiiddla and her marriage with 
Sikhidhwaja and their youthful sports. 


VASISHTHA related: — Rama! do you keep your view fixed to one object, 
as it was kept in the mind of Bhagiratha; and do you pursue your calling with 
a calm and quiet understanding, as it was done by that steady minded prince 
in the accomplishment of his purpose! (For he that runs many ways, stands in 
the middle and gets to the end of none). 


2. Give up your thoughts of this and that, (shilly-shallying), and confine the 
flying bird of your mind within your bosom, and remain in full possession of 
yourself after the example of the resolute prince Sikhidhwaja of old. 


3. Rama asked: — Who was this Sikhidhwaja, Sir, and how did he maintain 
the firmness of his purpose? Please explain this fully to me for the edification 
of my understanding. 


4. Vasishtha replied: — It was in a former Dwdpara age, that there lived a 
loving pair of consorts who are again to be born in a future period, in the same 
manner and at the same place. 


5. Rama rejoined: — Tell me, O great preacher! how the past could be the 
same as at present, and how can these again be alike in future also. (Since 
there can be no cause of the likeness of past ages and their productions with 
those of the present or future. It is reasonable to believe the recurrence of such 
other things, but not of the same and very things as of yore). 


6. Vasishtha replied: — Such is the irreversible law of destiny and the 
irreversible course of nature, that the creation of the world must continue in 
the same manner by the invariable will of the creative Brahma and others. 
(i.e., The repeated creation of worlds must go on in the same rotation by the 


inevitable will, (Satya Sankalpa), of the creative power; wherefore bygone 
things are to return and be re-born over and over again). 


7. As those which had been plentiful before come to be as plenteous again, so 
the past appears at present and in future also. Again, many things come to 
being that had not been before, and so many others become extinct in course 
of time; (e.g., as past crops return again and again and vegetables grow where 
there were none, and as a lopped off branch grows no more). 


8. Some reappear in their former forms and some in their resemblance also; 
others are changed in their forms, and many more disappear altogether. (see, 
for example, the different shapes of the waves of the ocean). 


9. These and many other things are seen in the course of the world; and 
therefore, the character of the subject of the present narrative will be found to 
bear exact resemblance to that of the bygone prince of the same name. 


10. Hear me tell you also, that there is yet to be born such another prince, as 
valiant as the one that had been in the former Dwdpara age of the past 
seventh manvantara period. 


11. It will be after the four Yugas of the fourth creation, past and gone, that he 
will be born again of the Kuru family in the vicinity of the Vindhyan 
mountains in the Jambudwipa continent. (This extravagant sloka is omitted in 
other editions of this work). 


12. There lived a prince by name of Sikhidhwaja in the country of Malava, 
who was handsome in his person, and endowed with firmness and 
magnanimity in his nature, and the virtues of patience and self-control in his 
character. 


13. He was brave but silent, and even inclined to good acts with all his great 
virtues; he was engaged in the performance of the religious sacrifices, as also 
in defeating bowyers in archery. 


14. He did many acts (of public endowments), and supported the poor people 
of the land; he was of a graceful appearance and complacent in his 
countenance, and loved all men with his great learning in the Sdstras. 


15. He was handsome, quiet and fortunate, and equally as valiant as he was 
virtuous. He was a preacher of morality and bestower of all benefits to his 
suitors. 


16. He enjoyed all luxuries in the company of good people, and listened to the 


lessons of the Srutis. He knew all knowledge without any boast on his part, 
and he hated to touch women as straws. 


17. His father departed to the next world, leaving him a lad of sixteen years in 
age; and yet he was able at that tender age to govern his realm, by defeating 
his adversaries on all sides. 


18. He conquered all other provinces of the country by means of the resources 
of his empire; and he remained free from all apprehension by ruling his 
subjects with justice and keeping them in peace. 


19. He brightened all sides by his intelligence and the wisdom of his 
ministers, till in the course of years, he came to his youth, as in the gaudy 
spring of the year. 


20. It was the vernal season, and he beheld the blooming flowers glistening 
brightly under the bright moon-beams; and he saw the budding blossoms, 
hanging down the arbours in the inner apartments. 


21. The door ways of the bowers were overhung with twining branches, 
decorated with florets scattering their fragrant dust like the hoary powder of 
camphor; and the rows of the guluncha flowers wafted their odours all around. 


22. There was the loud hum of bees, buzzing with their mates upon the 
flowery bushes; and the gentle zephyrs were wafting the sweet scent amidst 
the cooling showers of moon-beams. 


23. He saw the banks decorated with the kadali shrubbery glistening with 
their gemming blossoms under the sable shade of kadali (plantain) leaves; 
which excited his yearning after the dear one that was seated in his heart. 


24. Giddy with the intoxication of the honey draughts of fragrant flowers, his 
mind was fixed on his beloved object, and did not depart from it, as the spring 
is unwilling to quit the flowery garden. (So says Hapiz, — no pleasant sight is 
gladsome to the mind without the face of the fair possessor of the heart. See 
Sir Wm. Jones' version of it). 


25. When shall I in this swinging cradles of my pleasure garden, and when 
will I in my sports in this lake of lotuses, play with my love-smitten maid with 
her budding breasts resembling the two unblown blossoms of golden lotuses? 


26. When shall I embrace my beloved one to my bosom on my bed daubed 
with the dust of powdered frankincense, and when shall we on cradles of lotus 
stalks, like a pair of bees sucking the honey from flower cups? 


27. When shall I see that maiden lying relaxed in my arms, with her slender 
body resembling a tender stalk, and as fair as a string of milk-white kunda 
flowers, or as a plant formed of moon-beams? 


28. When will that moon-like beauty be inflamed with her love to me? With 
these and the like thoughts and ravings he roved about the garden looking at 
the variety of flowers. 


29. He then went on rambling in the flowery groves and skirts of forests, and 
thence strayed onward from one forest to another, and by the side of purling 
lakes blooming with the full-blown lotuses. (The lotus is the emblem of 
beauty in the east, as the rose is in the west). 


30. He entered in the alcoves formed by the twining creepers, and walked 
over the avenues of many garden grounds and forest lands, seeing and hearing 
the descriptions of woodland sceneries (from his associates). 


31. He was distracted in his mind, and took much delight in hearing 
discourses on erotic subjects, and the bright form of his necklaced and painted 
beloved was the sole idol in his breast. 


32. He adored the maiden in his heart, with her breasts resembling two golden 
pots on her person; and this ween was soon found by the sagacious ministers 
of the state. 


33. As it is the business of ministership to dive into matters by their signs and 
prognosis, so these officers met together to deliberate on his marriage. 


34. They proposed the youthful daughter of the king of Syrastra (Surat) for his 
marriage, and thought her as a proper match for him, on account of her 
coming to the full age of puberty. (/it., to the prime of her youth). 


35. The prince was married to her who was a worthy image (or like co- 
partner) of himself; and this fair princess was known by the name of Chiddld 
all over the land. 


36. She was as joyous in having him, as the new blown lotus at the rising sun; 
and he made the black-eyed maid to bloom, as the moon opens the bud of the 
blue lotus. (Lotuses are known as helio-solenus, the white ones opening at sun 
rise and the blue kind blooming with the rising moon). 


37. He delighted her with his love, as gives the white lotus to bloom; and they 
both inflamed their mutual passions by their abiding in the heart of one 
another. 


38. She flourished with her youthful wiles and dalliance, like a new grown 
creeper blooming with its flowers, and he was happy, and careless in her 
company by leaving the state affairs to the management of the ministers. (The 
words hav Chavavilasa, implying amorous dalliance, are all comprised in the 
couplet, “quips and cranks and wanton wiles, nods and becks and wreathed 
smiles.” — Pope). 


39. He disported in the company of his lady love, as the swan sports over a 
bed of lotuses in a large lake; and indulged his frolics in his swinging cradles 
and pleasure ponds in the inner apartments. 


40. They reveled in the gardens and groves, and in the bowers of creepers and 
flowering plants; and amused themselves in the woods and in walks under the 
sandalwood and a gulancha shades. 


41. They sported by the rows of manddra trees, and beside the lines of 
plantain and kadali plants; and regaled themselves wandering in the harem, 
and by the sides of the woods and lakes in the skirts of the town. 


42. He roved afar in distant forests and deserts, and in jungles of Jam and Jam 
bira trees; they passed by paths bordered by Jati or jasmine plants, and, in 
short they took delight in everything in the company of one another. 


43. The mutual attachment to one another was as delightsome to the people as 
the union of the raining sky with the cultivated ground; both tending to the 
welfare of mankind by the productiveness of the general weal. (This far- 
fetched simile and the mazy construction of the passage is incapable of a 
literal version). 


44. They were both skilled in the arts of love and music, and were so united 
together by their mutual attachment, that the one was a counterpart of the 
other. 


45. Being seated in each others heart, they were as two bodies with one soul; 
so that the learning of the Sdstras of the one, and the skill in painting and fine 
arts of the other, were orally communicated to and learnt by one another. 


46. She from her childhood was trained in every branch of learning, and he 
learned the arts of dancing and playing on musical instruments, from the oral 
instructions of Chidadld. 


47. They learned and became learned in the respective arts and parts of one 
another; as the sun and moon being set in conjunction, (amavasyd), impart to 
and partake of the qualities of each other. 


48. Being mutually situated in the heart of one another, they became the one 
and the same person and both being in the same inclination and pursuit, were 
the more endeared to one another (as a river running to the milky ocean is 
assimilated to the ocean of milk, so all souls mixing with the supreme soul 
form one universal and only soul). 


49. They were joined in one person, as the androgyne body of Uma and Siva 
on earth; and were united in one soul, as the different fragrances of flowers are 
mixed up with the common air. Their clearness of understanding and learning 
of the Sdstras led them both in the one and same way. 


50. They were born on earth to perform their parts, like the God Vishnu and 
his consort Lakshmi; they were equally frank and sweet by their mutual 
affection, and were as informed as communicative of their learning to others. 


51. They followed the course of the laws and customs, and attended to the 
affairs of the people; they delighted in the arts and sciences, and enjoyed their 
sweet pleasures also. They appeared as the two moons, shining with their 
beams. 


52. They tasted all their sweet enjoyments of life, in the quiet and solitary 
recesses of their private apartments, as a couple of giddy swans sporting 
merrily in the lake of the azure sky. 


CHAPTER LXXVIII. 


Beatification of Chudala. 


Argument: — The distaste and indifference of the happy pair to worldly 
enjoyments. 


VASISHTHA continued: — In this manner did this happy pair, revel for 
many years in the pleasures of their youth, and tasted with greater zest, every 
new delight that came on their way day by day. 


2. Years repeated their reiterated revolutions over their protracted revelries till 
by and by their youth began to give way to the decay of age; as the broken 
pitcher gives way to its waters out (or rather as the leaky vessel gives way to 
the waters in). 


3. They then thought that their bodies are as frail as the breakers on the sea; 
and as liable to fall as the ripened fruits of trees, and that death is not to be 
averted by anybody. 


4. As the arrowy snows rend the lotus leaves, so is our old age ready to batter 
and shatter our frames; and the cup of our life is drizzling away day by day, as 
the water held in the palm falls away by sliding drops. 


5. While our avarice is increasing on our hand, like the gourd plant in the 
rainy weather, so doth our youth glide away as soon as the torrent falls from 
the mountain cliffs to the ground. 


6. Our life is as false as a magic play, and the body a heap of rotting things; 
our pleasures are few and painful, and as fleeting as the flying arrows from the 
archers bow. 


7. Afflictions pounce upon our hearts, as vultures and kites dart upon fish and 
flesh; and these our bodies are as momentary as the bursting bubbles of 
dropping rains (or of rain drops). 


8. All reasoning and practice are as unsound, as the unsolid stem of the 
plantain tree; and our youth is as evanescent, as a fugacious woman that is in 
love with many men. 


9. The taste of youthful pleasure, is soon succeeded by a distaste to it in old 
age; just as the vernal freshness of plants, gives room to the dryness of 
autumn; where then is that permanent pleasure and lasting good in this world; 
which never grows stale, and is ever sweet and lovely. 


10. Therefore, should we seek that thing, which will support us in all 
conditions of life, and which will be a remedy of all the maladies, (evils), 
which circumvent us in this world. 


11. Being thus determined, they were both employed in the investigation of 
spiritual philosophy; because they thought their knowledge of the soul to be 
the only healing balm of the cholic pain of worldliness. (Because spiritual 
knowledge extricates the soul from its earthly bondage). 


12. Thus resolved, they were both devoted to their spiritual culture, and 
employed their head and heart, their lives and souls in the inquiry, and placed 
all their hope and trust in the same. 


13. They remained long in the study and mutual communication of their 
spiritual knowledge; and continued to meditate upon and worship the soul of 
souls in their own souls. 


14. They both rejoiced in their investigations into Divine knowledge, and she 
took a great delight in attending incessantly, to the admonitions and sermons 
of the Divine prelates. 


15. Having heard the words of salvation, from the mouths of the spiritual 
doctors, and from their exposition of the Sdstras; she continued thus to reflect 
about the soul by day and night. (Blessed is the man, that meditates on the 
laws of God by day and night. — Psalm.) 


16. Whether when engaged in action or not, I see naught but the one soul in 
my enlightened and clear understanding; what then, am I that very self, and is 
it my own self? (The Yogi, when enrapt in holy light, loses the sense of his 
own personality. So lost in Divine light, the saints themselves forget). 


17. Whence comes this error of my personality, why does it grow up and 
where does it subsist (in the body or in the mind)? It cannot consist in the 
gross body which knows not itself and is ignorant of everything. Surely, I am 
not this body, and my egoism lies beyond my corporeality. 


18. The error then rises in the mind and grows from boyhood to old age, to 
think one's self as lean or fat as if he were the very body. Again, it is usual to 
say, I act, I see, efc., as if the personality of one consists in his action; but the 
acts of the bodily organs, being related with the body, are as insensible and 
impersonal as the dull body itself. 


19. The part is not different from the whole, nor is the product of the one 
otherwise than that of the others. (As the branch and the tree are the same 
thing, and the fruit of the one the same as that of the other. Hence the actions 
of both the outward and inward organs of the body, are as passive and 
impersonal as the body itself). 


20. The mind moves the body as the bat drives the ball, and therefore, it must 
be dull matter also, being apart of the material body, and differing from it in 
its power of volition only. (The mind is called the antah-karana or an inward 
organ of the material body, and also material in its nature). 


21. The determination of the mind impels the organs to their several actions, 
as the sling sends the pebble in any direction; and this firmness of resolution is 
no doubt a property of matter. (Like the solidity of current). 


22. The egoism which leads the body forward in its action, is like the channel 
that carries the current of a stream in its onward course. This egoism also has 
no essence of its own, and is therefore, as inert and inactive as a dead body. 
(The ego [Sanskrit: aham] is subjective and really existent in Western 
philosophy). But egoism or egotism [Sanskrit: ahamkdra] is the false 
conception of the mind as the true ego. 


23. The living principle, (Jiva or zoa), is a false idea, as the phantom of a 
ghost; the living soul is one principle of intelligence and resides in the form of 
air in the heart. (That life is a produce of organism, acted by external physical 
stimuli). 


24. The life or living principle lives by another inner power, which is finer and 
more subtle than itself, and it is by means of this internal witness, (the soul), 
that all things are known to us, and not by means of this gross animal life. 
(Because there is a brute life, and a vegetable life also, which are as insensible 
as dull matter. Hence there is a distinct principle to direct vitality to all vital 
functions). 


25. The living soul lives in its form of vitality, by the primordial power of the 
intellect, the vital soul which is misunderstood as an intelligent principle, 
subsists by means of this intellectual power. (Life is the tension of the power, 


imparted by the intellect). 


26. The living soul carries with it the power, which is infused in it by the 
intellect; as the wind wafts in its course the fragrance of flowers, and the 
channel carries the current of the stream to a great distance. (Hence life also is 
an organism and no independent active power by itself). 


27. The heart which is the body or seat of the intellect, is nothing essential by 
itself; it is called chitta or centre for concentrating chayana of the powers of 
the intellect, and also the hrid or heart, for its bearing harana of these powers 
to the other parts of the body; and therefore, it is a dull material substance. 
(The heart is the receiver and distributor of force to the members of the body, 
and therefore, a mere organism of itself). 


28. All these and the living soul also, and anything that appears real or unreal, 
disappear in the meditation of the intellect, and are lost in it as the fire when it 
is immerged in water. (So the appearances at a ghata or pot and that of a pata 
or cloth, are lost in their substances of the clay and thread). 


29. It is our intelligence Chaitanya alone, that awakens us to the knowledge of 
the unreality and inanity of gross material bodies. With such reflections as 
these, Chuddld thought only how to gain a knowledge of the all-enlightening 
Intellect. 


30. Long did she cogitate and ponder in this manner in herself; till at last she 
came to know what she sought and then exclaimed, “O! I have after long 
known the imperishable one, that is only to be known.” (The knowledge of all 
things else, is as false as they are false in themselves). 


31. No one is disappointed in knowing the knowable, and what is worth 
knowing; and this is the knowledge of the intellectual soul and our 
contemplation of it. All other knowledge of the mind, understanding and the 
senses and all other things, are but leading steps to that ultimate end. (The end 
of learning is to know God. — Milton, or: — nosce te ipsum; know thyself 
which is of the supreme self or soul). 


32. All things besides are mere nullities, as a second moon in the sky; there is 
only one Intellect in existence, and this is called the great entity or the ens 
entium or the sum-total of all existence. 


33. The one purely immaculate and holy, without an equal or personality of 
the form of pure intelligence, the sole existence and felicity and everlasting 
without decay. 


34. This intellectual power is ever pure and bright, always on the zenith 
without its rise or fall, and is known among mankind under the appellations of 
Brahma, — supreme soul, and other attributes. (Because beyond conception 
can have no designation beside what is attributed to Him). 


35. The triple appellations of the Intellect, Intelligence, and Intelligible, are 
not exactly definitive of His nature; because He is the cause of these faculties, 
and witness of the functions of Intellections. 


36. This unthinkable intellect which is in me, is the exact and undecaying 
ectype of the supreme intellect; and evolves itself in the different forms of the 
mind, and the senses of perception. 


37. The intellect involves in itself the various forms of things in the world, as 
the sea rolls and unrolls the waves in its bosom. (The intellect either means 
the Divine intellect, or it is the subjective view of the intellect, as evolving the 
objective world from itself). 


38. This world is verily the semblance of that great intellect, which is like the 
pure crystal stone and is manifest in this form. (The world reflects the image 
of the intellect, which again reflects the image of the mundane world, the one 
in the form of its visible appearance, murta; and the other, in its invisible 
form, amiurta. — Gloss). 


39. The same power is manifest in the form of the world, which has no 
separate existence, except in the mind of the ignorant; because it is impossible 
for any other thing to exist except the self-existing one. 


40. As it is the gold which represents the various forms of jewels, so the 
intellect represents everything in the world as it sees in itself. (The Divine is 
the source and store house of all figures and forms). 


41. As it is the thought of fluidity in the mind, that causes us to perceive the 
wave in the water, whether it really exists or not (as in our dream or magic); 
so is the thought in the Divine mind, which shows the picture of the world, 
whether it is in being or in not esse. 


42. And as the divine soul appears as the wave of the sea, from its thought of 
fluidity; so am I the same intellect without any personality of myself. 
(Because the one impersonal soul pervades everywhere). 


43. This soul has neither its birth nor death, nor has it a good or bad future 
state, (Heaven or Hell); it has no destruction at any time; because it is of the 
form of the various intellect, which is indestructible in its nature. 


44. It is not to be broken or burnt; (i.e., though everywhere, yet it is an entire 
whole, and though full of light; yet it is not inflammable); and it is the 
unclouded luminary of the intellect. By meditating on the soul in this manner, 
I am quite at rest and peace. 


45. I live free from error and rest as calm as the untroubled ocean; and 
meditate on the invisible one, who is quite clear to me, as the unborn, 
undecaying and infinite soul of all. 


46. It is the vacuous soul, unrestricted by time or place, immaculate by any 
figure or form, eternal and transcending our thought and knowledge. It is the 
infinite void, and all attempts to grasp it, are as vain as to grasp the empty air 
in the hand. 


47. This soul pervades equally over all the Sura as well as the Asura races of 
the earth; but is none of those artificial forms, in which the people represent it 
in their images of clay, likening the dolls of children. 


48. The essences of both the viewer and the view, (i.e., of both the subjective 
and the objective), reside at once in the unity of the intellect; though men are 
apt to make the distinctions of unity and duality, and of the ego and non ego 
through their error only. 


49. But what error or delusion is there, and how, when and whence can it 
overtake me, when I have attained my truly spiritual and immortal form, and 
seated in my easy and quiet state. (This is calmness of the soul attending the 
thought of one's immortality begun in this life). 


50. Tam absorbed and extinct in eternity, and all my cares are extinct with my 
own extinction in it. My soul is in its entranced state between sensibility and 
insensibility, and feels what is reflected upon it. (i.e., the inspiration which is 
communicated to the ravished soul). 


51. The soul settled in the great intellect of God, and shining with the light of 
the supreme soul, as the sky is illumed by the luminary of the day. There is no 
thought of this or that or even of one's self or that of any other being or not 
being; all is calm and quiet and having no object in view, except the one 
transcendent spirit. 


52. With these excogitations, she remained as calm and quiet as a white 
cloudy spot in the autumnal sky; her soul was awake to the inspiration of 
Divine truth, but her mind was cold to the feelings of love and fear, of pride 
and pleasure, and quite insusceptible of delusion. 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 


Princess coming to the sight of the supreme soul. 


Argument: — The prince's wonder of the sight of the princess, and her 
relation of her Abstract meditation. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Thus did the princess live day by day in the 
rapture of her soul; and with her views concentrated within herself, she lived 
as in her own and proper element. 


2. She had no passion nor affection, nor any discord nor desire in her heart; 
she neither coveted nor hated anything, and was indifferent to all; but 
persistent in her course, and vigilant in her pursuit (after her self-perfection). 


3. She had got over the wide gulf of the world, and freed herself from the 
entangling snare of doubts (and the horns of dilemmas); she had gained the 
great good of knowing the supreme soul, which filled her inward soul. 


4. She found her rest in God after her weariness of the world, and in her state 
of perfect bliss and felicity; and her name sounded in the lips of all men, as 
the model of incomparable perfection. 


5. Thus this lady, — the princess Chuddld, became in a short time, acquainted 
with the true God. (/it., knowing the knowable one), by the earnestness of her 
inquiry. 


6. The errors of the world subside in the same manner, under the knowledge 
of truth, as they rise in the human mind by its addictedness to worldliness. 
(The world is an abode of errors and illusion. — Persian Proverb). 


7. After she had found her repose in that state of perfect blessedness, wherein 
the sight of all things is lost in its dazzling blaze, she appeared as bright as a 
fragment of autumnal cloud, that is ever steady in its place. 


8. Apart from and irrelated with all, she continued in the meditation of the 


spirit in her own spirit, as the aged bull remained careless on the mountain 
top, where he happened to find a verdant meadow for his pasture. 


9. By her constant habit of loneliness, and the elevation of her soul in her 
solitude, she became as fresh as the new grown plant, with her blooming face 
shining as the new blown flower. 


10. It happened to pass at one time, that the prince Sikhidhwaja came in sight 
of the unblamable beauty, and being struck with wonder at seeing her unusual 
gracefulness of her person, he addressed her saying: — 


11. How is it, my dear one, that you are again your youthful bloom like the 
flowery plant of the vernal season; you appear more brilliant than the 
lightsome world under the bright beams of full moon. 


12. You shine more brightly, my beloved, than one drinking the ambrosia or 
elixir of life, and as one obtaining the object of her desire, and filled with 
perfect delight in herself. 


13. You seem quite satisfied and lovely with your graceful person, and surpass 
the bright moon in the beauty of thy body; methinks you are approaching to 
me as when the Goddess of love or Laxmi draws near her favourite Kama. 


14. I see thy mind disdaining all enjoyments and is parsimonious of its 
pleasures; it is tranquil and cool, and elated with spiritual ardour, and is as 
deep as it is tranquil in its nature. 


15. I see thy mind spurning the three worlds as if they were straws before it, 
and tasted all their sweets to its full satisfaction; it is above the endless broils 
of the world, and is quite charming in itself. 


16. O fortunate princess, there are no such gratifications in the enjoyment of 
earthly possessions, which may equal the spiritual joy of thy tranquil mind. 
The one is as dry as the dryness of the sandy desert, compared with the 
refreshing water of the milky ocean. 


17. Being born with thy tender limbs resembling the tendrils of young 
plantains, and the soft shoots of lotus stalks, thou seemest now to have grown 
strong and stout in thy frame of body and mind. (It is the spirit and spiritual 
power that strengthens both the body and mind). 


18. With the same features and figure of thy body as before, thou hast became 
as another being, like a plant growing up to a tree, under the influence of the 
revolving seasons. 


19. Tell me, whether thou hast drunk the ambrosial draught of the Gods, or 
obtained thy sovereignty over an empire; or whether thou hast gained thy 
immorality by drinking the elixir of life, or by means of thy practice of Yoga 
meditation in either of its forms of Hatha or Rdja Yoga. 


20. Hast thou got a Kingdom or found out the philosopher's stone (which 
converts everything to gold); hast thou gained aught that is more precious than 
the three worlds, or that thou hast obtained, O my blue-eyed lady! something 
that is not attainable to mankind. 


21. Chuidala responded: — I have not lost my former form, nor am I changed 
to a new one to come before thee at present; but am as ever thy fortunate lady 
and wife. (There is a far-fetched meaning of this passage given in the gloss). 


22.1 have forsaken all that is untrue and unreal, and have laid hold of what is 
true and real; and it is thus that I remain thy fortunate consort as ever before. 


23. I have come to know whatever is something, as also all that which is 
nothing at all; and how all these nothings come to appearance, and ultimately 
disappear into nothing, and it is thus that I remain thy fortunate lady as ever. 


24. I am as content with my enjoyments as I am without them, as also with 
those that are long past and gone away; I am never delighted nor irritated at 
anything whether good or bad, but preserve my equanimity at all events and 
thus I remain forever thy fortunate consort. 


25. I delight only in one vacuous entity, that has taken possession of my heart, 
and I take no pleasure in the royal gardens and sports, and thence I am thy 
fortunate princess as ever. 


26. I rely constantly in myself (or soul) only, whether when sitting on my seat 
or walking about in the royal gardens or palaces; I am not fond of enjoyments 
nor ashamed at their want, and in this manner, I continue thy fortunate wife as 
ever. 


27. I think myself as the sovereign of the world, and having no form of my 
own; thus I am delighted in myself, and appear as thy fortunate and beauteous 
lady. 


28. I am this and not this likewise, I am the reality yet nothing real of any 
kind; I am the ego and no ego myself, I am the all and nothing in particular, 
and thus I remain your charming lady. 


29. I neither wish for pleasure nor fear any pain, I covet no riches nor hail 


poverty; I am constant with what I get, (knowing my god is the great giver of 
all), and hence I seem so very gladsome to thee. 


30. I disport in the company of my associates, who have governed their 
passions by the light of knowledge, and by the directions of the Sdstras, and 
therefore, I seem so very pleasing to thee. 


31. I know, my lord, that all that I see by the light of my eyes, or perceive by 
my senses, or conceive in my mind, to be nothing in reality; I therefore see 
something within myself, which is beyond the perception of the sensible 
organs, and the conception of the mind; and this bright vision of the spirit, 
hath made me appear so very brightsome to thy sight. 


CHAPTER LXXxX. 


Display of the Quintuple Elements. 


Argument: — Description of the five siddhis or modes of consummation. 


VASISHTHA related: — Hearing these words of the beauteous lady, her 
husband had not the wit to dive into the meaning of what she said, or to 
understand what she meant by her reliance in the soul, but jestingly told to 
her. 


2. Sikhidhwaja said: — How incongruous is thy speech, and how unbecoming 
it is to thy age, that being but a girl you speak of great things, go on indulging 
your regal pleasures and sports as you do in your royal state. 


3. Leaving all things, you live in the meditation of a nothing; (i.e., leaving all 
formal worship, you adore a formless Deity); and if you have all what is real 
to sense, how is it possible for you to be so graceful with an unreal nothing? 
(Nothing is nothing, and can effect nothing). 


4. Whoso abandons the enjoyments of life, by saying he can do without them; 
is like an angry man refraining from his food and rest for a while, and then 
weakens himself in his hunger and restlessness, and can never retain the 
gracefulness of his person. 


5. He who abstains from pleasures and enjoyments, and subsists upon empty 
air, is as a ghost devoid of a material form and figure, and lives a bodiless 
shadow in the sky. 


6. He that abandons his food and raiment, his bedstead and sleep, and all 
things besides; and remains devoutly reclined in one soul only, cannot 
possibly preserve the calmness of his person. (The Yogis are emaciated in 
their bodies, and never look so fresh and plump as the princess). 


7. That I am not the body nor bodiless, that I am nothing yet everything; are 
words so contradictory, that they bespeak no sane understanding. 


8. Again, the saying that I do not see what I see, but see something that is 
quite unseen; is so very inconsistent in itself, that it indicates no sanity of the 
mind. 


9. From these I find thee an ignorant and unsteady lass still, and my 
frolicsome playmate as before; it is by way of jest that I speak so to you, as 
you jestingly said these things to me. 


10. The prince finished his speech with a loud laughter, and finding it was the 
noon time of going to bath, he rose up and left the apartment of his lady. 


11. At this the princess thought with regret in herself and said, O fie! that the 
prince has quite misunderstood my meaning, and has not understood what I 
meant to say by my rest in the spirit, she then turned to her usual duties of the 
day. 


12. Since then the happy princess continued in her silent meditation in her 
retired seclusion, but passed her time in the company of the prince in the 
enjoyments of their royal sports and amusements. 


13. It came to pass one day, that the self-satisfied princess pondered in her 
mind, upon the method of flying in the air; and though she was void of every 
desire in her heart, wished to soar into the sky on an aerial journey. 


14. She then retired to a secluded spot, and there continued to contemplate 
about her aerial journey by abstaining from her food, and shunning the society 
of her comrades and companions. (During the absence of the prince from 
home. — Gloss). 


15. She sat alone in her retirement keeping her body steadily on her seat, and 
restraining her upheaving breath in the midst of her eye-brows. (This is called 
the Khechari mudra or the posture of aerial journey). 


16. Rama asked: — All motions of bodies in this world whether of moving or 
unmoving things, are seen to take place by means of the action of their bodies 
and the impulse of their breathing; how is it possible then to rise upwards by 
restraint of both of them at once? 


17. Tell me Sir, by what exercise of breathing or the force of oscillation, one 
attempts the power of volitation; and in consequence of which he is enabled to 
make his aerial journey (as an aeronaut). 


18. Tell me how the adept in spirituality or Yoga philosophy, succeeds to 
attend his consummation in this respect, and what processes he resorts to 


obtain this end of his arduous practice. 


19. Vasishtha replied: — There are three ways, Rama, of attaining the end of 
one's object, namely; the upddeya or effort for obtaining the object of pursuit; 
second, heya or disdain or detestation of the thing sought for; and the third is 
upeksha or indifference to the object of desire. (These technical terms answer 
the words positive, negative and neutrality in western terminology, all which 
answer the same end; such as the having, not having of and unconcernedness 
about a thing, are attended with the same result of rest and content to 
everybody). 


20. The first or attainment of the desirable upddeya, is secured by employing 
the means for its success, the second heya or detestation hates and slights the 
thing altogether; and the third or indifference is the intermediate way between 
the two (in which one is equally pleased with its gain or loss. It is a curious 
dogma, that the positive, negative and the intermediate tend all to the same 
end). 


21. Whatever is pleasable is sought after by all good people, and anything that 
is contrary to this, (i.e., painful), is avoided by everyone; and the intermediate 
one is neither sought nor shunned by anybody. (Pleasure is either immediate 
or mediate, as also that which keeps or wards off pain at present or in future). 


22. But no sooner doth the intelligent, learned devotee, come to the 
knowledge of his soul and become spiritualized in himself, than all these three 
states vanished from his sight, and he feels them all the same to him. 


23. As he comes to see these worlds full with the presence of God, and his 
intellect takes its delight in this thought, he then remains in the midmost state 
of indifference or loses sight of that also. 


24. All wise men remain in the course of neutrality, (knowing that an eternal 
fate overrules all human endeavours), which the ignorant are in eager pursuit 
of their objects in vain, but the dispassionate and recluse shun everything, 
(finding the same satisfaction in having of a thing as in its want). Hear me 
now tell you the ways to consummation. 


25. All success is obtained in course of proper time, place, action and its 
instruments, (called the quadruple instrumentalities to success); and this 
gladdens the hearts of a person, as the vernal season renovates the earth. 


26. Among these four, preference is given to actions, because it is of highest 
importance in the bringing about of consummation. (The place of success 


siddhi is a holy spot, its time, — a happy conjunction of planets and events, 
action is the intensity of practice, and its instruments are Yoga, yantra, tantra, 
mantra, japa, etc.). 


27. There are many instruments of aerostation, such as the use of Gutika pills, 
application of collyrium, the wielding of sword and the like; but all these are 
attended with many evils, which are prejudicial to holiness. 


28. There are some gems and drugs, as also some mantras or mystic syllables, 
and likewise, some charms and formulas prescribed for this purpose; but these 
being fully explained, will be found prejudicial to holy Yoga. (These magical 
practices and artifices are violations of the rules of righteousness). 


29. The mount Meru and Himalaya, and some sacred spots and holy places, 
are mentioned as the seats of divine inspiration; but a full description of them, 
will tend to the violation of holy meditation or Yoga. (Because all these places 
are full of false Yogis, who practice many fulsome arts for their gain). 


30. Therefore, hear me now relate unto you, something regarding the practice 
of restraining the breath, which is attended with its consequence of 
consummation; and is related with the narrative of Sikhidhwaja, and is the 
subject of the present discourse. (Here Vasishtha treats of the efficacy of the 
regulation of breath towards the attaining of consummation for satisfaction of 
Rama, in disregard of false and artificial practices). 


31. It is by driving away all desires from the heart, beside the only object in 
view, and by contracting all the orifices of the body; as also by keeping the 
stature, the head and neck erect, that one should attend the practices enjoined 
by the Yoga Sdstra, (namely, fixing the sight on the top of the nose and 
concentrating it between the eye-brows and the like). 


32. Moreover it is by the habit of taking pure food and sitting on clean seats, 
that one should ponder into the deep sense and sayings of the Sdstras, and 
continue in the course of good manners and right conduct in the society of the 
virtues, by refraining from worldliness and all earthly connections. 


33. It is also by refraining from anger and avarice, and abstaining from 
improper food and enjoyments, that one must be accustomed to constrain his 
breathings in the course of a long time. 


34. The wise man that knows the truth, and has his command over his triple 
breathings of inspiration, expiration and retention, (puiraka, rechaka and 
kumbhaka), has all his actions under his control, as a master has all his 


servants under his complete subjection. (because breath is life, and the life has 
command over all the bodily actions, as well as mental operations of a 
person). 


35. Know, Rama, that all the well-being of a man being under the command 
of his vital breath; it is equally possible for everyone, both to gain his 
sovereignty on earth, as also to secure his liberation for the future by means of 
his breath. (So says the proverb, “as long as there is breath, there every hope 
with it.” [Sanskrit: ydbat shusah tabat dshah] So in Hindi: — jan hai to Jehan 
hai, i.e., the life is all in all, etc. So it is said in regard to the kumbhaka or 
retentive breath, “repress your breath and you repress all,” because every 
action is done by the repression of the breath). 


36. The breath circulates through the inner lung of the breast, which encircles 
the entrails (antra) of the whole inner frame; it supplies all the arteries with 
life, and is joined to by all the intestines in the body as if they to that common 
channel. 


37. There is the curved artery resembling the disc at the top of lute, and the 
eddy of waters in the sea; it likens the curved half of the letter Om, and is 
situated as a cypher or circlet in the base or lower most gland. (It is called the 
kundalini or kula kundalini narhi in the original). 


38. It is deep seated at the base of the bodies of the Gods and demi Gods, of 
men and beasts, of fishes and fowls, of insects and worms, and of all aquatic 
molluscs and animals at large. 


39. It continues curved and curbed in the form of a folded snake in winter, 
until it unfolds its twisted form under the summer heat, (or the intestinal heat 
of its hunger Jatharagni), and lifts its hood likening the disk of the moon. (The 
moon in the Yoga Sdstra, means the loti-form gland under the upper most 
crown of the head). 


40. It extends from the lower base, and passing through the cavity of the heart, 
touches the holes between the eye brows; and remains in its continued 
vibration by the wind of the breath. 


41. In the midst of that curvilineal artery, (Kundalini ndrhi), there dwells a 
mighty power like the pith within the soft cell of the plantain tree, which is 
continually vibrating, like thrilling wires of the Indian lute, (or as the 
pendulum of a machine). 


42. This is called the curvilineal artery, (kundalini), on account of its 


curviform shape, and the power residing in it is that prime mobile force, 
which sets to motion all the parts and powers of the animal body. 


43. It is incessantly breathing like hissing of an infuriate snake and with its 
open mouths, it keeps continually blowing upwards, in order to give force to 
all the organs. 


44. When the vital breath enters into the heart, and is drawn in by the curved 
Kundalini; it then produces the consciousness of the mind, which is the 
ground of the seeds of all its faculties. 


45. As the Kundalini thrills in the body, in the manner of a bee fluttering over 
a flower; so doth our consciousness throb in the mind, and has the perception 
of the nice and delicate sensations. (Such as the lungs and arteries receive the 
crude food and drink; so doth our consciousness perceive their various tastes 
and flavour). 


46. The Kundalini artery stirs as quickly to grasp its gross objects, as our 
consciousness is roused at the perception of the object of the finer senses of 
sight, etc. These come in contact with one another, as an instrument lays hold 
of some material. 


47. All the veins in the body are connected with this grand artery, and flow 
together like so many cellular vessels into the cavity of the heart, where they 
rise and fall like rivers in the sea. (It shows the concentration of blood in the 
heart by all the veins and arteries, and its distribution to them in perpetual 
succession, to have been long known to the sages of India, before its 
discovery by Harvey in Europe). 


48. From the continued rise and fall (or heaving and sinking) of this artery, it 
is said to be the common root or source of all the sensations and perceptions 
in the consciousness. (It rises and falls with the inhaling and exhaling breaths 
up to the pericranium and thence down to the fundament). 


49. Rama regained: — How is it Sir, that our consciousness, coming from the 
infinite intellect at all times and places, is confined like a minute particle of 
matter, in the cellular vessel of the curved Kundalini artery, and there it rises 
and falls by turns. 


50. Vasishtha replied: — It is true, O sinless Rama, that consciousness is the 
property of the infinite intellect, and is always present in all places and things 
with the all-pervading intellect; yet it is sometimes compressed in the form of 
a minute atom of matter in material and finite bodies. 


51. The consciousness of the infinite intellect, is of course as infinite as 
infinity itself; but being confined in corporeal bodies, it is fused as a fluid to 
diffuse over a small space. So the sunshine that lightens the universe, appears 
to flush over a wall or any circumscribed place. (Such as human 
consciousness, which is but a flush of the Divine omniscience). 


52. In some bodies it is altogether lost, as in mineral substances which are 
unconscious of their own existence; and in others it is fully developed, as in 
the Gods and human species; while in some it is imperfectly developed, as in 
the vegetable creation, and in others it appears in its perverted form, as in the 
inferior animals. So everything is found to have its consciousness in some 
form or other. 


53. Hear me moreover to explain you, the manner in which consciousness (or 
other), appears in its various forms and degrees, in the different bodies of 
animated beings. 


54. As all cavities and empty spaces are comprised under the term air, so are 
all intelligent as well as unintelligent beings comprehended under the general 
category of the one ever existent intellect, which pervades all things in the 
manner of vacuum. (Here is another proof of the vacuistic theory of the 
theosophy of Vasishtha). 


55. The same undecaying and unchanging entity of the intellect, is situated 
somewhere in the manner of pure consciousness, and elsewhere in the form of 
the subtle form of the quintuple elements. (i.e., As the simple soul and the 
gross body or the mundane soul. So says Pope: — Whose body nature is, and 
God the soul). 


56. This quintuple element of consciousness is reduplicate into many other 
quintuples, as a great many lamps are lighted from one lamp; these are the 
five vital airs, the mind and its five-fold faculties of the understanding; the five 
internal and the five external senses and their five-fold organs, together with 
the five elementary bodies; and all having the principles of their growth, rise 
and decay, as also their states of waking, dreaming and sleeping ingrained in 
them. 


57. All these quintuples abide in the different bodies of the Gods and mortals, 
according to their respective natures and inclinations, (which are the causes of 
their past and present and future lives in different forms). 


58. Some taking the forms of places, and others of the things situated in them; 
while some take the forms of minerals, and others of the animals dwelling on 


earth. 


59. Thus is this world the production of the action of the said quintuples, 
having the principle of intellectual consciousness, presiding over the whole 
and every part of it. 


60. It is the union of these quintuples in gross bodies, that gives them their 
intelligence; hence we see the mobility of some dull material bodies, as also 
the immobility of others (as of mineral and vegetable creations). 


61. As the wave of the sea is seen to roll in one place, and to be dull and at a 
lull in another; so is this intellectual power in full force in some bodies, and 
quite quiescent in others. 


62. As the sea is calm and still in one place, and quite boisterous in another; 
so is the quintuple body either in motion or at rest in different places. (Hence 
rest and motion are properties of gross bodies and not of the intellectual soul, 
which is ever quiescent). 


63. The quintuple body is mobile by means of the vital airs, and the vital life, 
(jiva), is intelligent by cause of its intelligence; the rocks are devoid of both, 
but the trees have their sensibility by reason of their being moved by the 
breath of winds; and such is the nature of the triple creation of animals, 
minerals and vegetables. 


64. Different words are used to denote the different natures of things, (or else 
the same word is used for things of the same kind); thus fire is the general 
name for heat, and frost is that of coldness in general. 


65. (Or if it is not the difference in the disposition of the quintuple elements in 
bodies, that causes the difference in their natures and names). It is the 
difference in the desires of the mind, which by being matured in time, dispose 
the quintuple elements in the forms of their liking. 


66. The various desires of the mind, that run in their divers directions, are 
capable of being collected together by the sapient, and employed in the way of 
their best advantage and well-being. 


67. The desires of men tending either to their good or evil, are capable of 
being roused or suppressed, and employed to their purposes by turns. (The 
changeful desires always run in their several courses). 


68. Man must direct his desires to that way, which promises him the objects of 
his desires; or else it will be as fruitless, as his throwing the dust at the face of 


the sky. 


69. The great mountains are but heaps of the pentuples, hanging on the tender 
and slender blade of consciousness, and these moving and unmoving bodies, 
appear as worms on the tree of knowledge; (i.e., before the intelligent mind). 


70. There are some beings with their desires lying dormant in them, as the 
unmoving vegetable and mineral productions of the earth; while there are 
others with their ever- wakeful desires, as the deities, daityas and men. 


71. Some are cloyed with their desires, as the worms and insects in the dirt; 
and others are devoid of their desires as the emancipate Yogis, and the heirs of 
salvation. 


72. Now every man is conscious in himself of his having the mind and 
understanding, and being joined with his hands, feet and other members of his 
body, formed by the assemblage of the quintuple materials. 


73. The inferior animals have other senses, with other members of their 
bodies; and so the immoveables also have some kind of sensibility, with other 
sorts of their organs. (The members of brute bodies are, the four feet, horns 
and tails of quadrupeds; the birds are biped and have their feathers, bills and 
their tails also; the snakes have their hoods and tails; the worms have their 
teeth, and the insects their stings, etc. And all these they have agreeably to the 
peculiar desire of their particular natures. — Gloss). 


74. Thus my good Rama! do these quintuple elements, display themselves in 
these different forms in the beginning, middle and end of all sensible and 
insensible and moving and unmoving beings. 


75. The slightest desire of any of these, be it as minute as an atom, becomes 
the seed of aerial trees producing the fruits of future births in the forms of the 
desired objects. (Every one's desire is the root of his future fate). 


76. The organs of sense are the flowers of this tree (of the body), and the 
sensations of their objects are as the fragrance of those flowers, our wishes are 
as the bees fluttering about the pistils and filaments of our fickle efforts and 
exertions. 


77. The clear heavens are the hairy tufts, resting on the stalks of the lofty 
mountains; its leaves are the cerulean clouds of the sky, and the ten sides of 
the firmament, are as the straggling creepers stretching all about it. 


78. All beings now in being, and those coming into existence in future, are 


innumerable in their number, and are as the fruits of this tree, growing and 
blooming and falling off by turns. 


79. The five seeds of these trees, grow and perish of their own nature and 
spontaneity, also perish of themselves in their proper time. 


80. They become many from their sameness, and come to exhaust their 
powers after long inertness; and then subside to rest of their own accord like 
the heaving waves of the ocean. 


81. On one side, there swelling as huge surges, and on the other sinking low 
below the deep, excited by the heat of the dullness on the one hand, and 
hushed by the coolness of reason on the other, (like the puffing and bursting of 
the waves in the sea). 


82. These multitudes of bodies, that are the toys or play things of the 
quintuple essences, are destined to remain and rove forever in this world, 
unless they come under the dominion of reason, and are freed from further 
transmigration. 


CHAPTER LXXXI. 


Inquiry into Agni, Soma or fire and moon 


Argument: — Investigation into the Kundalini artery, as the source of 
consummation. 


VASISHTHA continued: — The seeds of these pentuples are contained in the 
inside of the great artery, and are expanding every moment by the vibration of 
the vital breath in the beings. 


2. The vibration of the Kundalinf being stopped, it roused the intellect by its 
touch, and the rising of the intellect is attended with rising of the intellectual 
powers as follows. 


3. This intellect is the living principle from its vitality, and the mind from its 
mental powers; it is the volitive principle from its volition, and is called the 
understanding, from its understanding of all things. 


4. It becomes egoism with its octuple properties called the puryashtakas, and 
remains as the principle of vitality in the body in the form of the Kundalini 
artery. (The gloss gives no explanation of the psychological truths). 


5. The intellect abides in Kundalinf entrails in the form of triple winds. Being 
deposited in the bowels and passing downwards, it takes the name of the 
apdna wind; moving about the abdomen it is called the samdna wind; and 
when seated in the chest it rises upwards, it is known by the name of the 
uddna wind. 


6. The apdna wind passing downward evacuates the bowels, but the samdna 
wind of the abdominal part serves to sustain the body; and the uddna rising 
upward and being let out, inflates and invigorates the frame. 


7. If after all your efforts, you are unable to repress the passing off of the 
downward wind; then the person is sure to meet his death, by the forcible and 
irrepressible egress of the apdna wind; (this irrepressible egress is called 


abishtambha). (The translator regrets for his inability to give the English 
terminology of these psychological words in the original). 


8. And when one with all his attempts, is unable to suppress his rising breath 
of life; but it forces of his mouth or nostrils, it is sure to be followed by his 
expiration. 


9. If one by his continual attention, can succeed to repress the outward and 
inward egress of his vital breath, and preserve calm quiet of his disposition, he 
is sure to have his longevity accompanied with his freedom from all diseases. 


10. Know that the decomposure of the smaller arteries, is attended with 
distempers of the body, but the disturbance of the greater arteries is followed 
by serious consequences. (There are a hundred great arteries, attached to the 
main conduit of Kundalini, besides hundreds of small veins and nerves 
diverging from them throughout the body. The Yogi has the power of stopping 
the current of his breath and blood into these by his restraint of respiration, — 
prdandydma). 


11. Rama said: — Tell me, O holy sage! how our health and sickness 
connected with the organs and arteries of the body, (rather than with the blood 
and humours circulating through them). 


12. Vasishtha replied: — Know, Rama, that uneasiness and sickness, are both 
of them the causes of pain to the body; their healing by medicine is their 
remedy, which is attended with our pleasure; but the killing of them at once 
by our liberation (from the sensations of pain and pleasure), is what conduces 
to our true felicity. (Because both health and sickness are attended with but 
short-lived pleasure and pain, and cannot give us the lasting felicity to our 
souls). 


13. Sometimes the body is subject both to uneasiness and sickness also, as the 
causes of one another; sometimes they are both alleviated to give us pleasure, 
and at others they come upon us by turns to cause our pain only. 


14. It is ailing of the body, that we call our sickness, and it is the trouble of the 
mind that we term our uneasiness. Both of them take their rise from our 
inordinate desires, and it is our ignorance only of the nature of things, that is 
the source of both. (Our intemperance and covetousness, which are dispelled 
by our right knowledge). 


15. Without the knowledge of the natures and virtues of things, and the want 
of the government of our desires and appetites, that the heart string loses its 


tenuity and even course; and is swollen and hurried on by the impulse of 
passions and inordinate desires. 


16. The exultation at having obtained something, and ardour for having more; 
equally boil the blood of the heart, and shroud the mind under a shadow of 
infatuation, as an impervious cloud in the rainy weather. 


17. The ever increasing greediness of the mind, and the subjection of the 
intellect under the dominion of foolhardiness, drives men to distant countries 
in search of a livelihood. (One's natal land is enough to supply him with a 
simple living). 


18. Again, the working at improper seasons, (as at night and in rain and heat), 
and the doing of improper actions; the company of infamous men, and 
aptitude to wicked habits and practices. 


19. The weakness and fulness of the intestines caused by sparing food on the 
one hand, and its excess on the other, cause the derangement of the humours 
and the disorder of the constitution. 


20. It is by cause of this disordered state of the body, that a great many 
diseases grow in it, both by reason of the deficit as well as the excess of its 
humours; as a river becomes foul both in its fulness and low water in the rain 
and summer heat. 


21. As the good or bad proclivities of men, are the results of their actions of 
prior and present births, so the anxieties and diseases of the present state, are 
the effects of the good and bad deeds both of this life as also those of the past. 


22. I have told you Rama, about the growth of the diseases and anxieties in 
the quintessential bodies of men; now hear me tell you the mode of 
extirpating them from the human constitution. 


23. There are two sorts of diseases here common to human nature, namely, — 
the ordinary ones and the essential; the ordinary ones are the occurrences of 
daily life, and the essential is what is inborn in our nature. (The ordinary cares 
for supplying our natural wants are of the first sort, and the inbred errors and 
affections of the mind are of other kind). 


24. The ordinary anxieties are removed by the attainments of the objects in 
want; and the diseases growing out of them, are also removed by the removal 
of our anxious cares. 


25. But the essential infirmities of one's dispositions, being bred in the blood 


and bone, cannot be removed from the body, without the knowledge of the 
soul; as the error of the snake in the rope, is removed only by examination of 
the rope. (So the affection will be found to rise in the mind and not rooted in 
the soul). 


26. The erroneous affections of the mind, being known as the source of the 
rise of all our anxious cares and maladies; it is enough to put a stop to this 
main-spring in order to prevent their outlets, so the stream that breaks its 
banks in the rains, carries away the arbours that grew by it in its rapid course. 
(The fissures of stopping the source, and breaking out of the course, are quite 
opposed to one another). 


27. The non-essential or extrinsical diseases that are derived from without, are 
capable of being removed by the application of drugs, the spell of mantras 
and propitiating as well as obviating charms; as also by medicaments and 
treatments, according to the prescriptions of medical science and the practice 
of medical men. 


28. You will know, Rama, the efficacy of baths and bathing in holy rivers, and 
are acquainted with the expiatory mantras and prescriptions of experienced 
practitioners; and as you have learnt the medical Sdstras, | have nothing 
further to direct you in this matter. 


29. Rama rejoined: — But tell me Sir, how the intrinsic causes produce the 
external diseases; and how are they removed by other remedies than those of 
medicinal drugs, as the muttering of mantra incantations and observance of 
pious acts and ceremonies. 


30. Vasishtha replied: — The mind being disturbed by anxieties the body is 
disordered also in its functions, as the man that is overtaken by anger, loses 
the sight of whatever is present before his eyes. 


31. He loses sight of the broad way before him, and takes a devious course of 
his own; and like a stag pierced with arrows, flies from the beaten path and 
enters himself amidst the thickest. 


32. The spirit being troubled, the vital spirits are disturbed and breathe out by 
fits and snatches; as the waters of a river being disturbed by a body of 
elephants, rise above its channel and over flow the banks. (Violent passions 
raging in the breast burst out of and break down their bounds). 


33. The vital airs breathing irregularly, derange the lungs and nerves and all 
the veins and arteries of the body; as the misrule in the government, puts the 


laws of the realm into disorder. 


34. The breathings being irregular, unsettles the whole body; by making the 
blood vessels quite empty and dry in some parts, and full and stout in others, 
resembling the empty and full flowing channels of rivers. 


35. The want of free breathing is attended both with indigestion and bad 
digestion of the food, and also evaporation of the chyle and blood that it 
produces; and these defects in digestion, bring forth a great many maladies in 
the system. 


36. The vital breaths carry the essence of the food we take to the inferior 
organs, as the currents of a river carry the floating woods down the stream. 


37. The crude matter which remains in the intestines, for want of its 
assimilation into blood, and circulation in the frame by restraint of breathing; 
turn at the end to be sources of multifarious maladies in the constitution. 


38. Thus it is that the perturbed states of the mind and spirit, produce the 
diseases of the body, and are avoided and removed by want of mental anxiety. 
Now hear me tell you, how the mantra-exorcism serve to drive away the 
diseases of the body. 


39. As the karitaki fruit, (chebule myrobalan) is purgative of its own nature, 
and purges out the crudities from the bodies; so the headwork into the 
mysterious meaning of the mantras, removes the crude diseases from the 
frame. (Such are the mystic letters ya, ra, la, va, in the liquids y, r, 1, v), 
signifying the four elements of earth, water, air and fire; curative of many 
diseases by reflection on their hidden meaning. 


40. I have told you Rama, that pious acts, holy service, virtuous deeds and 
religious observances, serve also to drive the diseases from the body; by their 
purifying the mind from its impurities, as the gold is depurated by the touch 
stone. 


41. The purity of the mind produces a delight in the body; as the rising of the 
full moon, spreads the gentle moon-beams on earth. (Every good act is 
attended with a rapture, recompenses the deed; or as the maxim goes, “virtue 
has its own reward”). 


42. The vital airs breathe freely from the purity of the mind, and these tending 
to help the culinary process in the stomach, produce the nutrition of the body, 
and destroy the germ of its diseases. (The germs of growth and decay and of 
life and death, are both connate in the nature of all living beings; and the 


increase of the one, is the cause of the decrease of the other). 


43. I have thus far related to you, Rama! concerning the causes of the rise and 
fall of the diseases and distempers of the living body, in connection with the 
subject of the main artery of Kundalini; now hear me relate to you regarding 
the main point of one's attainment of consummation or siddhi by mean of his 
Yoga practice. 


44. Now know the life of the puryashtaka or octuple human body, to be 
confined in the Kundalini artery, as the fragrance of the flower is contained in 
its inner filament. 


45. It is when one fills the channel of this great artery with his inhaling breath, 
and shuts it at its mouth, (called the Kurma opening), and becomes as sedate 
as a stone; he is then said to have attained his rock like fixity and firmness, 
and his siddhi or consummation of garima or inflation. 


46. Again, when the body is thus filled with the inflated air, and the wind 
confined in the Kundalini artery, is carried upwards by the vital breath (of 
respiration), from the base or fundamental tube at the bottom, to the cell of the 
cranium in the head, it touches the consciousness seated in the brain, and 
drives away the fatigue of the process. (This is called the ascent of the vital air 
in its heavenward journey). 


47. Thence the wind rises upward as smoke into the air, carrying with it the 
powers of all the arteries attached to it like creepers clinging to a tree; and 
then stands as erect as a stick, with its head lifted upwards like the hood of a 
snake. (The art of mounting in the air, is as the act of jumping and leaping into 
it). 


48. Then this uprising force carries the whole body, filled with wind from its 
top to toe into the upper sky; as an aerosol floats upon the water, or as air 
balloon rises in the air. (The early Hindus are thus recorded to have made 
their aerial journeys by force of the inflated air, instead of the compressed gas 
smoke of modern discovery). 


49. It is thus that the Yogis make their aerial excursions, by means of the 
compression of air in the wind pipes in their bodies; and are as happy (in their 
descrying the scattered worlds all about), as poor people feel themselves at 
having the dignity of the king of Gods. (Indra). 


50. When the force of the exhaling breath, (rechaka prabdha), of the cranial 
tube, constrains the power of the Kundalinf, to stand at the distance of twelve 


inches in the outside of the upper valve between eye-brows. 


51. And as the same exhaling makes it remain there for a moment by 
preventing its entering into any other passage, it is at that instant that one 
comes to see the supernatural beings before his sight. (It is said in phrenology, 
that fixed attention, far-sightedness and supernatural vision, are seated 
between the eye-brows). 


52. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how we may be able to see the supernatural 
Siddhas, without feeling them by the rays and light of our eye sight, and 
without having any supernatural organ of perception of our own. 


53. Vasishtha replied: — It is true, Rama, as you say, that the aerial spirit of 
Siddhas, are invisible to earthly mortals with the imperfect organs of their 
bodies, and without the aid of supernatural organs. 


54. It is by means of the clairvoyance obtained by the practice of Yoga, that 
the aerial and beneficent Siddhas became visible to us like the appearances in 
our dreams. 


55. The sight of the Siddhas is like that of persons in our dream, with this 
difference only, that the sight of a siddha is fraught with many real benefits 
and blessings accruing thereby unto the beholder. 


56. It is by the practice of posting the exhaled breath, at the distance of twelve 
inches on the outside of the mouth, that it may be made to enter into the body 
of another person. (This is the practice of imparting one's spirit into the body 
of another person, and of enlivening and raising the dead). 


57. Rama said: — But tell me Sir, how you maintain the immutability of 
nature (when everything is seen to be in the course of its incessant change at 
all times). I know you will not be displeased at this interruption to your 
discourse, because good preachers are kindly disposed, to solve even the 
intricate of their hearers. 


58. Vasishtha replied: — It is certain that the power known as nature, is 
manifest in the volition of the spirit, in its acts of the creation and preservation 
of the world. (Here nature is identified with eternal will of God). 


59. Nature being nothing in reality, but the states and powers of things; and 
these are seen some times to differ from one another, as the autumnal fruits 
are found to grow in the spring at Assam, (these varieties also called their 
nature). 


60. Vasishtha replied: — All this universe is one Brahma or the immensity of 
God, and all its variety is the unity of the same. (i.e., the various modalities of 
the unvaried one); these different existences and appearances, are only our 
verbal distinctions for ordinary purposes, and proceeding from our ignorance 
of the true nature of Brahma. We know not why these words concerning 
divine nature, which are irrelevant to the main subject, are introduced in this 
place. 


61. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how our bodies are thinned as well as 
thickened, in order to enter into very narrow passages as also to feel and 
occupy large spaces (by means of the anima and garima yogas, of minimizing 
the body to an atomic spright and of magnifying it to a stalwart giant). 


62. Vasishtha replied: — As the attrition of the wood and saw, causes a split 
in the midst; and as the friction of two things (as of a flint and stone) produces 
a fire between them, in the same manner doth the confrication of the inhaling 
and exhaling breath, divide the two prdna and apdna gases, and produce the 
jathardgni in the abdomen. (The prdna air is explained elsewhere as passing 
from the heart through the mouth and nostrils, and the apdna as that which 
passes from the region of the navel to the great toe. The jathardgni is rendered 
somewhere as gastric fire). 


63. There is a muscle in the abdominal part of these ugly machine of the 
internal body, which extends as a pair of bellows both above and below the 
navel, with their mouths joined together and shaking to and fro like a willow 
moved by the water and air. 


64. It is under this bladder that the kundalinf artery rest in her quiescent state; 
and ties as a string of pears in a casket of the yellow padmariya james. (This 
place under the navel is called the mulddhdra, whence the aorta strength 
upwards and downwards). 


65. Here the kundalinf string turns and twirls round like a string of beads 
counted about the finger; and coils also with its reflected head and a hissing 
sound like the hood of a snake stricken by a stick. (it requires too much 
anatomy to show these operations of the arteries). 


66. It thrills in the string of the lotus like heart, as a bee flutters over the honey 
cup of the lotus flower; and it kindles our knowledge in the body like the 
luminous sun amidst the earth and sky. (It gives action to the heart string, 
which arises its cognitive faculties). 


67. It is then that the action of the heart, moves all the blood vessels in the 


body to their several functions; as the breeze of the outer air, shakes the leaves 
of trees. 


68. As the high winds rage in the sky and break down the weaker leaves of the 
branches of trees, so do the vital airs coil in the body and crush the soft food, 
that has been taken in the stomach. 


69. As the winds of the air batter the lotus leaves, and at last dissolve them 
into the native element; so the internal winds break down the food like the 
leaves of trees, and convert the food ingested in the stomach into chyle, blood, 
flesh, skin, fat, marrow and bones one after another. 


70. The internal airs clash against one another the produce of the gastric fire, 
as the bamboos in the wood produce the living fire by their friction. 


71. The body which is naturally cold and cold-blooded, becomes heated in all 
its parts by this internal heat, as every part of the world becomes warmed by 
the warmth of the sun. 


72. This internal fire which pervades throughout the frame and flutters like 
golden bees over the loti-form heart, is meditated upon as twinkling stars in 
the minds of the ascetic Yogis. 


73. Reflections of these lights are attended with the full blaze of intellectual 
light, whereby the meditative Yogi sees in his heart objects, which are situated 
at the distance of millions of miles from him. (This is called the 
consummation of clairvoyance or divyadrishti). 


74. This culinary fire being continually fed by the fuel of food, continues to 
burn in the lake of the lotus-like muscle of the heart, as the sub-marine fire 
burns latent in the waters of the seas. 


75. But the clear and cold light which is the soul of the body, bears the name 
of the serene moon; and because it is the product of the other fire of the body, 
thence called the sumdgni or the residence of the moon and fire, (its two 
presiding divinities). 


76. All hotter lights in the world are known by the names of suns, (as the 
planetary and cometary bodies); and all colder lights are designated as moons, 
(as the stars and satellites), and as these two lights cherish the world, it is 
named as the surydgni and somdgni also. 


77. Know, after all the world to be a manifestation of the combination of 
intelligence and ignorance, (i.e., of the intellect and soul matter), as also of an 


admixture of reality and unreality among who has made it as such in himself 
manifest in this form. 


78. The learned call the light of intelligence, by the terms knowledge, sun and 
fire, and designate the unrealities of ignorance, by the names of dullness and 
darkness, ignorance and the coldness of the moon. (i.e., There are antithetical 
words expressive of Intelligence and ignorance; the former designated as the 
light of knowledge and reason, the daylight and the light of lamp, efc., and the 
latter as the darkness of night, and the coldness of frost, etc.). 


79. Rama said: — I well understand that the product of the air of breath, etc., 
(by their friction as said before); and that the air proceeds from the moon, but 
tell me Sir, whence comes the moon into existence? 


80. Vasishtha replied: — The fire and moon are the mutual causes and effects 
of one another, as they are mutually productive as well as destructive of each 
other by turns. 


81. Their production is by alternation as that of the seed and its sprout, (of 
which nobody knows is the cause or effect of the other). Their reiteration is as 
the return of day and night, (of which we know not which precedes the other). 
They last awhile and are lost instantly like the succession of light and shade 
(the one producing as also destroying the other). 


82. When these opposites come to take place at the one and same time, you 
see them stand side by side as in the case of the light and shade occurring into 
the daytime, but when they occur at different times, you then see the one only 
at a time without any trace of the other, as in the occurrence of the daylight 
and nocturnal gloom by turns. (These two are instances of the simultaneous 
and separate occurrence of the opposites. — Gloss). 


83. I have also told you of two kinds of causality; namely, the one in which 
the cause is co-existent with its effect, and the other wherein the effect comes 
to appearance after disappearance of its cause or the antecedent. 


84. It is called the synchronous causation which is coeval with its effect, as the 
seed is coexistent with its germ, and the tree is contemporaneous with the 
produced seed. 


85. The other is named the antecedent or preterite cause, which disappears 
before the appearance of its consequent effect; as the disappearance of the day 
is the cause of its subsequent night; and the preteriteness of the night, causes 
the retardation of the following day. (In plain words, it is the concurrence and 
distance of the cause and effect, called the [Sanskrit: samavdyo] and [Sanskrit: 
amasdvdyo kdrana| or the united or separate causality in Nyaya-terminology). 


86. The former kind of the united cause and effect, (called the [Sanskrit: 
sadrupa parindma], i.e., the presence of both causality and its effectuality); is 
exemplified in the instance of the doer and the earthen pot, both of which are 
in existence; and this being evident to sight, requires no example to elucidate 
it. 


87. The kind of the disunited cause and effect, (called the [Sanskrit: 
bindshartipa parindma]) in which the effect is unassociated with its (cause); 
the succession of day and night to one another, is a sufficient proof of the 
absence of its antecedent causality. (This serves as an instance of an unknown 
cause, and hence we infer the existence of a pristine darkness, prior to the 
birth of day-light, [Sanskrit: tame dsit] teomerant). 


88. The rationalists that deny the causality of an unevident cause, are to be 
disregarded as fools for ignoring their own convictions, and must be spurned 
with contempt. (They deny the causality of the day and night to bring one 
another by their rotation which no sensible being (can ignore). They say, 
[Sanskrit: dinasda rdtri nirmmasa katritamsti]) 


89. Know, Rama, that an unknown and absent cause is as evident as any 
present and palpable cause, which is perceptible to the senses; for who can 
deny the fact, that it is the absence of fire that produces the cold, and which is 
quite evident to every living body. 


90. See Rama, how the fire ascends upward in the air in form of fumes, which 
take the shape of clouds in the azure sky, which being transformed afterwards 
into fire (electricity); becomes the immediate cause of the moon (by its 
presence [Sanskrit: djndt kdrana)). 


91. Again, the fire being extinguished by cold, sends its watery particles 
upwards, and this moisture produces the moon, as the absent or remote cause 
of the same. ({Sanskrit: mauna kdrana}). 


92. The sub-marine fire likewise that falls into the feeding on the foulness of 
the seven oceans, and swallows their briny waters, disgorges their gases and 


fumes in the open air, and these flying to the upper sky in the form of clouds, 
drop down their purified waters in the form of sweet milky fluids in the milky 
ocean (which gives birth to the milk white moon). (It is said that there is an 
apparatus in the bosom of the clouds, for purifying the impure waters rising in 
vapours in the atmosphere from the earth and seas below). 


93. The hot sun also devours the frigid ball of the moon or (the moon beams), 
in the conjunction at the dark fortnight (amdvasya), and then ejects her out in 
their opposition in the bright half of every month, as the stork throws off the 
tender stalk of the lotus which it has taken. (The sun is represented to feed on, 
and let out the moon beams by turns in every month). 


94. Again, the winds that suck up the heat and moisture of the earth in the 
vernal and hot weather, drop them down as rain water in the rainy season, 
which serves to renovate the body of exhausted nature. (This passage is 
explained in many ways from the homonymous word some of which it is 
composed; and which severally means the moon, the handsome, the soma 
plant and its juice). 


95. The earthly water being carried up by the sun beams, which are called his 
karas or hands, are converted into the solar rays, which are the immediate 
cause of fire. (Here the water which is by its nature opposed to fire, becomes 
the cause of that element also). 


96. Here the water becomes fire both by privation of its fluidity and frigidity, 
which is the remote cause of its formation as also by its acquirement of aridity 
or dryness and calidity or warmth; which is the immediate of its 
transformation to the igneous element. (This is an instance of the double or 
mixed causality of water in the production of fire. — Gloss). 


97. The fire being absent, there remains the presence of the moon; and the 
absence of the moon, presents the presence of fire. 


98. Again, the fire being destroyed, the moon takes its place; in the same 
manner, as the departure of the day introduces the night in lieu of it. 


99. Now in the interval of day and night, and in the interim of daylight and 
darkness, and in the midst of shade and light, there is a midmost point and a 
certain figure in it, which is unknown to the learned. (This point which is 
neither this nor that, nor this thing or any other, is the state of the inscrutable 
Brahma). 


100. That point is no nullity nor an empty vacuity (because it is neither the 


one or the other). Nor it is a positive entity and the real pivot and connecting 
link of both sides. It never changes its central place between both extremes of 
this and that, or the two states of being and not being. 


101. It is by means of the two opposite principles of the intelligent soul and 
inert matter, that all things exist in the universe; in the same manner, as the 
two contraries of light and darkness bring on the day and night in regular 
succession. (so the self-moving and self-shining sun is followed by the dull 
and dark moon, which moves and shines with her borrowed force and light). 


102. As the course of the world commenced with the union of mind and 
matter, or the mover and the moved from the beginning; so the body of the 
moon, came to be formed by an admixture of aqueous and nectarious particles 
in the air. (The body of the moon formed of the frozen waters, were early 
impregnated with the ambrosial beams of the sun). (This bespeaks of the 
creation of the solar orb prior to the formation of the satellite of the earth). 


103. Know, Rama, the beams of the sun to be composed of fire or igneous 
particles, and the solar light to be the effulgence of the intellect; and the body 
of the moon to be but a mass of dull darkness, (unless it is lighted by its 
borrowed light from the sun). (The sun is said to shine with intellectual light, 
because it disperses the outer gloom of the world, as the other removes the 
darkness of the mind. — Gloss). 


104. The sight of the outward sun in the sky, destroys the out spreading 
darkness of night; but the appearance of the intellectual luminary, dispels the 
overspreading gloom of the world from the mind. 


105. But if you behold your intellect in the form of the cooling moon, it 
becomes as dull and cold as that satellite itself; just as if you look at a lotus at 
night, you will not find it to be as blooming as at sunshine, (but may be at the 
danger of contracting lunacy or stupefaction of the intellect by looking long at 
the cold luminary). 


106. Fire in the form of sunlight enlightens the moon, in the same manner as 
the light of the intellect illumes the inner body, (lingadeha); our 
consciousness is as the moonlight of the inner soul, and is the product of the 
sun beams of our intellect. (So says the Bharata: — As the sun illumes the 
worlds so doth the intellect enlighten the soul). 


107. The intellect has no action, it is therefore, without attribute or 
appellation; it is like light on the lamp of the soul, and is known as any 
common light from the lantern which shows it to the sight. 


108. The avidity of this intellectual after the knowledge of the intelligibles, 
brings it to the intelligence of the sensible world; but its thirst after the 
unintelligible one, is attended with the precious gain of its Kaivalya or 
oneness with the self-same one. (Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for 
spiritual knowledge, for they shall verily be satisfied therewith). 


109. The two powers of the fire and moon, (agni-soma), are to be known as 
united with one another in the form of the body and its soul, and their union is 
expressed in the scriptures as the contact of the light and lighted room with 
one another, as the reflexion of the sunshine on the wall. (The two powers of 
igneous and lunar lights are represented in the conjoined bodies of the Agni 
soma deities). 


110. They are also known to be separately of themselves, in different bodies 
and at different times; such as bodies addicted to dullness, are said to be 
actuated by the lunar influence; and persons advancing in their spirituality, are 
said to be led on by force of the solar power. 


111. The rising breath (prdna) which of its nature hot and warm, is said to be 
Agni's or igneous; and setting breath of apdna which is cold and slow is 
termed the soma or lunar, they abide as the light and shade in every body, the 
one rising upward and passing by the mouth, and the other going down by the 
anus. 


112. The apdna being cooled gives rise to the fiery hot breath of prana, which 
remains in the body like the reflexion of something in a mirror. 


113. The light of the intellect produces the brightness of consciousness, and 
the sun-beams reflect themselves as lunar orbs; in the dew drops on lotus 
leaves at early dawn. 


114. There was a certain consciousness in the beginning of creation, which 
with its properties of heat and cold as those of agni and soma; came to be 
combined together in the formation of human body and mind. 


115. Strive, Rama, to settle yourself at that position of the distance of outside 
the mouth, apdna, where the sun and moon of the body, (i.e., the prdana and 
apdna breaths) meet in conjunction, — amdvasya. 


CHAPTER LXXXII. 


Yoga instructions for Acquirement of the supernatural Powers of Anima- 
Minuteness etc. 


Argument: — Means of acquiring the Quadruple Capacities of Anima 
minima, Mahima-maxima, Laghima-lightness and Garima-heaviness, together 
with the power of entering into the bodies of others. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Hear me now tell you, how the bodies of Yogis 
are capable of expansion and contraction at will; as to be multum in parvo; 
and parvum in multo. 


2. There is above the lotus-like diaphragm of the heart, a blazing fire emitting 
its sparks, like gold coloured butterflies flirting about it, and flaring as flashes 
of lightning in the evening clouds. (This is the jathardgni or culinary fire). 


3. It is fanned and roused by the enkindling animal spirit, which blows over it 
as with the breath of the wind; it pervades the whole body without burning it, 
and shines as brightly as the sun in the form of our consciousness. 


4. Being then kindled into a blaze in an instant, like the early raise of the 
rising sun gleaming upon the morning clouds; it melts down the whole body 
(to its toes and nails), as the burning furnace dissolves the gold in the crucible. 
(It is impossible to make out anything of this allegory). 


5. Being unextinguishable by water, it burns the whole outer body down to the 
feet; and then it coils inside the body, and remains in the form of the mind in 
the ativahika or spiritual body of man. (It is hard to find out the hidden sense 
of this passage also). 


6. Having then reduced the inner body likewise, it becomes lifeless of itself; 
and becomes extinct as the frost at the blowing of winds (or blast of a 
tempest). 


7. The force of the Kundalini or intestinal canal, being put out to the 


fundamental artery of the rectum; remains in the vacuity of the spiritual body, 
like a shadow of the smoke of fire. 


8. This smoky shade parades over the heart like a swarthy maiden, and 
encloses in her bosom the subtle body composed of its mind and 
understanding, the living principle and its egoism. 


9. It has the power to enter into the porous fibres of lotuses to penetrate the 
rocks, to stretch over the grass, to pop into houses and stones, to pry in the sky 
and ply in the ground, and remain and move about everywhere in the manner 
it likes of its own will. (This power is called sakti or energy which is 
omnipotent). 


10. This power produces consciousness and sensibility, by the sap and serum 
which it supplies to the whole body; and is itself filled with juice, like a 
leather bag that is dipped into a well or water. 


11. This great artery of Kundalini being filled with gastric juice, forms the 
body in any shape it likes; as an artist draws the lines of a picture in any form, 
as it is pictured in his mind. (Hence it depends on the gastric artery to extend 
and sketch out the body according to its own plan). 


12. It supplies the embryonic seed placed in the foetus of the mother, with the 
power of its evolution into the fleshy and bony parts of its future body; as the 
tender sprout of the vegetative seed, waxes in time to a hard woody tree. (The 
act of evolution is attributed in the text to the triple causality of the physical 
nutrition in the stomach, the metaphysical cause of the intensity of thought in 
the growing mind, and the psychological tendency of the soul, produced from 
the fourth and prime cause of its prior propensity, which is inbred in grain and 
essential nature of every being, the intense thought is called [Sanskrit: hridaya 
bhdvna)). 


13. Know, Rama, this certain truth which is acknowledged by the wise, that 
the living principles acquire its desired state and stature, be it that of a 
mountain or bit of straw. (This passage supports the free agency of man to go 
in either way in opposition to the doctrine of blind fatalism, and the arbitrary 
power of the Divine will). 


14. You have heard, O Rama! of certain powers as of diminishing and 
increasing the bulk and stature of the body, attainable by the practice of Yoga; 
you will now hear me give you an interesting lecture, regarding the attainment 
of these capacities by means of knowledge or jndna. (This is the theory or 
theoretical part of the practice or practical art of Yoga). 


15. Know for certain that there is but only one intelligent principle of the 
Intellect, which is inscrutable, pure and most charming; which is minuter than 
the minutest, perfectly tranquil and is nothing of the mundane world or any of 
its actions or properties. 


16. The same chit, — intellect being collected in itself into an individuality 
(by its power of chayana integration) from the undivided whole, and 
assuming the power of will or volition, — sankalpa itself, becomes the living 
soul by transformation of its pure nature to an impure one. (This power of 
integration is said to be a fallacy, adhydsa, or misconception, — adhydropa, 
of the human mind, which attributes a certain quality to a thing by mistake or 
dropa as (Sanskrit: paratra pardbabhdsah); or mistaking a thing for another, 
e.g., [Sanskrit: shuktau ratradtavaddbhdsah]; i.e., taking the shell for silver 
from its outward appearance.) 


17. The will is a fallacy, and the body is a mistake; (because there is no 
mutation of volition or personality of the infinite intellect); and the ignorant 
alone distinguish the living soul from the universal spirit, as the ignorant boy 
sees the demon in a shadow. (AIl these are false attributes of the true one). 


18. When the lamp of knowledge brings the mind to the full light of truth, 
then the error of volition is removed from the living soul, as the cloud of the 
rainy weather are dissipated in Autumn. 


19. The body has its rest, after the wishes have subsided in the mind; just as 
the lamp is extinguished after its oil is exhausted. (Mental anxieties cause the 
restlessness of the body). 


20. The soul that sees the truth, has no more the knowledge of his body; as the 
man awakened from his sleep, has no longer the apparitions of his dream 
appearing before him. 


21. It is the mistaking of the unreal for the real or what is the same, the 
ascribing of reality to the unreality that gives the colour of reality to false 
material bodies; but the knowledge of the truth removes the error of the 
corporal body, and restore the soul to its wonted splendour and true felicity. 


22. But the error of taking the material body for the immaterial soul, is so 
deep rooted in the mind; that it is as difficult to remove, as it is for the 
strongest sun beams to perceive the mental gloom of men. 


23. This impervious darkness of the mind, is only to be perceived by the sun- 
shine of knowledge; that our soul is the seat of immaculate and all-pervading 


spirit of God, and that I myself am no other than the pure intellect which is in 
me. (The anal Huq of Mansur). 


24. Those that have known the supreme soul meditate on it in this manner in 
their own souls, until they find themselves to be assimilated to the same by 
their extensive thought of it. (Here we have the curious doctrine of strong 
thought drirha-bhdvand of Vasishtha again which inculcates the possibility of 
one's being whatever he strongly thinks himself to be. It is allied to the 
doctrine of the strength of belief, — faith and bhakti of others). 


25. It is hence, O Rama! that some men convert the deadly poison to sweet 
ambrosial food, and change the delicious nectar to bitter gall. (Thus Siva the 
God and Yogi converts the snake poison to his food and the sweets offered to 
his topmost mouth to the bitterest bane). 


26. So whatever is thought upon with intensity in any manner and on any 
occasion, the same comes to take place as it is seen in many instances. 


27. The body when seen in the light of a reality, is found to be a real 
existence; but being looked upon as an unreality, it vanishes into nothing (or it 
mixes in the vacuity of Brahma). 


28. You have thus heard from me, O righteous Rama! the theoretical mode, 
(jndna-yukti), of attaining the capacities of magnifying and minimizing one's 
person at will; I will now tell you of another method of gaining these powers, 
to which you shall have now to attend. 


29. You can practice by exhalation of your rechaka breath, to extract your 
vital power (life) from the cell of your Kundalini artery, and infuse it into 
another body; as the winds of the air, carry the fragrance of flowers into the 
nostrils. (This is the mode of ones forsaking its own body in order to enliven 
another). 


30. The former body is left lifeless like a log of wood or block of stone, and 
such is the relation between the body and life; as that of a bucket and its 
water, which is powered out to enliven the plants. 


31. Thus is the life infused in all movable and immovable things, in order to 
enjoy the pleasures of their particular states at its pleasure. 


32. The living soul having relished the bliss of its consummate state, returns 
to its former body if it is still in existence, or it goes and settles somewhere 
else, as it may best suit its taste. 


33. The Yogis thus pass into all bodies and live with their conscious souls, and 
fill the world also by magnifying their spirits over all space. 


34. The Yogi who is lord of himself by his enlightened understanding, and his 
knowledge of all things beside their accompanying evils; obtains in an instant 
whatever he wants to have, and which is present before the effulgence of 
divine light, (andvarana Brahma jyoti). 


CHAPTER LXXXIII. 


Story of the miserly Kirata. 


Argument: — Perfection of Chudala and the imbecility of the Prince; efficacy 
of instruction and its elucidation in the tale of niggardly Kirata. 


VASISHTHA continued: — Thus the royal dame was possessed of the 
qualities of contracting and expanding herself to any form, and became so 
expert in these by their continued practice of them; 


2. That she made her aerial journey and navigated at pleasure over the 
expanse of waters; she moved on the surface of the earth, as the river Ganges 
glides on in her silent course. 


3. She dwelt in the bosom of her lord, as the goddess of prosperity abides in 
the heart of Hari, and travelled in a moment with her mind over every city and 
country over the earth. 


4. This fairy lady fled in the air, and flashed like the lightning with the flashes 
of her twinkling eyes; she passed as a shadow over the earth, as a body of 
clouds passes over a range of mountains. 


5. She passed without any hazard through the grass and wood, stones and 
clods of earth, and through fire and water and air and vacuum, as a thread 
passes through hole of a heart. (Milton says: — That with no middle flight, to 
the heaven of heavens I have presented through an earthly quest). 


6. She lightly skimmed over the mountain peaks, and pryed through the 
regions of the regents of all the sides of heaven; she penetrated into the 
cavities of the empty womb of vacuity, and have a pleasant trip whatever she 
directed in her flight. (All this is brain action and no reality at all). 


7. She conversed freely with all living beings, whether they move or prone on 
the ground as the beast of earth, or crawl upon it as the snakes and insects. 
She talked with the savage Pisacha tribes and communicated with men and the 


immortal Gods and demi-gods also. (The clever princess, like the far-seeing 
seer, saw everything with her mind's eye, and held her converse (vyavahdra) 
with all). 


8. She tried much to communicate her knowledge to her ignorant husband, but 
he was no way capable of receiving her spiritual instruction. (Atmajndna 
means also her intuitive or self-taught knowledge). 


9. He understood her as no other than his young princess and the mistress of 
his house, and skilled only in the arts of coquetry and house-wifery, (and quite 
ignorant of higher things because the ladies of India were barred from 
spiritual knowledge). 


10. Until this time the prince had been ignorant of the qualifications of the 
princess Chudala, and knew not that she had made her progress in the spiritual 
science, as a young student makes his proficiency in the different branches of 
learning. 


11. She also was as reserved to show her consummate learning to her 
unenlightened husband; as a Brahman declines to show his secret rites to a 
vile sudra. 


12. Rama said: — If it was impossible, Sir, for the seeress of consummate 
wisdom to communicate her knowledge to her husband Sikhidhwaja, with all 
her endeavours to enlighten him on the subject; how can it be possible for 
others, to be conversant in spiritual knowledge in any other means. 


13. Vasishtha answered: — Rama, it is obedience to the rule of attending to 
the precepts of the preceptor, joined with the intelligence of the pupil, which 
is the only means of gaining instruction. 


14. The hearing of sermon nor the observance of any religious rite, is of any 
efficacy towards the knowledge of the soul; unless one will employ his own 
soul, to have the light of the supreme soul shine upon it. It is the spirit alone 
that can know the spirit, as it is the serpent only that can trace out the path of 
another serpent. 


15. Rama rejoined: — If such is the course of the world, that we can learn 
nothing without the instruction of our preceptors; then tell me, O sage! how 
the precepts of the wise lead to our spiritual knowledge also. 


16. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me Rama, relate to you a tale to this effect. 
There lived an old Kirata of yore, who was miserly in his conduct as he was 
rich in his possessions of wealth and grains. He dwelt with his family by the 


side of the Vindhyan woods, as a poor Brahman lives apart from his kith and 
kin. 


17. He happened to pass by his native forest at one time, and slip a single 
couri from his purse, which fell in a grassy furze and was lost under the grass. 


18. He ran on every side, and beat at the bush for three days to find out his lost 
couri, and impelled by his niggardliness to leave no fallen leaf unturned over 
the ground. 


19. As he searched and turned about, he ran and turned it ever in his mind, 
saying: — Ah! this single couri would make four by its commerce, and that 
would bring me eight in time, and this would make a hundred and a thousand, 
and more and more by repetition, so I have lost a treasure in this. 


20. Thus he counted over and over, over the gains he would gain, and sighed 
as often at the loss he did sustain; and took into no account of the rustic 
peasantry on his foolish penury. 


21. At the end of the third day, he came across a rich jewel, as brilliant as the 
bright moon in the same forest; which compensated for the loss of his paltry 
couri by a thousand fold. 


22. He returned gladly with his great gain to his homely dwelling, and was 
highly delighted with the thought of keeping off poverty forever from his 
door. (The word Kerate is commonly used for Kirata, — the miser). 


23. Now as the Kiradta was quite satisfied, with his unexpected gain of the 
great treasure, in the search of his trifling couri; and passed his days without 
any care or fear of the changeful world. 


24. So the student comes to obtain his spiritual knowledge from his preceptor, 
while he has been in quest of his temporal learning, which is but a trifle in 
comparison to his eternal concern. 


25. But then, O sinless Rama! it is not possible to attain to divine knowledge, 
by the mere lectures of the preceptor; because the lord is beyond the 
perception of senses, and can neither be expressed by nor known from the 
words of the instructor's mouth. (It requires one's intuition and spiritual 
inspiration also to see the spirit in one's own spirit). 


26. Again, it is not possible to arrive to spiritual knowledge, without the 
guidance of the spiritual guide; for can one gain the rich gem without his 
search after the couri like the miserly Kirata? (This means that it is impossible 


to attain the esoteric or abstract knowledge of the soul, without a prior 
acquaintance of the exoteric and concrete). 


27. As the search of couri became the cause of or was attended with the gain 
of the gem, so our attendance on secular instructions of the preceptor, 
becomes an indirect cause to our acquirement of the invaluable treasure of 
spiritual knowledge. 


28. Rama, look at this wonderful eventualities of nature, which brings forth 
events otherwise than the necessary results of our pursuits, (as the search of 
couri resulted the gain of the gem). 


29. As it often comes to pass, that our attempts are attended with other result 
than those which are ought; it is better for us to remain indifferent with regard 
to the result of our act. 


CHAPTER LXXXIV. 


Pilgrimage of prince Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — Sikhidhwaja's abandonment of the world, and remaining as 
religious Recluse on the Mandara mountain; followed by the visit of the 
Princess and her admonition to him. 


VASISHTHA related: — The prince Sikhidhwaja continued in utter darkness, 
without the sight of his spiritual knowledge; and groped his way amidst the 
gloom of the world, as a childless man passes his woeful days, in utter despair 
of any glimpse of hope. (As son is the hope of a man both in this world as 
well as in the next). 


2. His heart burned disconsolate in the flame of his anxieties, without the 
consolation of his salvation; and the great affluence of his fortune, served as 
full to feed the fire of his hopelessness, for want of the cooling shower of 
religion. 


3. He found his consolation in lonely retreats, in the caves of mountains and 
beside their falling waters; where he strayed at large, like the beasts of prey 
flying from the arrows of huntsmen. 


4. Rama, he became as distracted as you had been before; and discharged his 
daily rituals, at the humble request and repeated solicitations of his attending 
servants. 


5. He was as inexcitable and cold blooded, as a religious recluse; he desisted 
from the enjoyments of his princely pleasures, and abstained also from his 
usual food. 


6. He gave his homage with large largesses of lands and gifts of gold and kine 
to the gods, Brahmans and his relatives also. 


7. He went on performing the austerities of the religious rites, and the rigorous 
ceremonies of the chandaéryana and others; he travelled through wilds and 


deserts and inhabited tracts, to his pilgrimages far and near. 


8. Yet he found nowhere the consolation of his mind, which he kept seeking 
all-abouts; as a miner digs the sterile soil in quest of some mineral, where 
there is no such thing to be found. 


9. He was pining away under the ardour of his anxiety, as it were under the 
fiery heat of the sun; in search of some remedy for his worldly cares, which 
hunted him incessantly both by day and night. 


10. Being absorbed in his thoughts, he sought not for aught of the poisonous 
pleasures of his realm; and with the meekness of his spirit and mind, he did 
not look at the grand estate which lay before him. 


11. It happened one day, as he was sitting with his beloved princess reclining 
on his lap; that he spoke to her as follows, in his mellifluent speech. 


12. Sikhidhwaja said: — I have long tasted the pleasures of my realm, and 
enjoyed the sweet and bitter of my large property and landed possessions. I 
am now grown as weary of them, as they are both the same and stale to me. 


13. Know my delighted lady, that the silent sage is exempt from pleasure and 
pain; and no prosperity nor adversity, can ever betide the lonely hermit of the 
forest. 


14. Neither the fear of the loss of lives in battle, nor the dread of losing the 
territory in the reverse of victory, can ever betake the lonely hermit of the 
forest; wherefore, I ween his helpless state, to be happier far than the dignity 
of royalty. 


15. The woodland parterres are as pleasing to me, as thyself with the clusters 
of their blossoms in spring, and with their ruddy leaves resembling thy rosy 
palms; their twisted filaments are as the fillets of thy curling hairs, and the 
hoary and flimsy clouds in the air, are as their white and clean vests and 
raiments. 


16. The blooming flowers resemble their ornaments, and their pollen is the 
scented powder on their persons; and the seats of reddish stones, bear 
resemblance to the protruberances on their posteriors. 


17. The ambient and pearly rills flowing amidst them, resemble the pendant 
strings of pearls on their necks; and their foaming waves seen as clusters of 
pearls, tied as the knots of their vestures. The tender creepers are as their 
playful daughters, and the frisking fawns are as their play-some darlings. 


18. Perfumed with the natural fragrance of flowers, and having the swarming 
bees for their eye-lids and eyebrows; and wearing the flowery garment of 
flowers, they are offering an abundance of fruits for the food of the 
passengers. 


19. The pure waters of the falling cascades are sweet to taste, and cool the 
body as thy company gratifies my senses. I foster therefore, an equal fondness 
for these woodland scenes, as I bear for thy company also. 


20. But the calm composures which these solitudes seem to afford to the soul, 
are in my estimation far superior to the delight, that I derive from the cooling 
moon light, and the bliss that I might enjoy in the paradise of India and in the 
heaven of Brahma himself. 


21. Now my dear one, you ought to put no obstacle to these designs of mine; 
because no faithful wife ever presents any obstructions to the desire of her 
lord. 


22. Chuidala replied: — The work done in its proper time, is commendable as 
seasonable and not that which is unseasonable or intempestive; it is as 
delightful to see the blossoming of flowers in the vernal season, as it is 
pleasant to find the ripened fruits and grains in autumn. 


23. It is for the old and decrepit and those broken down in their bodies by age, 
to resort in their retirement in the woods; and does not befit a young man as 
yourself to fly from the world, wherefore I do not approve your choice. (So 
says the poet, “O that my weary age may find a peaceful hermitage”). 


24. Let us remain at home, O young prince, so long as we have not passed our 
youth, and flourish here as flowers which do not forsake the parent tree, until 
the flowering time is over. 


25. Let us, like flowery creepers, grow hoary with grey hairs on our heads, 
and then get out together from our home; as a pair of fond herons fly from the 
dried lake forever. 


26. Mind also my noble lord, the great sin that awaits on the person of that 
disgraceful prince of the royal race, who forsakes to seek after the welfare of 
his people during the time of his rule and reign. (Abdication of the crown was 
not allowable without an apparent heir). 


27. Moreover, mind the opposition you will have to meet with from your 
subjects, who are authorized to check your unseasonable and unworthy act, as 
you are empowered to put a check to theirs. (The Hindu law is opposed to the 


spirit of despotism and lawlessness of the ruling power). 


28. Sikhidhwaja rejoined: — Know my royal dame, that thy application is all 
in vain to my determination of going away from here; and know me as already 
gone from thee and thy realm to the retreat woods afar from hence. 


29. Thou art young and handsome, and aught not accompany me to dreary 
deserts and forests; which are in many respects dreadful to and impassable by 
men. 


30. Women however, hardy they may be, are never able to endure the 
hardships of forest life; as it is impossible for the tender tendril to withstand 
the stroke of the felling axe. 


31. Do thou remain here, O excellent lady, to rule over this realm in my 
absence; and take upon thee the burden of supporting thy dependents, which 
is the highest and best duty of women. 


32. Vasishtha related: — Saying so to the moon-faced princess, the self- 
governed prince rose from his seat, to make his daily ablution and discharge 
his multitudinous duties of the day. 


33. Afterwards, the prince took leave of his subjects, notwithstanding all their 
entreaties to detain him; and departed like the setting sun towards his sylvan 
journey, which was unknown to and impassable by everyone. 


34. He set out like the setting sun shorn of his glory, and disappeared like the 
sun from the sight of everybody; veil of melancholy covered the face of the 
princess, as she saw the egress of her lord from the recess of her chamber; as 
the face of nature is obscured from the shadow of darkness, upon the 
disappearance of day light below the horizon. (Here is a continued simile 
between the parting sun and the departing prince, and the face of nature and 
that of the princess). 


35. Now the dark night advanced, veiling the world under her mantle of the 
ash-coloured dusk; as when the God Hara forsakes the fair Ganga, and takes 
the nigrescent Yamuna to his embrace. (The day and night representing the 
two consorts of the sun). 


36. The sides of heaven seemed to smile all around, with the denticulated 
clumps of evening clouds; and with the brightness of the moon-beams, 
glittering on the shoots of Tamala trees. (i.e., The skies seemed to smile with 
their glittering teeth of the evening clouds, and smiling moon-beams all 
around). 


37. And as the lord of the day departed towards the setting mountain of 
Sumeru on the other side of the horizon, in order to rove over the elysian 
garden or paradise of the gods on the north; so the brightness of the day began 
to fail, as the shade of evening prevailed over the face of the forsaken world. 


38. Now sable night accompanied by her lord the nocturnal luminary, 
advanced on this side of the southern hemisphere; to sport as a loving couple 
with this cooling light and shade. 


39. Then were the clusters of stars seen spangled in the ethereal sphere under 
the canopy of heaven, and appeared as handfuls of /djas or fried rice scattered 
by the hands of celestial maiden on the auspicious occasion. 


40. The sable night gradually advanced to her puberty, with the buds of 
lotuses as her budding breasts; she then smiled with her moony face, and 
littered in the opening of the nightly flowers. 


41. The prince returned to his beloved princess after performing his evening 
services, and was drowned in deep sleep; as the mount Mainaka has drowned 
in the depth of the sea. (Mainaka is a hidden rock in the sea). 


42. It was now the time of midnight, when all was still and quiet all about; and 
the people were all as fast asleep, as if they were pent up in the bosom of 
stones. 


43. He finding her fast asleep in her soft and downy bed, and lolling in the lap 
of indolence, like the female bee in the cup of the lotus. 


44. The prince started from his sleep, and parted the sleeping partner of his 
bed from his cold embrace; as the ascending node of rahu slowly lets off from 
its mouth, the eclipsed moon in the east. 


45. He got up from one-half of the bed cloth, while the supine princess lay on 
the other-half of it; as when the God Hari rises from his bed of the waters of 
the milky ocean, leaving the lonely Lakshmi roll in the waves after him. 


46. He walked out of the palace, and bade the guards to stand at their places; 
while he was going, he said to arrest a gang of robbers beyond the skirts of the 
city, with his full confidence in himself. 


47. Farewell my royalty, said he, and then passed onward out of his 
princedom; and passed through inhabited tracts and forest lands, as the course 
of a river runs to the sea. 


48. He passed amidst the gloom of night and through the thickets of the forest 


beset by thorny bushes; and full of heinous beasts and reptiles, with his firm 
fortitude. 


49. In the morning he arrived at an open tract of land which was free from 
woods and jungles, and ran the course of the day with his peregrination on 
foot from sun rise to the setting sun; when he took refuge under the bower of 
the grove. 


50. The sun departing from sight left him to the darkness of night, when he 
performed his bathing and the daily rite; and having eaten some root or fruit 
which he could get, he passed the night resting on the barren ground under 
him. (The custom of evening bath, is now falling into disuse). 


51. Again and again, the morning appeared and brought to light many new 
cities and districts, and many hills and rivers; which he passed over bravely 
for twelve repeated days and nights. 


52. He then reached at the foot of the Mandara mountain, which was covered 
by a dense and immense forest which no human foot could penetrate; and lay, 
(stood), afar from the reach of man and the boundaries of human habitation. 


53. There appeared a spot beset by sounding rills amidst it, and set with rows 
of trees with aqueducts under them; here the relics of a dilapidated dwelling 
came to sight, and seemed to bear the appearance of the deserted mansion of 
some holy hermit. 


54. It was clear of all heinous reptiles and small insects, and was planted with 
sacred plants and creepers for the sacerdotal purposes of the holy Siddhas; 
while it was full of fruit trees which supplied its occupant with ample food. 


55. There was seen a level and pure spot of ground with a water course, and 
presenting the green verdure and verdant trees; loaded with luxuriant fruits 
and stretching a cooling shade all over it. 


56. The prince built here a bower of verdant creepers and leafy branches, 
which with their blooming blossoms glistened; as the blue vault of heaven 
under the lightnings of the rainy season. 


57. He made for himself a staff of bamboo and some vessels for his food and 
drink, as also some plates to put his offerings of fruits and flowers in them; 
and a jar for the presentation of holy water. He likewise strung some seeds 
together for the purpose of his saintly rosary. 


58. He procured the hides of dead animals and the deer-skin for his seat and 


cover let in cold, and placed them carefully in his holy hermit's cell. 


59. He also collected all other things, which were of use in the discharge of 
his sacerdotal functions; and preserved in his sacred cell, as the Lord of 
creatures has stored the earth, with every provision requisite for living beings. 


60. He made his morning devotion, and turned his beads with the muttering of 
his mantras in the hours of his forenoon; and then performed his sacred 
ablution, and offered the flowers in the service of the Gods in the afternoon. 


61. He afterwards took some wild fruits and ground roots, and the soft lotus 
stalks for his food in the evening, and then passed the night with his lonely 
self-possession, and in the meditation of his Maker. 


62. Thus did the prince of Malwa pass his days with perfect cheer of his heart 
in the cottage cell, which he had constructed at the foot of the Mandara 
mountain; and thought no more of his princely pleasures which were utterly 
lost under the influence of the resignation, which had now taken full 
possession of his entire soul and mind. 


CHAPTER LXXXV 


Investigation into true Happiness. 


Argument: — The princess goes in quest of the Prince. Their Meeting and the 
Admonition of the Princess. 


VASISHTHA continued: — In this manner, the prince Sikhidhwaja remained 
in his monastery in the forest, in his state of perfect felicity; while the princess 
remained at home, and did as you shall now hear from me. 


2. After the prince had gone away from the palace at midnight, Chudala 
started from her sleep; as a timid fawn lying in the village, is startled by fear. 


3. She found the bed vacated by her husband and thought it as dreary as the 
sky, without the sun and moon. (A deserted wife is as forlorn as a deserted 
village or desolate country). 


4. She rose up with a melancholy face, and with her heart full of sorrow and 
sadness; and her limbs were as lank as the leaves of plants, without being well 
watered in summer. 


5. Sorrow sat heavy in her heart, and drove the charm and cheerfulness off her 
countenance; and she remained as a winter day, over cast by a cloud or 
covered by a hoar-frost over its face. 


6. She sat awhile on the bedstead, and thought with sorrow in herself; saying, 
“Ah woe unto me,” that my lord is gone away from here, and abandoned a 
kingdom for a retreat in the woods. 


7. What then can I do now, than repair to my husband; where he is, because it 
is appointed both by the law of nature and God, that the husband is the only 
resort and support of the wife. 


8. Having thought so, Chidala rose up to follow her husband and she fled by 
the door of a window into the open air. (This means that her spirit fled into air, 


by the power of her Yoga). 


9. She roamed in her aerial course, and by the force of her breath on the wings 
of air; and appeared before the face of the aerial spirits, (Siddhas), as a second 
moon moving in the skies. 


10. As she was passing at the night time, she happened to behold her lord 
roving about with a sword in his hand; and appearing as a ghost of a vetala or 
demon wandering in the solitary forest. 


11. The princess seeing her husband in this manner from her aerial seat, she 
began to reflect on the future state which awaited on her husband; and which 
she foresaw by power of her Yoga. 


12. It is certain, O Rama! that whatever is allotted in the book of fate to befall 
on anybody at any time or place or manner, the same is sure to take place at 
the very moment and spot and in the same way; (and all this is well known to 
the holy seer and seeress by the prophetic power, which they acquire by their 
knowledge and practice of Yoga). 


13. The princess seeing plainly in her presence, whatever is to take place on 
her husband; and knowing it to be averted by no means, she stopped from 
going to him to communicate the same. 


14. Be my visit postponed to him to a future occasion, when it is destined for 
me to be in his company again. 


15. Thinking so in her mind, Chtidala turned her course from him, and 
returned to her inner apartment and reclined on her milk white pillow; as the 
crescent of the moon lies recumbent on the hoary forehead of Hara. 


16. She proclaimed to her people, that the prince was gone on some important 
occasion; and having relieved with the consolation of his quick return, she 
took the reins of the government in her own hands. 


17. She managed the state in the manner of her husband, according to the 
established rules of toleration; and with the same care and vigilance, as the 
husband-woman guards her ripening cornfields. 


18. In this manner they passed their days without seeing one another, and the 
conjugal pair lived separated from each other; in their respective habitations 
of the royal palace and the solitary forest. 


19. And in this manner passed on their days and nights, their weeks and 
fortnights, their months and seasons in regular succession over one and 


another; the one counting his days in the woods and the other in her princely 
palace. 


20. What is the use of a lengthy description of full eighteen years, which 
glided on slowly over the separated couple, the one dwelling in her palatial 
dome, and the other in his woodland retreat. 


21. Many more years elapsed in this manner, until the hermit prince 
Sikhidhwaja was overtaken by the hoary old age; in his holy hermitage in a 
cell of the great Mandara mountain. 


22. Knowing the passions of the prince to be on the wane, with his declining 
age and grey hairs, and finding herself not yet too old to overtake him in the 
distant forest. 


23. And believing that it was the proper time for her to prevail on him, and to 
bring him back to the palace, she thought of joining her husband where he 
was. 


24. With these thoughts, she made up her mind of going towards the Mandara 
mountain; and started from her home at night, and mounted on the wings of 
air to the upper sky. 


25. As she was moving onward on the pinions of air, she beheld in the upper 
sky some Siddha-women, wearing the thin bark of the Kalpa tree and girt with 
jewels of clustering gems. 


26. These were the inhabitants of the garden of paradise, and going out to 
meet their Siddha husbands; and sprinkled over with perfumeries, shedding 
their dews as bright moon beams. 


27. She breathed the air perfumed by the flowers of the garden of paradise, 
and worn by the Siddhas of Eden; and wallowed in the moon-beams, waving 
like the billows of the milky ocean. 


28. She felt a purer moon light, as she ascended the higher atmosphere; and 
she passed amidst the clouds, as the flashing lightning moves in their midst. 
(The fair princess flashed as the lightning). 


29. She said, — this flashing lightning though situated in the bosom of her 
cloudy spouse, is yet looking at him repeatedly with the winkling of her eyes; 
so must I look out for my absent lord, as I pass like the lightning in the 
midway sky. 


30. It is true, she said, that nature is irrepressible during the life time of a 


person; hence it is impossible for my disquieted mind, to have its quiet 
without the sight of my loving and lion like lord. 


31. My mind roves and runs mad, when I say, I will see my lord, and when I 
will see these creepers turning round and clasping their supporting tree. (And 
all my philosophy avails me naught against my nature). 


32. My mind loses its patience to see the contraction of these senseless 
creepers, and the excursion of the superior siddha females in quest of their 
consorts. (All animated nature from the vegetable to the immortal are bound 
by conjugal love). 


33. How then, and when, shall I like them come to meet the man that is 
situated in my heart. 


34. These gentle breezes, and these cooling moon-beams and those plants of 
the forest, do all continue to disquiet my heart and set it on fire, (instead of 
cooling its fervour). 


35. O my simple heart, why dost thou throb in vain and thrill at every vein 
within me? and oh my faithful mind, that art pure as air, why dost thou lose 
thy reason and right discretion? 


36. It is thou, O faithless mind! that dost excite my heart to run after its 
spouse; better remain with thy yearnings in thyself, than torment my quiet 
spirit with thy longings. 


37. Or, why is it, O silly woman! that thou dost long in vain after thy husband, 
who possibly became too old (to require thee anymore); he is now an ascetic 
and too weak in his bodily frame, and devoid of all his earthly desires. 


38. I think these desires of the enjoyment of his princely honors and pleasures, 
have now been utterly rooted out of his mind; and the plant of his fondness for 
sensual gratifications, is now as dry as a channel that pours forth its waters 
into a large river or sea. 


39. I think my husband, who was as fond of me as to form one soul with 
myself; has become as callous to soft passions, as a dried and withered tree. 


40. Or, I will try the power of my Yoga to waken his mind to sense, and infuse 
the eager longings and throbbings of my heart into his. 


41. I will collect the thoughts of the ascetic devotee to one focus, and employ 
them towards the government of his realm; where we may be settled forever 
to our hearts content. 


42. O, I have after long discovered the way to my object, and it is by infusing 
my very thoughts into the mind of thy husband. 


43. The unanimity of the minds of the wedded pair, and the pleasure of their 
constant union; contribute to the highest happiness of human beings on earth. 


44. Revolving in this manner in her mind, the princess Chudala passed 
onward in her aerial journey; now mounting on mountains and mountainous 
clouds, and then passing the bounds of lands and visible horizons; she reached 
the sight of Mandara, and found the glen and cavern in it. 


45. She entered the grove as an aerial spirit invisible to sight, and passed as 
the air amidst it known by the shaking of the leaves of trees. (The spirits like 
winds have motion and the power of moving other bodies). 


46. She beheld a leafy hut in one corner of the wood, and knew her husband 
by the power of her Yoga; though appeared to be transformed to another 
person. 


47. She found his body that was decorated before by a variety of jewels, and 
glittered as the mount of Meru with its gold; to have grown as lean and thin 
and as dark and dry, as a withered and dried leaf. 


48. He wore a vest of rays, and seemed as if he had dipped in a fountain of 
ink; he sat alone in one spot, and appeared as the god Siva to be wholly 
devoid of all desire. 


49. He was sitting on the barren ground, and stringing the flowers to his 
braided hairs; when the beauteous princess approached before him. 


50. She was moved to sorrow at the sight of his miserable plight, and thus 
bespoke to herself inaudibly in her mind. Alas, how painful it is to behold this 
piteous sight! 


51. O! the great stupidity that rises from ignorance of spiritual knowledge, and 
which has brought on this miserable condition on this self-deluded prince. 


52. I must not call him unfortunate, as long as he is my husband; though the 
deep darkness of his mind, (ignorance), hath brought to this miserable plight. 
(The living husband however miserable, is always to be called true fortunate 
by the faithful wife.) 


53. I must try my best to bring him to the knowledge of truth, which will no 
doubt restore him to his sense of enjoyment here, and of his liberation 
hereafter; and change his figure to another form altogether. 


54. I must advance nearer to him to instil understanding in his mind, or else 
my words will make no effect in him; who treats me always as his young and 
silly wife. 


55. I will therefore, admonish my husband in the figure of a devotee, and it is 
possible that my admonition delivered in this manner, will make its effect in 
him; who is now grown hoary with age; (old age must have abated the ardour 
of youth). 


56. It is possible that good senses may dawn in the clear understanding, which 
is not perverted from its nature; saying so, the princess Chudala took the 
shape of a Brahman boy on herself. 


57. She reflected a little on the Agni-soma-mantra, and changed her form as 
the water turns to a wave; and then alighted on the earth, in the shape of a 
Brahman's lad. 


58. She advanced toward her lord with a smiling countenance, and the prince 
Sikhidhwaja beheld the Brahman boy advancing towards him. 


59. He appeared to come from some other forest, and stood before him in the 
form of devotion itself; his body was as bright as the molten gold, and his 
person was ornamented with a string of pearls. 


60. The white sacrificial thread graced his neck, and his body was covered 
with two pieces of milk white vests; he held the sacred water pot on one hand, 
and with his pupils staff in the other, he made his approach to the prince. (The 
order of the students was called dandi, from their holding the sacred stick in 
one hand, like the pilgrim staff in Europe). 


61. His wrist was entwined by a string of beads, and a long and double chain 
of rosary hang from his neck to the ground. (Double and triple threads of 
sacred seeds worn about the necks of saints). 


62. His head was covered over by long and flowing jet black hairs, in the 
manner of the strings of black bees, fluttering about the tops of white lotuses; 
and the radiance of his, shed a lustre on the spot. 


63. His face ornamented with earrings, glowed as the rising sun with his lustre 
of rosy rays, and the knotted hair on the top of his head with the manddara 
flower fastened on it, appeared as pinnacle of a mountain with the rising moon 
above it. 


64. The husband that sat quiet with his tall stature, and his limbs and senses 


under his subjection; appeared as a mount of ice with the ashes rubbed all 
over his body. 


65. He saw the Brahman boy appearing before him, as the full moon rising on 
the aureate mount of Meru; and rose before him with the respect. (Which is 
paid to that luminary by her worshippers). 


66. Thinking his guest as the son of some God, the prince stood with his bare 
feet before him; and addressed him saying, — obeisance to thee, O thou son 
of a God, take this seat and sit thyself there. 


67. He pointed out to him with his hand the leafy bed that was spread before 
him, and offered him a handful of flowers which he poured into his hands. 


68. The Brahman boy responded to him saying: — “I greet thee in return, O 
thou son of a king! that lookest like a dew drop or the beaming moon-light 
sparkling on a lotus leaf.” He then received the flowers from his hand and sat 
upon the leafy bed. 


69. Sikhidhwaja said: — Tell me, O thou heaven born boy, whence thou 
comest and whither thou goest, as for me it is lucky day that has brought thee 
to my sight. 


70. Please accept this pure water, and fragrant flowers and this honorarium 
also; and receive this string of flowers, that I have strung with my hands; and 
so be all well with thee. 


71. Vasishtha related: — So saying, Sikhidhwaja offered the flowers, the 
wreathed blossoms, the honorariums and other offerings; as directed by the 
ceremonial law to his worshipful lady. 


72. Chudala said: — I have travelled far and wide over many countries on the 
surface of this earth, and have never met with so hearty a reception and such 
honors; as I have now received from thee. 


73. Thy humility, courtesy and complacence bespeak thee to be highly 
favoured of the Gods, and betoken thee to be attended with long life on earth. 
(Because the meek and gentle are said to be long lived on earth). 


74. Tell me, O devotee, whether you have ever applied your mind towards the 
acquirement of your final liberation and extinction; after the abandonment of 
all your earthly desires, by the magnanimity and tranquillization of your soul 
for a long time. (It is true you have long forsaken the vanities of the world, but 
have you set your heart to seek the eternal emancipation of your soul?). 


75. You have, my dear Sir, chosen a very painful alternative for your final 
liberation, that you have made the vow of your undergoing the hardship of 
this forest life, by forsaking the care of your large dominion. (The care of the 
state is painful, but the pains of hermitage are much more so). 


76. Sikhidhwaja replied: — I wonder not that thou must know all things, 
being a God thyself and thou wearest this form of the Brahman boy, yet the 
super-natural beauty of thy person, bespeaks thee to be an all-knowing deity. 


77. Methinks these members of the body, are bedewed with the ambrosial 
beam of moon-light, or how could thy very appearance shed such nectarious 
peace even at the first sight. 


78. O handsome boy! I see in thy person a great resemblance of the features of 
my beloved one, who is now reigning over my kingdom, (and whom perhaps I 
will see no more in this life). 


79. Please now to refresh thy fair and fatigued frame, with wearing these 
flowery chaplet from the head to foot; as the vest of a hoary cloud, invests a 
mountain from its top to bottom. 


80. I see thy face as beautiful, as the stainless moon; and thy limbs as delicate, 
as tender petals of flowers; and I find them now waning and fading under the 
solar gleams. 


81. Know pretty youth that it was for the service of the gods, that I had 
wreathed the flowers together; and now I offer and bequeath them to thee, that 
art no less a God to me. 


82. My life is crowned today with its best luck by its service of a guest like 
thyself, for it is said by the wise that attendance on guests is meritorious than 
the merit of attending on the Gods. (Hence the law of Hospitality is not less 
binding on the Hindu than it is with the Bedouin Arabs). 


83. Now deign, O moon faced deva (deity) to reveal unto me what God thou 
art, and the progeny of what deity that dost deign to dignify me with thy visit; 
please tell me all this and remove the doubts that disturb my breast. 


84. The Brahman boy replied: — Hear me, prince, relate to thee all that thou 
requirest to know of me; for who is there so uncivil, that will deceive and not 
comply to the request of his humble suppliant. 


85. There lives in this world, the well-known, the holy saint, Narada by name; 
who is the snowy spot of pure camphor, on the face of those that are famed 


for the purity of their lives. 


86. It was at one time that this Godly saint sat in his devotion in a cavern of 
the golden mountain; where the holy river of Ganga, fast flows with her 
running current and huge billows dashing against the shore. 


87. The saint stepped out once to the beach of the river, to see how it glided 
on in its course; like a necklace of gems torn down from the mountain on 
high. 


88. He heard there at once the tinkling sound of trinkets and bracelets, and a 
mixed murmur of vocal voice; and felt the curiosity to know what it was and 
whence it came. 


89. He lightly looked towards the sacred stream and observed there an 
assemblage of young ladies, who equalled the celestial nymphs Rambha and 
Tilottama in the beauty of their persons; who had come out to sport by and 
bathe in the clear waters of the holy river. 


90. They plunged and played in the waters removed from the sight of men, 
and were all naked with their uncovered breasts; blooming as the buds of 
golden lotuses in the lake. 


91. These were jogging to and fro and dashing against one another like the 
ripened fruits of trees, and seemed to be filled with flavoured liquor for the 
giddiness of their observers. 


92. Their swollen bosoms formed the sanctuary of the God of love, and were 
washed by the pure waters of the sacred river. 


93. Their fullness with luscious liquor, put to blush the sweet waters of the 
sacred river of Ganga; they were as mound in the garden of paradise, and as 
the wheels of the car for the God Kama to ride upon. 


94. Their buttocks were as pillars of the bridge in water, obstructing and 
dividing the free passage of the waters of the Ganges; and their upper part of 
the body, gives a lustre of world's beauty. 


95. The shadow of one another's body was clearly visible to the naked eye, on 
the limpid waters of the Ganga; like a Kalpa tree in rainy season, with all its 
branches. 


96. The thick verdure of the verdant season, had put to shade the light of the 
day; and the flying dust of flowers, had filled the forest air with fragrance. 


97. Water-fowls of various kinds were sporting on the banks, as they do by 
the sea side and about the watering places round the trees; while the budding 
breasts of these dames, had put to blush the blooming buds of lotuses. 


98. They held up their faces, which were as beautiful as a bud of lotuses; 
while their loosened hairs hung by them, like swarms of bees; and the loose 
glances of their eye-balls, were playing as the fluttering black-bees. 


99. Their swollen breasts resembling the aureate lotuses, which were used by 
the Gods as golden cups to hide their ambrosial nectar therein, for fear of its 
being ravished by the demons and demi-Gods. 


100. They were now seen to be hiding themselves in the secret bowers and 
caverns of the mountain, like lotuses hidden under foliage; and now hastening 
to the cooling beach of the river, to leave their lovely limbs in its limpid 
stream. 


101. The saint saw the bevy of the young ladies, resembling the body of the 
full moon, complete with all its digits; and his mind was ravished with their 
beauty (as the minds of men are turned to the delirium of lunacy by looking at 
the moon-light). 


102. He lost the balance of his reason, and became elated with giddiness; and 
his breath of his life throbbed in his heart, by impulse of the delight that raged 
and boiled in his breast. 


103. At last the excess of his rapture, gave effusion of his passion; as the 
fullness of a cloud in summer, breaks out in water in the rainy weather. 


104. The saint turned as wan as a waning moon, and as the pale moon-light in 
frost; and like a fading plant, torn from its supporting tree. 


105. He faded as the stalk of a creeper parted in two, and withered away as a 
sapling after it has lost its juicy sap. 


106. Sikhidhwaja asked: — How is it that the pure and peerless saint, who is 
liberated in his life time and acquainted with all knowledge; who is void of 
desires and devoid of passions, and who is as pure as the clear air both in the 
inside as well as outside of his body? 


107. How is it that even he the holy Narada himself, could lose his patience 
and countenance who leads his life of celibacy all along? 


108. Chudala replied: — Know, O princely sage! that all living beings in the 
three worlds, not excepting even the Gods, have their bodies composed of 


both ingredients (of good and evil) by their very nature. 


109. Some remain in ignorance, and others in knowledge to the end of their 
lives; and some remaining in happiness, and others in misery to the end of 
their days. 


110. Some thrive in happiness with their virtue of contentment and the like, 
and are enlightened in their minds like a room by the light of the lamps; and 
as the bosom of the sea by the light of the luminaries of heaven. 


111. Some are tormented by their hunger and poverty, and are involved in 
misery like the face of nature under the darkness of clouds. 


112. The true and pure reality of the soul, (divine spirit), being once lost to 
one's sight, (the visible or phenomenal world), makes its appearance before 
him, like a dark and thick cloud of rainy weather. 


113. Though one may be employed in his continuous investigation into 
spirituality, yet a moment's neglect of his spiritualism is sure to darken his 
spiritual light; as the apparition of the world appears to sight. 


114. As the succession of light and darkness makes the course of the day and 
night, so the return of the pain and pleasure indicates the progress of life. 
(This variety kills the monotony of life). 


115. Thus the two states of pleasure and pain, are known to accompany over 
lives from birth to death; as the results of our prior acts (of merit and demerit). 


116. This impression of past life marks the lives of the ignorant entirely, as 
the red colouring sticks forever in a cloth; but it is not so with the intelligent, 
whose knowledge of truth wipes off the stigma of their pristine acts. 


117. As the eternal hue of a gem, whether it be good or bad, is exhibited on 
the outside of it; and also as a crystal stone, however clear it may be, takes the 
colour of the outward object in it. (so the ignorant exhibit their inherent nature 
in their outward conduct, and partake also the qualities of their surroundings). 


118. But it is not so with the intelligent knower of truth, (tatwajna), whose 
soul is free from all inward and outward impressions in his life time; and 
whose mind is never tinged like that of the ignorant, by the reflexion of 
anything about him. (Knowledge of truth is vitiated by nothing). 


119. It is not only the contiguity or presence of things or pleasures, that taint 
the minds of the ignorant; but the absence and loss also are causes of great 
regret, from the stain they leave in the memory; as it is not only a new paint 


that paints a thing, but also the vestiges that it leaves behind, give it also a 
colouring. (The remembrance of past things, gives a colouring to the character 
of man). 


120. Thus, as the minds of the ignorant are never cleansed from the taint of 
their favourite objects, so they are never free from their bondage in this world; 
like the liberated sage by his want of earthly attachment. Because it is the 
parvitude of our desires that contributes to our liberation, while the amplitudes 
of our wishes lead us to our continued bondage in this world. (This passage 
presents us with the pains of memory, instead of the pleasures which some 
poets have portrayed on its face). 


121. Sikhidhwaja said: — Tell me my lord, why men feel sorry or joyous at 
their pain or pleasure, to which they are bound by their birth in this world; and 
for what is far off from them (either as past or gone and what is in their 
expectation in future, since both the past and future are absent from us)? 


122. I find your words my lord to be as clear as they are pretty and full of 
meaning, and the more I hear them so much the more do I thirst to listen to 
them; as the peacock is insatiate with the roarings of clouds. 


123. Chudala answered: — It is pleasant to inquire into the cause of our birth, 
and how the soul being accompanied with the body, derives its knowledge 
through the senses, and feels thereby a delight which is apparent in babes. 
(We see by observation how babies are pleased with the exercise of their 
limbs and senses). 


124. But the living soul, (or the vital principle), which is contained in the 
heart and runs through the Kundalini artery as the breath of life; is subject to 
pain and sorrow by its very birth. (Hence we see, a new born child coming to 
cry out no sooner it comes to life after its birth). 


125. The living soul or vital spirit, (which is as free as air), comes to be 
confined in the arterial chains of the prison houses of the different bodies; by 
its entering into the lungs breathing with the breath of life. (The spirit of God 
was breathed into the nostrils of man). 


126. The breath of life circulating through the body, and touching its different 
parts or the organs of sense, raise their sensations in the soul; and as the 
moisture of the ground grows the trees and shrubs on earth, so doth our 
vitality produce the sensations of the pleasure and pain in the soul. 


127. The living soul being confined in the arteries of different bodies, gives a 
degree of happiness and steadiness to some, which the miserable can never 
enjoy. (The poor are bereft to the comforts of high life). 


128. Know that the living soul, is said to be liberated in the same proportion 


as it manifests its tranquilized state; and know also that it is bounden bondage 
in the same degree, as it appears to be sorry in the face and choked in its 
breathing. (The dejected and depressed spirit does not breathe out freely). 


129. The alternate feeling of pain and pleasure, is likewise the bondage of the 
soul and no other, but this and it is the want of these alternations, that 
constitutes its liberation; and these are the two states of the living soul. 


130. As long as the deceptive senses, do not bring the false sensations of pain 
and pleasure unto the soul; so long does it rest in its state of sweet composure, 
and the calm tranquillity of the positive rest. 


131. The invisible soul, coming in sight of some transient pleasure or want of 
pain, becomes as joyous as the cheerful sea passing the reflexion of the bright 
moon-beams in its bosom. 


132. The soul equally exults at the sight of pleasure, as it grieves at the 
knowledge of its unsteadiness; as a foolish cat rejoices to see of fish, which it 
has not the power to catch or hold fast in its clutches. 


133. When the soul, has the pure knowledge of the intelligibles and the 
cognition of itself, it comes to know that there is no such thing as positive 
pain or pleasure; and has thereby its calm and quiet composure forever, and 
under every circumstance. 


134. When it comes to know that it has no concern with any pain or pleasure, 
and that its living is to no purpose at all; it is then said to be awakened in 
itself, and to rest in its quietude of nirvdna-extinction. (unconsciousness of 
one's self or its consciousness of itself as a cypher, is termed the state of its 
nirvdna-annihilation). 


135. When the living soul comes to know by its internal intuition, that pain 
and pleasure are unreal in their nature; it is no longer concerned about them, 
but rests quietly within itself. 


136. When the soul comes to the belief that the visible world is no other than 
the vacuity of Intellect or Brahma himself; it gets its rest in its quietness, and 
becomes as cool as an oilless and extinguished lamp. (Here is the vacuism of 
Vasishtha again). 


137. The belief that all nature is vacuity, and all existence is the one unity 
together with the thought of an infinite inanity; is what leads the soul to its 
unconsciousness of pain and pleasure. (All is but void and vacancy, and mere 
air-drawn phantasy). 


138. The thoughts of pleasure and pain therefore, are as false as the false 
appearance of the world; and this error is inherited by the living soul from 
Brahma the first of living beings in the world. (The error of taking the unreal 
for real began with Brahma himself). 


139. Whatever was thought and ordained by the first creative power in the 
beginning, the same has taken root in the living soul; and is going on even to 
the present time as its nature. 


140. Sikhidhwaja asked: — It is only when one feels some pleasure in his 
mind, that it runs in the blood through his veins and arteries; but the holy 
Narada could not be affected by the sight, nor drop his semen from him. 


141. Chudala replied: — The animal soul being exited (by the existent sight of 
women), excites the living breath of prdna to motion; and the whole body 
obeys the dictate of the mind, as the body of soldier obeys the command of 
their commander. 


142. The vital airs being put to motion, they move the internal sap and serum 
from their seats; as the blowing winds bear away the fragrance of flowers and 
the dust of leaves, and drop down the fruits and flowers and leaves of trees. 


143. The semen being put to motion falls downwards, as the clouds being 
driven together burst into the rain water. 


144. The semen then passes out of the body by the canals of the veins and 
arteries, as the running waters pass through the channels and canals of a river. 


145. Sikhidhwaja said: — O thou divine boy! that knowest both the past and 
present states of things, as it appears from thy instructive discourse; please to 
instruct me at present, what you mean by the nature of things by the Brahmic 
power of Brahma. 


146. Chuidala replied: — Nature is that intrinsic character, which is implanted 
in the constitution of things at the beginning of their creation; and the same 
which continues to this day the essential part of the ghata, pata, and all other 
things. 


147. It comes on by a kdkdtdlya or accidental course of its own, as it is 
compared by the learned with the rise and fall of waves and bubbles in the 
water; and the marks of the lacuna in wood and iron. (The fortuitous 
combination of the atomic principles, is the cause of the formation of concrete 
bodies; according to the Atomic philosophy of Leucippus, Democritus and the 
Epicureans of old). 


148. It is under the power of this nature, that all things move about in the 
world in the various forms; and with all their properties of change and 
persistence. It is only the indifferent and inappetent soul that is liberated from 
the subjection of nature, while the apparent is fast bound to its chains and 
wander with their prurient nature in repeated transmigrations. 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 


The Production of the Pot (or the Embryonic cell). 


Argument: — The birth of the Brahman boy from the seed of Narada, 
preserved in a pot whereby he was called the pot-born, and his education. 


CHUDALA continues: — It is the nature of everything in the extensive world 
to be born in its own kind. (i.e., the similar only springs from the similar and 
nothing of a dissimilar kind). All persons and things continue to go on in it by 
their desires and tendencies, whether it be in the directions of virtue or vice or 
good or evil. (Nature is the invariable quiddity of a thing; but its desire or 
inclination is a variable property or quality of it). 


2. When this desire or want of the mind of a man is either diminished or 
brought under his control, he is no longer subject to the acts of goodness or 
vice, but becomes exempt both from merit and demerit; and _ their 
consequences of reiterated births and deaths by the utter indifference. 
(Neutrality in action is the way to one's inanity in both worlds. This is not a 
right rule since the commission of a good action is as commendable, as an 
omission in the discharge of duty is held culpable in law and morality). 


3. Sikhidhwaja rejoined: — O eloquent speaker! your words are as full of 
sense as they are of great import to me, they bespeak your great penetration 
into the depths of wisdom. 


4. My audience of the sweet exultance of your speech has given me a 
satisfaction, equal to that of my draught of a large dose of the ambrosial 
water. 


5. Now be pleased to give me a brief narration of the story of your birth and 
pedigree, and I will hear with all my attention your words of sound sense and 
wisdom. 


6. Please Sir, to relate unto me, what the son of lotus-Brahmaé, — the 


venerable sage Narada, did with the seminal strength, which unconsciously 
fell from him on the ground. 


7. Chudala related: — The muni then curbed back the infuriate elephant of his 
beastly mind by the strong bridle of prudence; and bound it fast in the iron 
chain of the great intelligence. 


8. His virile strength which was as hot as fire, resembled the molten moon 
melted down by the flame of the final conflagration; and as liquified as the 
fluid quick-silver or other metallic solution. 


9. The sage who had a water-pot of crystal stone fast by his side, laid hold of 
the same and put the fluid semen in it, in the manner of his depositing the 
liquid moon-beams in the disc of the moon. 


10. There was on one side of the mount of Meru, a projected rock with a deep 
cavern in it; the passage of which was not obstructed by the heaps of stones 
which lay before it. 


11. The muni placed the pot inside that cave as the embryo is situated in the 
belly, and he filled the pot with milk which he produced by his will; as the 
lord of creation has filled the milky ocean with its watery milk. (The sages are 
said to have miraculous powers by force of their Yoga). 


12. The muni neglected his sacred offering and brooded over the pot, as a bird 
hatches over its egg; and it was in a course of a month that the foetus grew up 
in the pot of milk, as the reflexion of the crescent moon increases in the 
bosom of the milky ocean. 


13. At the end of the month, the pot bore a full formed foetus, as the orb of the 
moon becomes full in the course of a month; and as the season of spring 
produces the lotus bud with its blushing petals. 


14. The foetus came out in the fullness of its time, and with the full possession 
of all the members of its body; as the full moon rises from the milky ocean 
without diminution of any of its digits. 


15. The body became fully developed in time, and the limbs were as beautiful 
as the horns of the moon shine brightly in the lighted fortnight. 


16. After performance of the initiatory ceremonies (of tonsure and investiture 
of the sacred thread); and the sage instructed him in whatever he knew, as one 
pours out the contents of one vessel into another. 


17. In course of a short time, the boy became acquainted with all the oral 


instructions, (Vangmaya), of his father, and became an exact ectype of the 
venerable sage. (The best son likens his father). 


18. The old sage became as illustrious with his brilliant boy, as the orb of the 
moon shines brightly with its train of resplendent stars. 


19. Once on a time, the sage Narada went to the empyrean of his father 
Brahma accompanied by his young progeny, and there made his obeisance to 
the prime progenitor of mankind. 


20. The boy also bowed down before his grandsire, who knowing him to be 
versed in the vedas and sciences; took him up and set him on his lap. 


21. The lord Brahma pronounced his blessings on the boy, and knowing him 
to be born of the pot and acquainted with the vedas, gave him the name of 
Kumbha or the pot. 


22. Know me, O hermit! to be the son of the sage Narada, and grandson of the 
great lotus-born Brahma himself; and know by the appellation of Kumbha 
from my birth into the pot. 


23. I have the four vedas for my companions and playmates, and I always 
delighted with their company; in the heavenly abode of my lotus-born 
grandsire, — the Divine Brahma. 


24. Know the Goddess Saraswati to be my mother, and the Gayatri hymn as 
my maternal aunt; my habitation is in the heaven of Brahma where I dwell as 
the grand-child of the lord of creatures. 


25. I wander at my pleasure, throughout the wide extended world; I rove 
about with a soul full of felicity, and not on any errand or business whatever. 


26. I walk over the earth without touching it with my feet, and its flying dust 
do not approach my person; nor is my body ever fatigued in all its rambles. 
(The spiritual body is intangible and unwearied). 


27. It happened this day, that I came to behold thy hermitage in the course of 
my ethereal journey; and so directed my course this way, to see thee in this 
place. (This is the substance of my life, as I have now related unto thee). 


28. Thus, O forester! I have given you the whole account of my life as you 
have heard just now; because it is a pleasure to good people, to hold 
conversation with the good and wise. 


29. Valmiki said: — As they were talking in this manner, the day past away to 


its evening service, and the sun set down below the horizon; the court broke 
and every one repaired to his evening ablution, and met again with the rising 
sun on the next morning. 


CHAPTER LXXXVII. 


Continuation of the same and enlightenment of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — Sikhidhwaja's praise of Kumbha and expression of his sorrow, 
he turns to be a disciple of the same and professes his faith in the vedanta 
doctrines. 


SIKHIDWAJA said: — Sir, it appears to me that the hoarded merits of all my 
former lives, have brought you today to my presence here; as an unforeseen 
hurricane drives the waters of the sea on the dry mountain tops. (i.e., thy 
speech is as cooling draught to my perished soul). 


2. [reckon myself as highly blest among the blessed today to be thus favoured 
by your presence, and cooled by your speech distilling as ambrosial dews 
from your lips. 


3. Never did a more sensible speech, touch and cool my soul to such a degree 
as yours ere this; wherefore I deem your holy presence as more precious to 
me, than the gaining of a kingdom. 


4. The unrestrained delight which is felt in general (from the words of the 
wise), which are free from self-interest and selfish motives; is far superior to 
the self-restricted pleasure of sovereignty, which is delightful once in 
imagination only (and not in its actual possession). 


5. Vasishtha said: — As the prince was uttering these encomiums, the 
Brahman boy Kumbha passed over them in silence; and interrupted him by 
saying: — 


6. Chiidala said: — Please put a stop, Sir, to these words of yours, and give 
me an account of yourself as I have given mine to you; and tell me who you 
are, and what you do in this lonely mountain. 


7. How long is it that you have passed in this forester’s life of yours, and what 
is your main object in view. Tell me the bare truth, because it is beyond the 


probity of an ascetic, to utter anything but the plain truth. (The ascetics are 
names of satyavrata or vowed to truth). 


8. Sikhidhwaja replied: — Lord as you are the offspring of a God, everything 
must be well known to you; and as the Gods are full well acquainted with the 
secrets and circumstances of all people, I have very little to relate to you about 
me. 


9. It is from my fear of the world (and its temptations), that I have abandoned 
it and taken my abode amidst this forest; and this though you well know, will 
I now briefly state unto you. 


10. I am Sikhidhwaja the ruler of a country, which I have long relinquished 
for a seat in the forest; and know, O knower of all truths, that it is my fear of 
the trap-doors of the world and future transmigration in it, that has driven me 
to this retired wilderness. 


11. It is no more than the reiteration of pain and pleasure, and of life and death 
in this accursed world; and it is to evade all these, that I have betaken myself 
to my austerities in these solitary woods. 


12. I wander about on all sides, and perform my rigorous austerities without 
any respite; and I give no rest to myself, but keep my vigils like a miser over 
his little stock. 


13. I am without any effort or attempt, and so without any fruit and fruition 
also; I am lonely, and so helpless likewise; I am poor and therefore, friendless 
also, and know me Divine personage! to be pining in this forest like a 
withered tree perforated by worms. 


14. I observe strictly all my sacred rites without any fail or failure, and yet I 
fall from one sorrow into a sea of sorrows; and have grown too pensive, that 
even the ambrosial draught is unpleasant to me. 


15. Chudala said: — It was once on a time that I had my great progenitor 
(Brahma) to tell me which of the two, the observance of duties or their non- 
observance for the sake of knowledge; (i.e., whether practice or theoretical 
knowledge); is the more useful to and preferable by mankind. 


16. Brahma replied: — Knowledge is no doubt the supreme Good, as it leads 
to ones acquaintance with the unity of the Deity and the oneness of himself; 
but action is inculcated to man at the duty of his life, both for the pleasure and 
passing of his life time. 


17. Let them that have not acquired their intellectual light and the sight of the 
soul, be employed in their duties by their offsprings and fellow creatures; for 
who that is devoid of a silken robe, will go about naked and not wrap himself 
with a blanket or coarse cloth. 


18. The ignorant that are actuated by their desires and live upon their hopes, 
meet with their objects as the reward of their action; but the knowing and 
speculative theorist, having neither any desire in his mind nor action of his 
body, meets with no reward of either. 


19. An action without its object goes to naught and for nothing, as the fruit 
bearing plants become fruitless and die away without being properly watered 
in their time. (There it is doubtful whether the comparison of watering refers 
to the desire or action. The gloss refers it to the action without which no desire 
is successful). 


20. As the effect of a certain season on plants, efc., is displaced by that of the 
succeeding one; so the fruit of an action, is frustrated by its want of its desire 
(of the object). 


21. As it is the nature of kusa-grass never to fructify, though they bear the 
flowers in time; so my son, no action can produce any fruit without the desire 
of the main object (as its final cause). (Here Chuidala addresses her husband as 
her son). 


22. As the boy possessed the idea of a ghost in his mind, sees the apparition of 
a devil before him; and as a sick man having hypochondria of his malady, is 
soon attacked by it, (so everyone meets with what he has in his mind). 


23. As the kusa-grass presents the fair flowers to view, without ever bearing 
their fruits; so does the speculative theorist meditate on the beauty of his 
theory, without producing its results by its practice. 


24. Sikhidhwaja said: — But it is said that all human desire is vain, and its 
accompanying egoism is a fallacy; and that they are the creatures of our 
ignorance, like our error of a sea in the burning sands of a desert. 


25. So it is to the gnostic theist, whose ignorance is altogether removed by his 
knowledge of all things as the Divine spirit; such a man of course has no 
desire rising in his mind, as there is no appearance of the sea in the sands 
before the eyes of the wise. 


26. It is by forsaking his desires, that a person is freed from his bonds of his 
disease and death; and his internal soul arriving to the perfection of the Deity, 


is exempted from future birth. 


27. But know the human mind to be fraught with desires, from which the 
learned few are only exempt; it is by their transcendental knowledge of the 
knowable one, that the Divinely wise alone are exempted from their 
regeneration in this mortal world. 


28. Chudala replied — It is true, O princely sage! that knowledge is said to be 
the chief good, (summum bonum), by the Gods Brahma and others and also by 
all sapient sages; and notwithstanding thy knowing of this, why is it that thou 
remainest in this state of thy gross ignorance? 


29. What mean these pots and staffs, these wooden stools and those seats of 
kusa-grass; and why is it, O royal prince! that you delight in these false 
playings of fools? 


30. Why is it that you do not employ your mind to inquire into the questions 
as to what thou art, and how has this world came to existence, and how and 
when will cease to exist (in your consciousness of reality). Instead of making 
inquiries in these solemn truths, you are passing your time like the ignorant in 
your fooleries only? 


31. Why don't you discuss about the natures of bondage and liberation in the 
company of the learned, and pay your homage at their venerable feet? 


32. Do you want, O prince to pass your life in the discharge of your painful 
austerities, as some insects finish their days in perforating the stones in which 
they live? 


33. You can easily obtain the delight you seek, if you will but betake yourself 
to the service of holy man; and keep company with the tolerant and wise 
souls, arguing with them on spiritual subjects. 


34. Or you may continue to remain in your grotto, in this forest living on the 
simple food of holy men; and by forsaking the evil propensities of your mind, 
abide here as an insect in a hole under the ground. 


35. Vasishtha related: — Being thus awakened to sense by his wife, — the 
Divine boy, — Sikhidhwaja, melted into tears; and with his face bathed in 
water, spoke to the lad as follows: — 


36. Sikhidhwaja said: — O Divine child! it is after a long time, that I am 
awakened by thee to my senses; and I perceive now that it was my weak- 
headedness, which drove me from the society of respectable to this lonely 


forest. 


37. Ah! I find now that my mind is purged today of its endless sins, which has 
brought thee to my presence here, and remonstrate with me on my past 
misconduct. 


38. O beauteous boy! I deem thee henceforward as my monitor and father and 
my best friend forever, and acknowledge myself as thy pupil; wherefore I bow 
down at thy feet and pray thee to take piety on me. 


39. Please admonish me now on the subject of Divine knowledge, as you are 
best acquainted with it; and whereby I may be freed from all my sorrows, and 
be settled with perfect peace and bliss of my mind. 


40. You said at first, that knowledge is the supreme bliss or summum bonum 
of mankind; now tell me, which is that knowledge which saves us from 
misery; whether it is the knowledge of particulars which lead us to the 
acquaintance of specials, or that of the general which brings us to the 
transcendental. (The former is the inductive knowledge of ascending from 
particulars to the universal, and the latter is deductive knowledge of deducing 
everything from the primitive one). 


41. Chuidala replied: — I will tell thee prince as far as I know about it, and 
what may be best acceptable to thee; and not throw away my words in vain, 
like crowing ravens about a headless trunk. 


42. Because the words that are uttered to the impertinent questions of a person 
and not heeded by him, are thrown in vain; and become as useless to him, as 
her eye sight in the dark. 


43. Sikhidhwaja said: — Sir, your words are as acceptable to me as the 
ordinances of the veda, (gospel truth); and though you utter them without 
previous meditation, (extempore), yet I have full faith in them. 


44. Chudala replied: — As a boy obeys the words of his father, knowing it to 
be pronounced for his certain good; so must you receive my words, (knowing 
them to tend to your best welfare). 


45. Think my advices to be all good for you, after you hear them with proper 
attention; and hear unto my words, as you hear music without inquiring into 
their reason or rhyme. 


46. Hear me now relate to you an interesting story of a certain person, whose 
conduct and character resembled in every way to thine; and who was brought 


back to his sense after his long aberration. This is a tale to dispel the worldly 
cares and fears of the intelligent. 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 


The Tale of the crystal Gem. 


Argument: — The slipping of a precious stone in ignorance, and picking of a 
glossy glass in view of it. 


CHUDALA related: — There lived once a rich man, combined with opposite 
qualities (of charity and penury) in his character; as the sea contains the water 
and the sub-marine fire in its depth. 


2. He was as skilled in arts, as he was practiced in arms; and was trained up in 
all dealings, as he was expert in business. But his great ambition in all his 
pursuits, kept him from the knowledge of the most-high. (His excess of 
worldliness, was a preventive to spiritual knowledge). 


3. He employed all his endeavours to obtain the imaginary gem of the 
philosopher's stone, chintd mani, (by means of his pujas and prayers and other 
sacred rites); as the sub-marine fire wants to devour the waters, and dries up 
the bed of the sea. 


4. His great avidity and persevering patience, succeeded after a lapse of a long 
time to obtain the precious gem at last; because there is nothing which may 
not be effected by the ardent zeal of man. (Omnia vincit labor). 


5. He succeeded in his attempts by his unwearied labour, joined with his firm 
resolution and well directed plan; as the meanest man is favoured with a 
fortune, by his employment of these means. (Fortune crowns all strenuous 
efforts with success). 


6. He saw the stone as lying before him, and ready to be grasped in his hand; 
as a hermit sitting on the peak of a mountain, thinks the rising moon as easy to 
be grasped by his hand. (Too ardent desire presents the shadow of the object 
to one's view). 


7. He saw the brilliant gem before him, but became mistrustful of his sight 


and the reality of the object before it; as a poor man hearing of his sudden 
elevation to royalty, mistrusts the report and doubts its being meant for him. 


8. He was then immerged in himself to think with amazement for a long time, 
he overlooked and neglected to lay hold on his great gain, and kept dubitating 
in his mind in the following manner. 


9. Whether this stone is gem or not, and if so, whether it be the philosopher's 
stone or any other; shall I touch it or not, for I fear lest it fly away from my 
touch or be soiled by it. 


10. No one hath until this time obtained the long sought philosopher's stone, 
and if ever it was obtained by any one, it was, says the sastra, in his next life. 


11. It is no doubt that my miserliness only, that makes me view aslant this 
brilliant gem before me with my eyes; as a purblind man sees a flashing fire- 
brand and deep-laid moon in the sky. 


12. How could the tide of my fortune run so high at once, that I should 
succeed so soon to obtain the precious stone, that is the pink and acme of 
perfection and productive of all treasure. 


13. There must be few and very few indeed of those fortunate men, who can 
expect their good fortune to court and wait on them; at a little pains in a short 
time. 


14. I am but a poor and honest man, and one possessed of very little 
qualification nor of any worth and account among mankind; and it is 
impossible that so miserable a wretch, could ever be blessed with this 
masterpiece of perfection. 


15. The incredulous man hung for a long time in a state of suspense, between 
his certainty and uncertainty; and was infatuated by his mental blindness, that 
he did not even stretch out his hand to lay hold on the jewel lying open before 
him. 


16. Hence whatever is obtainable by anyone at any time, is often missed and 
lost sight of by either his ignorance or negligence of it; as the precious gem in 
the parable, which was proffered and lay palpable in full view. 


17. As the undetermined man hung in the balance of his suspicion, the 
precious gem flew away and vanished from his sight; as the merited man 
avoids his slighter, and as the shaft flies from its string or the stone from its 
sling. (Fly from the fool as the arrow flies from the bow-string). 


18. When prosperity appears to one, she confers on him her blessings of 
wisdom and prudence, efc.; but as she forsakes her foolish votary, she 
deprives him of all his discretion. (Such is the case with this once wise and 
afterwards foolish devotee of prosperity). 


19. The man tried again to invoke and recall the precious gem to his presence, 
because the persevering spirit is never tired to try again and again for his 
expected success. 


20. He came to behold before him a brittle piece of glass, shining with its 
false glare as the former gem; and this was placed in his presence by the 
invisible hands of the siddha that had come to tempt him and deride his folly. 


21. The fool thought this brittle thing to be the real gem now lying before him, 
as the ignorant sot believes the sparkling sands to be the dusts of the purest 
gold. 


22. Such is the case with the deluded mind, that it mistakes the eight for six 
and a foe for a friend; it sees the serpent in the rope and views the desert land 
as the watery expanse, it drinks the poison for the nectar and spies another 
moon in the sky in the reflexion of the true one. 


23. He took up that sham trumpery for a real gem, and thought it as the 
philosopher's stone that would confer on him whatever he desired; with this 
belief he gave up in charity all he had, as they were no more of any use to 
him. 


24. He thought his country to be devoid of all that was delightsome to him and 
its people as debasing to his society; he thought his lost house was of no use 
to him, and his relatives and friends to be averse to his happiness. 


25. Thus thinking in his mind, he determined to remove himself to a distant 
country and enjoy his rest there; and then taking his false gem with him, he 
went out and entered an uninhabited forest. 


26. There, his deceptive gem proving of no use to him, loaded him with all 
imaginable calamities, likening to the gloomy shadow of the black mountain 
and the horrid gloom of deep ignorance. 


27. The affections which are brought to one by his own ignorance, are by far 
greater than those which are caused by his old age and the torments of death. 
The calamity of ignorance supercedes all other earthly affections, as the black 
hairs rise on the top of the body and cover the crown of the head. 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 


The Parable of an elephant. 


Argument: — Freedom of the Incarcerated Elephant; and his falling again into 
the Pit. 


CHUDALA said: — Hear, O holy hermit! another very interesting story of 
mine, which well applies to your case; as the ruler of a land and to serve to 
awaken your understandings (from its present theory). 


2. There lived a large elephant in the Vindhya mountains, which was the head 
and leader of a great number of elephants; and had as clear an understanding 
in its big and elevated head, as the lofty summit of the mountain was humbled 
down at the bidding of Agastya, — the sage. (Agastya is recorded as the first 
Aryan emigrant, who crossed the Vindhya and settled in southern India, and 
civilized the wild mountainous and rude people of Deccan by his wise law 
and instructions). 


3. His two tusks were as strong as the thunder-bolts of heaven, and as long 
and stunning as the far reaching flashes of lightning; they were as destructive 
as the flames of final desolation, (kalpdnta), and as piercing as to bore and 
uproot a mountain. 


4. He came to be caught by an iron trap laid by elephant catchers in his way, 
and was fast held in it as the Vindhya by the Muni's charm; and as the giant 
Bali was bound in the chains of India. (Vindhya and its people were spell 
bound by the Agastya sage). 


5. The captive and patient elephant was tormented by the iron goad in his 
proboscis, and suffered the excruciating pains of his torture; like the Tripura 
giant under the burning fire of Hara. (Siva is called Tripura-hara for his 
quelling that giant by his fire arms). 


6. The elephant lay in this sad plight in the net for three days together, and 


was thus watched over by his hunter from a distance. (See the paper of 
elephant catching in the Asiatic Researches). 


7. The great suffering of the elephant made him open his mouth widely, and 
utter a loud scream that growled about like the loud noise of roaring clouds. 


8. Then he exerted the force of both his tusks, and succeeded thereby to break 
asunder the iron bar; as the Titan of old broke open the bolts at the gate of 
heaven. 


9. The hunter saw the breaking of his hard fetters by the infuriate beast from a 
distance, as Hara beheld the breaking of the demon Bali (Belos) from his 
subterranean cell beneath the mountain, in order to invade his heaven on high. 


10. The elephant catcher then mounted a tall td/a (palm) tree, and leaped from 
its top in order to fall down on its head; but haplessly he fell down on the 
ground, as the demon was hurled down to hell by victorious Hara. 


11. The hunter missed the head of the huge animal, and fell headlong upon his 
legs on the ground; as a ripe fruit, is dropped down by the hurrying winds. 


12. The great elephant took pity in seeing him falling, and lying prostrate 
before him; as the mind of the noble is compassionate on others even in their 
own piteous state. 


13. The noble animal thought in his mind, that it was no valour on his part to 
trample over the self-fallen; and had thus the magnanimity of sparing the life 
of his own enemy. 


14. He broke only the chains in two pieces, and took his way before him; 
leaving away all obstacles and barriers, as the rushing waters bear down the 
strongest bridge. 


15. His strength broke the strong net, but his piety spared the life of the weak 
man; he went off as the sun sets, after dispelling the evening clouds. 


16. The hunter rose up from the ground after he saw the elephant had gone 
away; and he found himself to be as safe and sound after his fall as he had 
been before it; and as the elephant was relieved from his pains after his 
liberation from the chains. 


17. Notwithstanding the great shock which the man had felt by his fall from 
the tall palm tree, he felt no hurt with any part of his body; whence I ween, the 
bodies of scoundrels are fortified against every harm. 


18. The wicked gain greater strength by execution of their repeated crimes, as 
the rainy clouds gather the more by their frequent showers. Thus the hunter 
went after his fresh excursion. 


19. The elephant catcher felt very sorry, at the escape of the elephant and 
unsuccessfulness of his attempt; as one in dejected mind, is to lose a treasure 
that has fallen into his hand. 


20. He sought about and beat the forest, to find out the hiding elephant amidst 
the thickets; as the ascending node of Rahu rises in the sky, to lay hold on the 
moon covered under the clouds. 


21. After a long search, he came in sight of the elephant halting under a tree; 
as when a warrior returns from the battlefield, and breathes the air under a 
shady arbour. 


22. The cunning huntsman collected a great many tools, capable to entrap the 
elephant at his resting place. 


23. He dug a circular ditch round about that place in the forest, as the great 
creator of the world had stretched the ocean encircling this earth. 


24. He then covered the great pit, with green branches and soft leaves of trees; 
as the season of autumn covers the face of the empty sky with fleecy and 
flimsy clouds. 


25. The elephant roaming at large in the forest, happened to fall down into the 
pit one day; as the fragment of a rock on the coast, falls headlong on the dried 
bed of the sea. 


26. The big elephant was thus caught in the circular pit, which was as deep as 
the dreadful depth of the sea; and lay confined in it, as some treasure is shut 
up in the hollow womb of a chest. 


27. Being thus confined at the bottom of that far extending pit, still passes his 
time in endless trouble and anxiety; like the demon Bali in his dark cave under 
the grounds. 


28. This is the effect of the silly elephant, letting unhurt his cruel hunter who 
had fallen ere long before him; or else he would not be thus pent up in the pit, 
if he made an end of him in time. 


29. Hence all foolish people that had not foresight to prevent their future 
mishaps, and provide against their coming mischances by their precautions at 
present, are surely to be exposed like the calamity as the vindhyan elephant. 


(Hence all unforeseeing men are designated as gaja murkha or elephantine 
fools). 


30. The elephant was glad with the thought of his freedom from the hunter's 
chains, and thought no more of any future mishap; which was the sole cause 
of his being by another mischance, which lay at a long distance from him. 


31. Know, O great soul! that there is no bondage of man except his own 
ignorance; and the jail prisoners are not under such thraldom, as the 
intellectual servitude of freemen under their errors and prejudice. The 
enlightenment of the soul and the knowledge of the cosmos as one universal 
soul, is the greatest freedom of man; while the ignorance of this truth, is the 
root of the slavery of mankind to the errors of this world. 


CHAPTER XC. 


Way to obtain the Philosopher's stone. 


Argument: — ChitidAla's Interpretation of the Parable of the Precious stone 
and the Glassy Gewgaw. 


SIKHIDWAJA said: — Please explain unto me, O Divine boy! the purport of 
the parables of the true and false gems; and the unfettered and pent up 
elephant, which you have spoken before to me. 


2. Chudala replied: — Hear me now expound to you the meaning of my 
stories, and the purport of the words and their senses; which I have stored in 
your heart and mind, for the enlightenment of your understanding. 


3. That searcher after the philosopher's stone, was undoubtedly acquainted 
with science, but had no knowledge of the truth, (tatwajndna); he searched the 
gem but knew not what it was, and the same man is thyself. 


4. You are versed in the sciences as he, and shinest above others as the 
shining sun on the mountain tops; but you have not that rest and quiet, which 
is derived from the knowledge of truth; and are immerged in your errors, as a 
block of stone in the water. 


5. Know, O holy man! that it is relinquishing of errors, which is said to be the 
philosopher's stone, (because they are the only men that have set themselves 
above the reach of error). Try to get that, O holy man! in your possession, and 
set yourself thereby above the reach of misery. 


6. It is the relinquishment of gross objects, that produces the pure joy of 
holiness; it is the abandonment of the world, that gives one the sovereignty 
over his soul, and which is reckoned as the true philosopher's stone. 


7. Abandonment of all is the highest perfection, which you must practice 
betimes; because it is contemning of worldly grandeur, that shows the greatest 
magnanimity of the soul. 


8. You have, O prince! forsaken your princedom together with your princess, 
riches, relatives and friends, and have rested in your resignation; as Brahma 
the lord of creatures, rested at the night of cessation of the act of his creation. 


9. You have come out too far from your country, to this distant hermitage of 
mine; as the bird of heaven the great Garuda lighted with his prey of the 
tortoise, on the farthest mount of the earth. (The legend of Gaja-kachchhapa 
borne by Garuda, is narrated at length in the Purdna). 


10. You have relinquished your egotism, with your abandonment of all 
worldly goods; and you purged your nature from every stain, as autumnal 
winds disperse the clouds from the sky. 


11. Know that it is only by driving away the egoism of the mind as well as all 
desires from the heart, that one gets his perfection and has the fulness of the 
world or perfect bliss in himself. But you have been labouring under the 
ignorance of what is to be abandoned and what is to be retained, as the sky 
labours under the clouds. (It is not the abandonment of the world, but the 
greedy desires of the mind, that is attended with true felicity). 


12. It is not your abandonment of the world, which can give you that highest 
felicity, the summum bonum that you seek; it is something else that must be 
yet sought after by you. (True happiness is a thing of heavenly growth, and is 
to be obtained by the grace of God only). 


13. When the mind is overflown by its thoughts, and the heart is corroded by 
the canker of its desire; all its resignation flies from it, as the stillness of a 
forest flies before the tempest. 


14. Of what avail is the abandonment of the world to one, whose mind is ever 
infested by his troublesome thoughts; it is impossible for a tree to be at rest, 
that is exposed to the tempests of the sky. (Inward passions disturb the breast, 
as tempests rend the sky). 


15. The thoughts constitute the mind, which is but another name for will or 
desire; and so long as these are found to be raging in one, it is in vain to talk 
of the subjection of the mind. 


16. The mind being occupied by its busy thoughts, finds the three worlds to 
present themselves before it in an instant; of what avail therefore, is the 
abandonment of this world to one, when the infinite worlds of the universe are 
present before his mind. 


17. Resignation flies on its swift pinions, soon as it sees a desire to be 


entertained in it; as a bird puts on its wings, no sooner it hears a noise below. 


18. It is insouciance and want of care, which is the main object of the 
abandonment of the world; but when you allow a care to rankle in your breast, 
you bid a fair adieu to your resignation; as one bid farewell to his honoured 
and invited guest. 


19. After you have let slip the precious gem of resignation from your hand, 
you have chosen the false glossy gewgaw of austerity for some fond wish in 
your view. (All outward observances of rites and austerities proceed from 
some favourite object fostered in the mind, while the pure bliss of holiness is 
obtained from the purity of the heart only, and without any need of outward 
acts). 


20. I see thy mind is fixed in willful pains of thy austerities, as the sight of a 
deluded man is settled on the reflexion of the moon in the waters (from his 
error of its being the true moon). 


21. Forsaking the indifference of your mind, you have become a follower of 
the prurience of your heart; and chosen for yourself the mortification of an 
anchorite, which is full of from its first to last. 


22. He who forsakes the easy task of his devotion to God, which is fraught 
with infinite bliss; and betakes himself to the difficult duties of painful 
austerity, is said to make a suicide of his own soul. (The sruti calls them self- 
suicides, (dtmaghanojdnah); who neglect the felicity of their souls). 


23. You betook yourself to the vow of self-resignation, by your 
relinquishment of all earthly possessions; but instead of observing the 
forbearance of resignation, you are bound to the painful austerities of your 
asceticism in this dreary wilderness. 


24. You broke the bonds of your princedom, and decamped from the bounds 
of your realm thinking them as too painful to you; but say are you not 
constrained here to the faster and far more irksome toils of your asceticism, 
and the unbearable chains of its rigid incarceration. 


25. I think you are involved in much more care to defend yourself from heat 
and cold in the defenceless forest, and have come to find yourself to be more 
fast bound to your rigours than you had any idea of this before. 


26. You thought in vain to have obtained the philosopher's stone before, but 
must have come to find at last; that your gain is not worth even a grain of 
glassy bauble. 


27. Now Sir, I have given you a full interpretation of the avidity of a man to 
pocket the invaluable gem; you have no doubt comprehended its right 
meaning in your mind, and will now store its purport in the casket of your 
breast. 


CHAPTER XCI. 


Interpretation of the Parable of the Elephant. 


Argument: — Ignorance which is the cause of worldly desire, flies with loss 
of wishes. 


CHUDALA continued: — Hear me, O great prince! now explain to you the 
meaning of the story of the Vindhyan elephant, which will be as useful as it 
will appear wonderful to you. 


2. That elephant of the vindhyan range, is thy very self in this forest; and his 
two strong tusks are no other than the two virtues of reasoning and 
resignation, on which you lay your strength. (Viveka and vairdgya, i.e., reason 
and resignation are the most potent arms of men). 


3. The hunter that was the enemy of the elephant and waylaid him in his free 
rambles, is the personification of that great ignorance, which hath laid hold of 
thee for thy misery only. 


4. Even the strong is foiled by weak, and lead from one danger to another and 
from woe to woe; as the strong elephant was led to by the weak huntsman, 
and as you, O mighty prince! are exposed by your imbecile ignorance in this 
forest. 


5. As the mighty elephant was caught in the strong iron chain, so are you held 
fast in the snare of your desire (of a future reward); which has brought all this 
calamity on you. 


6. The expectation of man is the iron chain, that is stronger and harder and 
more durable than the other; the iron rusts and wastes away in time, but our 
expectations rise high and hold us faster. 


7. As it was in the hostility of the huntsman, that he marked the elephant by 
his remaining unseen in his hiding place, so thy ignorance which lurks after 
thee, marks thee for his prey from a distance. 


8. As the elephant broke the bonds of the iron chains of his enemy, so have 
you broken asunder the ties of your peaceful reign and the bonds of your 
royalty and enjoyments. 


9. It is sometimes possible, O pious prince! to break down the bonds of iron 
fetters; but is impossible, O holy prince, to put a stop to our growing desires 
and fond expectations. 


10. As the huntsman that had caught the elephant in the trap, fell down 
himself from on high to the ground; so was thy ignorance also levelled to the 
ground, seeing thee deprived of thy royalty and all thy former dignity. (The 
pride and ignorance of a man sinks down with his misfortune). 


11. When the man who is disgusted with the world, wants to relinquish his 
desire of enjoyment, he makes his ignorance tremble in himself, as the demon 
that dwells on a tree, quakes with fear when the tree is felled. 


12. When the self-resigned man, remains devoid of his desire for temporal 
enjoyments; he bids farewell to his ignorance, which quits him as the demon 
departs from the fallen tree. 


13. A man getting rid of his animal gratifications, demolishes the abode of his 
ignorance from the mind; as a woodcutter destroys the bird-nests of the tree, 
which he has sawn or cut down on the ground. 


14. You have no doubt put down your ignorance, by your resignation of 
royalty and resorting to this forest; your mind is of course cast down by it, but 
it is not yet destroyed by the sword of your resignation. (A cast down or 
sunken spirit or mind is not really killed, but revives and lives again in time). 


15. It rises again and gains renewed strength and minding its former defeat, it 
has at last over-powered on you by confining you in this wilderness; and 
restraining you in the painful dungeon of your false asceticism. 


16. If you can but now kill your fallen ignorance in any way, it will not be 
able to destroy you at once in your rigorous penance; though it has reduced 
you to this plight by your abdication of royalty. 


17. The ditch that the huntsman had dug to circumvent the elephant, is verily 
this painful pit of austerity, which thy ignorance has scooped to enthral you 
in. 


18. The many provisions and supplies with which the huntsman had filled the 
hollow, in order to entice the elephant; are the very many expectations of 


future reward, which your ignorance presents before you, as the recompense 
of your penitence. 


19. O prince, though you are not the witless elephant, (gaja-murkha); yet you 
are not unlike the same, by your being cast in this forest by your incorrigible 
ignorance. 


20. The ditch of the elephant, was verily filled with the tender plants and 
leaves for the fodder of the elephant; but your cave is full of rigorous 
austerities, which no humanity can bear or tolerate. 


21. You are still encaged in this prison house of the ascetic's cell, and doomed 
to undergo all the imaginative torments of your penance and martyrdom. You 
verily resemble the fallen Bali, that is confined in his subterranean cell. 


22. You are no doubt the empty-headed elephant, that art fast bound in the 
chain of false rigours, and incarcerated in this cave of your ignorance; thus I 
have given the full exposition of the parable of the elephant of Vindhyan 
mountain, and now glean the best lesson for thyself from this. 


CHAPTER XCII. 


The Prince's abjuration of his asceticism. 


Argument. — The prince coming to his sense, took all his relics of asceticism 
and set them on fire. 


CHUDALA continued: — Tell me prince, what made you decline to accept 
the advice of the princess Chiidala, who is equally skilled in morality, as well 
as in Divine knowledge. 


2. She is an adept among the knowers of truth, and actually practices all what 
she preaches to others; her words are the dictates of truth, and deserved to be 
received with due deference. 


3. If you rejected her advice, by your over confidence in your own judgment; 
yet let me know, why she prevented you not, from parting with your all to 
others. (There is a proverb that men should rely on their own judgment and 
that of their elders; but never on those of other people and women). 


4. Sikhidhwaja replied: — But I ask you another question, and hope you will 
reply to it, i.e., how do you say that I have not relinquished my all, when I 
have resigned my realm, my habitation and my country all together; and when 
I left my wife and all my wealth behind. 


5. Chuidala replied: — You say truly, O prince! that you have forsaken your 
kingdom and habitation, and your lands and relatives, and even your wife and 
wealth, but that does not make your relinquishment of all, since none of these 
truly belong to thee; they come of themselves and go away from man; it is 
your egoism only which is yours, and which you have not yet got rid of. 


6. You have not yet abandoned your egoism, which is the greatest delight of 
your soul; you cannot get rid of your sorrows, until you are quite freed from 
your egoistic feelings. 


7. Sikhidhwaja said: — If you say that my kingdom and possession, were not 


my all, and that this forest which I have resorted to forms my all at present; 
and these rocks and trees and shrubs form my present possessions, then I am 
willing to quit all these even, if that would constitute resignation of all. 


8. Vasishtha said: — Hearing these words of the Brahman boy, — Kumbha, 
the cold blooded prince Sikhidhwaja held silence for a while, and returned no 
answer. 


9. He wiped off his attachment to the forest from his heart, and made up his 
mind to slide away from it; as the current of a stream in the rainy weather, 
glides along and carries down the dust and dirt of the beach. 


10. Sikhidhwaja said: — Now Sir, I am resolved to leave this forest, and bid 
adieu to all its caves and arbours; say now does not this relinquishment of all, 
form my absolute abnegation of all things. 


11. Kumbha replied: — The foot of this mountain with all its wood-lands, 
arbours and caverns are no properties of yours, but the common fells and 
dales of all; how then can your forsaking of them, form your self-abnegation 
at all? 


12. The best boon of your egoism which has fallen to your lot, is still 
unforsaken by you; you must get rid of this, in order to be freed from the cares 
and sorrows of this sublunary world of woes. 


13. If none of these things is mine, then my hermit's cell and grove, which I 
own as mine are what I am willing to resign, if that would make my total 
abnegation. 


14. Vasishtha said: — The self-governed Sikhidhwaja, being awaked to his 
sense by these admonitions of Kumbha, — the Brahman boy; he remained 
silent for a moment, with the light that shone within him. 


15. His pure conscience returned to his mind, and the blaze of his right 
knowledge, burnt away the dross of his attachment to the hermitage; as a gust 
of wind drives the dusts from the ground. 


16. Sikhidhwaja said: — Know me Sir, to have now taken away my heart 
from this hermitage, and forsaken my attachment to all its sacred bowers and 
arbours; now therefore, consider me to have resigned my all and everything in 
world. 


17. Kumbha replied: — How can I consider you as fully resigned, by your 
resigning these groves and arbours and everything appertaining to them; none 


of which belong to you, nor are you their master or deserter in anyway. 
(Know there is but one being, who is the sole master of all). 


18. Thou hast another thing to be forsaken by thee, and that is the greatest and 
best thing that has fallen to thy lot in this world; it must be by your resignation 
of that thing, that you can set yourself free from all. (The prince was so very 
infatuated with his knowledge of the gross sensibles, that he would never 
come to know what egoism meant). 


19. Sikhidhwaja said: — If this even be not the all that I have, and which you 
want me to resign; then take these earthen pots and basins, these hides and 
skins and this my cell also, and know me to forgo all these forever and betake 
myself elsewhere. 


20. Vasishtha said: — So saying, the dispassionate prince rose from his seat, 
with his composed and quiet mind; as when an autumnal cloud rises on the 
top of a mountain, and disperses elsewhere. 


21. Kumbha saw from his seat, the motions and movements of the prince, 
with her smiles and amazement, as when the sun laughs from above, to see the 
foolish attempts of men on the earth below. 


22. Kumbha looked steadfastly on Sikhidhwaja, and sat silently with the 
thought, “Ah! let him do whatever he likes for his sanctification and 
renunciation of the temporal articles of this world, which do not serve for his 
spiritual edification at all.” 


23. Sikhidhwaja then brought out all his sacred vessels and seats from his 
grotto, and collected them all in one spot; as the great ocean yielded up all her 
submerged treasures, after the diluvian flood was over. 


24. Having collected them in a pile, he set fire to them with dried fuel; as the 
sun-stone or sun-glass burns down the combustible by its fire. 


25. The sacred vessels and chattels which were set on fire and burnt down by 
it, were left behind by the prince who sat on a seat beside Kumbha; as the sun 
sets on the mount Meru, after he had burnt down in the world by the fire of 
dissolution. 


26. He said to his rosary, you have been confident to me your master, as long 
as I turn you on my fingers as my counting beads. 


27. And though I have turned you over and over, with my sacred mantras in 
this forests; yet you have been of no service to me at all. 


28. And though I have travelled with you, Oh my reliquary! and seen many 
holy places in thy company; but as you proved of no good to me, I now resign 
you to the flames. 


29. The burning fire rose in flames and flashes in the sky, and they appeared 
as stars glittering in it; he then cast his seat of the deer's skin on the fire, and 
said: — I have borne you about me so long on my back as an ignorant stag. 


30. It was by my ignorance, that I held you so long with me; and now you are 
at liberty to go your own way; where may peace and bliss attend on you 
forever. 


31. Ascend with the rising fire to heaven, and twinkle there as the stars on 
high; so saying he took off his hide garment from his body with his hands, and 
committed it to the flames. 


32. The funeral pyre of the prince spread as a sea of fire and it was driven 
about as a conflagration by the winds blowing from the mountains; when the 
prince thought of throwing his water pot also into the fire. 


33. And said to it: — you Sir, that bore the sacred water for all my sacerdotal 
functions; O my good water pot, it is true that I have not the power of 
rendering the proper recompense of your past services. 


34. You were the best model of true friendship, good nature, benevolence and 
constancy to me; and the best exemplar of goodness and all good qualities in 
thy great bounty. 


35. O thou! (my water pot), that wast the receptacle of all goodness to me; 
now depart your own way, by your purification in the same sacred fire, as thou 
wast at first found by me (from the potter's fire). Be thy ways all blissful to 
thee! so saying, he cast his water pot into the consecrated fire. 


36. Because all good things are to be given to the good or to the fire; but all 
bad things are cast off, like the dust of the earth; and as foolish men fall to the 
ground, by their secret craft. 


37. It is well for thee, my low mattress, to be put to fire and reduced to 
worthless ashes; so saying, he took up his wet matted seat, and cast it into the 
flaming fire. 


38. The seat on which he used to sit in his pure meditation on God, (i.e., his 
kusdsana or his seat made of kusa-grass), he soon committed to the flames; 
because it is better to give up a thing betimes, of which one must get rid 


shortly afterwards. 


39. This my alms-pot which contained the best articles of food, which were 
presented to me by good people; I now commit to this flame with whatever it 
has in it. 


40. The fire burns a thing but once, and the burnt article ceases to burn 
anymore; hence I shun all the implements to my ceremonial rites, in order to 
set me free from the bondage of all actions for ever more. 


41. Be ye not sorry therefore, that I forsake you thus; for who is there, that 
will bear about him things that are unworthy of himself. 


42. So saying, he threw into the fire all his cooking vessels, and the plates and 
dishes of his kitchen; and all things whatever he had need of in his hermitage. 
And these began to burn in a blaze, as the world was burnt down by the all 
destructive fire of the kalpdnta. 


CHAPTER XCIII. 


Admonition of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — As the prince was going to immolate himself after this, he is 
recalled from his rashness by the wisdom of his young monitor, who 
admonishes him to the relinquishment of his mind and not of the body. 


VASISHTHA said: — He then rose up and set fire to his hut of dry leaves and 
grass, as it is the case with foolish men very often to demolish the structure of 
their own fancy and caprice. (i.e., To undo the doings of their own hobbies 
and wild imagination). 


2. Whatever else there was left beside aught of the chattels and goods of the 
hermit Sikhidhwaja, took them all one after another, and set fire to them with 
his composed and unconcerned mind, and observing a strict taciturnity all the 
while. 


3. He burnt and broke down everything, and then flung away from him his 
eatables and preserved condiments; his clothings and all, with a quite content 
state of his mind. (This unconcerned state of the mind is called avahittha or 
insouciance; which cares for no mortal thing). 


4. The hermitage was now turned to a desolation, for its having been a human 
habitation a while before; and resembled the relics of the sacrificial pavilion 
of Daksha, after its devastation by the all-devouring fire of Virabhadra. (The 
legend of Daxa-yajna-bhanga, forms the subject of many Puranas, poems and 
dramas, but the mystery and allegory of the fable remains as dark and 
inexplicable as the Runic characters). 


5. The timorous fawns being affrighted at the lighted fire, left their lairs where 
they lay chewing the cud at their ease; and fled afar to distant deserts, as the 
townsmen flee from a burning quarter to distant abodes. 


6. Seeing the vessels and utensils to be all in a blaze, with the fuel of the dry 


woods on all sides; the prince seemed to remain quite content and careless 
amidst the scene, with the possession of his body only. 


7. Sikhidhwaja said: — I am now become an all-abandoning saint, by my 
abandonment of all desire and every object; and wonder that I should after so 
long a period of my life, be awakened to my right knowledge, by the holy 
lectures of my heavenly child. 


8. I have now become a pure and perfect unit, and quite conscious of the 
ineffable joy in myself; of what use and to what good, are all these 
appendages of my ever-varying desires to me. (No temporal object, leads to 
our permanent good; save our own bodies, which feel the inward bliss of the 
soul). 


9. As the knots of the chain that bind the soul to this world, are cut asunder 
and fall off one after another; so the mind comes to feel its quiet composure, 
until it attains to its ultimate rest and inaction. 


10. I am quite composed, and in perfect ease with the extinction of my 
desires; I am joyous and rejoice in myself, that my ties are all broken and 
fallen off from me; and that I have at last, fully accomplished the 
abandonment of all things, (sarva tyaga). 


11. I am become as nude as the open sky, and as roofless as the vault of 
vacuity; I view the wide world as an expanse of vacuum, and myself as a 
nullity within the whole inanity; say, O divine boy! is there anything still 
wanting to my complete renouncement of all. 


12. Kumbha replied: — Yet you must be aware! O prince Sikhidhwaja! that 
you are never released from all the bonds of this life, by your renunciation of 
every mortal thing; appertaining to this your mortal and transitory state of 
your being. 


13. I see the gravity and purity of the nature of your soul, which is placed far 
above the reach and track of the commonality; by its abandonment of the 
innumerable seeds and sprouts of fond desires, which incessantly rise as 
thistles and thorns on the human breast. (If virtue we plant not, vice will fill 
the place; and the rankest weeds, the richest soils deface). 


14. Vasishtha said: — On hearing these words of Kumbha, the prince 
Sikhidhwaja reflected on its purport within himself for a short while; he spoke 
these words in reply as you shall, O mighty armed Rama, now hear from me. 
(i.e., The prince was not so very easily prevailed upon by his eloquent 


monitor). 


15. Sikhidhwaja said: — Tell me, O heaven born child! what else dost thou 
see remaining in me; except the serpentine entrails within myself, and 
supporting the body composed of a heap of flesh, blood and bones. 


16. And if this body reckoned an appendage to myself, I will then ascend to 
the top of this mountain, and let it fall to be dashed to pieces on the ground; 
and thus get rid of my mortal part for ever. 


17. Saying so, as he was proceeding to immolate his body on the craggy hill 
before him; he was interrupted by his monitor Kumbha, who spoke to him as 
follows: — 


18. Kumbha said: — What is it prince that you are going to do, why do you 
attempt to destroy this innocent body of yours from this hideous height, as the 
enraged bull hurls its calf below the hill? 


19. What is this body, but a lump of dull and gross matter, a dumb and poor 
painstaking thing; it never does you any harm, nor can you ever find any fault 
in it; why then do you wish in vain to destroy so harmless and faultless a 
thing? 


20. It is of itself a dull and dumb thing, (as your beast of burden); it ever 
remains in its torpid meditative mood, and is moved to and fro by other 
agencies; as a plank is tossed up and down, by the adverse current and waves 
in the sea. 


21. He who hurts or annoys his inoffensive body, deserves to be put to 
torturous punishment; like the ruffian rogue who robs and annoys the holy 
saint, sitting in his solitary cell. 


22. The body is quite guiltless of all the pain and pleasure, which betide the 
living soul by turns; as the tree is wholly unconcerned with the fall of its fruits 
and leaves, which are dropped down by the blowing winds. 


23. You see the gusts of winds dropping down the fruits, flowers and leaves of 
trees; then tell me, O holy men! how you can charge your innocent tree, with 
the fault of letting fall its best produce. 


24. Know it for certain, O lotus eyed prince! that the immolation of your body 
even, is not enough to make your total renouncement of all things, sarva 
tydga, you must know is not an easy matter. 


25. It is in vain that you intend, to destroy this inoffensive body of yours on 


this rock; your quitting or getting rid of your body, does not cause your 
renunciation and freedom from all. (Death releases us from the bondage of the 
body, but not from the stings of conscience). 


26. There is an enemy of this body which agitates it, as an elephant shakes a 
huge tree; if you can but get rid of that mortal enemy of your body and soul, 
you are then said to be freed from all. 


27. Now prince, it is by avoiding this inveterate enemy of yours, that you are 
freed from the bondage of your body, and everything besides in this world; or 
else however you may kill your body, you can never put a stop to its regrowth 
(in some form or other). 


28. Sikhidhwaja rejoined: — What is it then that agitates the body and what is 
the root of our transmigrations and of the doings and sufferings of our future 
lives? And what is it by the avoidance of which, we avoid and forsake 
everything in the world? 


29. Kumbha replied: — Know, holy prince, that it is neither the forsaking of 
your realm nor that of your body, nor the burning of your hut and chattels, nor 
all these things taken together, that can constitute your renouncement of all 
and everything. 


30. That which is all and everywhere, is the one only cause of all; it is by 
resigning everything in that sole existent being, that one becomes the 
renouncer of all. 


31. Sikhidhwaja said: — You say that there is an all, — to-pan, which is 
situated in all to whom all things are to be resigned at all times. Now Sir, you 
that know all, what this all or omnium can be. 


32. Kumbha replied: — Know, O holy man, this all-pervading being is known 
under the various appellations of the living soul, jiva, the life, Prana, and 
many more also; it is neither an active or inactive principle, and is called the 
mind which is ever liable to error. 


33. Know the mind to be the seat of illusion, and to make the man by itself; it 
is the essential constituent of every person, and the speculum of all these 
worlds in itself. 


34. Know the mind, as the source of your body and estates; and know it also, 
as the root of your hermitage and everything else; just as one tree bears the 
seed of another. (The ingrained desire of the mind is the seed of all extraneous 
accidents). 


35. It is therefore, by your giving up this seed of all events, that you really 
resign everything in the world, which is contained in and depends on this 
primary seed and mainspring of the mind. All possible as well as impossible 
renunciations, depend on the resignation of the mind. 


36. The man that is under the subjection of his mind, is ever subject to cares, 
both when he is attentive to his duties or negligent of them; as also when he 
rules his realm, or flies from it to a forest; but the man of a well governed 
mind, is quite content in every condition of life. 


37. It is the mind which revolves incessantly in the manner of the rotatory 
world, and evolves itself in the form of the body and its limbs; as the minute 
seed displays itself in the shape of a tree and its branches and leaves. 


38. As the trees are shaken by the blowing winds, and as the mountains are 
shook by the bursting earthquakes; and as the bellows are blown by the 
inflated air, so is the animated body moved about by the mobile force of the 
mind. 


39. These miserable mortals that are born to death and decay, and those happy 
few that live to enjoy the pleasures of life; and the great sages of staunch 
hearts and souls, are all of them bound alike to the thraldom of their minds. 
(The mind governs all, and there are few to govern it). 


40. The mind acts its several parts, in all the various forms and figures of the 
stage of the world; it shows its gestures in the motions of the body, it lives and 
breathes in the shape of the living spirit, and it thinks and cogitates in the form 
of the mind. (The mind and the heart, the living soul and the active body, are 
all the one and same thing). 


41. It takes the different epithets of the understanding, buddhi, consciousness, 
mahat, egoism, ahamkara, the life or prdna and the intellect, agreeably to its 
sundry internal functions in the body, or else it is the silent soul, when it is 
without any action to be assigned to it. 


42. The mind is said to be all in all, and by getting release of this, we are 
released of all diseases and dangers; and then we are said to have avoided and 
abandoned all and everything. 


43. O ye, that want to know what resignation is, must know that it is the 
resignation of the mind, which makes your renunciation of all things. If you 
succeed in the abnegation of your mind, you come to know the truth, and feel 
the true felicity of your soul. 


44. With the riddance of your mind, you get rid of the unity and duality of 
creeds, and come to perceive all diversities and pluralities blend in one 
universal whole; which is transcendental tranquillity, transparent purity and 
undiminished felicity; (which is andmaya without alloy). 


45. The mind is the field for the course of everybody, in his career in this 
world; but if this field be over grown with thorns and brambles, how can you 
expect to grow rice in it? 


46. The mind shows its manifold aspects, and plays its many parts at will; it 
turns and moves in the forms of things, as the waters roll in the shapes of 
waves. 


47. Know young prince, that your abandonment of all things by the 
resignation of your mind, will redound to your joy, not unequal to that of your 
gaining a kingdom to yourself. 


48. In the matter of self-abnegation, you are on the same footing with other 
men; in that you resign whatever you dislike, and want to have something that 
you have a liking for. 


49. He who connects all the worlds with himself, as the thread that connects 
the pearls in a necklace, is the man that possesses everything, by renouncing 
all things from himself. (This is the attribute of sutrdtmdad, — the connecting 
thread of the supreme soul, which unites all units to it, by living all things as 
apart from it). 


50. The soul that is unattached to all things, doth yet connect and pass alike 
through them all; as the thread of the divine soul, connects the world as a 
string of pearls. (It spreads unspent). 


51. The soul that bears no attachment to the world, is like an oilless lamp that 
is soon extinguished to darkness; but the spirit that is warm with its affections, 
likens an oily lamp, that burns with universal love, and enlightens all objects 
about it. 


52. The lord that lives aloof from all, resembles the oilless lamp in dark 
obscurity; but the same Lord manifesting himself in all things, resembles the 
oily lamp that lights every object. (The two hypostases of the supreme spirit, 
— the unknowable and the Manifest, the aprakdsdtmad and the saprakdsdtma). 


53. As after the relinquishment of all your possessions, (both in your estate as 
also in this forest), you still remain by yourself; so after your resignation of 
your body, mind and all, you have still your consciousness by you, which you 


can never get rid of. 


54. As by the burning of your articles, you have burnt no part of your body; so 
by your resignation of all things, you cannot resign yourself or your soul, 
which would then amount to nirvdna or utter extinction (which is tantamount 
to moksha or ultimate absorption in the supreme spirit). 


55. Sarvatydga or total abnegation, means the voidance of the soul of all its 
worldly attachment, when it becomes the seat of all knowledge; and likens to 
the ethereal paradise of the hosts of celestial beings. 


56. Sarvatydga or self-abnegation is like the water, immortality, which drives 
away all fear of disease and death by a single draught of it; and it remains 
untouched by the cares of the world, as the clear firmament is untinged by the 
spots of clouds. 


57. Sarvatydga again, is the entire abandonment of all affections, gives a man 
his true greatness and glory; and as you get rid of your temporary affections, 
so you get the stability of your understanding, and the firmness of your 
determination. 


58. Sarvatydga or abandonment of all, is fraught with perfect delight; as its 
contrary is attended with extreme misery. This is a certain truth, and knowing 
as such, choose what you think best for you. 


59. He who gives away his all in this life, comes to be in possession of them 
in his future state; as the rivers which pour their waters into the sea, are again 
filled by its flood tide. 


60. After resignation of all things from the mind, its hollowness is filled with 
full knowledge of them, which is highly gratifying to the soul; as an empty 
box, is stored with rich gems and jewels in it. 


61. It was by virtue of his resignation of all things, that Sdkyamuni became 
dauntless amidst the troubles of the Kali-age, and sat as firm as a rock. (Hence 
the Yogis of prior ages, have remained as pure air). 


62. Total resignation of all things, is tantamount to the acquisition of all 
prosperity; because the lord gives everything to him, who dedicates and 
devotes his all unto Him. 


63. You have now, O prince, become as quiet as the calm atmosphere, after 
your abandonment of all things; now try to be as graceful as the lightsome 
moon, by the complaisance of your manners. 


64. Now, O high minded prince, forget at once your past abdication of your 
crown and kingdom, as also your subsequent of all things in this hermitage; 
drive away the pride of your total abandonment of all you had, and be of a 
clear and complacent countenance. 


CHAPTER XCIV. 


Enlightenment of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — On the abandonment of the affections of the mind. 


VASISHTHA continued: — As the disguised boy was admonishing in this 
manner on the relinquishment of mind, (ie., the mental passions and 
affections); the prince ruminated inwardly on its sense, and then spoke as 
follows. 


2. Sikhidhwaja said: — I find my mind fluttering always, as a bird in the open 
sky of my bosom; and lurking incessantly as an ape, in the wilderness of my 
heart. 


3. I know how to restrain my mind, as they do the fishes in the net; but know 
not how to get rid of it, when it is so much engaged with the objects of sense. 


4. Please Sir, acquaint me first with the nature of the mind, and then teach me 
the method of relinquishing it forever from me. 


5. Kumbha replied: — Know great prince, cupidity to be the intrinsic nature 
of the mind; and know the word desire to be used as a synonym for the mind. 
(The mind and will are synonymous terms). 


6. The abandonment of the mind is very easy, and more facile than the stirring 
of it; it is attended with a greater delight, than the possession of a kingdom 
can afford, and is more pleasant than the scent of fragrant flowers. 


7. But it is very difficult for the ignorant, to get rid of or forsake the desires of 
their minds; it is as hard to them as it is for a boor to wield the reins of a 
kingdom, and for a heap of grass to be as high as a mountain. 


8. Sikhidhwaja said: — I understand the nature of the mind, to be replete with 
its desires; but I find my riddance from it, to be as impossible as the 
swallowing of an iron-bolt by anybody. 


9. I find the mind as the fragrant flower in the great garden of the world, and 
the crater of the fire of all our woes; it is the stalk of the lotus of the world, 
and it is the bag that bears and blows the gusts of delusion all over the world. 
Now tell me how this thing may be easily removed from us. 


10. The mind is the locomotive engine of the body, it is the bee that flutters 
about the lotus of the heart; now tell me how I may with ease get rid of this 
mind. 


11. Kumbha answered: — The total extirpation of the mind, consists in the 
entire extinction of the world from it; the learned and the men of long 
foresight, call this to be the abandonment of the mind; (i.e., when it is cast out 
with all its thoughts and cares). 


12. Sikhidhwaja rejoined: — I think the extinction of the mind, is better than 
our abandonment of it, on account of securing the success of our purposes; but 
how can we know the gradual expurgation of the mind, from the hundreds of 
diseases to which it is subject. 


13. Kumbha replied: — Egoism is the root (seed) of the arbour of the mind, 
with all its branches and leaves and fruits and flowers; therefore, root out the 
mind with its very root of egoism, and have thy breast as clear as the empty 
and lurid sky. 


14. Sikhidhwaja rejoined: — Tell me, O sage, what is the root of the mind, 
what are its sprouts and fruits; tell me also how many stems and branches it 
has, and how is it possible to root it out at once. 


15. Kumbha replied: — Know prince, that egoism and all the words 
expressive of the self as meity, efc., and indicative of the mind, are the seeds 
of the tree of the mind. 


16. The field of its growth is the supreme soul, which is the common source of 
all entities; but that field being filled with illusion, the mind is deluded to 
believe itself as the first-born sprout springing out of this field. (The first-born 
germ of the Divine spirit being the living soul, which originates in the mind). 


17. The certain knowledge of the mind in its discrete state, is called its 
understanding, (which in its concrete state is known as sensation); the buddhi 
or understanding, is the state of maturity of the germ or sprout of the mind. 
(The infant mind ripens into the understanding). 


18. The understanding or buddhi, being subject to various desires, takes the 
name of chitta or wasteful mind; and this mind makes the living being, which 


is as hollow within it, as a carved image of stone (or moulded metal), and a 
mere false conception. 


19. The body is the stem of this tree of the mind, and is composed of the skin 
and bones and juicy matters. 


20. The branches of the tree of the mind, extend to a great distance all about 
it; and so the sensible organs of the body, protruding wide about it, perish at 
last in seeking for its enjoyment. 


21. Now try to lop off the branches of the tree of thy mind, and try also to root 
out the noxious tree at once. 


22. Sikhidhwaja said: — I can somehow or other lop off the branches of the 
tree of mind, but tell me, O my sagely monitor, how I may be able to pull it 
out by its very root at once. 


23. Kumbha replied: — All our desires are the several branches of this tree, 
which are hanging with loads of fruits; and are lopped off by the axe of our 
reason. 


24. He alone is able to lop off the plant of his mind, who is unattached to the 
world, who holds his taciturnity and inward tranquillity, who is judicious in 
all discussions, and does whatever offers of itself to him at any time. 


25. He who lops off the branches and brambles of the arbour of his mind, by 
his manliness of reason and discretion, is able also to root out this tree at once 
from his heart. 


26. The first thing to be done with the mind, is to root it out at once from the 
heart and the next process is to lop off its branches; therefore, employ thyself 
more to its eradication, than to the severing of its boughs and branches. 


27. You may also burn it as the first step, instead of lopping the branches; and 
thus the great trunk of the tree of mind being reduced to ashes, there remains 
an entire mindlessness at last. 


28. Sikhidhwaja said: — Tell me, O my sagely guide, what is that fire which 
is able to burn away the seed of the tree of mind, which is covered all over 
with the cuticle of egoism. 


29. Kumbha replied: — Prince, the fire which is able to consume the seed of 
the noxious plant of the mind, is the expostulation of the question, “what am I 
that bear this corporeal form upon me.” 


30. Sikhidhwaja said: — O sage! I have repeatedly considered the questions 
in my own understanding, and found that my egoism does not consist in aught 
of this world, or this earth, or the woods which form its garniture. 


31. That my ego lay nowhere in the hills and forests where I resided, nor in 
the shaking of the leaves before me; nor did it lie in any part of my gross 
body, or in its flesh, bones or blood. 


32. It does not lie in any of the organs of action, nor in the organs of 
sensation; it does not consist in the mind or in the understanding, or in any 
part of the gross body. 


33. As we see the form of the bracelet in gold, so do I conceive my egoism to 
consist in the intelligent soul; because it is impossible for any material 
substance, to have anything as intelligence (as I perceive my egoism to be 
possessed of). 


34. All real existence depends on the supreme soul for its subsistence, so all 
real entities subsist in the supreme essence; or else it is impossible for 
anything to exist in a nullity, as there is no possibility for a forest to subsist in 
a vacuity (without a firm ground). 


35. Thus Sir, knowing it full well, that my egoism is an aspect or shadow of 
my internal soul and worthy to be wiped off from it; yet I regret at my 
ignorance of the intrinsic spirit from which it is to be wiped off, and the 
internal soul be set in full light. 


36. Kumbha replied: — If you are none of these material objects as you say, 
nor doth your egoism consist in materiality; then tell me prince, what you 
think yourself to be in reality. 


37. Sikhidhwaja answered: — I feel myself, O most learned Sir, to be that 
intelligent and pure soul, which is of the form of intelligence, which acquaints 
me of all existence, and which discriminates their different natures. 


38. I perceive thus my egoism to be attached to my body, but whether it is a 
caused or causeless principle, is what I am perfectly ignorant of. 


39. I am unable, O sage, to rub out this sense of my egoism as an unreality 
and unessentiality; and it is on that I greatly regret in myself (for my inability 
to get rid of my egoism as you led). 


40. Kumbha said: — Tell me, O prince, what is that great foulness, which 
thou feelest to be attached to thee, which makes thee act as a man of the 


world, and whether thou thinkest it as something or a mere delusion. 


41. Sikhidhwaja replied: — The sense of my egoism, which is the root of the 
tree of my mind, is the great foulness that attaches to me; I know not how to 
get rid of it, for however I try to shun it, the more it clings about me. 


42. Kumbha said: — Every effect is produced from some cause or other, and 
this is the general law of nature everywhere; anything otherwise, is as false as 
the sight of a second moon in the sky, which is nothing but a reflexion of the 
true moon. 


43. It is the cause which produces the effect, whether it be a big one or the 
small rudiment of it; therefore, explore into the cause of your egoism, and tell 
me what it is. 


44. Sikhidhwaja replied: — I know my sagely guide, that it is mere illusion, 
— mdayd, which is the cause of the fallacy of my egoism; but tell me Sir, how 
this error of mine is to subside and vanish away from one. 


45. It is from the proclivity of the mind towards the thinkables, that I am 
suffering all these pains and pangs within myself; now tell me, O muni, about 
the means of suppressing my thoughts, in regard to external objects. 


46. Kumbha said: — Tell me whether your thinking and knowing, are the 
causes of your thinkables and knowables, or these latter actuate your thinking 
and knowing powers. If you can tell me this, then shall I be able to explain to 
you the process of the cause and effect. 


47. Now tell me which do you think to be the cause and not the cause, of 
knowing and knowable, and of thinking and the thinkable, which are the 
subjects of my question to you. 


48. Sikhidhwaja answered: — I think, O sage, that the sensible objects of the 
body, efc., are the causes of the thinking and thinkable (thoughts), and of 
knowing and the knowables or knowledge. (Because unless there be things in 
actual existence, we can neither think of or know anything, nor have any idea 
or knowledge of it at all). 


49. Our knowledge of the entity of things, appears only in the sensible forms 
of bodies; or else the mere abstract thought of a thing, is as empty as an airy 
nothing. 


50. As I cannot conceive the non-entity of a positive entity, nor the abstract 
nature of a concrete body; so I know not how my egoism, which is the seed of 


my mind, can be at once ignored by me. 


51. Kumbha said: — If thou rely on thy material body as a real existence, then 
tell me, on what does your knowledge depend, when your soul is separated 
from the body. 


52. Sikhidhwaja replied: — The body which is evident to view, and a real 
entity, cannot be taken for an unreality by anybody; as the palpable sun light, 
cannot be called darkness by any man of common sense. 


53. Who can ignore the body, which is replete with its hands and feet and 
other members; which is full of activity and vivacity, and whose actions are so 
palpable to sight; and which is so evident to our perception and conception. 


54. Kumbha said: — Know prince, that nothing can be said to exist, which is 
not produced by some cause; and the knowledge or consciousness that we 
have of it, cannot be but the product of mistake and error. 


55. There can be no product without a similar cause, and no material form can 
come out from a formless and immaterial agent. How can any thing come to 
existence, without having its seed of the like nature? 


56. Whatever product appears to present itself to anyone without its true 
cause, is as false an appearance as the mirage in the sand, before its deluded 
observer. 


57. Know thyself to be no real existence, but a false shape of your error only; 
and with whatever earnestness you took to it, you will never get any water 
from this delusive mirage. 


58. Sikhidhwaja said: — It is as useless to inquire the cause of a nonentity, as 
it is fruitless to look into the origin of the secondary moon which is but false 
reflex of the true one. Believing in a nullity, is as decorating the person of a 
barren woman's son. 


59. Kumbha replied: — The body with its bones and ribs, are products of no 
assignable cause; therefore, know it as no entity, because it is impossible for 
the frail body to be the work of an Everlasting Maker. 


60. Sikhidhwaja said: — Now tell me Sir, why we should not reckon our 
fathers the causes and producers of our bodies, with all their members and 
parts, since they are known as the immediate causes of these. 


61. Kumbha replied: — The father can be nothing and no cause, without his 
having another cause for himself; because whatever is without a cause is 


nothing in itself. 


62. The causes of all things and effects are called as their seeds, and when 
there is no seed in existence, it is impossible for a germ to be produced in the 
earth from nothing. (Ex nihilo nihil fit). 


63. So when you cannot trace out the cause of an event, account the event as 
no event at all; because there can be nothing without its seed, and the 
knowledge of a causeless effect or eventuality, is an utter impossibility and 
fallacy of the understanding. 


64. It is an egregious error to suppose the existence of a thing without its 
cause or seed, such as to suppose the existence of two moons in the sky, of 
water in the mirage and of the son of a barren woman. 


65. Sikhidhwaja said: — Now tell me Sir, why should not our parents be 
taken as the causes of our production, who had our grandfathers and 
grandmothers for the causes or seeds of their birth likewise; and why should 
we not reckon our first great grandfather, (Brahma), as the prime progenitor of 
the human race? 


66. Kumbha replied: — The prime great grandfather, O prince, cannot be the 
original cause, since he also requires a cause for his birth, or else he could not 
come into existence. 


67. The great grandfather of creation, even Brahma himself, is the cause of 
production by means of the seeds of the supreme spirit which produced him; 
or else the visible form in which he appeared, was no more than a mere 
delusion. 


68. Know the form of the visible world, to be as great a fallacy as the 
appearance of water in the mirage; and so the creativeness of the great 
grandfather Brahma, is no more than an erroneous misconception. 


69. I will now wipe off the dark cloud of your error, that our great grandfather 
Brahma was conceived in the womb of the supreme spirit, (whereby he is 
styled the padma-yoni or born of the lotus like navel string of God); and this 
will be the salvation of your soul. (And Adam's ancestors without end. — 
Young). 


70. Now therefore, know, O prince, that the lord God shines forever with his 
intelligent soul and mind in Himself; it is from him that the lotus born Brahma 
and the whole universe, are manifest to our view, and that there is nothing 
which exhibits itself without Him. 


CHAPTER XCV. 


The anaesthetic Platonism of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — Dispersion of the gloom of ignorance from the mind of 
Sikhidhwaja. His coming to the Light of Truth and the Tranquillity of his 
soul. 


SIKHIDWAJA said: — If the view of the whole universe is but a phantom, 
and our knowledge of myself, thyself and of this and that, is but an error of 
our mind, then why is it that we should be concerned about or sorry for 
anything. 


2. Kumbha replied: — The erroneous impression of the existence of the 
world, has so firmly laid hold of the minds of men; as the frozen water 
appearing as crystal, is believed as dry land by people. 


3. It is said by the learned, that the knowledge of gross matter is lost with the 
dispersion of ignorance; and that there is no other way of getting rid of this 
long contracted prejudice, without our riddance from ignorance. 


4. It is the acuteness of the understanding, which is the only means of our 
coming to the knowledge of truth; that the creation and dissolution of the 
world, are dependent on the will and causality of the supreme Being. 


5. He whose understanding becomes, is sure to lose his rooted prejudice by 
degrees; and come to the knowledge of the nihility of the material world. 


6. In this way of refining your mind from its prepossession of gross ideas, you 
will come to find the erroneous conception of a prime male, (ddipurusha), as 
that of Brahma (or Adam) as the first creative power, to be as false as the 
water in the mirage. 


7. The great grandfather of the world being a nullity, the creation of all 
creatures by him, (who is thence called Prajdpatih or lord of creatures); is 
likewise as false and null, as it is absurd for an impossibility to come into 


being. 


8. The perception of a thing in esse, is as false as the conception of water in 
the mirage; a little reflexion is enough to remove this error, like the mistake of 
silver in cockles and conch-shells. 


9. Any work which appears to exist without its cause, is only a phantom of 
fallacy, and has no essential form whatever in reality. 


10. Whatever is done by one's erroneous knowledge or mistake of a thing, 
comes to be of no use to him; as the attempt to fill a pot with the water of the 
mirage, proves to be utterly vain. 


11. Sikhidhwaja said: — Why can't we call the supreme Brahma, to be the 
cause of Brahma, — the first creator of the world who is called the son of 
God, the one unborn and without end, and the inexpressible and everlasting. 


12. Kumbha replied: — The God Brahma, being neither the cause nor the 
effect of any action, is but an invariable unity and transcendent spirit, and is 
never the cause or effect of anything. 


13. How can the incomprehensible and unknowable Brahma, be designated as 
the creator, when he is not predicable by any of the predicates of the creator or 
created or as the instrument or cause of anything. 


14. The world having no separate cause, is no separate product of any 
causality whatever; it is no duality but one with the unity, without its 
beginning or end, and co-eternal with the eternal one. (To pan, — God is all in 
all). 


15. He that is inconceivable and unknowable, is perfect felicity, tranquillity 
and ever undecaying, and can never be the active or passive agent of anything, 
on account of the immutability of his nature. 


16. Hence, there is nothing as a creation, and the visible world is but a 
nihility, and the Lord God is neither an active nor passive agent, but quite still 
and full of bliss. 


17. There being no causal power, the world is not the production of anybody; 
it is our error only that this world as a production without any assignable 
cause. 


18. The uncaused world is the product of nothing, and therefore, nothing in 
itself; for if it be the production of nobody, it is a nullity like its cause also. 


19. The non-existence of anything or the not being of everything, (except that 
of the supreme Being), being proved as a certain truth; we can have no 
conception of anything, and the absence of such conception, it is in vain to 
suppose the existence of an egoism or tuism. 


20. Sikhidhwaja said: — Sir, I now perceive the truth, and find the 
reasonableness of all that you have said; I see now that I am the pure and free 
soul, and quite aloof of any bondage or its liberation from bonds. 


21. I understand Brahma as no cause of anything, for his entire want of 
causality; and the world is a nullity for its want of a cause, and therefore, there 
is no being whatever which we reckon as a category. 


22. Thence there is no such category as the mind or its seed, nor its growth 
nor decay; I therefore bow down to myself of which alone I have a 
consciousness in me. 


23. I am alone conscious of myself, existence in myself and have no real 
knowledge of anything else beside me, and which appear as fleeting clouds in 
the womb of the sky. 


24. The distinct knowledge of the different categories of time, place, action in 
the world, is now entirely blended in the knowledge of the unity of the 
tranquil spirit of Brahma (which composes all varieties in itself). 


25. I am tranquil, calm and quiet and settled in the spirit of God; I do not rise 
nor fall from nor move about this prop. I remain as you do in immovable spirit 
of God, which is all quiet, holiness and felicity in itself. 


CHAPTER XCVI. 


Enlightenment of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — Kumbha's Lecture on Effacing the Impression of Phenomenals 
from the mind of Sikhidhwaja or vanity of the visible world. 


VASISHTHA said: — Sikhidhwaja, having thus found his rest in the spirit of 
Brahma, remained quiet for some moments, as the steady and unflagging 
flame of a lamp in a calm. 


2. And as he was about to be absorbed in his unwavering meditation, he was 
suddenly roused from his trance by the diverting voice of Kumbha. 


3. Kumbha said: — Prince, I see you are not to wake from the sleep of your 
entranced meditation, wherein you are situated in your perfect bliss; you must 
neither be absorbed in your contemplation, nor be a stranger to your abstract 
meditation altogether, (but must observe your middle course between 
Platonism and perturbation). 


4. The mind that is undivided in its attention, is cleansed from all duplicity; 
and being freed from its knowledge of parts and particulars, becomes 
emancipated in its living states. 


5. Being thus enlightened by Kumbha, the prince became full of 
enlightenment; and being roused from his trance, he shone as brightly as a 
rich gem when taken out of its cover. 


6. The prince who in his state of quietism, beheld the unreality of visible 
things; and now perceived them spread all about him, thus spoke about them 
to Kumbha. 


7. Sikhidhwaja said: — Though I know full well about all these things, yet I 
want to propose some queries regarding them; to which I hope you will give 
your answers, for my correct and perfect knowledge of them. 


8. Tell me, how can we intermingle the impure conception of the universal or 
mundane soul representing the mundees or universe, with the pure idea of the 
supreme soul, which is ever calm, quiet and transparent. (The universal soul, 
is called viswdtmd, viswarupa and virdja, and is opaque with its contents; 
while the supreme is quite pure and clear, and untinged with the shade of 
creation). 


9. Kumbha replied: — You have asked well, O prince, and this shows the 
clearness of your understanding; and if this is all that you want to know, hear 
me then explain it fully to you. 


10. Whatever is seen here and everywhere together, with all the moving and 
unmoving beings which it contains, are all of them perishable, and are extinct 
at the end of every Kalpa age, (in which the creator wishes to create a new 
world). 


11. Then there remains the true and essential reality at the end of the Kalpa 
age, amidst an obscure chaotic state, which is deprived both of light and 
darkness. 


12. This essential reality is the divine intellect, which is pure and quiet and as 
clear as the transparent air; it is free from all attributes and imputations, and 
full of transcendental intelligence. 


13. The one that remains at the end of a Kalpa, is the supreme soul which 
extends over all space, and is purely bright, transparent and quiet; it is 
enveloped in light and is pure intelligence. 


14. It is inscrutable and unknowable, it is even and quiet, and full of bliss; it is 
called Brahma, — the great, the final extinction of all bodies and is full of all 
knowledge. 


15. It is the minutest of the minute, and the largest of whatever is large in the 
universe; it is the greatest and greatest of aught that is great and heavy, and it 
is the best of whatever is good and excellent. 


16. It is so very small, that if you place this sky beside it, the latter will appear 
as big as the great mount of Meru by the side of a small mite. 


17. It is again, so very big and bulky, that this stupendous world being placed 
side by side to it, the latter must appear as an atom before it or vanish into 
nothing. 


18. This is attributed with the epithet of universal soul, for its pervading all 


over the universe and being its intrinsic soul; while its extrinsic appearance, is 
called by the title of Virdj. 


19. There is no difference between this attribute and its attributive, as there is 
none between the air and the wind or the air in motion; and as the sky and 
vacuum are synonymous words, so the very same intellect is the phenomenal 
world, and the same consciousness is manifested in the forms of egoism and 
tuism. 


20. As the water becomes the wave at a certain time and place, by cause of the 
current wind; so the world rises and falls at times in the supreme soul, without 
any external cause (except the will of the supreme spirit). 


21. As gold is transformed to bracelets at certain times and place, by means of 
some or other; so the spirit of God is transformed to the visible world at 
certain times, without any other assignable cause whatever, (save by the 
supreme will). 


22. The most glorious God, is the Lord of his Kingdom of the world; He is 
one with his creation, ever pure, quiet and undecaying, and pervades over all 
these worlds which are scattered as turfs of grass all around us. 


23. This transcendentally good and great God is the only real existence, and 
comprises all temporary and finite existences within himself; and we know by 
our reason, that this glorious creation of the universe is all derived from him. 


24. Know him, O prince, to be the essence of the extended universe, and to 
extend over all in his form of an entire intellect, and an unity that never admits 
of a duality (under all the varieties and diversities in nature). 


25. There is no reason therefore, for our conceiving a duality beside his unity; 
since it is the sole principle of the supreme soul, that is fully manifest in all in 
its ever undiminished and unextinguished state. 


26. The Lord always remains as the all in all, and as manifest in all the various 
forms; and being neither visible nor perceptible by us, he can neither be said 
to be the cause or effect of anything (but is the unknown all in himself). 


27. The Lord being neither perceptible nor conceivable by us is something 
super-eminently good and superfine; He is all and the soul of all, too fine and 
transparent, and is known only by our conception of him; and no sensible 
perception whatever. (The knowledge of God, is innate and inborn in us. — 
Locke). 


28. Being inexpressible by words, and manifest in all without manifestation or 
appearance of himself; cannot be the cause of whatever is real or unreal. 
(Anything that is indefinite in itself, cannot cause another of a definite or 
indefinite form). 


29. That which has no name of itself, cannot be the seed of another; no 
nameless nothing can grow anything, nor can a commensurable world spring 
out of an incommensurable spirit. (A material and measurable thing, must 
have a material mensurator for its origin. Hence it is wrong to say: — God 
measured the seas without a measuring rod). 


30. The exhaustless mass of divine intellect, is indeed no cause or casual 
instrument or effect of anything; because the product of the divine soul, must 
be something of the form of the invisible soul, which is its everlasting 
consciousness or intelligence. 


31. So, O sage, nothing is produced by the supreme Brahma nor does anything 
arise from Him, like the waves from water which have their winds for their 
causality. (But the spirit of Brahma, is as the still water and has no stir or 
perturbation in it). 


32. All distinction of time and place, being absent in the uniform and 
unchanging spirit of Brahma, there can be no creation or destruction of the 
world from him, and hence the world is increate and without any cause. 


33. Sikhidhwaja said: — I know that the waves of water, have their cause in 
the winds of the air, and so I understand this world and our egoism, etc., have 
their causality in the supreme spirit, (which produces the worlds by its will, 
and acquaints me of my egoism by its intelligence). 


34. Kumbha replied: — Know now the positive truth, O prince, as I tell you 
after all, that there is nothing as a separate world or our egoism, efc., existent 
in supreme spirit; though the world and the Ego exist as one with the divine 
spirit, without bearing their distinct names and personalities at all. (ie., The 
world and its gods as one and the same thing). 


35. As the subtle ether, contains the subtle element of vacuum in its bosom; so 
the divine soul entertains in itself, the fine spun idea of the mundane system 
without its substance. 


36. Whether you behold this world in its true form of divine intelligence, or in 
any other form of gross matter; it is to be understood rightly as no other than a 
representation of the divine intellect. 


37. The full knowledge of a thing, makes it sweet to the understanding, 
though it be as bitter as gall to taste; but the imperfect knowledge of a thing, 
as that of the world makes it appear as full of woe, though it is no such thing 
in reality. (Hence the crying and laughing philosophers took two different 
views of the world). 


38. Ambrosia the water of life being taken in the light of poison, will act as 
poison in the constitution of the patient; so the lord of the intellect appears in 
a favourable or unfavourable light, as knowledge and ignorance of him 
represents him to our understanding. 


39. The blessed lord God appears to us in the propitious or unpropitious 
aspect, as our true and false knowledge paints him to our minds, just as the 
blinding eye sees many a false sight in the light of the sun. 


40. The essence of Brahma, always remains the same in his essential form of 
the intellect; though the turpitude of our understanding, will now represent 
him in one form and then in another at a different time and under different 
circumstances. 


41. In fact, the body and the embodied soul appear as any other sensible 
object in the world; but being viewed in reality in their abstract light, they 
blend in the spiritual form of God. 


42. Therefore, it is in vain to make any inquiry, concerning the nature of the 
world and our egoism, efc.; because what is really existent is to be inquired 
into, and not that which is a nullity in itself. 


43. It is vain to ask about an appearance, which being looked into vanishes 
into nothing; as it is in vain to speak of the essence of gold, when it presents 
us no figure of it. 


44. Therefore, there is no entity of the world and our egoism, without the 
existence of God, these things having no cause, are self-same with the one 
self-existent Deity. 


45. The world does not appear to be prominent, and to rest by itself to view; it 
rests in relief in the spirit of God, and shows itself as separate to us by illusion 
only. 


46. These existences being composed of the five elements, produce many 
other beings; as the copulations of the male and female, produce their 
offspring in infinity; so the divine intellect being joined with the illusory 
intelligence, presents endless form to our view. 


47. It is by the inherent knowledge of the divine soul, that it represents itself 
the shapes of many things that are comprised in his omniscience. He is full in 
himself and manifests his fullness in himself, and is never wanting in his 
fullness which always subsist in Him. (So the sea is ever full with its waves 
and waters, which roll forever in its bosom). 


48. The fullness or plenum of the world is derived from the fullness of God; 
and yet the divine fullness remains entire, as when you deduct the infinite, that 
remains the infinite also as the remainder. 


49. The divine intellect, though forever the same and serene, appears to shine 
forth in the creation with our knowledge of the same, and set at its dissolution 
with our imperceptibility of it; so our egoism being the same with the divine 
ego, appears to be different from it, as our fluctuating minds depict it in 
various lights. 


50. The ego never becomes many, nor forsake its undecaying state; it is of a 
luminous form and having no beginning nor end of its essence; but assumes as 
many forms, as the ever varying mind imposes upon it. (The unchanging soul 
assumes many forms with the changeful mind). 


51. The self-same soul believes itself as Virdj, — the lord of the world at one 
time, and as contemptible being at another; it sometimes sees itself in its true 
form of a divinity, and its thought makes it think as some other thing at 
another time. 


52. The world appears as a vast and extended space, perfectly quiet in its 
nature, inexpressible by words and their senses, (as its real nature). All its 
objects are of wonderful shape to view, and appear to us according to our 
conceptions or without showing their real nature's unto us. (The true nature of 
things is hidden from our knowledge). 


CHAPTER XCVILI. 


Enlightenment of the Prince in Theosophy. 


Argument: — Effacing the impression of visibles from the mind; continued. 


KUMBHA continued: — Know that nothing is produced from, nor destroyed 
by the ever-tranquil spirit of God at any time; but everything appears as the 
panorama of the one all, (to pan), God; like the various kinds of ornaments 
made of the same metal of gold. 


2. Brahma remains forever in his own essence, and never becomes the seed or 
cause of any other thing; he is ever of the form of our innate conception of 
him, and therefore, never becomes any other than our simple idea of him. 


3. Sikhidhwaja said: — I grant, Oh sagely monitor, that there subsists no 
separate world, nor any other egoism in the one pure Siva, (Zeus or Jove), 
except his own essence of omniscience; but please to tell me, what thing is 
this world and individual egoisms that seem to be infinite in number, and 
appear as distinct creations of God? 


4. Kumbha replied: — The essence of God is without its beginning and end, 
and extends to infinite space and time. 


5. The same also is this transparent cosmos, and the very same is the body of 
this world; which is simple and of the form of divine intelligence, and neither 
a void nor any extraneous thing. 


6. The essential property of God being his intelligence, he is said to be of 
essence of intellect; and as fluidity is the property of water, so is intelligence 
the essential property of everything; and there is no reason to suppose an 
unintelligent principle as the prime cause of all. 


7. The Lord is infinite in himself and is so situated in his infinitude forever, 
without the grossness of the infinitesimals ever attaching to their pure 
intelligence in the subjective soul. 


8. We cannot attribute the creation of the impure world, to the pure essence of 
the divine spirit; because the purity of the divine soul, cannot admit the 
impurity of creation, which would amount to a duality of purity and impurity 
in the supreme soul; (which is altogether absurd to believe). 


9. The Lord can never be supposed as the seed or cause of the universe, since 
his nature is inscrutable and beyond our conception, and cannot be thought of 
as the root of anything whatever. 


10. Therefore, there is no creation or production of an effect, without its cause 
or seed; nor does reason point out to us, any other source of creation. 


11. Therefore, there is no gross creation whatsoever, except of the form of the 
intellect itself; and hence all that is visible to us, is no other than the solid 
intellect itself. 


12. The feeling of egoism and the term world, are meaningless words and 
mere inventions of men; because nothing whatever can be called an effect or 
product, which has no cause assigned to it. 


13. The duality of the world appears in the unity of God, in the same manner 
as a flower called the sky flower appears in the hollow vacuum of the sky (by 
mere delusion). And all things being perishable in their nature, exist only in 
the intellect in which they live and die. (If the world be of the solid intellect, 
then the very intellect becomes the cause of the same, by means of the 
solidification of its own substance; but it is not so, because it is impossible for 
the same thing to be both the cause and effect of something by itself). 


14. Destruction is not the giver of life to destruction, nor is it a giver of life to 
perishable things; hence intellect is the giver of light to all; but you may call 
whatever you like the best. 


15. What difficulty you have, provided all things are to be called one, when all 
have come from the intellect; the duality what you call, that is the mystery of 
intellect, — chit, only. 


16. The intellect therefore, is the only true entity, which admits no unity nor 
duality in it. And therefore, O prince, you must know the nullity of all other 
entities beside it. 


17. The feeling of thy egoism, is as false as thy conception of any other thing; 
and thus, the idea of egoism proving to be false, what else can there be except 
the only entity of the intellect. 


18. Thus, egoism (being) no other than a form of the intellect, there is no 
difference whatever between them; hence the words, I, thou, efc., are mere 
human inventions to distinguish one from another (when there is in reality no 
difference in the personality of anybody). 


19. Whether you remain in your embodied or disembodied state, continue to 
remain always as firm as a rock; by knowing yourself only as the pure 
intellect, and the nullity of all things besides. 


20. By thinking yourself always as the intellect, you will lose the sense of 
your egoism and personality; and so will your reflexion on the contexts of the 
texts of the vedas, lead you to the same conclusion. (There are numerous texts 
to the effect that God is the only entity, and this all is naught but God). 


21. From all these know thyself as the pure essence, which is uncaused and 
unmade, and the same with the first and original principle; that thou art same 
with the emancipate and everlasting Brahma, and multiform in thy unity; that 
thou art as void as vacuity, having neither thy beginning, middle or end; and 
that this world is the intellect and that intellect is the very Brahma himself. 


CHAPTER XCVIII. 


Admonition of Sikhidhwaja Continued. 


Argument: — The non-entity of the mind, proved from the non-existence of 
sensible objects, and the want of these proving only the entity of one Brahma 
only. 


SIKHIDWAJA said: — I understand, that there is no such thing as the mind 
also; but as I have no clear and correct knowledge of this subject, I beg of you 
to tell me, whether it is so (as I believe) or not. 


2. Kumbha replied: — You have truly said, O prince, that there is no such real 
entity as the mind at any time and in any space whatever; and that which 
appears as the mind, is no other than a faculty of the only one everlasting 
Brahma. 


3. Anything besides which is fallible or unconscious of itself, as the mind or 
anything of this world, can never be a positive or self-existence substance; 
therefore, the words, I, thou, and this, or that, are only coinings of our 
imagination, and have no existence in reality. 


4. There is no reality of the cosmos or any of its contents; and all that seem to 
be in existence, are no more than the various representations of the one self- 
existent Brahma himself. (Because there is no duality beside the unity of 
Brahma). 


5. It is said that there was no mind or its personification of Brahma, and the 
final dissolution of the world, and this proves the unreality of both of them. 
Again, it is said that the mind took the form of Brahma and created the world 
in the beginning, which proves also the mind to be the divine mind, and 
represented by substitution of the metaphor of Brahma. 


6. As there can be no material object without the prior existence of a material 
cause, so it is impossible to believe the existence of the sensible mind and the 


myriads of the sensible objects in absence of their material cause, which never 
existed from before. (The spirit alone was the pre-existent thing, which could 
not create anything except in its own immaterial form). 


7. Hence there is no such thing, as a dull and unconscious world; and all that 
appears to exist as such, is no other than a representation of the Divine spirit, 
(which reflects itself in various ways), as the gold exhibits its ornaments to 
view. 


8. It is entirely false to believe, that the nameless and formless Deity does this 
all; and because the world is visible, yet there is no proof of its reality in our 
subjective knowledge of it. 


9. That the nameless and formless spirit of God, which has no shelter nor 
support for itself, should make this world for the abode of others, is a 
laughable assumption of the ignorant only, (therefore, this world is his own 
abode and the stage of his own action). 


10. From these reasons, it is plain that there is no world in existence, nor even 
the mind, which is but a part of it; the world being a non-entity, there can be 
no mind which is conversant alone with it. 


11. The mind means no more than the wish, and then only there is said to be a 
wish in anyone, when there is an object to be wished for; but this world which 
appears to be so very desirable, being a nullity itself, how can there be the 
mind to desire it. (The mind is a nullity for want of any of its objects to dwell 
upon or engage its attention). 


12. That which is manifested unto us under the name of the Mind, is no other 
than a manifestation of the spirit of God in itself, and is designated by various 
appellations. 


13. This visible which is so desirable to everybody, is no production of any 
one; it is an uncaused entity ever existent in the divine mind, from before its 
production by the mind of Brahma the creator. (Being prior to the mind, it is 
no production of it). 


14. Therefore, the divine soul, is of the form of an intellectual vacuum, and is 
a void as the transcendent air; it is full with the light of its intelligence, and 
having no shadow of the gross world in it. 


15. The slight light which shines in the divine soul, is like the twilight that 
fills the ethereal sphere; is the reflexion of the mirror of the supreme intellect, 
and is neither the dim light of the mind, nor any reflexion of the phenomenal 


world. (The nature of spiritual light, as quite distinct from the mental and 
physical lights). 


16. Our knowledge of, I, thou, and this world, (i.e., of the subjective and 
objective), are never real nor reliable; it is like the appearance of our dreams, 
that serve only to delude us to mistake. 


17. As the absence of the desirable world, removes our desire of it; so the 
privation of our desire, displaces the mind which is the seat of our wishes. 


18. The ignorant believe that this visible world is the mind, (because it is the 
display of the divine mind and the mind dwells upon it); but the unreal and 
formless mind had not this visible form, before it developed itself in the form 
of creation. (The world is not the mind because it is posterior in the order of 
creation, being created by the mind of the great Brahma). 


19. But this world is said to be coeval with the eternal mind, which is 
altogether impossible; because we read nowhere in the Sdstras, nor find in the 
ordinary course of nature, that a visible object has ever come into existence 
without some cause or other, either in the beginning of creation or at any time 
afterwards. (Hence the visible world is not coeval with the mind its maker). 


20. How can eternity, uncreatedness and everlastingness be predicated of this 
visible world, which is a gross material substance, and subject to decay and 
dissolution. 


21. There is no testimony of the Sdstras, nor ocular evidence nor any 
reasonable inference, to show any material thing to be uncaused by some 
agent or other, and to survive the final dissolution of the world. 


22. There is no written testimony of the vedas, and of other Sdstras and 
Siddhdntas to show, that any material thing is ever exempt from its three 
conditions of birth, growth and decay, and is not perishable at the last 
dissolution. 


23. He that is not guided by the evidence and dictates of the Sdstras and 
vedas, is the most foolish among fools, and is never to be relied upon by good 
and sensible men. 


24. It is never possible for anyone to prevent the accidents, that are incidentals 
to perishable things, nor can there be any cause to render a material object an 
immaterial one. 


25. But the immaterial view of this world, identifies it with the unchangeable 


Brahma, and exempts it from the accidents of action and passion, and of 
growth and decay. 


26. Therefore, know this world to be contained, in the undivided and 
unutterable vacuity of the Divine Intellect; which is infinite and formless void, 
and is forever more in its undivided and undivisible state. 


27. Brahma, who is omniform and ever tranquil in himself, manifests his own 
self in this manner in the forms of creation and dissolution all in himself. 


28. The lord now shows himself to our understanding, as embodied in his 
body of the world, and now manifests himself unto us, as the one Brahma in 
his spiritual form. 


29. Know after all, that this world is the essence of the one Brahma only, 
beside which there is no separate world or anything else in existence; and it is 
our imagination only which represents it sometimes in one form and then in 
another. 


30. All this is one, eternal and ever tranquil soul, which is unborn and without 
any support and situated as it is. It shows itself as various without any 
variation in its nature, and so learn to remain thyself with thyself as 
motionless as a block of wood, and with thy dumb silence in utter amazement 
at all this. (The principles of vedanta philosophy being abstraction and 
generalisation, it takes the world and all things in their abstract light, and 
generalises them all under the general spirit of God). 


CHAPTER XCIX. 


Remonstration of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument. — Further exhortations to spiritual knowledge and _ its 
confirmations. 


SIKHIDWAJA said: — O sage, it is by thy good grace, that I am freed from 
my ignorance, and brought under the light of truth; my doubts are removed, 
and I am situated with my tranquillity of my spirit. 


2. I have become as one knowing the knowable, and sits taciturn after 
crossing over the sea of delusion; I am quiet by quitting my egoism, and am 
set out of all disquiet by my knowledge of true self. 


3. O! how long a time have I wandered, amidst the mazy depths of the world; 
after which I have now arrived to the safe harbour of my peace and security. 


4. Being so situated, O sage, I perceive neither my egoism, nor the existence 
of the three worlds; it is ignorance to believe in their existence, but I am 
taught to believe in Brahma alone. 


5. Kumbha replied: — How is it possible for the egoism, tuism or suism of 
anybody, to exist anywhere; when this universe, this air and sky, have not 
their existence anywhere. 


6. Sit quiet as usual, be calm and as silent as a sage; and remain as still as the 
calm ocean, without the perturbation of the waves and whirl pools within its 
bosom. 


7. Such is the quiet and tranquil state of Brahma, who is always one and the 
same as he is; and the words, I, thou, this and that, and the world, are as void 
of meaning, as the universal vacuity, is devoid of anything. 


8. What you call the world is a thing, having neither its beginning nor its end; 
it is the wonder of the Intellect, to shine as the clear light, which fills the 


ethereal firmament. 


9. The changes that appear to take place in the spirit of God, are as extraneous 
as the different colours that paint the vault of heaven, and the various 
jewelleries which are wrought upon gold; these have no intrinsic essentiality, 
and never affect the tranquillity of the divine spirit, nor the uniform serenity of 
the empty sky, nor the nature of the pure metal of gold. 


10. As the Lord is self-born, so is his eternal will inherent in and born with 
himself; and what we call as free will or fate, depend on the nature of our 
knowledge of them. 


11. Think yourself as something, and you become a bondsman to your desires; 
but believe yourself as nothing, and you are as free and enfranchised as free 
air itself. 


12. It is the certain knowledge or conviction of thyself as a reality, and that 
thou art subject either to bondage or freedom, that constitutes thy personality. 


13. It is the privation of thy knowledge of thyself or thy egoistic personality, 
that leads thee to thy consummation; whereas thy knowledge of thy 
personality exposes thee to danger; therefore, think thyself as himself and not 
thyself (according to the formula (“so ham ana ham,” i.e., 1 am he and not 
myself) and thou art safe from all calamity. (This is no more than one's self- 
resignation to God)). 


14. No sooner you get rid of the conviction of yourself, than your soul is 
enlightened by the light of true knowledge; and you lose the sense of your 
personality, and become consummated in your knowledge of yourself as one 
with the Holy spirit. 


15. The inscrutable nature of God admits of no cause, because causality refers 
only to what is caused and cannot come to existence without a cause, and not 
to the uncaused cause of all. 


16. As we have no knowledge of an object which is not in existence, so we 
cease to have any knowledge of our personality, if we but cease to consider 
ourselves as caused and created beings. (The sophists used to think 
themselves as increate and say, — man an wakt budam ke hichak nabud, i.e., I 
exist from a time when there was nothing in existence). 


17. What is this world to us if we are unconscious of ourselves, and if we are 
freed from our knowledge of the objective world, we see but the supreme soul 
remaining after all. 


18. Whatever is manifest here before us, is all situated in the spirit of the lord; 
all these are transcendent, and are situated as such and same with the full and 
transcendental spirit of God. (The fulness of the world, abides in the fulness 
of the divine spirit). 


19. Therefore, all these that are protuberant to view, are as figures carved on a 
rock; and the light that pervades the whole, is but the glory of the great God. 


20. In absence of this visionary world from view, its light which is more 
pellucid than that of the transparent firmament will vanish away into nothing. 


21. The insensible world seems to move about as a shadow or phantom in the 
air, whence it is called jagat or the moving world; but he alone sees it in its 
true light, who views it as motionless and without its sense of mobility, and as 
perfectly sedate and stationary in the spirit of God. 


22. When the sight of the visibles, together with the sense of sensibles and the 
feelings of the mind, become insipid to the torpid soul that is absorbed in 
divine meditation; it is then called by the wise as nirvana absorption or the 
full light and knowledge of God. 


23. As the breezeless winds sink in the air, and the jewelry melts in its gold; 
so doth the protruding form of the world, subside in the even spirit of God. 


24. The sight of the world and the perceptions of the mind, which testify the 
existence of the world unto us, are but the representations of Brahma; as the 
false mirage, represents the water in the desert sands. 


25. As when the vast body of water subsists without a wave to ruffle its 
surface, so doth the spirit of God remain in its state of calmness, when it is 
free from its operation of creation. 


26. The creation is identic with Brahma, as the lord is the same with his 
creation, and this is true from the dictum of the veda, which says, “All this is 
Brahma, and Brahma is this (to pan).” 


27. The meaning of the word Brahma or immensity, equally establishes the 
existence of the world; as the signification of the word world or cosmos, 
establishes the entity of Brahma. 


28. The meaning of all words taken collectively, expresses a multitude; which 
is synonymous with Brahma, — the great and immense aggregate of the 
whole. 


29. And if we reject the sense of the greatness of God and of the world, as 


they are usually meant to express, yet the little or minuteness of God that 
remains at last, is so very minute that words cannot express it. (So says the 
sruti, — neither the greatness nor minuteness of God is expressible by words). 


30. The lord that remains as the inherent and silent soul of all bodies, is yet 
but one soul in the aggregate; he remains as a huge mountain of his 
intelligence, as in the form of the whole of this universal cosmos. 


CHAPTER C. 


Continuation of the same subject. 


Argument: — Difference of Brahma from the world, consisting in the 
indestructibility of his essence. 


SIKHIDWASJA said: — If it is so, O most intelligent Sir, that the work is alike 
to the nature of its maker; and therefore, the world resembles Brahma in every 
respect. 


2. Kumbha replied: — Where there exists a causality, there is an effectuality 
also accompanied with it; so where there is no cause whatever, there can be 
no effect also following the same. 


3. Therefore, there is no possibility of any cause or its effect in this world, 
which is manifest before us as the self-same essence of the ever tranquil and 
the unborn spirit of God. 


4. The effect that comes to pass from a cause, is of course alike to the nature 
of its causality; but what similarity can there exist between one, which is 
neither the cause nor effect of the other? 


5. Say how can a tree grow which has no seed for its growth, and how can 
God have a seed whose nature is inscrutable in thought, and inexpressible in 
words. 


6. All things that have their causality at any time or place, are of course of the 
nature of their causal influence; but how can there be a similarity of anything 
with God who is never the cause of an effect? 


7. Brahma the uncausing uncaused cause of all, has no causality in him; 
therefore, the meaning of the word, world, is something that has no cause 
whatever. (Jagat means what is going on forever). 


8. Therefore, think thyself as Brahma, according to the view of the intelligent; 


but the world appears as something extended in the sight of men of imperfect 
understandings. 


9. When the world is taken as one and the same with the tranquil intellect of 
God, it must be viewed in the light of the transparent spirit of Brahma. (i.e., 
spiritually and intellectually they are both the same). 


10. Any other notion, Oh prince, which the mind may entertain about the 
nature of God, is said by the intelligent, to be the destruction of the right 
concept of the Deity. 


11. Know O prince, that the destruction of the mind (or mental error), is 
tantamount to the destruction of the soul; and slight forgetfulness of the spirit, 
is hard to be retrieved in a whole Kalpa. (He that loses the sight of his Lord 
for a moment, loses it forever). 


12. No sooner you are freed from your personality, than you find yourself to 
be full of Divine knowledge, and your false personality flies away for your 
consummation in spirituality. 


13. If you think the world to be existent from the meaning of the word viswa 
or all, then tell me how and whence could all this come into existence. 


14. How can you call one to be a Brahman, who lifts up his arms and 
proclaims himself about to be a sudra? 


15. He who cries himself saying that he is dead, after the sinking of his 
pulsation; take him for the dead, and his living to be mistaken for life. 


16. All these erroneous appearances, that present themselves before us, are as 
false as a circle described by the whirling flame of a torch; and as delusive as 
the water in the mirage, a secondary moon in the mist, and the spectre of boys. 


17. What then is the true name of this erroneous substance, misleading us to 
the wrong, which is commonly designated as the mind, and is wrapped in 
ignorance and error. 


18. The mind is another name for ignorance, and an unreality appearing as a 
real entity. Here ignorance takes the name of the mind, and unreality passes 
under the title of reality. Ignorance is the want of true knowledge, as 
knowledge is the privation of ignorance. 


19. Ignorance or false knowledge, is driven by our knowledge of truth; as the 
error of water in the desert, is dispelled by the knowledge of mirage. 


20. As the knowledge of mirage removes the error of water in the sandy 
desert, so the knowledge of the mind as gross ignorance, removes the 
erroneous mind from the inward seat of the heart. (The heart and mind are 
often used for one another). 


21. The knowledge of the want of a mind, serves to root out its prejudice at 
once; as the knowledge of the rope as no snake, removes the fear of the reptile 
in the rope. 


22. As the knowledge of the privation of the snake in the rope, removes its 
bias from the mind; so the knowledge of the want of the mind, removes this 
offspring of error and ignorance from within us. 


23. The knowledge of there being no such thing as the mind, removes its false 
impressions from the heart; because the mind and our egoism, are the brood of 
our ignorance only. 


24. There is no mind nor egoism, seated in us as we commonly believe to be; 
there is one pure intelligence only both with and without us, which we can 
hardly perceive. 


25. You who had so long the sense of your desire, your mind and your 
personality from your ignorance only; are quite set free from all of them at 
this moment, by your being awakened to the light of knowledge. 


26. All the troubles that you have to meet with, owing to your fostering the 
inborn desire of your heart; are all driven away by your want of desire, as the 
wind disperses the flaming conflagration of the forest. 


27. It is the dense essence of the Divinity that pervades the whole universe, as 
it is this circumambient ocean which surrounds all the continents of the earth. 


28. There is nothing in existence as I, thou, this, or that or any other; there is 
no mind nor the senses, nor the earth nor sky; but they are all as the 
manifestations of the Divine spirit. 


29. As the visibles appear in the forms of the frail pot and other fragile bodies 
on earth; so the many false invisible things appear to us in the forms of the 
mind, egoism and the like. 


30. There is nothing, that is either born or dies away in all these three worlds; 
it is only the display of the Divine intellect, that gives rise to the ideas of 
existence and non-existence. 


31. All these are but representations of the supreme soul, now evolved and 


now spread out from it; and there is no room for unity or duality, nor any error 
or fallibility in its nature. 


32. Mind, O friend, that you are the true one, in the shape of your senses; and 
these will never be burnt at your cremation, nor will you be utterly destroyed 
by your death. 


33. No part of thyself is ever increased or annihilated at any time, the entirety 
of thy pure self is immortal, and must remain entire forever. 


34. The powers of thy volition and nolition, and the other faculties of thy body 
and mind, are attributes of thyself; as the beams of moon, are the significant 
properties of that luminary. (The attributes are denotative of the subject). 


35. Always remember the nature of thy soul, to be unborn and increate, 
without its beginning and end, never decaying and ever remaining the same; it 
is indivisible and without parts, it is the true essence, and existing from the 
beginning and never to have its end. (The immortality of the soul). 


CHAPTER CI. 


Admonition of Chudala. 


Argument. — Obligation of the Prince for the instructions of his Monitor. 
And his attaining the Jivan-mukta, emancipation in lifetime. 


VASISHTHA said: — After the prince had so far attended to the lectures of 
Kumbha, he remained for some time in silent and deep meditation of his soul, 
as if in a State of trance. 


2. He continued with his intent-mind and fixed eyes and quite speechless all 
the while, and resembled the figure of a silent sage, and a carved statue 
without its motion and sensation. 


3. And then as he awoke after a while with his twinkling eyes, he was thus 
accosted by Chudala in her disguised form of Kumbha, the Brahman youth. 


4. Kumbha said: — Say prince, how you enjoyed yourself in your short-lived 
trance; did you feel in it that sweet composure of thy soul, as the Yogis 
experience in their bed of steadfast meditation and unshaken hypnotism? 


5. Say, were you awakened in your inmost soul, and set at large beyond the 
region of error and darkness; say, have you known the knowable one, and 
seen what is to be seen? 


6. Sikhidhwaja replied: — O Sir, it was by your good grace, that I have beheld 
a great glory in the most high heaven of heavens. 


7. I have beheld a state of bliss which is full of ambrosial delight, never yet 
known to mortals, and whose sight is the most ultimate reward of the wishes 
of the best and most intelligent men, and of saints and mahatmas of great and 
high souls. 


8. It is in your society today, that I have felt a delight, to which I have never 
experienced in my life before. 


9. O lotus eyed sage! I have heretofore, never enjoyed such a degree of 
spiritual bliss which knows no bounds and is a sea of ambrosial delight. 


10. Kumbha said: — The mind becomes composed and tranquil, after 
subordination of its desire of enjoyments, and its indifference to the taste of 
sweet and bitter, and its full control over the organs of sense. 


11. There arises a peace in the mind, which is purer than any earth born 
delight; and is as delightsome as the dew drops falling from flowers under the 
bright beams of cooling moonlight night. 


12. It is today, O prince, that your bad desires like the bitter taste of bodies, 
are bettered by your advancement in knowledge. 


13. It is by your holiness, O lotus-eyed prince, that the filth of your person is 
purged out; like the fruits of trees, falling off after they are ripened. 


14. As the desire of the impure heart, becomes purified by reason it is then 
only capable of receiving the instructions of the wise, as the pipe draws the 
water inside. (Else, advising the fool is folly or spreading pearls before 
swine). 


15. After the bitterness of your disposition was tempered by my lectures; you 
have been awakened today to your spiritual knowledge by me. 


16. You are just now cleansed from your impurity, and immediately purified 
by your pure knowledge; even now it is that you have received my 
admonition, and have been instantly awakened to your knowledge. 


17. You are purged today, from the merits and demerits of your good and bad 
conduct; and it is by the influence of good society, that you have got a new 
life in you. 


18. It was before the midday of this day, that I have come to know the 
edification and regeneration of your soul to spiritual light. 


19. I find you now, O prince, to be wakened in your mind, by your taking my 
words to your heart; and having now got rid of the feelings of your mind, you 
are awakened to your spiritual knowledge. 


20. As long as the mind has its seat and operations in the heart of man, so long 
does it retain its companion of ignorance by its side; but no sooner doth the 
mind forsake its residence in the heart, than pure knowledge comes to shine 
forth in it as the midday light. 


21. It is the suspense of the mind between unity and duality, that is called its 
ignorance; and it is the subsidence of these that is known as knowledge, and 
the way to the salvation of the soul. 


22. You are now awakened and emancipated, and your mind is driven away 
from your heart; you are now the reality and rescued from your unreality, and 
are set beyond this world of unreality. (The spiritual state is held to be real 
and all else as unreal). 


23. Rest in the pure state of thy soul, by being devoid of cares and anxieties; 
forsaking all society and relying your soul in nobody and in nothing here; and 
by your becoming as the devout and Divine and silent sage or saint or muni. 


24. Sikhidhwaja said: — So, I see Sir, that all ignorant people rely mostly on 
their minds; but the few that are awakened to the knowledge of God, do not 
mind their minds. (i.e., they are not led away by the inclinations of their 
minds). 


25. Now Sir, please tell me, how the living liberated men conduct themselves 
in their lifetime in this world; and how do these unmindful men like yourself, 
manage yourselves herein. 


26. O! tell me fully and dispel by the lustre of your glowing words, the deep 
darkness that is seated in my heart. 


27. Kumbha replied: — All that you say prince, is exact and incontrovertible 
truth; the minds of the living liberated men are dead in themselves, and like 
blocks of stone, never vegetate nor sprout forth in the wishes. 


28. The gross desire that germinates in its wishes, which become the causes of 
the regeneration of men in some form or other, is known by the name of mind; 
and which becomes altogether extinct in men, knowing the truly knowable 
one. 


29. The desire which guides the knowers of truth, in this life of action (or the 
active life) in the world; is known by the name of goodness, (satva), and 
which is unproductive of future birth. 


30. The great-souled and living liberated men, being placed in their quality of 
goodness and having their organs under control; do not place any reliance in 
their minds. 


31. The darkened mind is called the mind, but the enlightened one is known as 
the principle of goodness; the unenlightened rely in their minds, but 


enlightened men of great understanding confide in their goodness only. 


32. The mind is repeatedly born with the body, but the nature of goodness is 
never reborn anymore; the unawakened mind is under perpetual bondage, but 
the enlightened soul is under no restraint. 


33. Now Sir, you are become of the nature of goodness, and deserves the title 
of the forsaker of all things; and I understand you to have quite got rid of the 
propensities of your mind. 


34. I find you today as brilliant as the full moon, freed from the shadows of 
the eclipse; and your mind to have become as lucid as the clear firmament, 
without any tinge in it. 


35. You have got that equanimity, which is characteristic of the consummate 
Yogi; this is called that total renunciation of all, which you exhibit in yourself. 


36. The enlightened understanding is freed from the trammels, of its desire of 
heaven and future rewards, and its observance of austerities and charity, by 
means of its superior knowledge. (The divine knowledge is called the superior 
or pardvidyd in opposition to the worldly or apardvidyd). 


37. All austerities and mortifications, serve but to procure a short-lived 
cessation of pain; but the happiness which is wholly free from its decay, is to 
be found only in one's equanimity and indifference under all circumstances of 
life. (The original word is samatd or the sameness or evenness of disposition 
at all times). 


38. That thing must be truly good, which is different from the enjoyment of 
temporary bliss of heaven, and altogether different from an existent pleasure, 
which is both preceded as well as followed by pain. 


39. We are all doubtful of the happiness, that most await on us hereafter in 
heaven; and what are our religious acts, but for the purpose of procuring some 
happiness to those, who are unacquainted with the consummate felicity of 
their souls, derived from their spiritual knowledge. 


40. Let them use their ornaments of brass, who have no gold ornaments for 
their persons; so let the ignorant adhere to their ritual and not the wise who 
are quite happy in their knowledge. But you, O prince, have happily come 
both to your knowledge and happiness in the company of Chuidala and others. 


41. Why therefore, are you devoted in vain, to the observance of your 
austerities; because the mortifications and penance of asceticism, are 


prescribed for the expiation of the prior misdeeds of men, (and neither for 
their salvation or eternal felicity of the souls). 


42. The beginning and end of asceticism are both attended with pain, the 
middle alone promises a short and temporary happiness; and as mortifications 
are mere preparatory to the purification of the soul. (it is better to acquire this 
purity by divine knowledge, than by the painful practices of hermitage). 


43. Remain steady in that pure knowledge, which is said to be the result of 
penitence; and the purity of the soul being had with the clearness of the 
intellectual sphere, all things and thoughts will be as perspicuous to view as in 
the clear light of the sky. 


44. All things are seen to rise and disappear in the vacuous sphere of the 
divine intellect, and the thoughts of our good and bad actions, are as the drops 
of rain which mix with the waters of the immeasurable ocean of the Divine 
soul. 


45. Therefore, O Sikhidhwaja, abandon the barren soil (of rituals), and resort 
to the abundant field (of divine knowledge); and ask of me to know your best 
good, as men desire to know of their best friends. 


46. As a wife that requires her husband, refrains from asking petty things of 
him; so should you refrain from asking of trifling blessings from thy God, if 
thou dost require thy communion with him. And know the objects of thy 
desire, are not always for thy good. (Therefore, let his will be done and not 
theirs). 


47. As no wise man runs to grasp the sun, in his reflexion in the water; so 
should you never pursue after the pleasures of heaven or felicity of liberation, 
after thou hast found him in thy own spirit. (Better to possess the whole God 
than pray for a partial blessing). 


48. Forsake what is unstable, though it may appear as stable to thee; and thou 
always stable, by leaving the unstable to perish by itself. (i.e., All adscititious 
properties are unstable). 


49. Knowing the instability of things, preserve the stability of thy mind, 
because the motionless mind perceives no fluctuation of its thoughts, nor the 
changes and motions of things (as in sound sleep). 


50. All our evils proceed from the acts of our bodies, as well as from the 
thoughts and action of our minds; these two are main springs of the miseries 
of men, in all places and times. 


51. Curb the fickleness of your mind, and be ever calm and quiet; if you desire 
to enjoy the happiness of quiet and rest. 


52. Know all motions and its want to dwindle into perfect rest, in the mind of 
the truly wise men; hold them therefore, in equal light and be happy forever. 


53. Sikhidhwaja said: — Tell me Sir, how can the motion and force of a thing 
be one and the same with its immobility and rest; and you who are the 
remover of my doubts, will I dare say quickly clear this point to me. 


54. Kumbha replied: — There is one thing only, which also the all and whole 
of this universe; it is as the water of the sea, and is agitated by its intelligence, 
as the sea water is agitated into billows. 


55. The immensity of Brahma, which is named the only essence and is of the 
form of the pure intellect; is beheld in the shape of the formal world by the 
ignorant. 


56. The agitation of the intellect is all in all in the world and constitute the 
moving principle of the universe (or the main spring of the cosmos). 


57. The agitation of the intellect being concomitant with the divine spirit, it is 
alike to its stillness, and the unity of these two forms the spirit of God called 
Siva or Zeus. 


58. The agitation of the divine spirit in the work of creation, vanishes before 
the sight of perfect understandings; though it appears to be in active operation 
to the ignorant, who view it as they do a false snake in the rope. 


59. The intellect is ever busy and active, from which it derives its name, (chit, 
— intellect). But the inactive spirit which is all pervasive, is both 
inexpressible as well as inconceivable, owing to its devoid of all attributes, 
(turiydtita). 


60. It is by long study of the Sdstras and association with the wise, as also by 
continued practice of Yoga, that the light of the supreme spirit dawns in the 
inner soul, like the rising moon with her benign beams. 


61. The supreme spirit is only to be perceived by our understanding, from the 
benign rays which it spreads over it; and this says by the wise to be the light 
of the holy spirit. 


62. You have now known the essence of your soul, which is without its 
beginning, middle and end, and must forever continue in it as your real and 
true state; there is no other distinct form of the great intellectual soul, 


wherefore, know this as yourself, and remain from all sorrow and pain. 


CHAPTER CII. 


Repose of Sikhidhwaja in the Divine spirit. 


Argument: — Anxiety of the Prince at the Disappearance of Kumbha, and his 
falling to a trance in his deep and hypnotic meditation. 


KUMBHA continued: — I have already related to you, O prince, how have all 
this phenomenon of the world sprung from Brahma, and how it disappears 
also in him. 


2. Having thus heard from me, and understood and reflected in yourself all 
what I have said, you are at liberty, O sagely prince, to repose in the supreme 
bliss, which you have well known and felt within yourself. 


3. 1am now to repair to my heavenly abode, at this time of the conjunction of 
the moon, when it is very likely that the sage Narada, may have come before 
the assemblage of the gods from his seat in the high heaven of Brahma. 


4. He may be angry in not finding me there, and it is not mannerly in youth to 
tease their superiors at any time. 


5. May you ever abide at your ease, by your utter abandonment of every tint 
of desire, and by your firm reliance in these holy precepts, which the wise 
have always in their view. 


6. Vasishtha said: — At hearing these words, as Sikhidhwaja was about to 
throw his handful of flowers, and make his obeisance to his departing monitor, 
he vanished immediately from his sight and mixed in the ethereal air. 


7. As one absorbed in meditation, does not see the things present before him 
even in his waking state; so the prince lost sight of Kumbha from before his 
presence. 


8. The prince was plunged in deep sorrow, after the departure of Kumbha 
from before him; and remained as a painted picture, with his thoughts 


dwelling on his vanished friend. 


9. He thought how marvelous it was, and how very inscrutable are the ways of 
providence, that it should bring him to the light of the self-manifest Lord, 
through the means of strange person of Kumbha. 


10. Where is this sage Narada, said he, and who is his son this Kumbha to me; 
and how came it to happen after so long, that I should come to be awakened 
by him. 


11. O! how very fully has that son of the divine sage, explained everything to 
me with his good reasons; and O, how I am now awakened from my long 
slumber in ignorance. 


12. How had I been plunged in the mud of my acts for such a long time, and 
was rolling on the wheels of distinguishing between what was right or wrong 
to be done. 


13. O, how very pure and cold, tranquil and quiet is my present state; and I 
find my essence to be as cooling to me, as I am washed in the cold bath of 
refrigeratory. 


14. Iam quite calm and lost in my trance, and sit alone as one with the unity; I 
have no desire for even a straw, but remain solely by myself. 


15. Thinking thus in himself, he sat as quiet as a statue carved in wood or 
stone. 


16. He then became silent, and had no desire nor refuge for his reliance; and 
remained in his immovable posture, like the peak of mountain. 


17. Being then freed from fear in an instant, he remained a long time with the 
tranquillity of his soul and mind; and being united with the holy spirit in his 
hypnotism, he continued long in his sleepy trance, with his soul shining as the 
rising sun. 


CHAPTER CIII. 


Return of Kumbha to the Hermitage of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument. — Chudala's return after three days, and her rousing the Prince 
from his trance. 


VASISHTHA said: — Now hear me relate to you about Sikhidhwaja, sitting 
like a block of wood on one side, and the reappearance of Chudala to him 
from the other. 


2. After Chiidala had hypnotized her husband Sikhidhwaja, in her guise of the 
sagely Kumbha; she disappeared from her, and traversed into the regions of 
air. 


3. She forsook her form of the son of the Divine sage in the empty sky, and 
which she had took upon her by her magic spell. The enchanted form melted 
away in the air, and she appeared in her female form of beauteous fair. 


4. She bent her airy course to her palace in the city, where she showed herself 
as their queen, before her assembled attendants and courtiers, and discharged 
the royal duties of her absent lord. 


5. After three days she took again to her aerial journey, retook her enchanted 
form of Kumbha, and advanced to the hermitage of Sikhidhwaja in the forest. 


6. She saw there the prince in his woodland retreat, and sitting in his posture 
of deep meditation and resembling a figure carved in wood. 


7. Seeing him thus, she exclaimed repeatedly in herself; O heyday! that he is 
reposing here in his own soul, and is sitting quiet and tranquil in himself. 


8. I must now awaken him from his trance in the supreme Being, or else his 
soul will soon forsake its mortal frame, owing to his disregard of it, and the 
end of his worldly bondage by his excessive devotion. 


9. It is desirable that he should live some time longer, either with his royalty 
in the palace or with devotion in this forest; and then we both of us will depart 
together, by shuffling our mortal coils. 


10. It would be difficult to instruct him, in all (seven) stages of devotion, 
(saptama bhumi); and as there is no end of these things, I will try to train him 
in the practical part of Yoga only. 


11. Thus pondering in herself, she made a loud shout which startled the wild 
beasts; but did not rouse the entranced prince, though she repeated her loud 
shouts before him. 


12. When neither her shouts and shrieks could rouse him, who remained 
unshaken as a stone in the rock; she shook him with her hands, to bring him 
back to his sense. 


13. Though shaken and moved and thrown down on the ground, yet the prince 
neither awoke nor came to his senses; then Chiidala thought on another 
expedient in his guise of Kumbha. 


14. She said, Ah! I see my lord is absorbed in his prophetic trance, and I must 
find some expedient to rouse him to his sense. 


15. Or why should I try to rouse his deified spirit back to its sensation, when 
he is so well absorbed in his state of disembodied or abstract meditation, (in 
which he enjoys himself and has forgotten his embodiment in the material 
frame and become as the disembodied or videha spirit). 


16. I also wish to get rid of my female form, and to reach that state of supreme 
beatitude like him, which is free from further births and transmigrations. 


17. Thus thinking in herself, Chiidala was about to abandon her own body; 
when her better understanding recalled her undertaking that attempt. 


18. Let me feel the body of the prince at first, she said, whether there is an end 
of his life, or there is any feeling or pulsation in his heart. 


19. Should he be alive, he must come back to his sense; as the juicy root of 
trees, recalls the flowers in the flowering season of spring. 


20. If he is alive, he will walk about like myself, in his state of a living 
liberated soul; but if he be found to be no longer living, then I shall follow 
him to the next world. 


21. With this mind Chudala felt his person, and examined it with her eyes; and 


then perceiving him to be living, she thus said rejoicingly to herself: — 


22. He has still the relic of his life, pulsating in his breast, the beating of the 
pulse and the throbbing of his breast, show his life to be not yet extinct. 


23. Rama said: — How can the little spark of the vital flame, be known to 
reside in the body of the self-distracted Yogi; whose mind is as cold as stone, 
and whose body becomes as callous as a clod of earth or a block of wood. 


24. Vasishtha replied: — The relic of life remains in the heart, as an 
imperceptible atom and in the manner of sensibility; just as the future fruits 
and flowers, are contained in their seeds. 


25. The calm and cold Yogi, who is devoid of his knowledge of unity and 
duality, and views all things in the same light; who remains as quiet as a rock 
and without the pulsation of his heart, has yet the vibration of his intellect 
within him; (which keeps him alive). 


26. The body of the temperate and tranquil minded man, never wastes or 
swells in bulk; it never decays nor grows up in heights, but ever remains in the 
same state. 


27. The man whose mind vibrates with its thoughts of unity and duality, (i.e., 
which perceives the difference of things), has the change and decay of his 
body, which is never the case with the Yogi of unchangeful mind. (The action 
of the mind impairs the body, but its inaction preserves it entire). 


28. The action of the heart, is the spring of the life of every-body in this 
world, just as the honey in the flower-cup, is the cause of its future fruit. 


29. These frail bodies of mortals, are notwithstanding subject to the fits of joy 
and anger, and of the quickness and dullness every moment; and these, O 
Rama! are the seeds of repeated births, and are hard to be checked or subdued. 


30. The mind being still and quiet, the body becomes as dull as it were 
lifeless; when it is subject to no passion nor change whatever; but remains as 
even as the still and clear firmament which nothing can disturb. 


31. The man of even and dispassionate mind, is never ruffled nor tainted by 
any fault; but remains as calm as the waters of the billowless and breezeless 
ocean. 


32. The body is never lifeless, nor is its life ever imperceptible, unless the 
mind is defunct in its action; and is in course of long practice, that the mind 
becomes inexcitable and numb in itself. 


33. The body which is without the action of its mind and vitality, quickly 
melts away to rottenness; as the snow melts away under the solar heat. 


34. The body of Sikhidhwaja was felt to be hot, though it was without its 
active mind; it was therefore, known to be possessed of its vitality, which 
prevented it from wasting and rotting away. 


35. The noble lady, having perceived the body of her husband to be in that 
plight; held it fastly with her hands, and began to consider what to do with it. 


36. She said, I will try to raise him by infusion of my intellection into his 
mind; and this will no doubt bring him back to his senses. 


37. If I do not raise him now, he must rise himself after sometime; but why 
should I wait till then, and must remain alone all the while. 


38. Having thought so, Chuidala left her body, — the framework of the senses; 
and entered into the body of the body and joined with the intellectual essence 
of the same. 


39. She then gave a vibration to the intellection of her living lord, and after 
putting it in its action and motion, she returned to her own body; as a bird flits 
on the twig of a tree which is shaken thereby, it comes back to its own nest 
again. 


40. She rose in her figure of the Brahman boy Kumbha, and sat upon a 
flowery bed, where she began to chaunt her hymns of the sdma veda, 
(psalmody); with her soft tunes resembling the melodious chime of buzzing 
bees. 


41. The prince felt an intellectual exhilaration, on hearing the tuneful chime of 
the psalms; and his dormant life was awakened to its sensibility, as the lotus 
bud comes to bloom by the breath of the vernal season. 


42. His eyelids opened to light, as the lotus bud blooms at the sunlight; and 
the whole body of the prince, became vivid with his renewed life. 


43. He beheld the Brahman boy Kumbha, singing sdma psalms before him; 
and appeared in his divinely fair form, as the divinity of music was present in 
person. 


44. O fortunate am I, said he, to have found my friendly Kumbha again before 
me; and so saying, he picked up some flowers and offered them to him. 


45. O how great is my good fortune, said he to his guest, to be thus recalled to 


your gracious memory; or what else is it, that could cause a divine personage 
like yourself, to be so favourably disposed towards me. 


46. It is only the cause of my salvation, that has caused you to come to and 
call at mine, or else what else can it be to bring a godson down to revisit me. 


47. Kumbha spoke: — O sinless prince, my mind was ever intent on thee, 
ever since I departed from thee; and now it has come back to me, to have 
found thee well in this place. 


48. I do not reap so much delight in the ever-delightful region of heaven, as I 
do here in your presence; because I have the great work of your redemption 
not pending before me. 


49. I have no friend or companion, that is dearer to my soul than yourself; nor 
have I any faithful pupil, nor confidential disciple like you in this world. 


50. Sikhidhwaja replied: — Ah! I see now that the arbours of this mountain, 
are about to yield the fruits of my meritorious acts, that have made a retired 
recluse like yourself to condescend to desire my company. 


51. If these woods and trees and myself who am so devoted to you, should 
find favour in your sight than the bliss of your heavenly abode, then may you 
please to take your residence with me in this lonely forest. 


52. For my part, who am so blest with the gift of thy samddhi, that I have 
always my perfect repose in God even in this place; have no desire for 
heavenly delights, (which cannot be better than my absorption in the Divine 
spirit). 


53. Reclining in that state of pure effulgence, I enjoy my fill of heavenly bliss 
even in this earth below. 


54. Kumbha interrogated: — Have you ever had your repose in the state of 
supreme felicity, and were you ever freed from the infelicity, which is ever 
attendant on the knowledge of duality. 


55. Have you ever felt a disgust to all temporary enjoyments, and have rooted 
out your taste for insipid pleasures of this earth. 


56. Has your mind ever rested in that state of even indifference, which has no 
liking for the desirable nor dislike to what is undesirable, but is ever content 
with whatever awaits upon it at any time? 


57. Sikhidhwaja replied: — It is by your favour Sir, that I have seen all what 


transcends human sights; that I have reached beyond the verge of the 
universe, and obtained the best obtainable and most certain bliss. 


58. It is after long that I am freed from decay and disease, and gained all 
which is to be gained, and wherewith I am quite content. 


59. I require no further advice, from anyone for my edification; I feel fully 
gratified with everything in all places, and am quite at ease and out of disease 
everywhere. 


60. I have nothing to know that is unknown to me, and nothing to obtain that 
is not obtained by one; I have forsaken whatever is not worth having, and my 
soul has its reliance in the supreme essence. 


61. I rest quite aloof of all, being devoid of my fear and error and apathy at 
anything; I am always manifest in the even and equal tenor of my mind, and 
in the equality of my soul with all others; I am free from all imagination, as 
the clear sky is free from all taint and cloud. 


CHAPTER CIV. 


On the conduct of living-liberated men. 


Argument: — Kumbha and Sikhidhwaja's travel, and their conversation on 
various subjects; Kumbha's ideas of the predestined law of nature. 


VASISHTHA related: — In this manner did these knowers of the knowable 
God, continue in their mutual conversation on spiritual matters, until the third 
watch of the day in that forest. 


2. Then rising together, they wandered in the delightful dales, and about in 
cooling lakes and pleasant rills. 


3. In this manner they kept roving in that forest for full eight days, and passed 
their time in conversations on various subjects. 


4. Then said Kumbha to the prince, let us walk to some other forest to which 
he gave his consent, with uttering the word om, and then they walked forward 
in each other's company. 


5. In this manner they walked over many forest lands, and passed beside many 
jungles and shores; and they saw many lakes and thick woods, and rising hills 
and their thickets of dense woods and plants. 


6. They traversed many woodland tracts and rivers, and saw many villages, 
towns and woods on their way; they passed by many sweet sounding rivers 
and groves, and many holy places and the abodes of men. 


7. They were united together in equal love and friendship, and being of equal 
age and the same tenor of mind, they were of equal vivacity; and both walked 
or stayed together with their unanimity. 


8. They worshipped the gods and the manes of their ancestors in the holy 
places, and ate what they got at any place; and lived together both in marshy 
and dry lands in concord and peace. 


9. The loving pair bearing equal affection to one another in their hearts, dwelt 
together in mutual concord amidst the tamdla woods and in the forests of the 
Mandara hills. 


10. To them no place was their home or own, but they alike in all; nothing 
occurred to disturb their minds, which were always as undisturbed as a 
mountain amidst the winds. 


11. They walked sometimes amidst the flying dust, and at others amidst the 
far stretching fragrance of sandal wood forests. They were now daubed with 
ashes, and then besmeared with the sandal paste. 


12. They were sometimes clad in good garments, and sometimes in variegated 
raiments; now they were covered with the leaves of trees, and were decorated 
with flowers at another. 


13. Remaining thus in mutual company for some days, and having the 
unanimity of their hearts and minds; the prince turned to be as perfected in his 
nature, as another Kumbha himself. 


14. The holy and faithful Chidala, seeing the divine form of her husband 
Sikhidhwaja, began to reflect within herself in the following manner. 


15. How divinely fair has my husband become, and how very charming are 
these wood-land scenes; by living long in this place, we must be an easy prey 
to the God of love. 


16. I see that although one is liberated in his life time, yet the sense of his 
liberation, cannot give him freedom from his obligation of tasting the 
pleasures that are presented before him. I think it is ignorance to refuse the 
king of a proffered enjoyment. 


17. Seeing the husband to be noble minded, and free from all bodily disease 
and debility; and having a flowery grove before, it must be a wretched 
woman, that rejects to advance to her lord at such a time. 


18. That wretched woman is verily undone, who is seated in her bower of 
flowers and has her husband presented before her; and yet fails to approach to 
him for her satisfaction. 


19. Accursed is the woman, who being wedded to a handsome husband, and 
having him alone in her company fails to associate with him. 


20. Of what good is it to one acquainted with true knowledge, to reject a 
lawful pleasure that presents itself before that person. 


21. So I must contrive some artifice in this forest, whereby I may be 
successful to make my husband join with me. 


22. Having thought so in her mind, Chudala who was disguised in the from of 
Kumbha, thus uttered to the prince, as the female kokila mutters to her mate 
from her flowery bower in the forest. 


23. This is the first day of the new moon of the lunar month of chaitra, and 
this is a day of great festivity in the court of Indra in heaven. 


24. So I must have to repair to the synod of the gods, and present myself 
before my father in that assembly. So my departure is ordained by destiny, nor 
can it be averted by any means. 


25. You shall have to expect my return till eve in this forest, and spend the 
meantime, by diverting yourself in these flowery arbours, which will lull your 
anxiety for me to rest. 


26. I shall positively return here from the azure sky, by the dusk of this day; 
and soon join your company, which is ever delightful to me. 


27. So saying, she gave a stalk of flowers of the Nandana forest to her 
beloved, to serve as a token of her affection for him (and as a pledge of her 
return to him before it fades away). 


28. The prince said, “you must return soon” to me; and she instantly, 
disappeared from his sight, and mixed with the air, as the light autumnal cloud 
vanishes in the empty sky. 


29. He flung flowers after her, as she mounted in the sky; and these floated in 
the air, like icicles in the cold season. 


30. Sikhidhwaja standing on the spot, first beheld her flight, and then her 
disappearance from him; as the peacock looks at the flight of a cloud with 
uplifted eyes, (so immutable is the friendship of a true friend). 


31. At last the body of Kumbha vanished from the sight of Sikhidhwaja, and 
mixed in the open air, as the waves of the sea subside in the still and smooth 
waters. 


32. Chudala then reached her celestial city, resembling the garden of paradise 
with its Kalpa arbours in full bloom, and its shining turrets waving with flags, 
hoisted on both sides of its charming paths. 


33. She entered secretly her private apartment, and met the company of the 


maids waiting for her; as the graceful beauty of the vernal season, meets the 
long expectant arbours of the forest. 


34. She attended to her state affairs, and discharged them quickly; and then 
flew aloft in the air and dropped at Sikhidhwaja's abode, as the autumnal fruits 
and flowers drop on the ground. 


35. She appeared there with a melancholy face, and as deeply dejected in her 
mind; just as the fair moon is darkened under the mist, and the beauteous lotus 
are hid under a fog. 


36. Believing her as his Kumbha, Sikhidhwaja rose up and stood in his 
presence; but being troubled in his mind to see him so sad and sorry, he asked 
the cause and thus addressed him saying: — 


37. I greet thee, O Kumbha, but why appearest thou so sad today; thou art the 
son of a deity and must not be sorry at anything, but please to take thy seat 
here. 


38. Holy saints and the knowers of the knowable one like you, are never 
moved by joy or grief; but remain untouched by them, as the lotuses remain 
intact in the water. 


39. Vasishtha said: — Being thus accosted by the prince, Kumbha sat on his 
seat, and then said in reply, with a voice as thin and soft as the sound of a 
bamboo flute. 


40. I know that the knowers of truth, who are not patient under all bodily 
accidents and mental anxieties, are not truthful men, but cheats who cheat 
people by their pretended truthfulness. 


41. Know prince that the most learned are the most ignorant, who expect 
foolishly to evade the condition in which they are exposed by their nature. 


42. The sesame seed has naturally the oil inherent in it, and the body has also 
its incidents connatural with it; he who is not subject to his bodily accidents, 
is able to sever the wind and air with his sword. 


43. It is of course to evade the evils that are incidental to the body, but it is to 
undergo patiently what is unavoidable by our bodily powers. 


44. Again, as long as we have our bodies, we must exert our bodily organs to 
their proper actions; and never attempt to suppress by our understanding, as it 
is done by many wise men. 


45. Even the great Brahma and the gods, are subject to the conditions of their 
bodily frames; nor have they with their great understandings, the power to 
avoid what is determined by irrevocable destiny. 


46. It is beyond the power of both the wise and unwise, to deter the power of 
destiny; which makes all things to run in their destined course, as the waters 
of rivers run into the sea. 


47. The same irrevocable destiny, determines equally the fates of the wise and 
unwise, and guides them as by her fingers to the same goal, until they get their 
release from the body. 


48. The ignorant however, whether exposed to their states of prosperity and 
adversity, are always destined to undergo their effects upon their bodies. 


49. Thus, therefore, it must be known by both the wise and unwise, that all 
beings are destined to roll in their re-iterated rotations of pleasure and pain, 
(according to the results of their prior merits and demerits); and that there is 
no power to change the ever changeful ordinances of unchanging destiny. 


CHAPTER CV. 


Metamorphoses of Kumbha to a female form. 


Argument: — Kumbha's relation of her transformation to a woman by right, 
and her attachment to the prince. 


SIKHIDWAJA said: — If such is the case, Sir, that destiny over-rules all 
events, why should you be sorry for aught that has befallen to you, knowing 
that you are a godson and knowing the knowable also. 


2. Kumbha replied: — Hear, O prince, the wonderful accident that has 
befallen on me; and I will relate to you all that has happened to me in body. 


3. The heart becomes light when its griefs are imparted to a friend, as the 
thickened gloominess of the cloudy atmosphere, is dissipated after discharge 
of its waters in rains. 


4. The troubled mind is restored to its serenity, by its communication with a 
sincere friend, as the turbid waters of a jar is cleared by its being filtered with 
kata seeds. 


5. Hear now that after I departed from here, by handing over the spike of 
flowers to you; I traversed though the regions of air, till I reached the 
heavenly abode of the God. 


6. There I met my father, and accompanied him to the court of the great Indra, 
where having sat a while, I got up with my father and then parted from him at 
his abode. 


7. Leaving the seat of the Gods in order to come down on earth, I entered the 
region of air; and kept my pace with the fleet steeds of the chariot of the sun, 
in the airy paths of the skies. 


8. Thus wafted together with the sun, I reached the point of my separation 
from him; and there took my path through the midway sky, as if I were sailing 


in the sea. 


9. I saw there in a track before me, a path stretching amidst the watery clouds 
of air, and marked the indignant sage Durvasa gliding swiftly by it. 


10. He was wrapt in the vest of clouds, and girt with girdles of flashing 
lightnings; the sandal taints on his body were washed off by showering rains, 
and he seemed as a maiden making her way in haste, to meet her lover at the 
appointed place. 


11. Or as a devotee he hastened to discharge in due time his fond devotion, on 
the beach of the river (Ganges), flowing under the shade of the beaching 
boughs of the rows of trees on the shore. (This refers to the custom of 
hastening to perform the sandhyd rites on the river side in the evening, as it is 
customary with other nations to hasten to the mosque or church at the call to 
prayers and the striking of the church-bell). 


12. I saluted the sage from my aerial seat, and said, — you, wrapt as you are 
in your blue vest of the cloud, seem to advance in haste, as an amorous 
woman to meet her lover (by hiding herself in her black mantle in the 
darkness of night). 


13. Hearing this, the reverend sage was incensed and pronounced his curse 
upon me; saying, — “Be thou transformed to an amorous woman as thou 
thinkest me to be.” 


14. “Go thy way, and bear my curse, that every night thou shall become a 
woman, with thy protuberant breasts and long braids of hairs on thy head, and 
fraught with all womanish grace and dalliance (and seek about thy lover).” 


15. As I was thunderstruck and deeply dejected at this imprecation, I found 
the old muni had already disappeared from before me; and then I bent my 
course this way from the upper sky, being quite sick in my heart (at this 
direful fulmination). 


16. Thus I have related to you all, regarding my being changed to a damsel at 
the approach of night; and my constant thought of the manner, how I shall 
manage myself under my womanhood. 


17. How shall I divulge to my father, the shame of my being a swollen 
breasted maid at night; and can I reconcile myself to my dire fate, throughout 
the course of my life. O how wonderful is the decree of fate, that we are fated 
to bear in this world in the course of time! 


18. I am now ill-fated to become a prey to young men, and the subject of 
fighting among them, like a piece of flesh among ravenous vultures. 


19. O what a fun have I become to the ludicrous boys of the Gods in heaven, 
and ah! how shameful have I been before the sages, who must be quite 
ashamed of me, and how shall I remain anywhere and before anybody in my 
female form at night. 


20. Vasishtha said: — After saying so far, Chuidala became as mute as a silent 
muni; and remained as quiet as if she were in a swoon. 


21. The pretended Kumbha then, seeming to recover his senses and his 
patience also, thus spoke out to himself; ah! why do I wail like the ignorant 
(for this change in my changeful body), when my soul suffers no change by 
this? 


22. Sikhidhwaja spoke: — Why sorrow you Sir for the body, that art the son 
of a God; let it become whatever may become of it, it can never affect the 
intangible soul. 


23. Whatever pain or pleasure betides us in this life, is all concomitant with 
the changing body, and can never touch the unchanging soul. 


24. If you who are acquainted with the vedas, and fortified against all events; 
if you should allow yourself to be so much moved by these accidents, say 
what will be the case with others, at all the casualties of life, to which they are 
incessantly subject. 


25. To be sorry in sorrow; is very sorrowful in the wise; and therefore, you 
who have yourself spoken these precepts before, should now be overwhelmed 
in sorrow, but remain as unmoved, as you are wont to be unshaken all along. 


26. Vasishtha related: — In this did the two hearty friends, continue to 
condole with one another; and console themselves by turns, under the cooling 
shade of the grove where they sat together. 


27. At last the bright sun who is the light of the world, set down in darkness 
like an oilless lamp, by involving Kumbha under despondency of her female 
form. 


28. The full-blown lotuses closed their folia, like the closing eyelids of the 
busy worldlings; and the footpaths became as deserted by their passengers, as 
the hearts of loving wives are forlorn in the absence of their husbands, 
devoted to travelling and staying in distant countries. 


29. The upper sky borrowed the semblance of the lower earth, by its spreading 
the curtain of darkness over the groups of its twinkling stars, like the 
outstretched nets of fishermen enfolding the finny tribe. (The similarity of the 
dark curtain of the sky overspreading its shining stars, to the black nets of 
fishers enveloping the silvery fishes under them). 


30. The black vault of the sky, was smiling above with its train of shining 
stars, as the blue bed of lakes was rejoicing with its chain of blooming lilies 
below; and the sounding black bees and beetles on the land, resounded to the 
cries of the ruddy geese in the water. 


31. The two friends then rose and offered their evening prayers at the rising of 
the moon, and chanted their hymns and muttered their mantras, and took their 
shelter under the sylvan retreat. 


32. Afterwards, Kumbha changed as he was in the female form, and sitting 
before Sikhidhwaja, lisped his faltering speech to him in the following 
manner. 


33. Sir, I seem to fall down and cry out and melt away in my tears, to see 
myself even now changed to my feminine figure in your presence. 


34. See Sir, how quickly are the hairs on my head lengthened to curling locks, 
and to how they sparkle with strings of pearls fastened to them, like the 
brilliant clusters of stars in the azure sky. 


35. Look here at these two snowy balls bulging out of my bosom, like two 
white lotus-buds rising on the surface of waters in the vernal season. 


36. Look how my long robe is stretched down to the heels, and how it mantles 
my whole body, like the person of a female. 


37. Look at these gemming ornaments and wreathes of flowers decorating my 
person, like the blooming blossoms of spring ornamenting the forest tree. 


38. Lo! the moon-bright vest covering the crown of my head, (like the disk of 
the moon resting on the hairy crest of Siva); and the necklaces hanging about 
my body (like the flowery wreathes of Kama). 


39. Look at my features, how they are converted to their effeminate 
comeliness, and see how my whole frame, graced all over with feminine 
loveliness. 


40. O! how very great is my sorrow, at this sudden change of mine to a 
woman; and ah! tell me friend, what am I to do, and where to go with this my 


female form. 


41. I perceive also the change to take place in my inner parts, and in my thighs 
and posteriors; Kumbha said so far to her friend, and then remained quite 
mute and silent. 


42. The prince also, seeing him thus, remained in his mute gaze and silence, 
and then after a while, he opened his mouth and spoke as follows: — 


43. It is of course very sorrowful and pitiable, to see you thus transformed to a 
female; but you, Sir, who know the truth, know also that there is no 
contending with fate. 


44. Whatever is destined, must come to pass; and wise men must not be 
startled at or feel sorry for the same; because all those events betake the body 
only, and cannot affect the inward soul. 


45. Kumbha replied: — So it is, and I must bear with my feminine form, with 
an unfeminine soul. (So it is no disgrace to be an effeminate female, combined 
with the grace of a manly soul). 


46. I will no more sorrow for, what is never to be averted; but must endure 
with patience what I cannot abjure. Relying on this principle, they alleviated 
their sorrow for what was impossible to avoid. 


47. They passed their nights in peace, and slept in the same bed without 
touching one another; and Kumbha rose in the morning in his masculine form 
again, without any trace of his female features and feminine beauty or grace. 


48. Kumbha was Kumbha again, by being shorn of his female form; and thus 
he passed as bisexual and biform being of the Brahman boy Kumbha by day, 
and of Chudala the princess by night. 


49. In his male form, Kumbha continued as a friend to the prince in the day 
time; and in female form of Chudala, he lived as a virgin maid with him at 
night. 


50. Thus did Chudala cling to her husband, as a string of necklace hangs upon 
the neck and breast of a person. They then continued to wander in the 
company of one another, to different countries and over distant hills, to satisfy 
their curiosity. 


CHAPTER CVI. 


Marriage of Chudala with Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument. — The Gandharva form of marriage, its Courtship and ceremonial 
rites. 


VASISHTHA resumed: — After the lapse of some days in this manner, 
Chiidala thus bespoke to her husband, in her guise of the pretended Brahman 
boy (or Kumbha). 


2. Hear me, O lotus eyed prince, she said, what I tell you in good earnest; that 
since I am obliged to become a woman every night, and continue to be so for 
ever more. 


3. I wish to fulfill the part of my womanhood, by joining myself to a husband 
by legal marriage for all that time. 


4. I want to taste the pleasure of conjugal union, with a dear friend, who is of 
his own accord so very friendly to me, and without any endeavour on my part: 
so I hope you will interpose no difficulty in my way. 


5. So I choose you Sir, as my husband, of all others in the three worlds, 
therefore, be pleased to accept me for your wife every night. 


6. The delightsome pleasure of conjugal union, has come down to us ever 
since the commencement of creation; and therefore, our obedience to the 
ordinance of nature, can entail no guilt on our part. 


7. I desire this that we may do as we like, without desiring or disliking 
anything; and be far from expecting the consequence of what we like or 
dislike. 


8. Sikhidhwaja answered: — I see friend, neither any good nor evil, of 
accepting your proposal; so you are at liberty to do as you like. 


9. Being possessed of the indifference of my mind, at everything in the world; 
I see everything in the same and in an equal light; so I let you have your 
option as you may like. 


10. Kumbha replied: — If so, then I say that this day is very favourable for 
celebrating the marriage ceremony; it is the full moon of Sravana, and all 
lucky asterism according to my best calculation. 


11. On this day of the full moon, our marriage may take place both in the day 
as well as night-time in the Gandharva form (by mutual choice and consent). 


12. It will be celebrated either on the summit of the Mahendra mountain, or on 
the delightful table-land there abouts; or in the grotto of some mineral mine, 
and in the light of the shining gems and mineral ores in the mountain; (serving 
as lamps and candle lights in the festivity). 


13. The rows of stately trees all around, will shed their flowers at the nuptial 
ceremony; and the twining creepers on them, will represent the dance of 
nanch girls by their tremulous shaking. (Dance and music being necessary 
accompaniments of marriage festivities). 


14. Let the bright luminary of the night, accompanied by his consort train of 
shining stars, witness our marriage from the high sky with their wide open and 
glaring eyes. 


15. Rise, O prince, for your marriage; and let us both hie to cull the forest 
flowers, and prepare the sandal paste and collect the scattered gems, in order 
to deck our nuptial seats therewith. 


16. Saying so, they both rose together, and culled the flowers and collected the 
gems. 


17. Then in a short time, they repaired to the gemming steppe, and heaped it 
with flowers of various kinds. 


18. They had their marriage vests and necklaces ready on the spot, and the 
God of love helped with the supply of everything required on the occasion. 


19. Having thus prepared the paraphernalia of their nuptials, and stored them 
in a golden grotto of the mountain, they both repaired to the sacred stream of 
the heavenly Ganges, Mandakini, for making their holy ablutions therein. 


20. Here Kumbha served as the priest, to lave the holy water profusely on the 
lofty head and elevated shoulders of the prince; as the elephantine clouds of 
Indra, pour the rain water in plenteous showers, on the towering tops and 


height of hills. 


21. So also did the prince act the part of the ministering prince, and washed 
the body of his beloved princess now in the form of Kumbha. Thus did the 
two friends anoint and absterge by turns, the persons of their quondam and 
future consorts. 


22. Bathed and purified, they adored the gods, the munis and the manes of 
their ancestors, for the sake of their honour, and without any desire of getting 
any good or gain from them; for they well knew that they could benefit 
nothing their service, as the deities, the deified spirits and the divine sages. 


23. They took their frugal and repast, as their nature and the course of the 
world required; and seasoned with the nectarine juice of their good and 
refined intelligence. 


24. They wore the whitish barks of kalpa trees, as their clean marriage 
raiments, and ate its fruits as their wedding cakes; then they repaired to the 
altar for their nuptial ceremony. 


25. At this time the sun descended below his setting mountain, as if to 
consummate their conjugal union in secret. 


26. As it now became dark and dusk they discharged their evening service and 
offered their prayers; and groups of stars now appeared on the plain of the 
firmament, to witness their union in matriage. 


27. Then came the sable night the only friend of the happy pair, spreading the 
veil of darkness over the face of nature, and smiling with the blushing of 
snow-white lotuses and lilies of the valley. 


28. Kumbha collected the rich stones, and placed those gemming on the table 
land of the mountain, while Brahma lighted his two lamps of the sun and 
moon together in the heavens. 


29. Being then changed to the female form, Kumbha anointed the prince with 
the fragrant sandal paste, agallochum, camphor powder and pulverised musk. 


30. She adorned his person with strings, bracelets and wristlets of flowers, and 
dressed in a robe of the thin bark of kalpa tree. 


31. His body was also decorated with the filaments of kalpa plant, and clusters 
of pdrijdta flowers and with many other flowers and gems from his head to 
foot. 


32. She appeared also at this time in her bridal garb and maiden like figure, 
with her big and swollen breasts, and with all her youthful grace and 
blandishments. 


33. She thought that as she was now attired and appeared as a nuptial bride, 
she must now offer herself to a husband worthy to her. 


34. Here am I as a lovely bride, said she to herself, and there is my husband in 
my presence; I must ask him to accept my hand, nor is this time to be slipped 
from hand. 


35. So saying, she approached her husband sitting apart from her in the wood; 
and appeared as Rati, — the goddess of love, was advancing towards her 
loving Kama. 


36. She went to him and said: — “I am Madanika by name and thy loving 
wife, I therefore, bow down at your feet, with the regard due to a husband.” 


37. So saying, the beauteous lady, bent down her head with female 
bashfulness; and made her obeisance to her lord, with the pendant locks on 
her head. 


38. And then she said to him: — “O thou my lord! do thou adorn me with 
ornaments also, and then light the nuptial fire, to attest thy acceptance of my 
hand.” 


39. Thou appearest as exceedingly fair to my eyes, and makest me quite fond 
of thee; and thou seemest to me to surpass the God of love in the beauty of 
person, even when he wedded his Rati at first in his youthful bloom. 


40. O prince, these wreathed flowers on thy person, appear as the brightsome 
beams in the body of the moon; and those strings of flowers pendant on thy 
bosom, seem to me as the stream of Ganges, gliding on the breast of the 
Sumeru mountain. 


41. With the flowing braided hairs on thy head, thou appearest as the mount of 
Mandara, with the clusters of creepers hanging down from its top; while thy 
head itself appears as golden lotus, with its hanging hairs resembling the 
filaments of the flower, and studded with strings of blackening bees. 


42. The gemming ornaments and flowery decorations of thy person, add to it 
the lustre and gracefulness of the mount Meru, with its mineral ores on one 
side and its floral beauty on the other. 


43. After her flattering speech was over, the new bride and bridegroom, and 


future husband and wife sat contented together, unmindful and forgetful of 
their past conjugal relation. 


44. The brave princess, now Madanika by name, and the noble prince 
Sikhidhwaja the saint, both sat together on a golden seat (of the mineral 
mountain); which added fresh lustre to the beauty and decoration of their 
persons. 


45. They were bedecked with their head dresses, garlands of flowers and 
ornaments of gems and pearls, and were furnished with flowers and 
ointments, and clad in fine cloths all over their bodies. 


46. The young lady Madanika blazed as Venus with her maddening beauty, 
and appeared as the goddess Gowri, — the surpassing paragon of beauty, at 
her wedding festivity. 


47. The noble lord having embellished his noble lady with his own hands, 
thus spoke to her after her toilet; “O thou fawn eyed fairy, thou art as graceful 
as the goddess of grace and prosperity.” 


48. I pray for all that prosperity to attend on thee, as it does with Sachi, — the 
queen of heaven, in the company of her lord Indra; and as it subsisted between 
the mutual pairs of Hara and Gowri; and Hari and his consort Lakshmi, — the 
goddess of fortune. 


49. Thou appearest as a limpid lake of lotuses, with thy breasts blooming like 
lotus buds; and thy black blue eyes resembling the cerulean lotuses, 
(nilumbiums); and the sweet fragrance of thy lotus like person, inviting the 
buzzing bees fluttering all about thee. 


50. Thou appearest likewise as a tender shoot of the kalpa plant of Cupid, 
with thy rubicund palms resembling its reddish leaves; and thy swollen 
breasts likening to its blooming buds, and every part of thy body, is as delicate 
as its delicious fruits. 


51. With thy cold and cooling body, and thy moon-like face and its smiles as 
moon-beams, thou art as beautiful as the full-moon, and equally delightful to 
sight. 


52. Rise therefore, my beauteous lady and ascend on the matrimonial altar, 
and there perform the marriage ceremony, standing on the slab of stone, 
marked with creeping plants and their fruits. (The gloss says, that this stone or 
stool, is also painted with the colours of the nine sorts of precious gems nava- 
ratna, that are sacred to the nine planets). 


53. Vasishtha said: — The altar was studded with strings of pearls, and 
bunches of flowers suspended on all sides; and it had four large cocoanut 
fruits, hang over the four sides of its square. 


54. There were pots filled with the holy water of Ganga set about it, and the 
sacred matrimonial fire was lighted amidst it, and fed with the fuel of the 
sandal wood and other fragrances. 


55. They turned round the flaming fire by the right-hand side, and then sat on 
seats of leaves with their faces turned towards the east. 


56. After sitting on the altar, the matrimonial couple kindled the nuptial fire, 
and made offerings of sesame seeds, and fried rice upon its flames. 


57. The married pair turned again about the sacred fire, and offered to each 
other their own selves and loves as their marriage dowries. 


58. They showed to one another their shining faces, as their nuptial presents; 
and completed the ceremony by going round the fire, and scattering the fried 
rice upon it. 


59. The husband and wife now parted other hands, from their hold of the 
palms of one another; and their smiling faces, appeared as the lunar disk on 
the new moon. 


60. After this they went to sleep on a flowery bedstead which they had newly 
prepared before, when the moon had already run her course of the first watch 
of the night. 


61. She cast her beams to fall aslant on the bedstead, as when the attendant 
women cast their glances askance on the bridal bed. 


62. She next spread her bright beams all about the leafy bower of the pair; as 
if to listen to the pleasant conversation, of the new married couple. 


63. The pair having sat there awhile, in the light of the mineral lamps, retired 
to their sleeping bed, which they had prepared beforehand in a secluded spot. 


64. It was a bedding of flowers, and beset by heaps of flowers of various 
kinds. (It is called the pushpa-talpa and is still in vogue even in the present 
form of marriage). 


65. There were heaps of lotuses of golden hue, as also manddra and other 
sorts of flowers, to drive away fatigue by their fragrance. 


66. The flat of the flowery bed of the bridal pair, resembled the plane of the 
broad and bright moon, and a level surface covered by the cooling ice. 


67. It bore likewise, the resemblance of the wide sea, whose waters are 
impregnated by the bright moon, and whose surface supplies a bed to Ananta, 
— the sleeping spirit of the endless God. 


68. The loving pair then lay themselves down, and rolled upon their snow- 
white bed of flowers; as when Mandara mountain, rolled about and churned 
the Milky ocean. 


69. They passed their bridal night in mutual caresses and conversation on 
topics of love, and the live long night glided before them as a few moments 
only. 


CHAPTER CVII. 


The advent of false Indra in the cottage of the happy pair. 


Argument. — The travels of the pair, and their meeting the false Indra, and 
their call to Heaven. 


NOW as the orient sun gilded the world with his golden rays; the queen 
consort of Sikhidhwaja, changed her form of Madanika to that of the Brahman 
boy Kumbha. 


2. She stood confest as such before her friend, sitting in the cavern of 
Mandara, where they lived in conjugal union together, as a pair of sylvan 
deities by night. 


3. They roved about in the daytime, amidst the sylvan forests and amongst the 
trees and plants loaded with fruits, and flowers of various hues. 


4. They passed the day as the two loving friends together, and spent the night 
as a wedded couple; and never separated from the company of one another 
either by day or night. 


5. They rambled about the caverns and arbours of the mountain, and sported 
under the bowers of tamala and mandara trees. 


6. They roved about the skirts of Dardura, Kailaésa, Mahendra, Malaya, 
Gandhamadana, Vindhadri and Lokdloka. 


7. On every third day or night, when Chudala found the prince to be fast 
asleep; she used to take upon herself her former form of the princess, and 
repair to her royal palace, whence she returned to her husband in the forest, 
soon after her discharge of the state affairs as before. 


8. Thus the loving pair lived as two friends by day, and as husband and wife at 
night; both decked in flowers, and sleeping on their flowery bed. 


9. They remained for a month in a gemming grotto of the Mahendra, and 
under the shade of the delightful sarala trees; where they were greatly 
endeared by the sylvan deities and the Kinnara foresters. 


10. They lived a fortnight in the arbour of Suktimat mountain, beset by 
mandara trees and kalpa plants; and feasted upon the fruits which they could 
reach with their hands. 


11. They passed two months on the southern ridge of the winged mountain of 
Mainaka, and its bowers overhung by the fruits and flowers of the celestial 
p4arijata trees. 


12. They dwelt a month in the valley of Jammu, at the foot of Himalayan 
range and beside the Jambu river; they regaled on the fruits of Jam, which 
gave its name to the whole country, (Jambudwipa). 


13. They travelled through the northern Kuru country for ten days, and for 
seven and twenty days, they sojourned in the districts lying north of Kosala. 
(Oudh). 


14. In this manner they passed over many countries and hilly districts, living 
together as two friends by day, and as a conjugal pair at night. 


15. Thus many months rolled away in their travels through many places, till 
there arose a thought in the mind of Chudala, to make a trial of her associate, 
and said: — 


16. I will make a trial of the heart of my partner, and see whether it is liable to 
have any attraction toward beauty and pleasurable objects. 


17. Thinking so, Chuidala showed by her magic skill the god Indra, sporting in 
the company of celestial nymphs in that forest. 


18. Sikhidhwaja seeing the god with his companion there, advanced before 
him and worshipped him, as he deserved, and said: — 


19. “O lord of gods!” will you deign to reveal unto me, the cause of your 
advent to this forest from your seat in the high and far distant heaven. 


20. Indra replied: — It is the attraction of the virtues, that has brought us 
down to these woods, as the flying kites of the air are drawn on earth, by the 
string fastened in their breasts. 


21. Now rise from here, and proceed with us to heaven; where the celestial 
nymphs are in eager expectation of seeing thee, since they have heard of your 


wondrous virtues. 


22. Wear these sandals and hold the sword, and anoint thy body with the 
ointment of these pills, and ascend to the upper sky and thence to heaven, in 
the manner of Siddhas and perfect Yogis. 


23. On reaching to the region of the gods, you will enjoy all sorts of delights, 
which awaits on the living liberated souls in this world and the next, and to 
which I come to invite you at present. 


24. No holy man like yourself, doth ever neglect the proffered occasion to 
their prosperity, nor should you scorn to take your heavenward course with 
ourselves at his moment. 


25. Let there be no impediment to your ascent to and enjoyment of heaven, 
where you will enjoy your full bliss, and which will be blessed by your 
presence as the three worlds by that of Hari. 


26. Sikhidhwaja said: — I know O lord of gods, the delights that there abound 
in heaven; but I have my heaven everywhere, and there is no particular place 
which I deem as heaven. 


27. Tam content everywhere, and am pleased with every place; and my soul 
being desirous of nothing from its fulness in itself, I am fully satisfied 
everywhere. 


28. O God! if it be forever to remain in one place and in the same state, what 
you call heaven; then pardon me for I decline to it, (because I am at liberty 
here to go wherever I like). 


29. Indra answered: — I know, O holy saint! that those that have known the 
knowable, and are perfect in their understandings, are indifferent to their 
sensual gratification; it is however not the part of the wise to reject an 
enjoyment, which offers itself unto him by the gracious allotment of his 
destiny. 


30. After the God had said so, the prince remained silent and returned no 
answer; when the God told him saying, “If you are resolved not to leave this 
place, then I must leave you here, and take my way to heaven.” 


31. Sikhidhwaja said: — I must not go there now, (“though I may do so on 
some future occasion”). Upon this the God made farewell to Kumbha (who 
had invoked him down by his spell, and disappeared from the spot). 


32. All the other Gods that were in the train of Indra, vanished also from view 


upon the disappearance of their chief; as the huge surges of the sea, subside in 
the deep together with their foaming froths, and the shoals of whales and 
fishes that played and lashed about the main, after a lull of the gales that had 
raised them. 


CHAPTER CVIII. 


Manifestation of Chidala in her own form. 


Argument: — Chitidala's artifices to deceive Sikhidhwaja, and Sikhidhwaja's 
strength of mind. 


VASISHTHA related: — The princess retracted the enchantment by which 
she had presented the God Indra before the prince; and was glad to find, that 
he had subdued, (lit. — put to blush), his desire of enjoyment. 


2. He remained with perfect tranquillity and equanimity of his mind, at the 
advent and in the presence of the God Indra, and was fearless and indifferent 
to and unmoved even by the persuasion of that God. 


3. I will again try to know by some artifice or other, whether this prince is 
subject to the passions of anger or annoyment or any other feeling, which 
serve at best but to blind-fold the understanding. 


4. With this intention she took upon her the form of the chaste Madanika, at 
the approach of night; and when the moon had already appeared above that 
forest land. 


5. The wind was blowing gently, bearing the sweet fragrance of flowers; and 
Sikhidhwaja was sitting by the side of a river, to perform his evening 
devotion. 


6. At this time she entered her bower formed by the twining creepers, and 
decorated with garlands of flowers, resembling the covert of a sylvan 
goddesses. 


7. She slept there on the bed of flowers decked by herself, and adorned with 
wreaths of flowers on her own person; she had her beloved one seated in her 
heart; and laid her on a pillow. 


8. Sikhidhwaja sought for her in the gardens and groves, and found her out at 


last sleeping in the bower, with the pretty paramour enfolding her neck in his 
arms. 


9. He had his hairs hanging on his neck and shoulders, and his beauteous body 
daubed with pasted sandal wood. He had a chaplet of flowers on his head, 
which was distorted from his crown, and lay loose on the pillow over which it 
rolled. 


10. The flowing tresses of the mistress, fell in two-fold braids, on her shoulder 
blades of golden hue; and hung over her ears and eye-brows and her cheeks 
and face. 


11. He beheld the amorous pair, with their smiling faces; and both kissing and 
embracing one another, as when the ivy entwines a large tree. (Their bodies 
and lip-like leaves are joined together). 


12. They lay with their wreathed flowers, hanging loosely on their persons; 
and both were enamoured of one another by the mutual contact of their 
bodies, which infused their reciprocal passion in the heart of each other. 


13. They were both infatuated and ravished by their mutual love, and were 
both bruising their breasts on the bosoms of one another. 


14. Seeing this, Sikhidhwaja felt no change in his disposition; but was rather 
pleased to find them sleeping so very happily in one another's embrace. 


15. “Remain ye lovers, he said, as you are in your hearts' content; and I will 
put no obstacle in your way, nor make you afraid of me by my presence in 
this place.” Saying so, he withdrew from there. 


16. Immediately at this time, she also withdrew her charm, and disclosed 
herself as the beauteous Venus, and loving spouse of the prince. 


17. She came out and saw the prince sitting in a crag of the mountain, in the 
posture of his intense meditation, and with both his eyes open. 


18. The lady Madanika advanced towards him with a bashful countenance, 
and then sat silent by his side with her down cast look and melancholy 
appearance; as if abashed and ashamed of her past misconduct. 


19. Then as Sikhidhwaja was released after a moment from his meditation, he 
cast his eyes upon her; and spoke to her with an exceedingly sweet voice, 
which bespoke the frankness of his mind. 


20. Lady, said he, why do you come so soon to me, and leave off the 


enjoyment of thy happiness? Oh! happiness is the end and aim of all beings on 
earth. (Oh happiness! our being's end and aim. — Pope). 


21. Go, return to thy lover, and gratify him with all thy endearments; because 
mutual love which is so much desired by all, and is hard to be had by any in 
this world. 


22. Think not, madam, that I am at all angry or sorry for this affair; as I am 
always contented in myself, with knowing the True One, that is only to be 
known. 


23. Myself and my companion Kumbha, are always dispassionate in our 
dispositions; but thou that art sprung from the curse of Durvasa as a woman, 
art ever at liberty to do whatever thou likest, without incurring any displeasure 
of ours. 


24. Madanika replied: — So it is! Oh highly favoured one of Heaven, who 
knowest that women by their nature are ten times more passionate than men, 
and should not therefore be chid on account of their gratification of their 
natural passions. 


25. I am but a frail woman, and find you absorbed in deep meditation, I could 
not choose otherwise than take me a partner as you saw, in the depth of the 
forest and in the night. (Solitude and the darkness of night, being so very 
favourable to love affairs). 


26. The weak sex in general, and the maidens in particular, are ever fond of 
paramour by their very nature for the gratification of their lust, which they can 
never have the power to check. 


27. A woman becomes graceful in the company of man, and no anathema or 
prohibition, nor the menaces of men, nor regard of chastity, is of any avail to 
retard them from it. 


28. Iam a damsel and a weaker vessel and an ignorant and independent lass, 
therefore Sir, it becomes you to forgive my fickleness, because forgiveness is 
the most prominent feature of holiness. 


29. Sikhidhwaja replied: — Know my belle, that anger has no seat in my 
heart, as there grows no plant in the sky; and it is only for fear of incurring the 
ignominy of good people, that I must decline to take thee as my spouse. 


30. But I can associate with thee as before in mutual friendship for ever more, 
without bearing any yearning or grudge in our hearts, either for or against one 


another (but remain in disinterested amity for life). 


31. Vasishtha replied: — After Sikhidhwaja had consented to continue in his 
indifference and disinterested friendship, with his only companion in the 
forest; Chudala was highly pleased to wit the nobleness of his mind, and thus 
said to herself. 


32. O the transcendent tranquillity, which this lord of mine has gained, and 
whose dispassionateness has set him above anger, and his living liberation 
hath attained. 


33. No delight doth attract his heart, nor any excellence ever allures his soul; 
whose mind is not elated by pleasure or prosperity, nor depressed by pain or 
calamity. 


34. Methinks all the imaginable perfections, have jointly met in his person; as 
the goddess of prosperity, is united with the personage of Narayana. (The 
Lord is the model of all excellence and perfection). 


35. It is now the proper time for me, to bring to his remembrance all and 
everything relating to myself; by relinquishing my figure of Kumbha, and 
disclosing myself to him in my form of Chudala. 


36. With this thought, she shuffled off her shape of Madanika, and took the 
complexion of Chiidala upon herself. 


37. She then issued forth as Chudala, from out of the body of Madanik4a, and 
stood confest before him, as a jewel when taken out of the chest and exposed 
to view. 


38. The prince beheld her unblemished and lovely figure, and found his 
beloved Madanika transformed to his wedded spouse Chuidala again. 


39. He saw his own wife present before him, like a lotus flower blooming in 
the spring; and as the goddess of prosperity rising out of the earth, or as a 
brilliant gem laid open from its casket. 


CHAPTER CIX. 


Appearance of Chudala in the presence of her Lord. 


Argument: — Recognisance of Chiidala, relation of her adventures and 
reunion with her lord. 


VASISHTHA related: — Sikhidhwaja was surprised to see the princess so 
suddenly appearing before him; he looked upon her with his eyes staring with 
mute astonishment, and then broke his silence, with uttering the following 
words in his faltering speech. 


2. What art thou, O lotus eyed maid, and whence comest thou to this place? 
why comest thou here, and how long hast thou been herein? say for what 
purpose dost thou abide in this forest. 


3. Thy gait and figure, thy features and thy form, thy sweet smiles, manners 
and courtesy, bespeak thee plainly, to be an ectype or counterpart of the image 
of my wedded wife. 


4. Chudala replied: — So it is my lord, as thou thinkest me to be thy lawful 
consort; I am no doubt thy princess Chudala, who has met thee today in her 
natural and undisguised form, as thou also hast found her as the same. 


5. I assumed to me the counterfeit forms of Kumbha and others, only to 
remonstrate with thee on thy mistaken course; and used every art and 
stratagem to recall thee only to the right path. 


6. Ever since thy foolish renunciation of thy kingdom, for the purpose of the 
performance of thy ascetic austerities in the forest. I have had recourse to the 
employment of every art, in order to reclaim thee to the right path of religion. 


7. | awakened to the light of truth in my form of Kumbha, and all the other 
forms which I took upon myself, were chiefly intended for thy instruction 
(and rousing thee from thy lethargy). 


8. The forms of Kumbha and others, were no real but magical appearance 
before thee; and thou that knowest the knowable, can very well discern the 
whole affair in your meditation. 


9. You will be convinced of all this, if you will but look into it by the light of 
your meditation and not otherwise. After Chudala said so far, the prince sat in 
his meditative mood and in the posture of his meditation, — yogdsana. 


10. He saw the whole affair, rising and exhibiting itself plainly before his 
mental vision; ever since the renunciation of his royalty, until his meeting 
with Chudala at the end (from first to last). 


11. All these he saw rising in his soul, in one moment of his meditation; and 
the successive events appeared before it, since the resignation of his kingdom 
to the present instant. 


12. The prince felt glad in himself, at seeing all these in his meditation; and he 
greatly rejoiced with his full open eyes, when his meditation was over at the 
end of the scene. 


13. He extended both his arms with the hairs standing at an end of his body 
through joy, and his countenance shining with the gladness of his heart; while 
the fondness of his heart had its vent, in the tears trickling in his eyes, and his 
limbs slackened by his want of self-control. 


14. And then embraced her to his bosom, as a weasel does its mate for a long 
time; and this continued embrace of theirs, indicated the permanency of their 
passion for one another. 


15. Nobody, nor even the hundred hooded Vasuki serpent, can express with 
its hundred tongues, the height of the happiness which the happy pair felt on 
this occasion of their reunion; when their two bodies met together, like the 
two orbs of the sun and moon in their conjunction; or as their two disks were 
joined in one, by adhesion of some paste or clay. 


16. The two constant lovers continued in their close contact, like two 
contiguous rocks sticking to one another; till at last they parted apart, with the 
profuse perspiration of their bodies. 


17. They then gradually relaxed their arms from their mutual embraces, and 
their hearts which had ere long over flowed with delight, became now as light 
as two empty pots of water. 


18. They loosened their arms, and stared at one another with their fixed and 


mute gaze of amazement; and they sat silent with their deep felt love, after the 
fervour of their delight was over. 


19. Then did the prince lay his hand under the chin of his legal and royal 
consort, and bespoke to her in soft and sweet words distilling with honey. 


20. Matrimonial love, is righteous and sweeter far than the celestial ambrosia 
itself; how then was it, O my moon faced love, that thou couldst continue so 
long without tasting its sweets? 


21. Thou hast doubtless undergone much privation, and suffered great pains in 
the absence of thy husband, and so also was the toil exceedingly great, that 
thou hast taken on thyself, in order to redeem me from the dungeon of the 
world. 


22. I know not with whom to compare thee, for the great wisdom that thou 
hast displayed in thine act of my redemption, for even the pious ladies Sachi 
and Arundhati, and the great goddesses Gouri, Gayatri and Sri, (Ceres), and 
Saraswati, fall short of thy admirable qualities. 


23. I see, my love, that even the personified powers of understanding and 
prosperity, the persons of the graces and clemency, and the virtues of 
forgiveness, sympathy and universal love, are unequal to thy unequalled 
virtues and beauty. 


24. I know no adequate recompense, that will compensate thy labour and 
repay my gratitude to thee, that hast spared no patience nor persevering pains, 
in the cause of my instruction and redemption. 


25. O say, what retribution will requite thy pains, and gladden thy mind; for 
thy redeeming me from the dark pit of ignorance, and reclaiming me from the 
boundless wilderness of errors. 


26. It is the true virtue of faithful wives, to raise their fallen husbands much 
more than the Sdstras or learning, riches, the spiritual guide and his teaching, 
can serve to save a man from his degradation. (Such accomplished wife, is 
very hard to be in India found in these days of degeneration). 


27. Faithful and affectionate wives, are by far more serviceable to their 
husbands, than a brother or relation or any friend or servant, or even a guru or 
one's riches ever can be. 


28. The faithful wife is the best guide of man, and her person serves to be his 
best abode and attendant than anything else in this world. Therefore, the wife 


deserves to be always regarded above all others, with utmost diligence and 
attention. 


29. The happiness of both worlds depends entirely on the person of the 
disinterested and virtuous wife, who serves as a raft to her husband, for his 
going across the wide ocean of the perilous world. 


30. How shall I, O virtuous lady! repay the recompense of what thou hast 
done for me, and whom I now regard as the wisest and best of all the virtuous 
ladies in the whole world. 


31. Thy name must ever afterwards remain foremost of virtuous women in the 
world, in all future narratives of female virtues and respectable character 
among female sex. 


32. Methinks the virtuous lady Arundhatf and others, whose names are 
immortalized for their virtues, in the record of sacred history, will feel jealous 
of thee as they came to learn thy chastity and other admirable qualities. So my 
dear, let me embrace thee again to my bosom. 


33. Vasishtha related: — Saying so, Sikhidhwaja again held Chudala to his 
fast embrace, as the weasel does his mate in their mutual fondness. 


34. Chuidala said: — My lord, I was sorry to find you entirely devoted to your 
dry ceremonial duties, and it was for that reason, that I took so much pains to 
dissuade you from them, and lead you to the knowledge of the intelligent soul. 


35. Now tell me, my lord, what shall we do in this place and what is the use of 
your extolling my virtues so far. 


36. Sikhidhwaja replied: — O you most excellent among women, you are here 
at your liberty to do whatever you think best; as it is the prerogative of 
respectable ladies, to manage everything in their own way. 


37. Chidala answered: — Now my lord! as you have come to know, that you 
are released from the network of this world, and are set free on the shore from 
all its broils; you must have perceived now that your past austerities were all 
in vain and gone for nothing. 


38. You must have known that it is all in vain, when you say, “I do this or 
that, and will get its reward, and will thus be settled in life etc.”; say, do you 
smile to think of these and other vagaries of your simple understanding. 


39. Do you know that these vagaries are the creatures of your avarice, and 
mere creations of your fancy? (because there is nothing that can do or bring 


out of your will or by your own power). 


40. Don't you yet perceive that these false creations of your imagination, are 
as unreal as the situation or appearance of mountains in the empty air? 


41. Say, what is it that you have learnt after all, what is it that you depend 
upon, and what is the object that you seek at present, and in what light you 
view all your bodily acts either of your past or future life. 


42. Sikhidhwaja replied: — O dear lady, with thy blooming eyes, resembling 
the leaves of a full-blown blue lotus, I am likewise situated in and at the same 
place, wherein thou art located also. 


43. I am tranquil and alike (or likened to) the object of my meditation, and am 
situated in the true ego long after leaving the sense of my personality. I am 
arrived to that state (of rapturous delight) which is known to and felt by the 
heart only, (/it., by way of the heart). 


44. There is no power anywhere, nor even that of Hari and Hara, that is able 
to obstruct that heart-felt joy of mine, which makes me think myself as 
nothing else or less than the very intellect (or a particle, — chinmdtra) itself. 


45. I am now free from errors, and liberated from the trammels of the world; I 
am neither this nor that, nor am I glad nor sorry at anything or at any event in 
the world. 


46. I am neither any gross or subtle matter, nor am I like a ray of the solar 
light, that emanates from the body of the sun, and falls below by traversing 
through the midday sky. (i.e., The human soul is the image of God, and not a 
particle of the undivided essence of the Deity). 


47. I am of the essence of that glorious light, which is ever without its 
increase or decrease; I am always tranquil and ever even in my nature, and I 
am quite at ease, having no desire of mine own, nor anything to expect from 
anybody. 


48. O thou most chaste lady, know me to be of that essence, which exists as 
extinct everywhere; I am what I am and what I cannot describe, and no other 
than this. 


49. O beauteous lady, with thy eye balls glancing like the flitting waves of 
rivulets! I bow down to thee as my instructor; because it is by thy good grace 
that I have come across the turbulent ocean of the world. 


50. I shall no more be soiled with the dirt of the earth, after being cleansed 


from it like a bit of gold from its alloy by repeated burnings. 


51. I am quite calm and easy, quiet and free from passions, and never divided 
in my attention nor distracted in my mind. I am beyond all things, I am 
ubiquitous and all pervading, and am situated as I am (without any change in 
me). 


52. Chudala said: — If you remain in this manner, O thou lord of my life, and 
dearly beloved one of my heart, then tell me, my lord, what is it that is now 
best agreeable to your most noble disposition. 


53. Sikhidhwaja answered: — I know of nothing, O good lady, that is either 
delectable or detestable to me; I do the same as you do, and am exactly of the 
same mind like yours in everything. 


54. O thou that art as fair as the firmament, know that I have nothing to 
choose for myself, beyond what I am possessed of; and leave it to you to 
choose and do whatever you think proper for us. 


55. I will act as you will do, like your shadow or reflexion in the mirror; 
because my mind being devoid of its desire and effort, I will patiently bear 
with whatever comes to pass on me. 


56. I will neither excite nor prevent, nor praise or blame thee for aught thou 
doest; but leave thee at thy full liberty, to do whatever thou best choosest for 
thyself. 


57. Chudala replied: — If it is so as you say, then hear me tell you what is 
best to be done by you at present; you are to set yourself to imitate the 
conduct of living-liberated persons, and set yourself released from your 
ignorance, by knowing the unity of the Deity, pervading all things in every 
place. 


58. We are both as devoid of desires, as the empty void of the sky is without 
its population; but that which I wish to do is what you do not wish at all. (i.e., 
I wish to manage the state, which you dislike to do). 


59. Say what man is there, who neglects his life and livelihood, and remains 
only, in his intellect? (No one can make his intellectual culture without having 
his life and living). And as there are three stages of human life, namely, its 
beginning or boyhood, its middle or youth, and its end or old age, and we 
being situated in the midst of it, must do the duties appertaining to this state, 
before we proceed to the last stage of our being. 


60. And as we are by birth the prince and princess of a realm, it is paramount 
on us to rule our state, and pass our days in the discharge of the duties of our 
royalty until our end. 


61. Sikhidhwaja said: — Tell me, O fickle minded lady, what you mean by 
the three stages; and how we stand at the midmost one, without having a whit 
to care for the final one. 


62. Chuidala replied: — Know prince, that we are royal personages by births, 
and must all along continue as such from the first to the last stage of our lives. 


63. Why then do you allow the imbecility and hermitage of old age, to 
overtake you in the prime of your youth; when it is your duty to remain in 
your city and palace, and govern your princely state. 


64. And then I will reign there as thy consort queen, and crown the ladies in 
the royal apartment; and all young maidens of the city will dance about in 
jovialty, to see their prince and princess again in the royal palace. 


65. And then the city glittering with its uplifted flags, and resounding with its 
loud beating drums, and decorated with wreaths of flowers hanging all about 
it; will resemble a vernal garden, smiling with its verdant plants, blooming 
buds and blushing flowers all around. 


66. Vasishtha related: — Hearing these words of the princess, the king 
smilingly spoke to her in his mellifluous words, which bespoke them to 
proceed from the simplicity and frankness of his soul. 


67. If such is your pleasure, O long sighted (eyed) lady, to incite me to earthly 
pleasures, then tell me what cause had I to slight the heavenly happiness, 
which was proffered to me by god Indra. 


68. Chidala replied: — Know prince, that I also have no taste in earthly 
enjoyments, nor any great zest for its grandeur or greatness. I depend upon the 
bounty of nature, and live as I receive from her hand. 


69. Hence I have no relish for heavenly joys or earthly royalty, nor do I derive 
any pleasure from the performance of virtuous and manly acts. My delight is 
in the undisturbed equanimity of my mind, and the positive rest of my 
position. 


70. It is only after I have lost my feeling of pleasure in something, and that of 
pain in another, that I gain my equanimity and indifference to both, and am 
settled in my perfect rest and tranquillity. 


71. Sikhidhwaja responded: — You have rightly said, O large eyed dame, 
with your calm and cool understanding; that it is all alike, whether we get or 
lose a kingdom, since we derive no lasting good nor suffer great evil, either 
from its gain or loss. 


72. Let us remain in perfect ease, by shunning all thoughts of pleasure or pain; 
and getting release of the envy, emulation and jealousy; and continue in the 
same state of thoughtlessness as we are at present. (Lovely lasting peace of 
mind, sweet delight of human kind; that neither envy nor ambition knows, 
etc., see ode on contentment). 


73. In this manner did the conjugal pair pass the day in their sweet 
endearments and mutual conversation; and the day glided on swiftly and 
sweetly over their feast of reason and flow of the soul. 


74. They rose on the departure of the day, to discharge their duties on the 
parting days; and though they were ill provided for the emergencies of night, 
yet they well knew how to suit themselves to every occasion in every place. 


75. Disdaining heavenly bliss, the loving pair lived together in perfect 
contentment with their conjugal bliss; and they both slept in the same bed- 
stead, loving and loved by one another. 


76. The live long night passed away swiftly in their heaven like happiness of 
conjugal enjoyment, and upon their conferral of reciprocal love and affection; 
and by exciting their anxiety for mutual embrace. 


CHAPTER CX. 


Final Extinction of Sikhidhwaja. 


Argument: — Return of the Royal pair and retinue to their realm, their long 
reign therein until their ultimate extinction in the Divine source. 


VASISHTHA related: — Then rose the orient sun above the horizon, like a 
brilliant gem appearing out of its containing casket; and dispelled the darkness 
of the sky, as the blazing gem enlightens the room with its rays. 


2. His dawning rays pierced the eyes of sleeping men, and opened their 
eyelids, as they open the folia of the closed lotuses; and they roused the lazy 
world to activity, as if the sun beams gave the sound of the morning bell. (The 
drdti bell is rung at dawn, like the matin cry of the Muezzin, to raise the 
sleeping men to their morning service). 


3. The loving pair rose from their bed of flowers, in the grotto of the mount 
brightened by its mineral gold; and sat on their soft and cool leafy seats, to 
make their morning prayers and discharge their matin functions. 


4. Then rose Chudala and stood before a golden urn of water, where she made 
the presence to take his solemn oath by the names of seven oceans of the 
earth. (This oath is more binding than swearing by the water of Ganges). 


5. She then made him sit by the sacred water pot, and facing towards the 
rising sun in the east; and performed the rite of his installation to his kingdom, 
in this sequestered retreat. 


6. After the solemnity of the ceremony was over, they both sat on the same 
bedding, (vishtara), when the god like Chuidala spoke to her husband in the 
following manner: — 


7. Now my lord, leave off your quiet character of a muni or hermit, and 
assume the vigour of the eight rulers of the upper skies and nether world. 
(These ruling powers are Indra, Varuna, etc.). 


8. After Chiidala had done speaking in this manner, the prince assented to 
what she said; and told her that he will do as she bade him, and return to my 
realm with you. 


9. He then said to the princess, who was standing at the post of the warder, 
(i.e., who was in attendance), on her inaugurated lord. “Now will I, my dear, 
install you in the rank of the queen regent in my turn and return for yours.” 


10. Saying so, he caused holy lavation in an adjacent pool, and inaugurated as 
the regnant Regina of his royalty and realm. 


11. Then the prince requested her to exert the powers, of her consummation in 
Yoga meditation; and to produce and bring to their presence a large force and 
retinue, as they wanted and thought suitable to their royal dignity. 


12. Hearing these words of prince, the praiseworthy princess produced by the 
power of her Yoga, a body of forces, as large and over-spreading as bodies of 
out-stretching clouds in the rainy season. 


13. They beheld their cloud like forces, to be composed of lines of horses and 
elephants, and flags flying in the air in the form of scattered clouds, while the 
forest land was covered over by the feet of foot-soldiers. 


14. The sound of music resounded in the hollow caves of mountains and 
woods; and the flash of the coronets on the head of the soldiers, drove away 
the darkness of the sky. 


15. Then the royal pair mounted upon a royal elephant, which exuded with the 
perfume of its ichor; escorted by the army on both sides of their procession. 


16. The prince Sikhidhwaja sat with the princess on the same seat, and was 
accompanied by a mighty force composed of foot-soldiers and chariots, that 
furrowed the ground as they drove on forward. 


17. The mighty force gushed out like a rolling mountain, and seemed to blow 
off and break down the rock and highlands, as the cyclone carries off 
everything in its way. 


18. The prince then proceeded from the Mahendra mountain, seeing on both 
sides the mountains and flatlands, rivers, forests and habitations of men, as he 
went onward with his great array. 


19. He showed and pointed out to his royal consort, the places where he 
sojourned before, on his way from out of his city, which he now beheld in his 
heavenly brightness, upon his arrival there in a little time. 


20. All his chiefs and chieftains, advanced to meet their prince; and welcomed 
with shouts of his victory, from their heart felt joy or from the revival of their 
hopes; on the occasion of his happy return. 


21. The prince entered the city, accompanied by his two regiments on both 
sides, and attended by bands of musicians playing in concord with the singing 
and dancing party. 


22. He passed through the market place, and beheld the beauty of the shops 
one after the other; and was hailed by groups of the city women, who pelted 
their handfuls of flowers and fried rice at him, as he passed on by them. 


23. He saw numbers of flags and banners hoisted on every side, and beheld 
strings of pearls hung over the doorways of houses. The women of the city 
were singing and dancing in merriment all around, and giving it the 
appearance of Kailasa, — the happy abode of gods. 


24. He entered his royal palace with all his retinue, and was welcomed by the 
congratulations of his courtiers and attendants. He gave due honors to all his 
servants, and then dismissed the train, as he entered the inner apartment. 


25. He ordered a festivity to be observed for a week, and then employed 
himself to the management of the state affairs, and in conducting his 
meditation in the inner apartment. 


26. He reigned over his realm, for the period of a thousand and ten rains; and 
desisted from bearing the burthen of their bodies, and expired together with 
his royal consort about the same time. 


27. Having quitted his mortal frame, he obtained his extinction like an oilless 
and extinguished lamp, and attained the state, whence the high-minded soul, 
has no more to return and be reborn on earth. 


28. It was by his observance of equanimity, that he enjoyed the peaceful reign 
of above a thousand years; and had the good fortune to live and die together 
with the princess, with whom he became extinct in the deity at last. 


29. It was by his sama-drishti or view of all persons and things with an even 
sight and in the same light, and his avoidance of fear and sorrow, together 
with his want of pride, envy and enmity, and the dispassionateness of his 
disposition, also his observance of the duties to which he was bound by his 
birth, that made him put off his death for more than a thousand cold seasons 
(years), and a peaceful reign for all time, with the co-partner of his felicity. 


30. Now Rama, try to imitate this prince, and be like him in everything; 
whose virtues had made him the crown of all other Kings on earth; who 
enjoyed all the enjoyments of life, and lived a long life until he attended his 
final state of immortality. Do you, O Rama! pursue your own callings, and 
never be sorry at any accident in life. Be ever prompt and vigilant in your 
duties, and enjoy the prosperity both of temporal enjoyments and spiritual 
liberations at once. 


CHAPTER CXI. 


Story of Kacha and his enlightenment by the Brihaspati 


Argument: — His coming to knowledge of himself by the instruction of his 
father Brihaspati. 


VASISHTHA related: — Now I have narrated to you fully, and finished my 
relation of the narrative of Sikhidhwaja; and hope you will imitate his 
example, to set you free from all sorrow and misery. 


2. Shut out the visible world from thy sight, and shut in thy passions and 
affections in close confinement within thy heart; and continue with the 
dispassionateness of thy mind, forever attached to the supreme spirit. 


3. Reign in thy kingdom with the leteration of Sikhidhwaja, and conduct 
yourself in a manner, that may secure to you the fruition of both worlds, 
(namely, — the peace and tranquillity of thy mind in this and the liberation of 
the soul in the next). 


4. As Sikhidhwaja came by degrees to attain his enlightenment, so also did 
Kacha the son of Brihaspati receive the light of his reason, as I shall now 
relate unto you. 


5. Rama said, please to tell me Sir, in short, how this Kacha, the saintly son of 
the sage Brihaspati, came to his reason and right understanding, after he was 
deluded before by error as Sikhidhwaja. 


6. Vasishtha began by saying: — Hear Rama, another tale as interesting as 
that of Sikhidhwaja, and the manner in which Kacha the progeny of the god 
like Brihaspati was awakened to the light of truth. 


7. As he has passed the period of his youth, and was about to enter the career 
of worldly life, and had ere this acquired the full knowledge of worlds and 
things, he proposed the following query to his father. 


8. He said, tell me, O father, that knowest all righteousness, how the animal 
spirit that is bound to the body by means of the too thin thread of life, is 
released from the bondage of it in this temporary world. 


9. Brihaspati replied: — The soul, my son, is well able to fly away easily and 
swiftly over the perilous ocean of the world, by means of its abandonment of 
concerns with it. 


10. Vasishtha added: — Kacha hearing this holy dictum of his father, 
abandoned all his earthly properties and expectations, and left his house and 
went to the forest where he took his shelter. 


11. Brihaspati was filled with sorrow at his departure; because it is the nature 
of good hearted men, to feel equal anxiety both at the union as well as the 
separation of their friends and inmates. 


12. After the sinless Kacha had passed three and five years in his solitude, he 
came to meet unawares his reverent father, seeking for him in the wood. 


13. The son rose and did homage to his venerable father, who embraced him 
in his arms and to his breast; and then bespoke to his father, — the lord of 
speech, in words that flowed like honey from his lips. 


14. Kacha said: — You see father, that I have for these full eight years, 
forsaken everything and betaken myself to this solitary retreat, and still why is 
it, that I do not enjoy the lovely and lasting peace of mind which I have been 
seeking so long? 


15. Vasishtha related: — Upon hearing these sorrowful words of Kacha, the 
lord of speech for Brihaspati told him again to abandon his all, and then left 
him and made his way to the upper sky. 


16. After his father's departure, Kacha cast off his mantle made of the bark 
and leaves of trees; when his frail body appeared out of it like the clear 
autumnal sky, after the setting of the sun and the stars of heaven. 


17. He then removed to another forest, where he took shelter in the cave of a 
rock, that defended him from rains and rainy clouds, as the autumnal sky 
protects the landscape from the floods of rain. 


18. He lived afterwards all apart on one side of a wood, with his naked body 
and tranquil and vacant mind, and breathed only the breath of his life; and as 
he was afflicted on one occasion in this state of his body and mind, he 
happened to see his father standing before him. 


19. The pious son rose from his seat, and did reverence to his sire with all the 
marks of filial piety; being then clasped in his close embrace, he asked him in 
his faltering words as follows: — 


20. Kacha said: — Behold my father how I have forsaken everything, and 
have even cast away my ragged wrapper and my shelter of reeds and weeds; 
and yet why is that I do not find my rest in my god, and what must I yet do to 
attain to that state. 


21. Brihaspati said: — I told you my son, to forsake your all, and this all 
means the mind, which comprehends all things in it; it is by forsaking your 
mind that you can gain your perfect felicity, because the learned know the 
mind to be all in all, on account of its being the container of everything in 
itself, and there being nothing, besides the ideas of them in our minds. 


22. Vasishtha related: — Saying so, the lord of speech, — Brihaspati flew 
hastily into the sky; and his son Kacha, strove henceforth to relinquish the 
thoughts and operations of his mind. 


23. But as found it impossible to subdue his mind, as also to suppress its 
action and motion; he then recalled his father to his mind, and thought in 
himself to be got into his presence. 


24. He considered in himself, the mind to be no part of his body, nor anything 
among the known categories in nature; It is quite aloof and apart from all, and 
therefore, perfectly guiltless in itself, why should I then abandon so innocent 
and constant a companion of mine. 


25. I shall therefore, have recourse to my father, to learn how and why the 
mind is accounted as the greatest enemy of men. Learning this fully from him, 
I will forthwith forsake it from me, and purchase my felicity thereby. 


26. Vasishtha related: — Having thought so, Kacha went upward to the upper 
sky, and meeting the lord of speech there, he bowed down to him, and did his 
homage with filial love and affection. 


27. He then called him aside, and asked him to tell him the true nature and 
form of the mind, so that he could be enabled to detect it thereby, and forsake 
it accordingly from him. 


28. Brihaspati answered: — The mind is known as the egoism of a man, by 
men acquainted with the mental science or psychology; the inward feeling of 
one's egoism, takes the name of his mind and no more. 


29. Kacha rejoined and said: — O sire of unlimited understanding, that art the 
preceptor of thirty-three millions of gods; explain to me this intricate point of 
identity of the mind or intellect or egoism. 


30. I see the difficulty both of forsaking his mind, as also of his forgetting his 
egoism or self-personality; and own also the impossibility of one's 
consummation, without his relinquishing both of these; tell me now, O thou 
greatest of Yogi thinkers, how is it possible to get rid of them in any wise. 


31. Brihaspati answered: — Why my son, the demolition of our egoism is as 
easy as the twinkling of our eyelids, and easier far than the crushing of 
flowers; and there is not the least pain in your rejecting this feeling. 


32. Now hear my boy tell you how this is to be done in a trice, and how it is to 
be removed like long standing bias of ignorance, by the true knowledge of the 
nature of a thing. 


33. There is no such thing in reality my son, as what you call your egoism or 
personality; it is an unreality appearing as reality, and a false chimera like the 
ghost of little boys. (Men fear death as children fear to go in the dark, thinking 
there are ghost and goblins lurking therein of Bacon's Essays). 


34. Like the fallacy of water in the mirage, and the mistake of a serpent in the 
rope; and alike all other errors appearing as truths, the misconception of 
egoism is a mere delusion of the understanding. 


35. As it is the delusion of our vision, that represents a couple of moons in the 
sky, and shows many things as their doubles; so it is the error of our 
understanding that presents to us our false egoism, instead of the one real and 
everlasting ego. 


36. There is one real Ego alone, which is without beginning and end, and 
quite pellucid in itself; it is more transparent than the clear atmosphere, and an 
Intelligence that knows all things. (Pure omniscience). 


37. He is always everywhere, as the light of all things and the life of all living 
beings; It is his essence only that spreads throughout all nature and shines in 
all her phenomena, as the same essence of water, displays itself in all the 
rolling surges and waves and moving bubbles in the sea. 


38. Such being the case, tell me what is this special egoism of ours, and how 
and whence could a separate personality come to exist; where can you find 
dust to raise from water, or behold water to spring from fire. (Things of the 
same kind spring from the same source, and the product is never different 


from the original). 


39. Shun my son, your false belief of the difference of this one and that 
another, and thyself a quite another person, (a tertium quid); and abstain to 
think thyself as a mean and contemptible being confined within the limits of 
space and time. (i.e., Know thyself as identic with the boundless and 
everlasting spirit and no other). 


40. Know thyself (soul) as unbounded by space and time, and ever overspread 
all over in thy essential transparency, which is always the same in all seeming 
varieties, the one invariable, pure and simple Intellect. 


41. Thyself (soul) is situated, in the fruits, flowers and leaves of all the trees 
on every side of thee; and abides in everything like the pith and marrow for its 
subsistence, and as moisture for its growth. The pure intellect eternally 
inheres in everything as its soul and essence, tell me then, O Kacha, whence 
you derive the belief of your egoism and personal existence (as an embodied 
person). 


CHAPTER CXII. 


A fanciful Being and his Occupation of Air drawn and Air built Abodes. 


Argument: — Man likened to a fantastic being, his egoism a mere phantasm, 
and his repeated births and bodies compared to aerial castles. 


VASISHTHA related: — Kacha, the son of the divine preceptor Brihaspati, 
being thus advised by his venerable sire in the best kind of Yoga meditation; 
began to muse in himself as one liberated from his personal entity, and lost 
and absorbed in essence of the sole and self-existent Deity. So says the sufi 
Sadi: — “Dui rachum badar kardam Eke binan Eke danam. etc.” When I kept 
the duality of my personality out of my sight, I saw before me all blending in 
one, ineffable blaze of light. 


2. Kacha remained quite freed from his egoism and meism, with the 
tranquillity of his mind, and cut off from all the ties of nature, and all apart 
from the bonds of worldly life. So I advise you, Rama, to remain unchanged 
and unmoved amidst all the changes and movements of earthly bodies and 
vicissitudes of a mortal life. 


3. Know all egoistic personality to total nihility, and never hesitate to remove 
yourself from this asylum of unreality, whose essence is as nothing at all as 
the horns of a hare whether you lay hold on it or lose your grasp of it, (and as 
inextricable and inexplicable as the horns of a dilemma). 


4. If it is impossible for your egoism to be a reality, why then talk of your 
birth and demise or your existence and inexistence; which is as it were 
planting a tree in the sky, of which you can neither reap the fruits or flowers. 


5. After annihilation of your egoism there remains the sole ego, which is of 
the form of intellect only and not that of fickle mind; It is tranquil and without 
any desire, and extends through all existence; it is minuter and more subtle 
than the smallest atom, and is only the power of intellection and 
understanding. (i.e., the omniscience). 


6. As the waves are raised upon the waters and the ornaments are made of 
gold; so our egoism springing from the original ego appears to be something 
different from it. 


7. It is our ignorance or imperfect knowledge only that represents the visible 
world as a magic show, but the light of right knowledge, brings us to see the 
one and self-same Brahma in all forms of things. 


8. Avoid your dubiety of the unity and duality; (7e., of the singleness of the 
prime cause, and variety of its products); but remain firm in your belief of that 
state, which lasts after the loss of both; (i.e., the one and all the same). Be 
happy with this belief, and never trouble yourself with thinking anything 
otherwise, like the false man in the tale. 


9. There is an inexplicable magic enveloping the whole, and this world is an 
impervious mass of theurgy or sorcery, which enwraps as thickly, as the 
autumnal mists obscure the firmament, and which is scattered by the light of 
good understanding. 


10. Rama said: — Sir, your learned lectures, like draughts of nectar, have 
given me entire satisfaction; and I am as refreshed by your cooling speeches, 
as the parching swallow is refrigerated by a shower of rain water. 


11. I feel as cold within myself, as if I were anointed with heavenly ambrosia; 
and I think myself raised above all beings, in my possession of unequalled 
riches and greatness, by the grace of God. 


12. I am never satiated to the fullness of my heart, at hearing the orations of 
thy mouth; and am like a chakora or swallow that is never satiate with 
swallowing dewy moon-beams by night. 


13. I confess to thee that I am never surfeited by drinking the sweet of thy 
speech, and the more I hearken to thee, the more am I disposed to learn from 
and listen to thee; for who is there so cloyed with the ambrosial honey, that he 
declines to taste the nectarine juice again? 


14. Tell me Sir, what do you mean by the false men of the tale; who thought 
the real entity as a non-entity, and look at the unreal world as a solar and solid 
reality. 


15. Vasishtha related: — Now attend to me, Rama, to relate unto you the story 
of the false and fanciful man; which is pleasant to hear, and quite ludicrous 
and laughable from first to last. 


16. There lived once a man, like a magical machine somewhere; who lived 
like an idiot with the imbecility of his infantine simplicity, and was full of 
gross ignorance as a fool or block-head. 


17. He was born somewhere in some remote region of the sky, and was 
doomed to wander in his ethereal sphere, like a false apparition in the air, or a 
mirage in the sandy desert. (as a phantom or phantasmagoria). 


18. There was no other person beside himself, and whatever else there was in 
that place, it was but his self or an exact likeness of itself. He saw naught but 
himself, and aught that he saw he thought to be but his self. 


19. As he grew up to manhood in this lonely retreat, he pondered in himself 
saying: — I am airy and belong to the aerial sphere; the air is my province, 
and I will therefore, rule over this region as mine. 


20. The air is my proprietory right, and therefore, I must preserve it with all 
diligence, then with this thought he built an aerial house for his abode, in 
order to protect and rule his ethereal dominion. 


21. He placed his reliance inside that aerial castle, from where he could 
manage to rule his aerial domain, and lived quite content amidst the sphere of 
his airy habitation for a long time. 


22. But in course of time his air-built castle came to be dilapidated, and to be 
utterly destroyed at last; as the clouds of heaven are driven and blown away in 
autumn, and the waves of the sea are dispersed by the breeze, and sunken 
down in a calm. 


23. He then cried out in sorrow, saying: — O my air-built mansion, why art 
thou broken down and blown away so soon; and, O my air drawn habitation, 
where art thou withdrawn from me. In this manner, he wailed in his excessive 
grief and said; Ah, now I see, that an aerial something must be reduced to an 
aerial nothing. 


24. After lamenting in this manner for a long time, this simpleton dug a cave 
in the vacuity of the atmosphere; and continued to dwell in that hollow cavity, 
in order to look up to his aerial realm from below. Thus he remained quite 
content in the closed air of the cave for a long period of time. 


25. In process of time, his cell was wasted and washed away, and he became 
immerged in deep sorrow upon the immersion of his empty cave. 


26. He then constructed a hollow pot, and took his residence in its open 


bowel, and adapted his living to its narrow limits. 


27. Know that his brittle earthen pot also, was broken down in course of a 
short time; and he came to know the frailty of all his habitations, as an 
unfortunate man finds the fickleness of all the hopes and helps, which he 
fondly lays hold upon. 


28. After the breaking of his pot, he got a tub for his residence (like the tub of 
Diogenes); and from there he surveyed the heavenly sphere; as any one 
beholds it from his particular habitation. 


29. His tub also was broken down in course of time, by some wild animal; and 
thus he lost all his stays, as the darkness and the dews of night, are dispelled 
and sucked up by the solar light and heat. 


30. After he had sorrowed in vain for the loss of his tub, he took his asylum in 
an enclosed cottage, with an open space in the midst, for his view of the upper 
skies. 


31. The all-devouring time, destroyed also that habitation of his; and scattered 
it all about, as the winds of heaven dispersed the dried leaves of trees, and left 
him to bewail the loss of his last retreat and flitting shelter. 


32. He then built a hut in the form of a barn house in the field, and thence 
watched over his estate of the air, as farmers keep watch and take care of their 
granaries in the farms. 


33. But the driving winds of the air, drove away and dispersed his hovel, as 
they do the gathering clouds of heaven; and the roofless man had once more to 
deplore at the loss of his last refuge. 


34. Having thus lost all his abodes, in the pool and pot, in the cottage and hut; 
the aerial man was left to bemoan over his losses, in his empty abode of the 
air. 


35. Being thus situated in his helpless state, the aerial man reflected upon the 
narrow confines of the abodes, which he had chosen for himself of his own 
accord; and thought on the multifarious pains and troubles, that he had 
repeatedly to undergo, in the erection and destruction of all his aerial castles 
by his own ignorance only. 


CHAPTER CXIII. 


The Parable of the Vain Man Continued. 


Argument. — Interpretation of the parable of the Aerial man. 


Rama said: — Please Sir, give me the interpretation of your parable of the 
false man, and tell me the allusion it bears to the fanciful man, whose business 
it was to watch the air or sky, (and to make his new posts for that purpose). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me, Rama, now expound to you the meaning of 
my parable of the false man, and the allusion which it bears to every fanciful 
man in this world. 


3. The man that I have represented to you, as a magical engine, (mdyd yantra), 
means the egoistic man, who is led by the magic of his egoism, to look upon 
the empty air of his personality as a real entity (and whose sole care it is to 
preserve its vital air as its only property). 


4. The vault of the sky, which contains all these orbs of worlds; is but an 
infinite space of empty void, as it was ere this creation came into existence, 
and before it becomes manifest to view. 


5. There is the spirit of the inscrutable and impersonal Brahma, immanent in 
this vacuity and becomes apparent in the personality of Brahma, in the 
manner of the audible sound issuing out of the empty air, which is its 
receptacle and support. 


6. It is from this also that there rises the subtle individual soul with the sense 
of its egoism, as the vibration of current winds springs from the motionless 
air; and then as it grows up in time in the same element, it comes to believe its 
having an individual soul and a personality of its own. 


7. Thus the impersonal soul being imbibed with the idea of its personality, 
tries to preserve its egoism forever; it enters into many bodies of different 
kinds, and creates new ones for its abode upon the loss of the former ones. 


8. This egoistic soul, is called the false and magical man; because it is a false 
creation of unreality, and a production of vain ignorance and imagination. 


9. The pit and the pot, and the cottage and the hut, represent the different 
bodies, the empty vacuity of which, supplies the egoistic soul with a 
temporary abode. 


10. Now listen to me to relate to you the different names, under which our 
ignorant spirit passes in this world, and begins itself under one or other of 
these appellations. 


11. It takes the various names of the living soul, the understanding, mind, the 
heart, and ignorance and nature also; and is known among men, by the words 
imagination, fancy and time, which are also applied to it. 


12. In these and a thousand other names and forms, doth this vain egoism 
appear to us in this world; but all these powers and faculties are mere 
attributives of the true ego which is imperceptible to us. 


13. The world is verily known to rest without its basis, in the extended and 
vacuous womb of the visible firmament; and the imaginary soul of the egoist 
is supposed to dwell in it, and feel all its pain and pleasure in vain. (But the 
sense of the unreality of the world, as also of one's personality, exempts from 
the sensations of pleasure and pain). 


14. Therefore, O Rama, do not, like the imaginary man in the fable, place any 
reliance in your false personality; nor subject yourself like the egoistic man, to 
the fancied pleasure and misery of this world. 


15. Do not trouble yourself, like the erroneous man, with the vain care of 
preserving your vacuous soul; nor suffer like him the pain of your 
confinement in the hollow of the pit, pot and others. 


16. How is it possible for anybody, to preserve or confine the vacuous spirit in 
the narrow limit of a pot and the like; when it is more extended than the 
boundless sky, and more subtle and purer than the all-pervading air. 


17. The soul is supposed to dwell in the cavity of the human heart, and is 
thought to perish with the decay and destruction of the body; hence people are 
seen to lament at the loss of their frail bodies, as if it entailed the destruction 
of their indestructible soul. 


18. As the destruction of the pot or any other hollow vessel, does not destroy 
the subtle air, which is contained in the same; so the dissolution of the body, 


does not dissolve the embodied and intangible soul. 


19. Know Rama, the nature of the soul, to be as that of the pure intellect; it is 
more subtle than the circumambient air, and minuter far than the minutest 
atom; it is a particle of our consciousness only, and indestructible as the all- 
pervasive air, which is never to be nullified. 


20. The soul is never born, nor does it die as any other thing at any place or 
time; it extends over the whole universe, as the universal soul of Brahma, 
which encompasses and comprehends all space, and manifests itself in all 
things. 


21. Know this spirit as one entire unit, and the only real entity; it is always 
calm and quiet, and without its beginning, middle and end. Know it as beyond 
the positive and negative, and be happy with thy knowledge of its 
transcendental nature. 


22. Now extricate your mind from the false cogitation of your egoism, which 
is the abode of all evils and dangers, and is an unstable thing depending on the 
life of a man; it is full of ignorance and vanity, and its own destruction and 
final perdition (in hell fire). Therefore, get rid of your egoistic feeling, and 
rely only on the ultimate and optimum state of the one everlasting Deity. 


CHAPTER CXIV. 


Sermon on Divine and Holy Knowledge. 


Argument: — Consideration of the Real and unreal, and of good and evil; 
Exhortation to the former and De-hortation from the latter. 


VASISHTHA said: — The mind sprang at first from the supreme spirit of 
Brahma, and being possessed of its power of thinking, it was situated in the 
Divine soul, and was styled as the Divine mind or intellect. 


2. The fickle mind resides in the spirit of God as the feeling of fragrance 
abides in the cup of a flower; and as the fluctuating waves roll about in a river. 
Know, Rama! the mind to radiate from its central point in Brahma, as the rays 
of the sun extend to the circumference of creation. 


3. Men forget the reality of the invisible spirit of God, and view the unreal 
world as a reality; as deluded persons are apt to believe a serpent in a rope, (as 
they do in magic play). 


4. He who beholds the solar beams, without seeing the sun whence they 
proceed; views them in a different light than the light of the sun. (Whoso sees 
the world without its God, is an ungodly man, and sees a Godless world). 


5. He who looks at the jewel without looking into the gold whereof it is made, 
is deluded by the finery of the jewelry, without knowing the value of the 
precious metal of which it is made. 


6. He who looks at the sun together with his glory, or sees the sun-beams as 
not without the sun whence they proceed, verily beholds the unity of the sun 
with his light, and not his duality by viewing them separately. (The 
monotheism of vedanta comprises everything in the unity of the Divinity). 


7. He who looks on the waves without seeing the sea, wherein they rise and 
fall, has only the knowledge of the turbulent billows disturbing his mind; and 
no idea of the calm waters underlying them, (like the tranquil spirit of 


Brahma). 


8. But who looks on the waves, without exception of the water of which they 
are composed; he sees the same water to be in common in all its swellings, 
and has the knowledge of its unity and commonalty in all its varieties. 


9. In this manner, seeing the same gold in its transformation into sundry sorts 
of jewels; we have the knowledge of the common essence of gold in all of 
them, notwithstanding their formal distinctions to sight. 


10. He who sees the flames only, and is unmindful of the fire which emits the 
flashes; is said to be ignorant of the material element, and conversant with its 
transient and evanescent flash only. 


11. The phenomenal world presents its aspect in various forms and colours, as 
the multiform and variegated clouds in the sky; and whoso places his faith and 
reliance on their reality and stability, has his mind always busied with those 
changeful appearances. 


12. He who views the flame as the same with its fire, has the knowledge of the 
fire only in his mind, and does not know the duality of the flame, as a thing 
distinct from its unity. 


13. He who is freed from his knowledge of dualities, has his mind restricted to 
the one and sole unity; he has a great soul that has obtained the obtainable 
one, and is released from the trouble of diving into the depth of the duality 
and plurality of all visible objects. 


14. Get rid of thy thoughts of the endless multiplicities and varieties of things, 
and keep thy mind fixed steadily within the cavity of thy pure intellect, and 
there employ it in the meditation of the supreme Intellect, in privation of the 
thoughts of all sensible objects. (This is the Buddhistic meditation of the soul 
only, by abstraction of the mind from all objects of sense). 


15. When the silent soul forms in itself its effort of volition, then there rises in 
it the power of its versatile desires, like the force of the fluctuating winds 
rising from the bosom of the quiet air. 


16. Then there rises the willful mind from it, as a distinct and independent 
thing of itself, and thinks in itself as the undivided and universal Mind of the 
mundane world. 


17. Whatever the volitive mind wills to do in this world, the same comes to 
take place immediately, agreeably to the type formed in its volition. 


18. This mind passes under the various names of the living principle, the 
understanding, the egoism, the heart, efc.; and becomes as minute as an 
animalcule and an aquatic mollusc, and as big as a mountain and fleeter than 
the swiftest winds. 


19. It forms and sustains the world at its own will, and becomes the unity and 
plurality at its own option; it extends itself to infinity, and shows itself in the 
endless diversity of objects which fill its ample space. 


20. The whole scenery of the universe, is nothing otherwise than a display of 
the eternal and infinite mind; it is neither a positive reality nor a negative 
unreality of itself, but appears to our view like the visionary appearance in a 
dream. 


21. The phenomenal world is a display of the realm of the divine mind, in the 
same manner as the Utopia and Elysium, display the imaginary dominions 
formed in the minds of men; and as every man builds the airy castle of his 
mind. 


22. As our knowledge of the existence of the world in the divine mind alone, 
serves to remove our fallacy of the entity of the visible world; so if we look 
into the phenomenal in its true light, it speedily vanishes into nothing. 


23. When we do not consider the visibles in their true colour, but take them in 
their false colour as they present themselves to view; we find them to ramify 
themselves into a thousand shapes, as we see the same sea-water in its 
diversities of the various forms of foam and froth, of bubbles and billows, of 
waves and surges, and of tides and whirlpools. 


24. As the sea bears its body of waters, so doth the mind show itself in the 
shape of its various faculties, (which are in constant motion like the waves of 
water); the mental powers are always busy with their manifold functions 
under the influence of the supreme intellect, without affecting its tranquillity. 
(The movements of the mental powers, can never move the quiet intellect to 
action). 


25. Yet the mind doth nothing otherwise of itself and apart from the dictates 
of the intellect, whether in its state of sleeping or waking, or in its bodily or 
mental actions. 


26. Know that there is nothing anew, in whatever thou dost or seest or thinkest 
upon; all of which proceed from the inherent intellect which is displayed in all 
things, and in all the actions and thoughts of men. 


27. Know all these to be contained in the immensity of Brahma, and besides 
whom there is nothing in existence; He abides in all things and categories, and 
remains as the essence of the inward consciousness of all. 


28. It is the divine consciousness that exhibits the whole of the imaginary 
world, and it is the evolution of the consciousness, that takes the name of the 
universe with all its myriads of worlds. 


29. Say how and whence rises your supposition of the difference of things 
from one another, and wherefore you take this thing as distinct from the other; 
when you will know that it is your consciousness alone that assumes these 
various forms, and represents itself to you under the various shapes and 
colours. (If therefore, there is no other object of which you are conscious 
besides our consciousness itself, (i.e., if there be nothing objective beside the 
subjective itself); then you have nothing to fear about the bondage of your 
soul to any object whatsoever; nor anything to care for your liberation from 
such bondage). 


30. Rama, relinquish at once the vanity of your egotism, together with all its 
concomitants of pride, self-esteem and others, and give up altogether your 
thoughts of bondage and liberation, (proceeding from the belief of your 
objectivity and subjectivity); and remain quiet and self-subdued in the 
continued discharge of your duties, like the holy Mahatmas of elevated souls 
and minds. 


CHAPTER CXV. 


Description of the Triple Conduct of Men. 


Argument. — Siva's interpretations of the three duties of action, Enjoyment 
and charity to his suppliant Bhringi. 


VASISHTHA said: — Take my advise, Rama, and strive to be an example or 
the greatest man in thy deeds, enjoyments, and bounty; and rely in thy 
unshaken endurance, by bidding defiance to all thy cares and fears. (i.e., 
Remain as a rock against all accidents of life). 


2. Rama asked: — Tell me Sir, what is the deed that makes the greatest actor, 
and what is that thing which constitutes the highest enjoyments; tell me also 
what is the great bounty, which you advise me to practice. 


3. These three virtues were explained long before by the God Siva, who holds 
the semi-circular disc of the crescent moon on his forehead; to the lord of the 
Bhringis, who was thereby released from all disease and disquiet. (Were the 
fair Bhringis the Fringis or Franks of modern times? If not, then who were 
this class of demi-gods?). 


4. The God who has the horn of the moon as a crown on his head, used to hold 
his residence of yore, on a northern peak of the north polar mountain, together 
with all his family and attendants. 


5. It happened that the mighty, but little knowing lord of the Bhringis, asked 
him one day, with his folded palms, and his body lowly bending down in 
suppliant mood before the godlike lord of Uma. (Uma is the same in sound 
and sense with Usha the dawn, appearing from the eastern ridge of the 
northmost mountain). 


6. Bhringi said: — Deign to explain to me, my lord, what I ask thee to tell for 
my knowledge; for thou knowest all things, and art the God of Gods. 


7. Lord! I am overwhelmed in sorrow, to see the boisterous waves of this deep 


and dark world in which we have been buffeting forever, without finding the 
calm and quiet harbour of truth. 


8. Tell me, my lord, what is that certain truth and inward assurance, whereon 
we may rely with confidence, and whereby we may find our rest and repose in 
this our shattered mansion of this world. 


9. The lord replied: — Place always your reliance in your unshaken patience, 
and neither care nor fear for anything else, and ever strive to be foremost in 
your action and passion and in your relinquishment of everything, (passion 
and relinquishment here are used in the senses of passivity and liberality). 


10. Bhringi rejoined: — Explain to me fully, my lord, what is meant by being 
the greatest in action and passion; and what are we to understand from the 
greatest liberality or abandonment of everything here. 


11. The lord replied: — He is said to be the greatest actor, who does his deeds 
as they occur to him, whether of goodness or of evil, without any fear or 
desire of fruition. (i.e., Who expects no reward of his acts of goodness, nor 
fears for the retribution of some heinous deed, which he could not avoid to 
do). 


12. He who does his acts of goodness or otherwise, who gives vent to his 
hatred and affection and feels both pleasure and pain, without reference to any 
person or thing, and without the expectation of their consequences, is said to 
be the greatest actor in the theatre of this world. 


13. He is said to act his part well, who does his business without any ado or 
anxiety, and maintains his taciturnity and purity of heart without any taint of 
egoism or envy. 


14. He is said to act his part well, who does not trouble his mind with the 
thoughts of actions, that are accounted as auspicious or inauspicious, or 
deemed as righteous or unrighteous, according to common opinion. (i.e., Best 
is the man that relies on his own probity, and is not guided by public opinion). 


15. He is said to perform well his part, who is not affected towards any person 
or thing, but witnesses all objects as a mere witness; and goes on doing his 
business, without his desiring or deep engagement in it. 


16. He is the best actor of his part, who is devoid of care and delight, and 
continues in the same tone and tenor of his mind, and retains the clearness of 
his understanding at all times, without feeling any joy or sorrow at anything. 


17. He does his duties best, who has the readiness of his wits at the fittest time 
of action; and sits unconcerned with it at other times, as a retired and silent 
sage or saint. (i.e., discharge your business promptly, but be no slave to 
service). 


18. He who does his works with unconcern and without assuming to himself 
the vanity of being the doer of it, is accounted as the best actor, that acts his 
part with his body, but keeps his mind quite unattached to it. 


19. He is reckoned as the best actor, who is naturally quiet in his disposition 
and never loses the evenness of his temper; who does good to his friends and 
evil to his enemies; without taking them to his heart. 


20. He is the greatest actor, who looks at his birth, life and death, and upon his 
rising and falling in the same light; and does not lose the equanimity of his 
mind under any circumstance whatever. 


21. Again, he is said to enjoy himself and his life the best, who neither envies 
anybody nor pines for anything; but enjoys and acquiesces to whatever is 
allotted to his lot, with cool composure and submission of his mind. 


22. He also is said to enjoy everything well, who receives with his hands what 
his mind does not perceive; and acts with his body without being conscious of 
it and enjoys everything without taking it to his heart. 


23. He is said to enjoy himself best, who looks on at the conduct and 
behaviour of mankind, as an unconcerned and indifferent spectator; and looks 
upon everything without craving anything for himself. 


24. He whose mind is not moved with pleasure or pain, nor elated with 
success and gain, nor dejected by his failure and loss; and who remains firm in 
all his terrible tribulations, is the man who is said to be in the perfect 
enjoyment of himself. 


25. He is said to be in the best enjoyment of himself, who hails with an equal 
eye of complaisance his decay and demise, his danger and difficulty, his 
affluence and poverty, and looks on their returns and revolutions, with an eye 
of delight and cheerfulness. 


26. He is called the man of greatest gratification, who sustains all the ups and 
downs of fortune with equal fortitude, as deep sea contains its boisterous 
waves in its fathomless depth. 


27. He is said to have the highest gratifications who is possessed of the virtues 


of contentment, equanimity and benevolence, (Jit., want of malice); and which 
always accompany his person, as the cooling beams cling to the disk of the 
moon. 


28. He too is greatly gratified in himself, who tastes the sour and sweet, the 
bitter and pungent with equal zest; and relishes a savoury and an unsavoury 
dish with the same taste. 


29. He who tastes the tasteful and juicy, as also the untasteful and dry food 
with equal zest, and beholds the pleasant as well as unpleasant things with 
equal delight, is the man that is ever gratified in himself. 


30. He to whom salt and sugar are both alike, and to whom both saline as well 
as saccharine victuals are equally palatable; and who remains unaltered both 
in his happy and adverse circumstances; is the man who enjoys the best bliss 
of his life in this world. 


31. He is in the enjoyment of his highest bliss, who makes no distinction of 
one kind of his food from another; and who yearns for nothing that he can 
hardly earn. (Happy is he, who does not itch beyond his reach). 


32. He enjoys his life best, who braves his misfortune with calmness, and 
brooks his good fortune, his joyous days and better circumstances with 
moderation and coolness. 


33. He is said to have abandoned his all, who has given up the thoughts of his 
life and death, of his pleasure and pain, and those of his merits and demerits at 
once from his mind. 


34. He who has abandoned all his desires and exertions, and forsaken all his 
hopes and fears, and effaced all his determinations from the tablet of his mind, 
is said to have relinquished everything in this world, and to have freed himself 
from all. 


35. He who does not take to his mind the pains which invade his body, mind 
and the senses, is said to have cast away from himself, all the troubles of his 
mortal state. (Because the mind only feels the bodily and sensuous pains, and 
its unfeelingness of them is its exemption from troubles). 


36. He is accounted as the greatest giver, (forsaker), of his all, who gives up 
the cares of his body and birth, (life); and has abandoned the thoughts of acts, 
deemed to be proper or improper for himself. (These are the social, civil, 
ceremonial and religious acts, which are binding on worldly people). 


37. He is said to have made his greatest sacrifice, who has sacrificed his mind 
and all his mental functions and endeavours, before the shrine of his self- 
abnegation. 


38. He who has given up the sight of the visibles from his view, and does not 
allow the sensibles to obtrude upon his senses, is said to have renounced all 
and everything from himself. 


39. It was in this manner that the lord of gods Mahadeva, gave his instructions 
to the lord of the Bhringis; and it is by your acting according to these precepts, 
that you must, O Rama! attain to the perfection of your self-abnegation. 


40. Meditate always on the everlasting and immaculate spirit, that is without 
its beginning and end; which is wholly this entire immensity and has no part 
nor partner, nor representative nor representation of itself. By thinking in this 
way, you become immaculate yourself, and come to be extinct in the self- 
same Brahma, where there is all peace and tranquillity. 


41. Know one undecaying Brahma, as the soul and seed of all various works 
or productions that are proceeded from him. It is his immensity which spreads 
unopened throughout the whole existence; as it is the endless sky which 
comprehends and manifests all things in itself. 


42. It is not possible for anything at all, whether of positive or potential 
existence, to subsist without and apart from this universal essence of all, rely 
secure with this firm belief in your mind, and be free from all fears in the 
world. 


43. O most righteous Rama, look always to the inner soul within thyself, and 
perform all thy outward actions with the outer members of thy body, by 
forsaking the sense of thy egoism and personality; and being thereby freed 
from all care and sorrow, thou shalt attain to thy supreme felicity. 


CHAPTER CXVI. 


Melting down of the Mind. 


Argument. — The Dissolation of the Mind and its Affections, as the only way 
for salvation of the soul. 


Rama said: — O all-knowing sage, please to tell me what becomes of the 
essence of the soul after one's egoism is lost in his mind, and both of them are 
dissolved into nothing. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — However great and predominant is one's egoism over 
himself, and how much so ever its concomitant evils of pride and ignorance, 
may Overpower on man; yet they can never touch the pure essence of the soul, 
as the water of the lake cannot come in contact with the lotus-leaf. 


3. The purity of the soul appears vividly in the bright and placid countenance 
of a man, after his egoism and its accompanying faults are all melted down in 
his mortified mind. 


4. All the ties of our passions and affections are cut asunder and fall off, upon 
breaking the string of our desires, our anger becomes weakened, and our 
ignorance wears out by degrees (our desire or greediness being the root of all 
evils). 


5. Our cupidity is weakened and wearied, and our covetousness flies away far 
from us; our limbs become slackened, and our sorrows subside to rest. 


6. It is then that our afflictions fail to afflict as our joys cease to elate us; we 
have then a calm everywhere and a coldness in our heart. 


7. Joy and grief now and then overcast his countenance, (as a cloud and sun- 
beam hide the face of the sky); but they cannot over shadow his soul, which is 
bright as eternal day. 


8. The virtuous man becomes a favourite of the Gods, after his mind is melted 


down with its passions; and then there rises the calm evenness of his soul, 
resembling the cooling beams of the moon. 


9. He bears a calm and quiet disposition, offending and opposing to none, and 
therefore, loved and honored by everyone; he remains retired and assiduous to 
his task, and enjoys the serenity of his soul at all times. 


10. Neither wealth nor poverty, nor prosperity or adversity, however opposite 
they are to one another; can ever affect or mislead or elate or depress the 
minds of the virtuous, (who have already melted them down in themselves). 


11. Accursed is the man that is drowned in his ignorance, and does not seek 
the salvation of his soul, which is easily obtainable by the light of reason, and 
which serves to save him from all the difficulties of this world. (Reliance in 
the immortality of the soul, supports a man amidst all earthly calamities). 


12. He that wants to obtain his longed for felicity, by getting over the waves 
of his miserable transmigrations in the vast ocean of this world; must always 
inquire in himself as what am I, and what is this world and what am I to be 
afterwards; what means this short lived enjoyments here, and what are the 
fruitions of my future state. These inquiries are the best expedients towards 
the salvation of the soul. 


CHAPTER CXVILI. 


Dialogue between Manu and Ikshaku. 


Argument: — Manu's Exposition of the Inquiries, what am I, efc., to Ikshaku. 


VASISHTHA said: — Know, Rama, that the renowned king Ikshaku was the 
first founder of your race; and learn, O thou progeny of that monarch, the 
manner in which he obtained his liberation. 


2. Once on a time, when this monarch was reigning over his kingdom, he 
came to think upon the state of humanity in one of his solitary hours. 


3. He thought in himself as to what might be the cause of the decay, disease, 
and death, as also of the sorrow, pleasure and pain, and likewise, of the errors 
to which all living beings are subject in this mortal world. 


4. He pondered long upon these thoughts, but was unable to find out the cause 
he so earnestly sought, and happening to meet the sage Manu one day, coming 
to him from Brahmé-loka or the seat of Brahmans, he proposed the same 
queries to him. 


5. Having honoured the lord of creatures, as he took his seat in his court; he 
said to him to be excused for asking him some questions to which he was 
impelled by his impatience. 


6. It is by thy favour Sir, that I take the liberty of asking thee the question, 
regarding the origin of this creation, and the original state in which it was 
made. 


7. Tell me, what is the number of these worlds, and who is the master and 
owner thereof; and when and by whom is it said to be created in the vedas. 


8. Tell me, how I may be extricated from my doubts and erroneous opinions 
regarding this creation, and how I may be released from them like a bird from 
its net. 


9. Manu replied: — I see O king, that you have after a long time come to 
exercise of your reasoning, as it is shown by your proposing to me so 
important a question as this. 


10. All this that you see is nothing real, (they are merely phenomenal and 
unsubstantial); they resemble the fairy castles in the air, and the water in the 
mirage of sandy deserts. So also, anything which is not seen in reality, is 
accounted nothing in existence. 


11. The mind also which lies beyond the six senses, is reckoned as nothing in 
reality; but that which is indestructible, is the only thing that is said to exist, 
and is called the Tatsat, the only being in reality. 


12. All these visible worlds and successive creations, are but unsubstantial 
appearances in the mirror of that real substance. 


13. The inherent powers of Brahma, evolve themselves as shining sparks of 
fire; and some of these assume the forms of the luminous worlds; while others 
appear in the shapes of living souls. 


14. Others again take many other forms which compose this universe; and 
there is nothing as bondage or liberation here, except that the undecaying 
Brahma is all in all; nor is there any unity or duality in nature, except the 
diversity displayed by the Divine Mind, from the essence of his own 
consciousness, (samvid). 


15. As it is the same water of the sea, which itself is in the various forms of its 
waves; so doth the Divine Intellect display itself in everything, and there is 
nothing else beside this. Therefore, leave aside your thoughts of bondage and 
liberation and rest, secure in this belief from the fears of the world. (This is 
pantheistic belief of one God in all). 


CHAPTER CXVIILI. 


Continuation of the same. 


Argument: — Manu's answers to the other questions of Ikshaku as, “Whence 
is this creation, etc.” 


MANU continued: — It is by the divine will, that the living souls of beings 
are evolved from the original intellect, (in which they are contained), as the 
waves rise from the main body of waters contained in the ocean. 


2. These living souls, retain the tendencies of their prior states in former 
births, and are thereby led to move in their course of light or ignorance, etfc., 
in this world, and to accordingly subject either to happiness or misery, which 
is felt by the mind and never affects the soul itself. 


3. The invisible soul is known in the knowable mind, which is actuated by it, 
(the soul); as the invisible node of Rahu, becomes visible to us in the eclipse 
of the moon, (which is affected by it). (So the mind acting under the impulse 
of the soul, becomes liable to pain or pleasure according to its desert). 


4. Neither the preceptor of Sdstras nor the lectures of our spiritual preceptors, 
can show the supreme spirit before our sight; but it is our spirit which shows 
us the holy spirit, when our understanding rests in its own true essence, (apart 
from its egoism and meism). 


5. As travellers are seen to be journeying abroad with their minds, free from 
all attainment and aversion to any particular object or spot; so the self- 
liberated souls are found to sojourn in this world, quite unconcerned even 
with their bodies and the objects of their senses. 


6. It is not for good and Godly men, either to pamper or famish their bodies, 
or quicken or weaken their senses; but to allow them to be employed with 
their objects at their own option. 


7. Be of an indifferent mind, (uddsina), with regard to your bodies and all 


external objects; and enjoy the cool composure of your soul, by betaking 
yourself entirely to your spirituality. 


8. The knowledge that, “I am an embodied being,” is the cause of our bondage 
in this world; and therefore, it is never to be entertained by them, that are 
seekers of their liberation. 


9. But the firm conviction that, “I am no other than an intellectual being, and 
as rarefied as the pure air”; is the only belief that is able to extricate our souls 
from their bondage in this world. 


10. As the light of the sun pierces and shines, both within and without the 
surface of a clear sheet of water; so doth the light of the Holy spirit, penetrate 
and shine both inside and outside of the pure souls of men, as well as in 
everything else. 


11. As it is the variety of formation, that makes the various kinds of 
ornaments out of the same substance of gold; so it is the various dispositions 
of the one soul, that makes the difference of things in the world. (The same 
soul exhibiting itself in sundry forms). 


12. The world resembles the vast ocean, and all its created are like the waves 
upon its surface; they rise for a moment, only to be succumbed to the latent 
flame of their insatiable desires. 


13. Know all the worlds to be absorbed in the vast ocean of the universal soul 
of God, as all things are devoured by death or time, (Kala), and lie buried like 
the ocean itself in the insatiable womb of Agastya or Eternity. 


14. Cease to consider the bodies of men as their souls, and to behold the 
visibles in a spiritual light; rely solely in thy spiritual self, and sit retired from 
all except alone with thyself. 


15. Men are seen foolishly to wail for the loss of their souls, though lying 
within themselves; as a fond mother moans on missing her child, forgetful of 
its sleeping upon her lap. (We miss our souls though situated within 
ourselves). 


16. Men bewail for themselves as lost upon the loss of their bodies, and 
exclaim as it saying, “Oh, I am dead and gone;” and so on, not knowing that 
their souls are ever undecaying and imperishable. 


17. As the fluctuation of water shows many forms upon its surface, so the will 
of God exhibits the forms of all things in the divine Intellect. (Just as the 


active principle of our imagination, represents endless varieties of scenes in 
the mirror of our minds). 


18. Now king, keep the steadiness of your mind, repress thy imagination and 
the flights of thy fancy; call thy thoughts home and confine them to thyself; 
remain calm and cool and unperturbed amidst all perturbations, and go and 
rule thy realm with thy self-possession. 


CHAPTER CXIX. 


The same subject continued. 


Argument. — On the Expansion of Divine Powers, and the Perfection of 
Human Soul. 


MANU resumed: — The Lord with his creative power exerts his active 
energy, and plays the part of a restless boy (in his formation of the worlds); 
and again, by his power of re-absorption, he engulphs all into himself and 
remains in his lonesome soliety. 


2. As it is his volition that gives rise to his active energy for action, so it is his 
nolition that causes the cessation of his exertion, and the intromission of the 
whole creation in himself. 


3. As the light of the luminous sun, moon and fire, and as the lustre of brilliant 
gems spread themselves on all sides; and as the leaves of trees put forth of 
themselves, and as the waters of a cataract scatter their liquid particles all 
about. 


4. So it is the lustration of divine glory, which displays itself in the works of 
creation; which appears to be intolerable to the ignorant, who know not that it 
is the self-same god though appearing to be otherwise. 


5. O! it is a wondrous illusion that has deluded the whole world, which does 
not perceive the divine spirit, that pervades every part of the universe. 


6. He who looks on the world as a scenery painted in the tablet of the Divine 
Intellect, and remains unimpressible and undesirous of everything, and quite 
content in his soul, has put an invulnerable armour upon himself (which no 
dart of error has the power to pierce). 


7. How happy is he who having nothing, no wealth nor support, has yet his all 
by thinking himself as the all-intelligent soul. 


8. The idea that this is pleasurable and the other is painful, being the sole 
cause of all pains and anxiety, it is the consuming of these feelings by the fire 
of our indifference to them, that prevents the access of pain and affliction unto 
us. 


9. Use, Oh King! the weapon of your restless anaesthesia, (samddhi), and cut 
in twain the feeling of the agreeable and disagreeable, and pare asunder your 
sensation of love and hatred by the sword of your manly equanimity. 


10. Clear the entangled jungle of ceremonious rites, (karma kanda), by the 
tool of your disregard of the merit or demerit of acts, (dharma adharma); and 
relying in the tenuity of your soul (as rarer than the rarefied air), shake off all 
sorrow and grief from you. 


11. Knowing thy soul to be full of all worldly possessions, and driving all 
differences from thy mind, bind thyself solely to reason, (viveka), and be free 
from all fabrications, (kalpand), of mankind; know the supreme bliss of the 
soul, and be as perfect and unfailing as itself, and being embodied in the 
intellectual mind, remain quite calm and transparent, and aloof from all the 
fears and cares of the world. 


CHAPTER CXX. 


Continuation of the same. On the seven stages of Edification. 


Argument: — The three stages of the seekers of Liberation, and the three 
others of the Liberated. 


MANU continued: — Enlightenment of the understanding by the study of the 
Sdstras and attendance on holy and wise men, is said to be the first stage of 
Yoga by Yogis. (These seven stages have been spoken of before in other 
words in the Utpatti-prakarana). 


2. Discussion and reconsideration of what has been learnt before, is second 
stage of Yoga; the third is the rumination of the same in one's self and is 
known under the name of nididhydsana, or self-communion of meditation. 
The fourth is silent meditation in which one loses his desires and darkness in 
his presence before the light of God. (This is called the atmdsakshyat kara 
also; and all these four stages are expressed in the vedic text. [Sanskrit: 
dtmdvare svitavad mantabd nididhydsitava karttavasveti]). 


3. The fifth stage is one of pure consciousness and felicity, wherein the living- 
liberated-devotee remains in his partly waking and partly sleeping state. (This 
is half hypnotism). 


4. The sixth stage in one's consciousness of ineffable bliss, in which he is 
absorbed in a state of trance or sound sleep. (This is known as samddhi or 
hypnotism). 


5. One's resting in the fourth and succeeding stages, is called his liberation, 
and then the seventh stage is the state of an even and transparent light, in 
which the devotee loses his self-consciousness. 


6. The state above turya or fourth stage, is called nirvdna, or extinction in 
God; and the seventh stage of perfection relates to disembodied souls only and 
not to those of living beings. 


7. The first three stages relate to the waking state of man, and the fourth stage 
concerns the sleeping state, in which the world appears in the manner of a 
dream. 


8. The fifth stage is the stage of sound sleep, in which the soul is drowned in 
deep felicity; and the unconsciousness of one's self in the sixth stage, is also 
called his turya or fourth state; (because it is beyond the three states of 
waking, sleeping or dreaming and_ sound sleep.  [Sanskrit: 
jagatnidrasusuptéh}). 


9. The seventh stage is still above the turya state of self-unconsciousness; and 
which is full of divine effulgence, whose excellence no words can express nor 
the mind can conceive. 


10. In this state the mind being withdrawn from its functions, it is freed from 
all thoughts of the thinkables, and all its doubts and cares are drowned in the 
calm composure of its even temperament. 


11. The mind that remains unmoved amidst its passions and enjoyments, and 
is unchanged in prosperity and adversity, and retains full possession of itself 
under all circumstances, becomes of this nature both in its embodied and 
disembodied states of life and death. 


12. The man that does not think himself to be alive or dead, or to be a reality 
or otherwise; but always remains joyous in himself, is one who is verily called 
to be liberated in his life time. (The happy minded are accounted as liberated 
in life). 


13. Whether engaged in business or retired from it, whether living with a 
family or leading a single life, (.e., whether leading a social or solitary mode 
of life), the man that thinks himself as naught but the intellect, and has 
nothing to fear or care or to be sorry for in this world, is reckoned as liberated 
in this life. 


14. The man who thinks himself to be unconnected with anyone, and to be 
free from disease, desire, and affections; and who believes himself to be a 
pure aerial substance of the divine intellect, has no cause to be sorry for 
anything. 


15. He who knows himself to be without beginning and end, and decay and 
demise, and to be of the nature of pure intelligence; remains always quiet and 
composed in himself, and has no cause for sorrow at all. 


16. He that deems himself to belong to that intellect, which dwells alike in the 


minute blade of grass, as well as in the infinite space of the sky, and in the 
luminous sun, moon and stars, and as also in the various races of beings, as 
men, Nagas and immortals; has no cause whatever for his sorrow. 


17. Whoso knows the majesty of the divine intellect, to fill all the regions both 
above and below and on all sides of him, and reflects himself as a display of 
his endless diversity, how can he be sorry at all for his decay and decline. 


18. The man that is bound to (or enslaved by his desire), is delighted to have 
the objects he seeks; but the very things tending to his pleasure by their gain, 
prove to be painful to his heart at their loss. (Hence the wise are never elated 
or dejected, at either gain or loss of temporal things, but are ever pleased and 
content with their spiritual souls only which they can never lose). 


19. The presence or absence of some thing, is the cause of the pleasure or pain 
of men in general; but it is either the curtailment or want of desires that is 
practiced by the wise. (The diminishing of desires is practiced by Yogis in the 
fourth and its two succeeding stages; but its utter annihilation occurs only in 
the seventh and last stage of Yoga). 


20. No act of ours nor its result, (whether good or bad), conduces either to our 
joy or grief, which we do with unconcern or little desire or expectation of its 
reward. 


21. Whatever act is done with ardent employment of the members of the 
body, and the application of the whole heart, mind and soul to it, such an act 
tends to bind a man; otherwise, an indifferent action like a fried grain, does 
not germinate into any effect. 


22. The thought that I am the doer and owner of a deed, overpowers all bodily 
exertions, and sprouts fourth with results, that are forever binding on the doer. 
(i.e., an indifferent action may pass for nothing, but a conscious and meditated 
act is binding on the actor). 


23. As the moon is cool with her cooling beams; and the sun is hot by his 
burning heat; so a man is either good or bad according as the work he does. 


24. All acts which are done or left undone, are as fugacious as the flying 
cotton on cotton trees; they are easily put to flight by the breath of 
understanding, (Jndna or wisdom). All the acts of men are lost by 
discontinuance of their practice, (as in Jndna khanda). 


25. The germ of knowledge growing in the mind, increases itself day by day, 
as the corn sown in good ground soon shoots forth into the paddy plant. 


26. There is one universal soul, that sparkles through all things in the world, 
as it is the same translucent water, that glistens in lake and large oceans and 
seas. 


27. Withhold, Sir, your notions of the varieties and multiplicities of things, 
and know these as parts of one undivided whole, which stretches through 
them as their essence and soul. 


CHAPTER CXXI. 


Continuation of the Same. 


Argument. — The causes of the Elevation and degradation of living being. 


MANU continued: — The soul is originally full of bliss by its nature, but 
being subject to ignorance, it fosters its vain desire for temporal enjoyment, 
whence it has the name of the living soul, (which is subjected to misery). This 
corresponds with the scriptural doctrine, that man was originally made in the 
image of his Maker, (i.e., full of bliss); but being tempted by delusion to taste 
the forbidden sweetness, became the mortal and miserable human soul. 


2. But when the desire of pleasure is lessened by the viveka or discriminative 
knowledge of man, he forsakes his nature of a living and mortal being, and his 
soul becomes one with the supreme spirit. (Man by his knowledge retrieves 
his godly nature). 


3. Do not, therefore, allow your desire of earthly enjoyment, to draw your soul 
up and down to heaven and hell; as a bucket tied in its neck with a cord, is 
cast down and again lifted up from a well. 


4. Those selfish folks who claim something as theirs from that of another, are 
grossly mistaken and led into error, and are destined like the dragging bucket 
to descend lower and lower. (The more niggardliness, the more degradation or 
the more selfishness, the greater baseness). 


5. He who gets rid of his knowledge that, this is I, and that is another, and that 
this is mine, and that is the others, gradually rises higher and higher according 
to his greater disinterestedness. (Disinterestedness characterises an elevated 
mind). 


6. Delay not to rely your dependance in your enlightened and elevated soul, 
stretching over and filling the whole space of the sky, end comprehending all 
the worlds in it. (This magnanimity is characteristic of the catholicity of 


Hindu religion). 


7. When the human mind is thus elevated and expanded beyond all limits, it 
then approaches the divine mind, and is assimilated to it. (This extinction is 
called its nirvdna). 


8. Anyone who has arrived to this state, may well think in himself to be able 
to effect whatever was done by the Gods Brahma, Vishnu, Indra, (by his 
intellectual body, Varuna, and others; who were of such elevated souls and 
minds). 


9. Whatever acts are attributed to any of the Gods or other persons, is no more 
than the display of divine pleasure in that form. 


10. Whoso is assimilated to the divine intellect, and has become deathless and 
unmindful of his mortal state, has a share of supreme felicity for his 
enjoyment, which bears no comparison; (unspeakable delight attends on the 
soul of the spiritualist). 


11. Continue to think this world as neither a vacuum nor a plenum; nor a 
material or spiritual substance. It is neither an intellectual being, nor a quite 
insensible thing. 


12. By thinking in this way, you will have composure of your disposition, or 
else there is no separate place or time or condition for your liberation or 
salvation. 


13. It is by the absence of our egoism and ignorance, that we get rid of our 
personal existence, and it is our contemplation of the nature of God, and his 
presence before us in our meditation, (sdkshat kdra), of him, that constitutes 
our moksha or liberation. 


14. It is the even delight and perpetual tranquillity of the soul, that constitutes 
our bliss and liberation; and these are to be obtained by means of calm and 
cool reasoning in the sense of Sdstras, avoiding all impatience and fickleness 
of our mind and temper, and the pleasure derived from our taste in poetry and 
light studies and trifling amusement. (It requires us to be free from the 
fluctuations of our desires and options of which there is no end). 


CHAPTER CXXII. 


The same. Manu's Admonition to Ikshaku. 


Argument. — On the Elevation of Humanity and its ultimate liberation. 


MANU continued: — Now the living liberated Yogi, in whatever manner he is 
clad, and however well or ill fed he may be, and wherever he may sleep or lay 
down his humble head, he rests with the joy of his mind, and in a state of 
perfect ease and blissfulness, as if he were the greatest emperor of the world. 
(Hence the fakirs are called shah sahibs by people). 


2. He breaks down all the bonds of his caste and creed, and the rites and 
restraints of his order by the battery of the Sdstra; and roves freed from the 
snare of society, as a lion breaking loose from his cage, and roaming rampant 
everywhere. (Here the Sdstra means the upanishads on the esoteric faith of 
spiritual freedom). 


3. He has his mind abstracted from all sensible objects, and fixed on an object 
which no words can express; (i.e., the unspeakable rapture of his mind); and 
he shines forth with a grace in his face, resembling the clearness of an 
autumnal sky. 


4. He is always as deep and clear, (i.e., grave in his mind and clear headed), as 
a large lake in a valley; and being rapt in holy and heavenly joy, he is always 
cheerful in himself, without his care for or want of anything else. 


5. He is ever content in his mind without having anything for his dependance, 
or any expectation of the reward of his actions; and is neither addicted to any 
meritorious or unworthy acts, nor subject to joy or grief for aught of pleasure 
or pain. 


6. As a piece of crystal does not receive or emit any other colour in its 
reflexion, excepting that of its pure whiteness; so the spiritualist is not imbued 
with the tinge of the effects of his actions. (i.e., The spiritualist does not 


benefit by the retribution of his acts). 


7. He remains indifferent in human society, and is not affected either by the 
torture or subministration of his body; he deems his pain and pleasure as 
passing on his shadow, and never takes them to his heart, as they do not touch 
his intangible soul. (It was by virtue of this indifference, that the holy saints 
did not shrink under their persecutions and martyrdom). 


8. Whether honoured or slighted by men, he neither praises nor is displeased 
with them; and remains himself either connected or unconnected with the 
customs and rules of society. 


9. He hurts nobody, nor is hurt by any; and may be free from the feelings of 
anger or affection, fear and joy, (and other passions which are allotted to 
humanity). 


10. No one can have the greatness of mind of his own nature, but it is possible 
for the author of nature, to raise the greatness of mind even in a boy. 


11. Whether a man quits his body (dies) in a holy place, or in the house of a 
low chandala; or whether one dies at this moment (in youth), or many years 
afterwards (in old age); 


12. He is released from his bondage to life, no sooner he comes to his 
knowledge of the soul and gets rid of his desires; because the error of his 
egoism is the cause of his bondage, and the wasting of it by his knowledge, is 
the means of his liberation. 


13. He the living liberated man is to be honoured and praised, and to be 
bowed down to with veneration, and regarded with every attention, by 
everyone who is desirous of his prosperity and elevation. (Because we honour 
ourselves by honouring the great). 


14. No religious sacrifice nor willful austerity, no charity nor pilgrimage, can 
lead us to that supremely holy state of human dignity; which is attainable by 
us only by our respectful attendance upon the godly, who have got rid of the 
troubles of the world. (Hence attendance on saints and at their holy shrines, is 
accounted as productive of our sanctity). 


15. Vasishtha said: — The venerable sage Manu, having spoken in this 
manner, departed to the celestial abode of his sire Brahma; and Ikshaku 
continued to act according to the precepts, which were delivered to him by the 
sacred seer. 


CHAPTER CXXIII. 


On the Difference between the Knowing and Unknowing. 


Argument. — Theoretical and Practical Yogas and the practices of Aerial 
journey, etc. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, that art most learned in spiritual knowledge, 
whether the living liberated man of this kind, (as you have described), attains 
to any extraordinary power; (or remains neutral with his theoretical 
knowledge of Yoga only). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The all-knowing sage, has sometimes a greater 
knowledge of one thing than another, and has his mind directed in one 
particular way than any other; but the learned seer of a contented mind, has 
his soul quite at rest in itself. 


3. There are many that have by their consummate knowledge of particular 
mantras, tantras, and the virtues of certain minerals, attained the power of 
aerial flight, etc.; but what is there that is extraordinary in these, (when these 
powers are in constant practice in the flight of ordinary birds and flies?). 


4. So the powers of self-expansion and contraction, etc., have been acquired 
by others by their constant practice of the same, (anima, laghima, and the 
like), which are disregarded by other seers in spiritual knowledge. 


5. There is this difference of these knowing seers, from the bulk of idle 
practitioners in Yoga, that they are content with their dispassionate mind, 
without placing any reliance in practice. 


6. This is verily the sign of the unconspicuous seer in Yoga, that he is always 
cool and calm in his mind, and freed from all the errors of the world; and in 
whom the traces of the passions of love and anger, sorrow and illusion and the 
mischances of life are scarcely visible. 


CHAPTER CXXIV. 


The Story of the Stag and the Huntsman. 


Argument. — Degradation of the divine soul of man to the state of the animal 
soul. 


VASISHTHA said: — Know now that the Lord (Divine soul), stops to take 
upon itself of the nature of the living or animal soul, as a Brahman (by birth) 
assumes the character of a vile sudra for some mean purpose, by disregarding 
the purity of its original nature. (This is the degradation of the lordly and 
blissful soul, to the state of the sensitive animal soul, by reason of its meaner 


propensity). 


2. There are two kinds of living beings, that come into existence in the 
beginning of the repeated creations; the one coming into existence without 
any causality, and are thence called to be causeless or uncaused, (such as that 
is they are not made like pots and the like, (ghatddi), by means of the 
instrumental causality of the potters wheel, stick, etc.) 


3. Thus the soul emanating from the Divine, is subjected to various 
transmigrations, and becomes many kinds of beings (in succession), according 
to its previous acts and propensities. (Thus, it is the tendency of the soul 
towards good or evil, that is the cause of its rise and fall or elevation or 
degradation). 


4. All beings emanate originally without any cause, from the source of the 
divine essence; and then their actions become the secondary cause of 
continuous transmigrations (until the end of the world). (All souls are bound 
to their revolutions in repeated births, until their final extinction in the deity 
on the last day of resurrection, or by their prior liberation by mukti or 
nirvana). 


5. The personal acts of men, are the causes both of their happiness as well as 
misery; and again, the will which is produced by the conscious knowledge of 


one's self, becomes the cause of the action, (i.e., the will proceeding from 
one's consciousness of himself, is the cause of his action, which again 
becomes the cause of his pleasure or pain as its result). 


6. Now this will or desire of any action or fruition, being likewise the cause of 
one's bondage to this world, it is to be got rid of for his liberation from it; and 
this what they call moksha, is no more than our release from the bond of our 
desire. (Every wish enchains the soul to earth, and drags it along to repeated 
birth). 


7. Be therefore, careful to make your choice of what is right and proper, from 
whatever is wrong and improper; and try betimes to contract your wishes 
within the narrowest scale. 


8. Do not let yourself to be possessor or possessed of anything or person, but 
give up thinking on anything, beside what remains after the thoughts of all 
other things. (i.e., Think alone of thine and the supreme soul, which remains 
in the absence of everything else). 


9. Anything to which the senses are addicted at all times, serves to bind the 
soul the more that it has its zest for the same; as also to unbind and release the 
mind in proportion to the distaste which it bears to it. (i.e., Love a thing to be 
enslaved to it, and hate the same to be saved from it). 


10. If there is anything which is pleasing to thy soul, know the same as thy 
binding string to the earth; if on the contrary, thou findest nothing to thy liking 
here, you are then freed from the trammels of all the trifles on earth. 


11. Therefore, let nothing whatever tempt or beguile thy mind, to anything 
existent in either the animate or inanimate kind; and regard everything from a 
mean straw to a great idol as unworthy of thy regard. 


12. Think not thyself to be either the doer or giver, or eater or offerer, of 
whatsoever thou doest or givest, or eatest or offerest in thy holy oblations of 
the Gods; but art quite aloof from all thy bodily actions, owing to the 
immaterial nature of thy self or soul. 


13. Concern not thyself with thy past acts, or thy cares for future, over which 
thou hast no command; but discharge well thy present duties, as they are and 
come to thy hand. 


14. All the feelings and passions of men, as their appetites, desires and the 
rest, are strung together with their hearts; and therefore, it is requisite to sever 
these heart strings with the weapon of a brave and strong heart, (because the 


feelings are fostered in weak hearts and minds only). 


15. Now break your sensuous mind by the power of your reasoning mind, and 
restrain its rage of running into errors; as they break the iron pegs by force of 
iron hammers (and remove one thing by another of the same kind, — similia 
similibus curantur.) 


16. So intelligent men rub out one dirt by another, and remove one poison by 
another poisonous substance; and so do soldiers oppose one steel by a weapon 
of the same metal. 


17. All living beings have a triple form, composed of the subtle, solid and the 
imperceptible spiritual bodies; now lay hold and rely on the last, in utter 
disregard of the two former. 


18. The solid or gross body, is composed of the hands, feet and other 
members and limbs; and subsist in this nether world upon its subsistence of 
food only. 


19. The living being has an intrinsic body also, which is derived from within; 
and is composed of all its wishes in the world, and is known as the mental or 
intellectual part of the body. 


20. Know the third form to be the transcendental or spiritual body, which 
assumes all forms, and is the simple intellectual soul; which is without its 
beginning or end, and without any alteration in its nature. 


21. This is the pure furya state, wherein you must remain steadfast as in that 
of your living liberation; and reject the two others, in which you must place 
no reliance. 


22. Rama said: — I have understood the three definite states, of waking, 
dreaming, and sound sleep, as they have been defined to me; but the fourth 
state of turya is yet left undefined, and I beg you to explain it clearly unto me. 


23. Vasishtha answered: — It is that state of the mind, in which the feelings of 
one's egoism and non-egoism, and those of his existence and inexistence, are 
utterly drowned under a total impassibility; and the mind is settled in one 
invariable and uniform tenor of tranquillity and transparency. 


24. It is that state in which the selfish feelings of mine and thine, are 
altogether wanting; and in which one remains as a mere witness and spectator 
of the affairs of life. This is the turya state of living liberation. (It is the state 
of a philosopher who lives to see and philosophise and mix with nothing). 


25. This is neither the state of waking, owing to its want of any wish or 
concern, nor it is the state of sound sleep, which is one of perfect insensibility. 


26. It is that calmness in which the wise man sees everything, to be going on 
in the world; and it is like the state of insensibility of the ignorant, in which 
they perceive no stir in the course of the world. (The calmness of the wise, 
like the dullness of others, is their turya also). 


27. The evenness of the mind after subsidence of every jot of its egotism in it, 
like the setting of the turbid waters underneath, is the turya state of the 
insouciance of the soul. 


28. Hear me relate to you an instance on this subject, which will confer as 
clear a light to your enlightened mind, as that of all seeing Gods. 


29. It happened once that a huntsman, roaming for his prey in some part of a 
forest, chanced to see a sage sitting silent in his solitude; and thinking it as 
something strange, he accosted him saying: — 


30. Have you seen, O sage, a wounded stag flying before me this way, with an 
arrow fixed in its back? 


31. The sage replied: — You ask me, where your stag has fled; but my friend, 
know that sages like ourselves and living in the forest, are as cool as blocks of 
stone (and insensible of every occurrence on earth). 


32. We want that egoism which enables one, in conducting the transactions of 
the world; and know my friend, that it is the mind, which conducts all the 
actions of the senses. (All actions of the organs of senses being under the 
direction of the mind, as well as all sensible perceptions under its attention). 


33. Know that the feeling of my egoism, has been long before dissolved in my 
mind; and I have no perception whatever of the three states of waking, 
dreaming and sound sleep. But I rest quiet in my fourth state of impossibility, 
wherein there is no vision of the visibles. 


34. The huntsman heard these words of the sage, but being quite at a loss to 
comprehend its meaning, he departed to his own way without uttering a word. 


35. I tell you therefore, O Rama, there is no other state beyond the fourth or 
turya quietism; it is that unalterable impassivity of the mind, which is not to 
be found in any other. 


36. The waking, dreaming and sound sleep, are the three palpable conditions 
of the mind; and these are respectively the dark, quiet and insensible states, in 


which the mind is situated in this world. 


37. The waking state presents us the dark complexion of the mind, for its 
susceptibility of all the passions and evils of life; and the sleeping state shows 
us its quiet aspect, for want of its cares and anxieties. 


38. The state of sound sleep is one of insensibility, and the state beyond these 
three bears the feature of death in it. Yet this dead like figure possesses the 
principle of life in it, which is diligently preserved by Yogis from harm and 
decay. 


39. Now Rama, the soul which remains in its quiet rest, after its renunciation 
of all desire, is said by sages to be in the coma or cool calmness of itself, and 
the liberated state of the holy and devout Yogi on earth. 


CHAPTER CXXV. 


The means of Attaining the Steadiness of the Turya State. 


Argument. — The means of attaining stability on Insouciance. 


VASISHTHA resumed: — Know Rama, that the conclusion which is arrived 
at in all works on spiritual philosophy, is the negation of everything except the 
entity of the supreme soul; and that there is no principle of ignorance, 
(avidya), nor that of delusion, (mdyd), as a secondary agent under one 
quiescent Brahma, who is ever without a second. 


2. The spirit of the Lord is always calm, with the serene brightness of the 
divine Intellect in itself; it is full of its omnipotence, and is attributed with the 
appellation of Brahma. 


3. The Divine Spirit is ascertained by some as the formless vacuum itself, and 
by others as omniscience, and is called as the Lord God by most people in the 
world. 


4. Do you avoid all these, O sinless Rama, and remain quite silent in yourself, 
and be extinct in the divine essence, by restraining the actions of your heart 
and mind and by the tranquillity of your soul. 


5. Have a quiet soul in yourself, and remain as a deaf and dumb man in your 
outward appearance; look always within yourself, and be full with the Divine 
Spirit. 


6. Discharge the duties of your waking state, as if you are doing them in your 
sound sleep; forsake everything in your inward mind, and do whatever comes 
to thee outwardly, without taking any into thy heart. 


7. The essence of the mind is only for one's misery, as its want is for his 
highest felicity; therefore, the mind must be drowned in the intelligent soul, 
by destroying the action of the mental powers altogether. 


8. Remain as cold as a stone, at the sight of anything, which is either 
delightsome or disgusting to thee; and by this means learn to subdue 
everything in the world under thy control. 


9. The objective is neither for our pleasure or pain, nor is it the intermediate 
state of the two; therefore, it is by diligent attention to the subjective, that we 
can attain the end of all our misery. (Live to thyself alone and unmindful of all 
others, in order to be completely blest). 


10. He who has known the supreme soul, has found within himself a delight; 
resembling the cooling beams of the full bright moon; and being possessed of 
the full knowledge of the essence of all things in the three worlds, performs 
his parts in a manner as he did not attend to them. 


CHAPTER CXXVI. 


Description of the Spiritual state. 


Argument: — The seven stages of Yoga Meditation, and the true state of 
spirituality. 
Rama said: — Tell me Sir, the practices of the seven stages of Yoga; and the 


characteristics of Yogis in every stage. 


2. Vasishtha related: — Know Rama, mankind to be divided into two classes 
of the zealous and resigned; (i.e., the active and the inactive); the one 
expectant of heavenly reward, and the other inclined to supreme felicity. 
Know now their different characters as follows: — 


3. Those that are addicted to enjoyments, think the quietude of nirvana as 
nothing to their purpose, and give preference to worldliness above the final 
bliss of others; and he that acts his part on this sense, is styled an active and 
energetic man. 


4. Such a man of the world bears his resemblance to a tortoise, which though 
it has its neck well hid in its shell, still stretches it out to drink the salt water 
of the sea it inhabits; until after many births, he gets a better life for his 
salvation (as when the tortoise is removed to a lake of fresh water). 


5. But he who reflects on the nothingness of the world, and the uselessness of 
his situation in it; such a man does not allow himself to be carried on by the 
current of his old and rotatory course of duties here in day after day. 


6. And he who reflects in himself, after being released from the burden of his 
business, on the delight of his rest after labour, he is the man who is said to 
repose in his quiescence. 


7. When a man comes to reconnoitre in himself, how he shall become 
dispassionate, and get over the boisterous ocean of the world; such a man is 
said to have come to his good and right sense, and to stand on the way to his 


tolerance. 


8. He who has an unfeelingness in his heart, of the very many thoughts that 
daily rise in his mind; and manages his gravest and greatest concerns, without 
being much concerned about them in his mind; each a man is said to taste the 
delight of his stayedness day by day. 


9. He who condemns the rustic amusements and mean employments of men; 
and instead of taking up the faults and failings of others for his merry talk, 
employs himself to meritorious acts. 


10. Whose mind, is engaged in agreeable tasks and unpainsome acts; who is 
afraid of sin, and disdains all pleasures and bodily enjoyments. 


11. Whose discourses are full of love and tenderness, and appropriate without 
any harshness; and whose speeches are suitable to the time and place in which 
they are delivered. 


12. Such a man is said to stand on the first step of Yoga, when he makes it his 
duty to attend the society of the good and great, whom he learns to imitate in 
his thoughts, words, and actions. 


13. He collects also the work on divine learning from everywhere, and reads 
with attention and diligence; he then considers their contexts, and lays hold on 
the tenets, which serve to save him from this sinful world. 


14. Such a man is said to have come upon the (first) stage of Yoga, or else he 
is a hypocrite who assumes the guise of a Yogi for his own interest only. The 
Yogi then comes to the next step of Yoga, which is styled the stage of 
investigation, — Vichara. 


15. He then hears from the mouths of the best pandits, the explanations of the 
Srutis and smritis, the rules of good conduct, and the manner of meditation 
and conduct of Yoga practice. 


16. He then learns the divisions of categories and distinction of things, 
together with the difference between actions that are to be done or avoided; all 
which being heard from the mouth of an adept in Yoga, will facilitate his 
course through the other stages, in like manner as the master of a house enters 
with facility into every apartment of his dwelling. (The guidance of a guru or 
spiritual guide, is essential to the practice of Yoga). 


17. He wears off his outer habit of pride and vanity, his jealousy and avarice, 
and the other passions which formed as it were an outer garment of his 


person, as a snake casts off his slough from him. 


18. Having thus purified his mind (from the vile passions), he attends to the 
service of his spiritual preceptors and holy persons, and makes himself 
acquainted with the mysteries of religion. (This is the second stage of Yoga, 
which is one of moral discipline and search after truth). 


19. He then enters into the third stage of unsociality or avoidance of all 
company, which he finds to be as agreeable to him as a bed of flowers. (Lit., a 
bedstead be strewn with flowers). 


20. Here he learns to fix his mind to its steadiness, according to the dictates of 
the Sdstras; and passes his time in talking on spiritual subjects, in society of 
hermits and devotees. 


21. He sits also with the dispassionate Vairdgis, and religious recluses, 
sanydsis, who are disgusted with the world; and relying on the firm rock of his 
faith, he wears out his long life with ease. 


22. He passes his moral life with cheerful delight of his loneliness, and 
pleasing tranquillity of his mind in his woodland retreat and wanderings. 


23. By study of holy books and performance of religious acts, he gets a clear 
view of things, as it generally attends upon the virtuous lives of men. 


24. The sensible man who has arrived to the third stage of his Yoga practice, 
perceives in himself two kinds of his unconnectedness with the world, as you 
will now hear from me. 


25. Now this disconnection of one with all others is of two sorts, one of which 
is his ordinary disassociation with all persons and things, and the other is his 
absolute unconnection with everything, including himself. (i.e., One's entire 
irrelation with both the subjective and objective). 


26. The ordinary unconnection is the sense of one's being neither the subject 
or object of his action, nor of his being the slayer of or slain by anybody; but 
that all accidents are incidental to his prior acts (of past lives), and all 
dependent to the dispensations of Providence. 


27. It is the conviction that, I have no control over my happiness or misery or 
pain or pleasure; and that all prosperity and adversity, employment and 
privation, and health and disease, ever betide me of their own accord. 


28. All union is for its disunion, and all gain is for its loss; so the health and 
disease and pain and pleasure come by turns, and there is nothing which is not 


succeeded by its reverse. Because time with its open jaws, is ever ready to 
devour all things. 


29. The negative idea of inexistence, which is produced in the mind, from our 
want of reliance in the reality of things; is the very sense which is conveyed 
by the phrase of our ordinary unconnection with all things. 


30. With this sort of the disunion of everything in the mind, and our union 
with the society of high minded men; and disassociation with the vile and 
unrighteous, and association with spiritual knowledge: — 


31. These joined with the continual exertion of our manliness in our habitual 
practice of these virtues, one assuredly arrives to the certain knowledge of 
what he seeks, (i.e., his god), as clearly as he sees a globe set in his hands. 


32. The knowledge of the supreme author of creation, sitting beyond the 
ocean of the universe, and watching over its concerns; impresses us with the 
belief, that it is not I, but God that does everything in the world, and that there 
is nothing that is done here by me, but by the great God Himself. 


33. Having left aside the thought of one's self agency on any act, whoso sits 
quiet, silent and tranquil in himself, such a one is said to be absolutely 
unconnected with everything in the world. 


34. He that does not reside within or without anything, nor dwells above or 
beneath any object; who is not situated in the sky, or in any side or part of the 
all-surrounding air and space; who is not in anything or in nothing, and 
neither in gross matter nor in the sensible spirit. 


35. Who is present and manifest in everything, without being expressed in 
any; and who pervades all things like the clear firmament, who is without 
beginning and end and birth and death. Whoso seeks this Lord of all, is said to 
be set in the best part of this stage. 


36. Contentment is as sweet fragrance in the mind, and virtuous acts are as 
handsome as the leaves of a flower; the heart string is as stalk beset by the 
thorns of cares and anxieties, and thralls with the gusts of dangers and 
difficulties. 


37. The flower of inward discrimination, is expanded like the lotus-bud, by 
the sun-beams of reason, and produces the fruit of resignation in the garden of 
the third stage of Yoga-practice. 


38. As it is by association with holy men, and by means of the assemblage of 


virtuous acts, that one arrives on a sudden to the first stage of Yoga: — 


39. So is this first step to be preserved with care, and grown up like a tender 
sprout, with the watering of reasoning at its root, (in order to lead it to the 
succeeding steps or stages). 


40. The Yoga practitioner, like a good gardener, must foster the rising plant of 
spiritual knowledge, by the daily application of reasoning to every part of it. 
(The parts of the plant of spirituality, are its dispassionateness, unworldliness 
and the like, which require to be reared up by proper reasoning). 


41. This stage being well managed, and all its parts being properly performed, 
introduces the succeeding stages, (all of which depend on the first as their 
basis). 


42. Now the better state of the third stage, as it has been already described, is 
one of all desires and arrogations in the mind of the Yogi. 


43. Rama said: — Now tell me Sir, what is the way of the salvation of an 
ignorant man, of one of a base birth, and addicted to baseness himself; who 
has never associated with the Yogis, nor received any spiritual instruction. 


44. Who has never ascended on any of the first, second or succeeding stages 
of Yoga, and is dead in the like state of ignorance in which he was born. 


45. Vasishtha replied: — The ignorant man that has never attained to any of 
the states of Yoga in his whole life, is carried by the current of his 
transmigration to rove in a hundred births, until he happens by some chance or 
other, to get some glimpse of spiritual light in any one of them. 


46. Or it may be that one happens to be dissatisfied with the world, by his 
association with holy men; and the resignation which springs thereby, 
becomes the ground of one of the stages of his Yoga. 


47. By this means, the man is saved from this miserable world; because it is 
the united voice of all the Sdstras, that an embodied being is released from 
death, no sooner he has passed through any one stage of Yoga (or union with 
his maker). 


48. The performance of a part only of some of the stages of Yoga, is enough 
for the remission of past sins; and for conducting the expurgated person to the 
celestial abode in a heavenly car. (The wicked man turning from his 
wickedness, and doing what is right and saveth his soul). 


49. He enjoys the Parnassian groves of Sumeru in company with his beloved, 


when the weight of his righteous acts, outweighs those of unrighteousness. 


50. The Yogi, released from the trap of his temporal enjoyments, and has 
passed his allotted period; expires in due time, to be reborn in the houses of 
Yogis and rich men, or in the private mansions of learned, good and virtuous 
people. 


51. Being thus born, he betakes himself to the habitual practice of the Yoga of 
his former birth; and has the wisdom to begin at once at the stage to which he 
was practiced, and which was left unfinished before, (hence arises the 
difference in the capacities of youth). 


52. These three stages, Rama, are designated the waking state; because the 
Yogi retains in them his perception of the differences of things, as a waking 
man perceives the visible to differ from one another. 


53. Men employed in Yoga acquire a venerable dignity (in their very 
appearance), which induce the ignorant to wish for their liberation also (in 
order to attain to the same rank). 


54. He is reckoned a venerable man, who is employed in all honorable deeds, 
and refrains from what is dishonourable, who is steadfast in the discharge of 
all his social duties, whether they are of the ordinary kind or occasional ones. 


55. He who acts according to customary usage, and the ordinances of Sdstras; 
who act conscientiously and according to his position; and thus dispenses all 
his affairs in the world, is verily called a venerable man. 


56. The venerableness of Yogis germinates in the first stage, it blossoms in the 
second, and becomes fruitful in the third stage of Yoga. 


57. The venerable Yogi dying in state of Yoga, comes first to enjoy the fruition 
of good desires for a long time (in his next birth); and then becomes a Yogi 
again (for the completion of his Yoga). 


58. The practice of the parts enjoyed in the three first stages of Yoga, serves to 
destroy at first the ignorance of the Yogi, and then sheds the light of true 
knowledge in his mind, as brightly as the beams of full-moon illume the sky 
at night. 


59. He who devotes his mind to Yoga, with his undivided attention from first 
to last, and sees all things in one even and same light, is said to have arrived 
to the fourth stage of Yoga. 


60. As the mistake of duality disappears from sight, and the knowledge of 


unity shines supremely bright; the Yogi is said in this state to have reached the 
fourth stage of Yoga, when he sees the world as a vision in his dream. 


61. The first three stages, are represented as the waking state of the Yogi; but 
the fourth is said to be the state of his dreaming, when the visibles disappear 
from his sight; as the dispersed clouds of autumn gradually vanish from sight, 
and as the scenes in a dream recede to nothingness. 


62. They are said to be in the fifth stage, who have their minds lying dormant 
in them, and insensible of their bodily sensations. This is called the sleeping 
state or hypnotism of Yoga meditation. 


63. In this state there is an utter stop of feelings, of the endless varieties of 
things and their different species, in the mind of the Yogi, who relies in his 
consciousness of an undivided unity only; and whose sense of a duality is 
entirely melted down and lost in the cheerfulness of his wakeful mind. 


64. The fifth stage is likewise, a state of sound sleep, when the Yogi loses all 
his external perceptions, and sits quiet with his internal vision within himself. 


65. The continued sedateness of his posture, gives him the appearance of his 
dormancy, and the Yogi continues in this position, the practice of the 
mortification of all his desires. 


66. This step leads gradually to the sixth stage, which is a state of insensibility 
both of the existence and inexistence of things as also of one's egoism and 
non-egoism (of his own entity and non-entity). 


67. The Yogi remains unmindful of everything, and quite unconscious of the 
unity or duality, and by being freed from every scruple and suspicion in his 
mind, he arrives to the dignity of living liberation. (This tetrastich is based on 
the sruti which says, — [Sanskrit: bhidyate hadayagranyi, chidyate 
svvammshyayah tasmindvashte pardvare}). 


68. The Yogi of this sort though, yet inextinct or living, is said to be extinct or 
dead to his sensibility; he sits as a pictured lamp which emits no flame, and 
remains with a vacant heart and mind like an empty cloud hanging in the 
empty air. 


69. He is full within and without him, with and amidst the fulness of divine 
ecstasy, like a full pot in a sea; and possessed of some higher power, yet he 
appears as worthless on the outside. 


70. After passing his sixth grade, the Yogi is led to the seventh stage; which is 


styled a state of disembodied liberation, from its purely spiritual nature. 


71. It is a state of quietude which is unapproachable, (i.e., inexpressible), by 
words, and extends beyond the limits of this earth; it is said to resemble the 
state of Siva by some, and that of Brahma by others. (The two views of the 
Tantrikas and Vedantists). 


72. By some it is said to be the state of the androgyne deity, or the 
indiscriminate of the male and female powers; while others have given many 
other denominations to it, according to their respective fancies. (The other 
systems have different appellations to designate this state). 


73. The seventh is the state of the eternal and incomprehensible God, and 
which no words can express nor explain in any way. Thus, Rama, have I 
mentioned to you the seven stages of Yoga, (each branding the other in its 
perfections). 


74. By practice of these perfections, one evades the miseries of this world; 
and it is by subjection of the indomitably elephantine senses, that one can 
arrive to these perfections. 


75. Hear me relate to you Rama, of a furious elephant, which with its 
protruded tusks, was ever ready to attack others. 


76. And as this elephant was about to kill many men, unless it could be killed 
by some one of them; so are the senses of men like ferocious elephants of 
destruction to them. 


77. Hence, every man becomes victorious in all the stages of Yoga, who has 
the valour of destroying this elephant of its sensuality the very first step of it. 


78. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, who is this victorious hero in the field of battle, 
and what is the nature of this elephant that is his enemy, and what are these 
grounds of combat where he encounters him, and the manner how he foils and 
kills this great foe of his. 


79. Vasishtha replied: — Rama! it is our concupiscence which has the 
gigantic figure of this elephant, and which roams at random in the forest of 
our bodies, and sports in the demonstrations of all our passions and feelings. 


80. It hides itself in the covert of our hearts, and has our acts for its great 
tusks; its fury is our ardent desire of anything, and our great ambition is its 
huge body. 


81. All the scenes on earth are the fields for its battle, where men are often 


foiled in their pursuit of any. 


82. The elephant of concupiscence kills members of miserly and covetous 
men, in the state of their wish or desire, or exertions and effort, or longing and 
hankering after anything. 


83. In this manner does this fierce greediness, lurk in the sheath of human 
breast under the said several names, and it is only our forbearance from those 
desires, that serves as the great weapon of their destruction. 


84. This ubiquious desire of our possession of everything in the world, is 
conquered by reflection on the ubiquity of the soul in all of them; and that the 
unity of my soul, stretches over and grasps all things that I covet. 


85. He is doomed to suffer under the colic pain of this venomous avarice, who 
minds to continue in this world, in the manner as it goes on with the rest of 
mankind. 


86. It is the mitigation of the smart poison of avarice, that is our highest 
wisdom, and it is our liberation, when the calm and cooling countenance of 
inappetency appears to our sight. 


87. Words of advice stick to the sapient mind, as drops of oil adhere on glass 
mirror; and that our indifference to the world is the only preventive of its 
thorns, and is the best advice to the wise. 


88. It is as advisable to destroy a desire by the weapon of indifference, no 
sooner it rises in the breast, as it is proper to root out the sprout of a poisonous 
plant, before it spreads itself on the ground. 


89. The concupiscent soul is never freed from its miserliness; while the mere 
effort of one's indifference, makes it set quiet in itself (without cringing at 
others). 


90. It is by your carelessness about everything, and by your lying down as 
supine as a dead carcass, that you can kill your desire by the weapon of your 
indifference, as they catch and kill fishes with hooks (by sitting silent beside 
some pond or lake). 


91. Let this be mine or that I may have it, is what is called desire by the wise; 
and the want of every desire for wealth, efc., is called resignation by them. 


92. Know that the remembrance of something, is alike the desire of having the 
same in one's possession again; and it includes both what was enjoyed before 
or next. 


93. O high minded Rama, you must learn to remain as a block in your mind, 
by forgetting whatever you think of or otherwise; all of which must be buried 
in oblivion, for your estrangement from the world. (Retire, the world shut out, 
imagination's airy wing repress. — Young). 


94. Who will not lift up his arms, and have his hairs standing at their end, to 
hear and reflect in himself that, want of desire is the summum bonum of every 
one's desire. (Desire of nothing is the most desirable thing, is a paralogism in 
logic). 


95. It is by sitting quite silent and quiet, that one attains to the state of his 
supreme felicity, a state before which the sovereignty of the world seems as a 
straw. 


96. As a traveller traverses on foot through many regions, in order to reach to 
his destination, so the Yogi passes through all his ordinary acts, to reach his 
goal of final bliss. 


97. What is the good of using many words, when it can be expressed in a few; 
that our desire is our strongest bondage, and its want our complete liberation. 


98. Now Rama, rest quiet in your joy, with knowing that all this creation is 
full of the increate, everlasting, undecaying and tranquil spirit of God; and sit 
quiet and delighted in yourself with viewing the visibles in their spiritual 
sense. 


99. Know that it is the ignoring of everything and the quiet posture of the 
Yogi, which is called as Yoga by the spiritual; and continue to discharge your 
duties even in your Yoga state, until you get rid of them by the privation of 
your desires. 


100. It is also the unconsciousness of one's self, which is likewise styled Yoga 
by the wise; and it consists of the entire absorption of one's self in the 
supreme, by wasting away his mind and all its operations. 


101. Again, this self-absorption is the conceiving of one's self, as he is the all- 
pervasive spirit of Siva, which is increate, self-conscious and ever benevolent 
to all. This conception of one's self is tantamount to his renunciation of 
everything besides himself. 


102. He who has the sense of his egoism and meism, (i.e., that this is I, and 
these are mine), is never released from the miseries of life; it is the negation of 
this sensation that produces our liberation, and therefore, it is at the option of 
everybody, to do either this or that for his bondage or salvation. 


CHAPTER CXXVII. 


Admonition to Bharadwaja. 


Argument: — Relation of the Quietude of Rama, and the Queries of 
Bharadwaja; with further description of states of waking and others, and of 
the ultimate turiya condition of the fourth stage of Yoga. 


BHARADWAJA asked: — Valmiki saying: — Tell me Sir, what did Rama 
do after hearing the lecture of the sage; whether he with his enlightened 
understanding put any other question, or remained in his ecstatic quietude 
with his full knowledge of Yoga and the supreme soul. 


2. And what did next that supremely blest Yogi, (Vasishtha), do, who is 
adored by all and honoured even by Gods; who is a personification of pure 
understanding, and free from the state of birth and death; who is fraught with 
every good quality and kindly disposed forever to the welfare and 
preservation of the peoples in all the three worlds. 


3. Valmiki replied: — After hearing the lecture of Vasishtha, combining the 
essence of the vedanta philosophy, the lotus-eyed Rama became perfectly 
acquainted with the full knowledge of Yoga. 


4. He felt the failing of his bodily strength, and the falling of the members of 
his body, he stared with his glaring eyes, and his clear intellect was shrouded 
under a cloud. He awoke in a moment from his entranced state, and felt a 
flood of rapturous joy within himself. 


5. He forgot the fashion of putting his questions, and hearing their answers; 
his mind was full with the ambrosial draught of delight, and the hairs of his 
body stood up like prickles in his horripilation. 


6. An inexpressibly ineffable light overspreads his intellect with its unusual 
glare; which cast the bright prospects of the eight dignities of Yoga into utter 
shade. (The eight dignities, — (ashta-siddhis), are so many perfections 


arrived at by practice of Yoga). 


7. In this way did Rama attain the supereminent state of Siva, in which he sat 
sedate without uttering a word. 


8. Bharadwaja said: — Oh! how much I wonder at such a high dignity, which 
Rama had attained; and how much I regret at the impossibility of its 
attainment, by a dull and ignorant sinner as myself. 


9. Tell me, O great sage, how it may be possible for me to attain to that stage 
of perfection, which it is impossible for the gods Brahma and others to arrive 
at any time; and tell me likewise, how I may get over the unfordable ocean of 
earthly troubles. 


10. Valmiki replied: — It is by your perusal of the history of Rama, from its 
first to last, and by your following the dictates of Vasishtha as given in these 
lectures; as also by your consideration of their true sense and purport in your 
understanding, that you may be able to attain to the state that you desire. This 
is all that I can tell you at present. 


11. The world is an exhibition of our ignorance, and there is no truth in aught 
that we see in it; it is a display of our error only, wherefore it is entirely 
disregarded by the wise, and so much regarded by fools. 


12. There is no entity of anything here, beside that of the divine Intellect; why 
then are you deluded by the visibles, learn their secrets and have a clear 
understanding. (or have the clearness of your understanding). 


13. The perception of the delusive phenomenals, resembles the waking dream 
of day dreamers; and he alone is said to be waking, who has the lamp of his 
intellect ever burning within himself. 


14. The world is based on vacuity, and it ends in vacuum also; its midmost 
part being vacuous, likewise, there is no reliance placed upon it by the 
intelligent and wise. 


15. Our primeval ignorance, (avidyd), being accompanied by our primordial 
desires, it presents all what is inexistent as existing in our presence; just as our 
fancy paints an Utopia or fairy city to our view, and as our sleep shows its 
multifarious dreams before us. 


16. Being unpracticed to taste the sweet plantain of your beneficent intellect, 
you are deluded greedily to devour the delirious drug of your desire, and make 
yourself giddy with draughts of its poisonous juice. 


17. He who lays hold on true knowledge for his support, never falls down into 
the pit of ignorance during his wakeful state; and those who depend on their 
subjective consciousness alone, (as in the turiya or fourth stage of Yoga), 
stand above all the other states (of fallibility). 


18. So long as the adepts in Yoga, do not plunge themselves (/it., — their 
souls), in the fresh and sweet waters of the great fountain of their 
consciousness; they must be exposed to the boisterous waves of the dangerous 
ocean of this world. (Spiritual knowledge alone saves a man from the troubles 
of life). 


19. That which has no existence before, nor will remain to exist afterwards 
(such as all created and perishable things in the world); must be understood to 
be inexistent in the interim also, as our night dreams and fleeting thoughts that 
are never in being, and so is this world and whatever is seen in it. 


20. All things are born of our ignorance, as the bubbles are swollen by the air; 
they glisten and move about for a moment, and then melt into the sea of our 
knowledge. 


21. Find out the stream of the cooling waters of your consciousness, and 
plunge yourself deep into it; and drive out all external things from you, as 
they shut out the warm and harmful sun-beams from their houses. 


22. The one ocean of ignorance surrounds and over floods the world, as the 
single salt sea girds and washes the whole island; and the distinctions of ego 
and tu, etc., are the waves of this salt sea of our erroneousness. 


23. The emotions of the mind, and its various feelings and passions, are the 
multiform billows of this sea of ignorance; our egoism or selfishness is the 
great whirlpool, in which the self-willed man is hurled of his own accord. 


24. His love and hatred are the two sharks, that lay hold of him in their jaws; 
and drag him at last into the depth (or to his death), which nobody can 
prevent. 


25. Go and plunge yourself in the calm and cooling sea of your solitude, and 
wash your soul in the nectareous waters of your ambrosial soliety; dive and 
dive deep in the depth of unity, and fly from the salt sea of duality, and the 
brackish waves of diversities. 


26. Who is lasting in this world, and who is passing from it, who is related to 
anyone, and what does one derive from another; why are you drowned in your 
delusion, rise and be wakeful (to your spiritual concerns). 


27. Know thyself as that one and very soul, which is said to be diffused all 
over the world; say what other thing is there except that and beside thee, that 
you should regret or lament for, (since the one soul is all and that is thyself, 
thou hast all in thee, and there is nothing for thee to regret that thou hast not or 
dost require to have). 


28. Brahma appears to the ignorant boys, to be diffused through all the 
worlds; but the learned always rely on the undiffused felicitous soul of God. 


29. It is the case of unreasonable men, to grieve as well as to be pleased on a 
sudden and without cause; but the learned are always joyous, and it is a sad 
thing to find them in error. 


30. The truth of the nice subtility of the divine soul, is hid from eyes of the 
ignorant; and they are as doubtful about its nature, as men are suspicious of 
land and water where they are not. (Water appears as ground in dark, and sand 
seems as water in the barren desert). 


31. See the great bodies of the earth, air, water and sky, which are composed 
of atomic particles, to be so durable as to last forever; why then mourn at the 
loss of anything in the world (which is never lost at all). 


32. From nothing comes nothing, and something cannot become nothing; it is 
only the appearance of the form, which takes place in the substance of things. 


33. But it is by virtue of the prior acts in the former births of men, that they 
are reborn in different shapes to enjoy or suffer the results of those acts; adore 
therefore, the lord God and author of the worlds, who is always bountiful and 
bestower of all blessings. 


34. The worship of this God destroys all our sins, and cuts off the knots of 
snares of this world. 


35. You may worship Him in some form or other, until your mind is cleared 
and your nature is purified; and then you can resort to the transcendent spirit 
of the formless Deity. 


36. Having overcome the impervious gloom of ignorance, by force of the 
purity of thy nature; you may pursue the course of the Yoga, with the 
contrition of your inner soul, and belief in the Sdstras, (and in the dictates of 
your spiritual guide). 


37. Then sit a moment in your fixed meditation, (samddhi), and behold the 
transcendent spirit in thy own spirit; in this state the dark night of your former 


ignorance, will break forth into open and bright daylight. 


38. It must be by one's manly exertion or by virtue of the meritorious acts of 
former births only, as also by grace of the great God, that men may obtain the 
obtainable one. (The unknown God is said to be knowable and obtainable by 
Yoga only). 


39. It is neither the birth nor character, nor the good manners, nor valour of a 
man, that ensures him his success in any undertaking, except it be by the merit 
of his acts in former births. 


40. Why sit you so sad to think of the events of inscrutable and unavoidable 
fate, since there is no power nor that of God himself, to efface what has been 
already written destined in the forehead (or luck) of anybody. (Fate overrules 
even Jove himself). 


41. Where is the expounder of intellectual science, and where is the pupil that 
can comprehend it fully; what is this creeping plant of ignorance, and what is 
this inscrutable destiny, that joins two things together, are questions too 
difficult to be solved. 


42. O Bharadwaja! Let your reason assist you to overcome your illusion, and 
then you will no doubt gain an uncommon share of wisdom. 


43. See how a high mettled hero overpowers on all his imminent dangers, and 
stretches his conquest far and wide; and behold on the other hand, how a 
mean-spirited man is tried and grieves at the ordinary casualties of life. 


44. A good understanding is the result of, and attendant upon the meritorious 
deeds of many lives; as it appears in the acts of wise men, and in the lives of 
all living liberated persons. 


45. Know, my son, that the same action is fraught both with your freedom as 
well as bondage, accordingly as it proves favourable or adverse to you. (As 
true faith is attended with salvation, but false faith or hypocrisy with 
damnation). 


46. The righteous acts of virtuous men, serve to destroy the sins of their past 
lives; as the showers of rain water, extinguish the flame of a conflagration in 
the forest. 


47. But my friend, I would advise you rather to avoid your religious acts, and 
attach your mind to the meditation of Brahma, if you want to avoid your 
falling into the deep eddy of this world. (Because all actions bind a man to the 


world over and over again). 


48. So long as one is attached to the outer world, being led to it by his 
insatiable desires, or so long as one is led by the insatiable desires of his mind, 
to attach himself to the outer world; he is exposed to the contrary wind and 
waves of the sea, and has only to find his rest in the calm water of his 
loneliness. 


49. Why do you lean so much upon your sorrow only to blind your 
understanding, rather support yourself on the strong staff of your good 
understanding, and it will never break under you. 


50. Those who are reckoned in the number of the great men, never allow 
themselves to be altered and moved by their joy or grief; and to be carried 
away like straws by the current of the river. 


51. Why do you sorrow, friend, for these people, who are swinging in the 
cradle of the circumstance of life in the dark night of this world, and playing 
their several parts with giddy amusement. 


52. Look at the gamesome time, that sports joyously in this world, with the 
slaughter and production of endless beings by turns. 


53. There is no body of any age or sex for his game in particular, he chases all 
in general like the all-devouring dragon. 


54. Why talk of mortal men and other animals, that live to die in a moment; 
even the whole body of gods, (said to be immortals), are under the clutches of 
the remorseless and relentless death. 


55. Why do you dance and make yourself merry in your amusement, when 
you are in danger of losing by degrees the powers of your body and limbs; sit 
but silently for a while, and see the drama of the course of this world 
(combining its comedy and tragedy together). 


56. Seeing the ever-varying scenes of this changeful theatre of the world, the 
wise spectator, O good Bharadwaja, never shrinks nor shudders for a moment, 
(knowing such to be its nature). 


57. Shun your unwelcomed sorrow, and seek for the favourable amidst all that 
is unfavourable; nor sadden the clear and cheerful countenance of your soul, 
which is of the nature of the perfectly blissful intellect of God. 


58. Bear always your reverence towards the gods, Brahmans and your 
superiors; and be a friend even to irrational animals; in order to meet with the 


grace of God, according to the dicta of the vedas, (that the grace is the leader 
to the light of truth, and thereby to the way of liberation). 


59. Bharadwaja rejoined: — I have known by your kindness all these and 
much more of such truths, and come to find that, there is not a greater friend 
to us than our indifference to the world, nor a greater enemy than this world 
itself to us. 


60. I want to learn at present the substance of all the knowledge, which was 
imparted by the sage Vasishtha, in many works of great verbosity. 


61. Valmiki answered: — Hear now, Bharadwaja, of the highest knowledge 
(which is taught by that sage) for the salvation of mankind; and the hearing of 
which will save you from your drowning in the iniquities of the world. 


62. First bow down to that supreme being, who is of the nature of the sole 
entity combined with intellect and felicity; (all which are his forms in the 
abstract), and who is ever existent with his attributes of creation, sustentation 
and destruction; (which are said to be so many states of himself). 


63. I will tell you in short, and upon the authority of the sruti, how you may 
come to the knowledge of the first principle, and the manner in which it 
exhibits itself in the acts of creation, preservation and destruction of the 
universe. 


64. But tell me first, how you have lost your remembrance of what I have told 
you on this subject; since it is possible by your reconsideration of all that from 
first to last, to know everything from your own memory, as they have a survey 
of the earth from a small globe in their hand. 


65. Now consider all this in your own mind, and you will get the truth which 
will prevent all your sorrows; associate moreover with the learned and study 
the best books, which with the help of your reasoning and resignation, may 
lead you to endless felicity. 


CHAPTER CXXVIII. 


Resuscitation of Rama. 


Argument. — Bharadwaja's Enlightenment and the duties of the Enlightened. 


VALMIKI continued: — The Yogi should be peaceful and tranquil, and 
exempt from all forbidden acts and those proceeding from a desire of fruition; 
he must avoid all sensual gratifications, and have his belief in God and his 
holy religion of the vedas. 


2. He must rest quiet in his seat, and have his mind and members of the body 
under his control; and continue to repeat the syllable Om, until his mind is 
cleared (from all its doubts). 


3. He must then restrain his respiration, for the purification of his inner 
organs, (the heart and mind); and then restrict his senses by degrees, from 
their respective outward objects. 


4. He must think on the natures and causes of its body and its organs of sense, 
of his mind and its understanding, as also of his soul and its consciousness; 
and repeat the Srutis or the holy texts which relate to these subjects. 


5. Let him sit reclined in the meditation of Virdj, the God of visible nature at 
first, and then in the internal soul of nature; next to this he must meditate on 
the formless spirit, as a part and abstracted from all; and at last fix his mind in 
the supreme cause alone. (Rising from the concrete to the discrete deity). 


6. Let him cast off in his mind, the earthly substance of his flesh and bones to 
the earth; and commit the liquid part of his blood to the water, and the heat of 
his body to fire. 


7. He is then to consign the airy and vacuous parts of his body to air and 
vacuum, and after having thus made over his elemental parts to the five 
elements; he shall deliver the organs of his sense to the particular divinities 
from whom they are derived. 


8. The ears and other organs, which are for the reception of their respective 
from all sides, being cast aside on all sides, he is to give the skin of his body 
to electricity, (which imparts to it the sensations of heat and cold by the 
electric shock). 


9. Let him then resign his eye sight to the solar disc, and his tongue to water, 
he must next give up his breath to air, his voice to fire, and his palms to the 
god Indra. (water and fire mean Varuna and Agni, — the regent gods of these 
elements). 


10. He must then offer his feet to the god Vishnu, and his anus to Mithra; and 
after giving up his penis to Kasyapa, he should dedicate his mind to the moon. 


11. He must afterwards lay down his understanding to Brahma, and the other 
inward faculties to special divinities, and at last abdicate his outer senses also 
to their presiding duties. 


12. Having thus resigned his whole body to the gods, he should think himself 
as the all comprehending Virdja; and this he must do in pursuance to the 
dictates of the veda, and not of his own will or fabrication. 


13. The lord that embodies the whole universe in himself, in his androgynous 
form of half-male and half-female, is said to be the source and support of all 
sorts of beings. 


14. He was born in the form of creation, and it is he that is settled in 
everything in the universe; and caused this earth to appear from the bipartite 
mundane egg, as also the water which is twice as much as the land. 


15. He produced the heat twice as much as the water, and the air also which is 
double in its volume to that of heat, and lastly the vacuum, which is twice 
more in its extent than the air which it contains. Each latter one lying next 
above the former. (So the sruti: — each succeeding one is above its preceding 
element). 


16. These form the world whether they are divided or undivided from their 
succeeding and surrounding ones; the earth being girt by the sea, and the same 
by sub-marine fire. 


17. Thus the Yogi, by contracting his thought of the former one under the 
latter, will engross his thought of heat under that of air, and this again under 
his idea of vacuum, which last is swallowed up by his thought of the great 
cause of all. 


18. In this manner, must the Yogi remain for a moment in his spiritual form 
only, by contraction of his corporeal body, (composed of the elemental 
particles, his desires and prior acts and his primeval ignorance, — avidyd), 
under the same, (because the material part is contained under the spiritual, and 
not the latter under the former as it is erroneously supposed by materialist). 


19. The spiritual body is represented by the wise, to be composed of the ten 
senses of perception and conception, the mind or memory and the 
understanding faculties; which is above and outside the corporeal half of the 
mundane egg. The Yogi must think himself to be this supermundane spiritual 
being. (This form is styled Hiranyagarbha). 


20. The former or intramundane half, which is composed of the quadruple 
subtle elements, is represented by the figure of the four faced Brahma; and 
differs from the former by its being an evolution of unevolved spirit. 


21. That nameless and formless being in which the world subsists, is called 
Prakriti or matter by some, and Maya or delusion by others, and also as atoms 
by atomic philosophers. 


22. The same is said to be ignorance, — avidyd, by agnostics, whose minds 
are confused by false reasoning; and it is after all that hidden and unknowable 
something, in which all things are dissolved at the ultimate dissolution of the 
world. 


23. Again, everything which is quite unrelated with the divine spirit and 
intellect, (i.e., material substance); comes to existence at the recreation of the 
world; and retains and remains in its primary form to the end of the world. 


24. Think of creation in the direct method, and of its destruction in the 
reversed order; and then betake yourself to the fourth stage of turiya, after you 
have passed over the three preceding steps. (The direct method of creation is 
the procedure from vacuity to air, and thence to heat, water and earth; or the 
meditation of the creative power under the three hypostasis or substantiality of 
Hiranyagarbha, Brahma and Prakriti; and the reversed order is the 
annihilation of these in the quiet state of the unpredicable Deity). 


25. And in order to that state of blissfulness, you must enter into the supreme 
spirit by removing from your mind all its impressions, (lingas), of matter and 
sense, mind and understanding and all desires and acts; that lie unexpanded 
and hidden in it. 


26. Bharadwaja responded: — I am now quite released from the fetters of my 


impressions, as my intellectual part has found its entrance into the sea of 
turiya or transcendent blissfulness. 


27. The indistinct nature of my soul from the supreme spirit, makes me identic 
to it; and I find myself to be devoid of all attributes, and only an intellectual 
power like the same; (the human soul being as intelligent a principle as the 
divine). 


28. As the vacuity contained in the hollow of a pot, becomes one with the 
universal and all-pervading vacuum after the pitcher is broken; so the human 
soul vanishes into the supreme spirit, after it flies from the confines of the 
body after its destruction. 


29. As a fire brand being cast into the burning furnace, becomes the one and 
same fire with it; so the kind mixing with its kind, becomes indistinctly known 
under common name, one. (Here we have the axiom, the even being added to 
the even, whole is even). 


30. Again, as straws swimming in the salt sea, are transformed to the sea salt; 
so all animal souls and the inanimate even mixing with the divine soul, 
become animated also. (Here is opposite dogma of unequals being equal; 
because the greater includes the less under it). 


31. As salt-petre being thrown into the sea, looses its name and nature and 
becomes the sea salt; so everything is swallowed in the universal soul and 
assimilated to it. 


32. As water mixing with water, salt with salt, and butter with butter; lose 
their distinctions and not their substances; so myself and all other substances 
mixing with the divine spirit, lose our distinct appellations without losing our 
substantialities. 


33. All bodies being absorbed in the all-knowing and ever blissful intellect of 
the great creator of all; become equally all-pervading and tranquil and 
everlasting and blessed forever. 


34. So I think myself as that eminently transcendent being, which is without 
any part or partner, without action or passion, without the organs of sense, and 
neither loving nor hating anyone. 


35. I think myself as that sole entity, which is of the form of truth and 
immutable in its nature and desires, which is devoid of virtue and vice, 
perfectly pure and the supreme cause of all worlds. 


36. I am that blissful Brahma, who is without a second and without decay, and 
of the form of pure light; who is expressed by these negative properties, and is 
beyond the three degrees of quality; as the satva, rajas and tamas, — the 
positive, comparative, and superlative, which do not relate to him as they do 
to others. 


37. Thus should one meditate himself as Brahma, even when he is employed 
in discharging the duties destined to his station in life; and his continued 
practice of this kind of meditation, will gradually wear out all other 
impressions from his mind. 


38. The mind being thus set down, the soul will then appear of itself within 
the man; and the appearance of the inward spirit, serves to destroy all his 
internal grief, and fill its place with his heart felt joy. 


39. He also perceives the height of the truth shining in himself, that there is no 
other blissful God beside his own intellect; and this is what he calls his ego 
and the supreme Brahma likewise. 


40. Valmiki said: — Friend, give up your observance of religious acts; and be 
devoted yourself to the meditation of Brahma, if you want to stop the 
revolution of the wheel of this world upon you. 


41. Bharadwaja replied: — I have well understood the drift of the knowledge 
you have imparted to me; I have acquired clearness of my understanding, and 
I have no more any reliance in the world. 


42. I am now desirous of knowing about the duties of those, who have gained 
the spiritual knowledge of God; as to whether they are subject to or freed from 
the performance of meritorious acts; (i.e., whether their knowledge is 
sufficient to save them or requires their acts also). 


43. Valmiki said: — The seekers of liberation are not liberated from the doing 
of those duties, whose avoidance entails the guilt of the omission of duty upon 
them; but he must refrain from doing the acts of his desire (of fruition), and 


those which he is prohibited to do. 


44. When the living soul comes to feel the spiritual bliss in itself, and to find 
his sensuous appetites disappear from his mind; as also when he perceives his 
organs of sense lying quite calm and quiet under him; he may then consider 
himself as one with the all-pervading spirit of the lord, (and therefore, freed 
from the bonds of action and all earthly duties). 


45. When the sentient soul conceives in itself, the sense of its conversion to 
the essence of God, (as conveyed by the formula Soham, He ego, I am He); 
and beyond the bounds of his body and its senses, and the reach of his mind 
and understanding; it is then freed from its obligation of worldly duties. 


46. When the soul is free from all its action and passions, and remains aloof 
from all titles and attributes; when it gets rid of the feelings of pain and 
pleasure, he is then exonerated from the burthen of his duties. 


47. When one sees the supreme soul to pervade over all beings, and beholds 
all creation to exist in the universal spirit; and when he finds no difference 
between the mundane soul and the supreme spirit, he is then released from the 
bonds of his action. 


48. When the living soul has passed over the three states, of waking, 
dreaming, and sound sleep; and enters into the fourth or turya state of perfect 
bliss, he is then freed from the binding of his earthly duties. 


49. The fourth state of turiya, which consists in the residence of the living 
soul, in the lap of the universal soul of God, is the state of the soul's liberation 
from its condition of sleep or hypnotism, and is full of its spiritual 
blissfulness. 


50. This turya state or the consciousness of one's felicity, derived from the 
fixedness of the soul in the supreme; is the great end of Yoga meditation. 


51. After the mental operations of a man have ceased in a man, he perceives 
nothing within himself except the turya state; which is a calm quiescence of 
the soul, in the sea of the ambrosial waters of one sole unity. 


52. Why are you plunging yourself, under the waves of the briny waters of the 
sea of duality; fly to the Lord of worlds and adore the great God, who is 
abundant of all blessings. 


53. I have thus related to you my son, all the doctrines of Vasishtha, as the 
best means to the way of your knowledge and practice of Yoga meditation. 


54. You will verily be able, O wise Bharadwaja, to learn everything from 
these, by means of your digesting the substance of this Sdstra, and 
reconsidering the purport of the precepts of this great preceptor. 


55. It is by continued practice, that we attain to the perfection of anything, 
according to the dictum of the vedas; therefore must you avoid to attend to all 
things besides, and concentrate your mind to the object of your practice. 


56. Bharadwaja rejoined: — Tell me O sage, the course of conduct which 
Rama followed, after he had received his knowledge of Yoga or uniting his 
soul with the supreme spirit. 


57. By knowing this I will also try to practice upon the same model, that I 
may succeed to attain to the same state of spiritual elevation and rapture like 
him. 


58. Valmiki said: — When the virtuous and high-minded Rama, was absorbed 
and sat entranced in the divine essence, it was then that Viswamitra addressed 
the venerable Vasishta and said. 


59. Viswamitra said: — O highly endowed son of Brahma, — wise Vasishtha, 
you have even now shown the efficacy of your preceptorship, by hypnotising 
and laying dormant the powers of Rama. 


60. He is verily the best to Yoga, who mesmerises the body of his pupil, by his 
kind look, touch and sound; and causes his inspiration by the infusion of the 
holy spirit of Siva in him. 


61. So it was with Rama, whose pure soul was dispassionate by its own 
nature; and whose earnest desire of hebetude led him to that happy state, by 
means of his conversation with his guru or spiritual guide. 


62. It is the intelligence of the student which is the cause of his understanding, 
by means of the guidance of his spiritual preceptor; but when these three roots 
or principles are imperfect, how can the understanding arrive to its perfection. 


63. It is evident, that knowledge is in need of both the pupil and preceptor for 
its communication; where both of them are competent and worthy of one 
another; it is certain that the result will be so likewise, (as in Rama's case). 
(The commentary adds the good Sdstras, as the third means of gaining 
knowledge). 


64. Now be pleased to rouse Rama from his torpor, which you alone can do, 
by your beatification in the apathy; whilst we being employed in worldly 


affairs, are too far from it. 


65. Please Sir, remember the cause that calls us hither, and the business to 
which we are invited at earnest request of king Dasaratha himself (for the 
performance of a certain sacrifice). 


66. Therefore, O sage, do not frustrate that object of ours, by the purity of thy 
mind; we have a service to perform to the Gods, and which is the cause of 
Rama's incarnation on earth. 


67. Rama is to be conducted by me to the abode of the Siddhas, and then shall 
he be called to the destruction of the Rakshasas; after which he will be led to 
the salvation of Ahalya and to his marriage with Sita. 


68. He will break the great bow of Siva in a chivalrous feat at that marriage, 
and then he shall encounter the furious Parusha-Réma, and restrain his way to 
heaven. 


69. The fearless Rama will then forsake his uncared for paternal and ancestral 
realms, and under pretext of his banishment, betake himself to the Dandaka 
woods of foresters. 


70. He will restore the sanctity of many places of pilgrimage, and will thereby 
save the lives and souls of beings from sin and its wages of death. He will 
show to the world the sorrows of men at the loss of their wives, from his own 
example of the loss of accompanying Sita by Ravana. 


71. He will set the lesson of the husband's duty of recovering the wives from 
the hands of their ravishers, by his recovery of Sita by slaughter of Ravana, 
and by his assembling the ape-savages of the forest in his favour. 


72. He will prove the purity of Sita to please his plea, and will be employed in 
the observance of all religious acts, with his entire liberation in this world, and 
want of the desire of fruition in the next. 


73. But in order to secure the future welfare of men, he will encourage the 
practice both of spiritual devotion and ritual acts, according to the instruction 
of those best acquainted with those subjects. 


74. He will liberally bestow his liberation to every living being of every kind. 
These and many others are the duties of Rama to this world and to myself 
also. (Viswamitra means a friend to the world, and the good services of Rama 
done to it were reckoned by the sage as done to the sage himself). 


75. Such are the acts that are to be performed by Rama, wherefore he is to be 


thanked by everyone here for all his conquests which no one else can make. 
So fare you well. 


76. Valmiki resumed: — After these words of the sage, were listened to by the 
princes in the court and by the assembled Siddhas and great Yogis as 
Vasishtha and others; they thanked the hero, and remained to think of his 
lotus-like feet with respect and esteem. 


77. But the sages Vasishtha and others, were not to be satisfied until they 
could hear further about the lord of Sita; whose virtues they all eagerly 
expected to hear those fully and recite in their carols. 


78. Vasishtha then said to Viswamitra: — Tell me Sir, who was this lotus- 
eyed Rama in his past life, whether he had been a god or sage or an ordinary 
man. 


79. Viswamitra replied: — Believe what I say, that this Rama is that primary 
Male, who had churned the sea for the good of the world, and is known only 
by the deepest learning of the vedas. 


80. He is full of spiritual joy, meek and gentle, and has the mark of the 
auspicious calf (lamb) upon his person; he is bountiful to all living beings, and 
is soon appeased by all (that rely in him). 


81. He destroys everyone in his rage, and abandons all the frail trifles of this 
world; he is the first male and creator of all, and is the supporter and nourisher 
and kind friend of all. 


82. He has passed over the unsubstantial and illusory things of this world; he 
is the sea of felicity, and is dived in by the dispassionate. 


83. He is some times known as a liberated soul, and relying in himself; at 
others he is seen to be settled in his turya state of hypnotism, and sometimes 
as a male or female agent of creation. 


84. He is the God of the triple veda, and beyond the reach of the three 
qualities of things; he is the soul of the veda and the wondrous male, (Virdj), 
that is displayed in the six branches of veda. 


85. He is the four armed and four-faced Brahma, — the creator of the world, 
he is also the great Mahadeva with his three eyes, who is the destroyer of the 
world. 


86. He is the uncreated creator, that is born by his Yoga or union with the 
power of delusion, (mdyd). He is the ever-wakeful and the ever-great spirit of 


God, which though it is formless doth yet form and support this frame of this 
universe, by transforming himself to the form of a man-lion. 


87. As victory is borne upon the wings of valour, and as light is borne upon 
the flame of fire; and as learning bears and conveys the fruit of good 
understanding, so is this god-like Rama borne upon the wings of the bird of 
heaven. (i.e., as Garuda bears Vishnu upon his back). 


88. Blessed in this king Dasaratha, who has the supreme prime male for his 
son, and fortunate is the ten headed Ravana, for his finding a place in the mind 
of Rama (as his enemy). (The enemies of the gods are not less fortunate than 
the godly; because their fall under the blessed hands of gods, secures to them 
the blissful seats of heaven and not of hell). 


89. Oh! how lamentable is the state of heaven by the absence of Rama from it; 
and how pitiable is the infernal region from its loss of Lakshmana who is 
present here. Happy is this midland of Oudh at present, from the presence of 
the two gods from those two regions in this place. 


90. This Rama is an incarnation of the god Vishnu, who sleeps in the midst of 
the sea; he is the incarnate and undecaying supreme soul, and is a 
consolidation of the divine intellect and felicity in his person. 


91. The Yogis of subdued organs discern Rama in spirit, but we of ordinary 
understanding can see him only in his outward figure. 


92. We hear that he has come down to blot out the iniquities of the race of 
Raghu, and hope that the venerable Vasishtha will kindly guide him to the 
affairs of the world. 


93. Valmiki said: — Saying so far, the great sage Viswamitra held his silence, 
when the vehement Vasishtha opened his mouth and addressed Rama, saying: 


94. Vasishtha said: — O great armed Rama! O highly intellectual prince! it is 
not the time for you thus to slumber in Yoga, rise and rejoice the hearts of 
your people. 


95. Until you satisfy the wants of men and their expectations of you, you are 
not filled to attain the acme of your pure samddhi meditation. 


96. Therefore, attend to the temporal affairs of your state for some time, and 
discharge the onus of your duties to the gods; and then betake yourself to the 
state of your entrancement, and be happy forever. 


97. Notwithstanding, Rama was addressed in this manner, yet as he remained 
transfixed in his trance and uttered not a word in reply; then the spirit of 
Vasishtha entered into the heart of Rama, through dormitory passage of 
susumnd. 


98. It infused its force to the respiratory beings, mental faculties, organs and 
to the vital spirit of Rama, it ran through the veins and arteries and inflated the 
organs of sense; then Rama slowly opened his eyelids, and saw before him the 
sage Vasishtha with the learned men about him. He remained gazing upon all 
without any wish or effort of his own; and without considering aught of his 
duties, or what he was to avoid. 


99. He heard the voice, which his preceptor Vasishtha had uttered to him; and 
in reply respectfully answered him, saying: — 


100. Rama said: — By your kindness Sir, I am taught to have no concern with 
aught of the injunctions or prohibitions of the law; yet it is my duty to abide 
by all, what my preceptor bids me to do. 


101. I ween, O great sage! that of all the sayings of the vedas, Agamas, 
Puranas, and smritis, it is the word of the preceptor, is the highest law, his 
bidding is commandment and its opposite a positive prohibition. 


102. So saying, the virtuous Rama bowed down his head at the feet of the 
venerable Vasishtha, and then bespoke of his indifference to the world, to all 
present in the assembly. 


103. Rama said: — May ye all prosper, and know the most certain truth to 
which I have arrived; that there is nothing better than the knowledge of the 
self, and none superior to the preceptor from whom it is derived. 


104. The Siddhas and others responded, saying: — Such is the impression of 
Rama, in our minds also; and it is by your favour and conversions also, that 
this belief is ratified in us. 


105. We thank you, Rama Chandra, and wish all happiness to attend on our 
great prince; and beg leave of the sage Vasishtha for our departure as we are 
called here (to attend to his lecture). 


106. Valmiki said: — so saying, they rose with giving praises to Rama, and 
blessing him with showers of flowers falling upon his head from their hands. 


107. Thus have I related to you the whole narrative of Rama, do you now, O 
Bharadwaja, follow the same course of Yoga, and be happy forever. 


108. Now this relation of mine of the consummation to which Rama had 
arrived, together with my rehearsal of the varied sayings of the sage which are 
as so many strings of gems to be worn on the breasts of Yogis and poets, will 
serve by the grace of the sage, to give you liberation (from the troubles of the 
world). 


109. Whoever hears and attends to these discourses of Rama and Vasishtha, is 
sure to be relieved in every state of life; to be united with Brahma after his 
release. 


110. End of the Mahé Ramayana of the sage Vasishtha and spoken by 
Valmiki, relating the boyhood of Rama and consisting of thirty-two thousand 
sloka stanzas. 


END OF THE THIRD VOLUME. 


BOOK VIL UTTARADHA 


OR THE LATTER HALF OR 
SUPPLEMENT TO THE NIRVANA 
PRAKARANA. 


CHAPTER I. 


On Unintentional Acts and Actions. 


Argument: — The manner how the liberated should conduct themselves in 
life, with renunciation of their egoism and selfish desires. 


Rama rejoined: — The renunciation of the notion of one’s personality or 
egoism in his own person, being attended by its attendant evil of inertness and 
inactivity, (dit., want of acts), it naturally brings on a premature decay and 
decline, and the eventual falling off of the body in a short time; how then is it 
possible Sir, for an indifferent person of this kind, to practice his actions and 
discharge the active duties of life, (as you preached in your last lecture)? 


2. Vasishtha replied: — It is possible, Rama, for the living person to resign 
his false ideas and not for one that is dead and gone (because the life of a man 
is independent of his notions; while the notions are dependent on his life). 
Hear me now to expound this truth, and it will greatly please your ears; (Jit., it 
will be an ornament to your ears). 


3. The idea of one’s egoism (or his personality in own person), is said to be 
an idealism by idealists; but it is the conception of the signification of the 
word air or vacuity (which is the essence of the Deity), that is represented as 
the repudiation of that erroneous notion. 


4. The idealists represent the sense of all substances, as a creation of the 
imagination, while it is the idea of a pure vacuum, which they say to be the 
resignation of this erroneous conception. (The vacuistic Vasishtha treats here 
in length of the nullity of all substances, and the eternity of all pervading 
vacuum, and establishes the doctrine of the nothingness of the world and its 
God). 


5. The idea of anything in the world as something in reality, is said to be 
mere imaginary by the best and wisest of men; but the belief of all things as 
an empty nothing, displaces the error of thought from the mind. Since all 


things are reduced to and return to nothing, it is this alone which is the 
everlasting something. (Ullum est nullum, et nullum est ullum). 


6. Know, thy remembrance of anything is thy imagination of it only, and its 
forgetfulness alone is good for thee; therefore, try to blot out all thy former 
impressions from thy mind, as if they were never impressed on it. 


7. Efface from thy mind the memory of all thou hast felt or unfelt, (i.e., 
fancied), and remain silent and secluded like a block after thy forgetfulness of 
all things whatsoever. 


8. Continue in the practice of thy continuous actions, with an utter oblivion 
of the past (nor need the assistance of thy memory of the past, in the discharge 
of thy present duties); because thy habit of activity is enough to conduct thee 
through all the actions of thy life, as it is the habit of a half-sleeping baby to 
move its limbs (without its consciousness of the movements). (Such is the 
force of habit, says the maxim, Abhyastopapatti, — habit is second nature). 


9. It requires no design or desire on the part of an actor to act his part, 
whereto he is led by the tenor of his prior propensities (of past lives); as a 
potter’s wheel is propelled by the pristine momentum, without requiring the 
application of continued force for its whirling motion. So, O sinless Rama! 
mind our actions to be under the direction of our previous impressions, and 
not under the exertion of our present efforts. 


10. Hence, inappetency has become the congenial tendency of your mind, 
without its inclination to the gratification of its appetites. The leanings of men 
to particular pursuits, are directed by the current of their previous 
propensities. The predisposition of the mind, is said to be the cause of the 
formation of the character and fortune of a man in his present state, (which is 
otherwise said to be the result of his predestination), which runs as a stream in 
wonted course, and carries all men as straws floating along with its tide. 


11. I am proclaiming it with a loud voice and lifted arms, and yet nobody 
will hearken unto me when I say that, want of desire is our supreme bliss and 
summum bonum, and yet why is it that none would perceive it as such? 


12. O the wondrous power of illusion! that it makes men to slight their 
reason, and throw away the richest jewel of their mind, from the chest of their 
breast wherein it is deposited. 


13. The best way to inappetence, is the ignoring and abnegation of the 
phenomenals which I want you to do; and know that your disavowal of all is 
of the greatest boon to you, as you will be best able to perceive in yourself. 


14. Sitting silent with calm content, will lead you to that blissful state, 


before which your possession of an empire will seem insignificant, and rather 
serving to increase your desire for more. (The adage says: — No one has got 
over the ocean of his ambition, neither an Alexander nor a Cesar). 


15. As the feet of a traveller are in continued motion, until he reaches to his 
destination; so are the body and mind of the avaricious in continual agitation, 
unless his inappetence would give him respite from his incessant action. 


16. Forget and forsake your expectation of fruition of the result of your 
actions, and allow yourself to be carried onward by the current of your 
fortune, and without taking anything to thy mind; as a sleeping man is 
insensibly carried on by his dreams. 


17. Stir yourself to action as it occurs to you, and without any purpose or 
desire of yours in it, and without your feeling any pain or pleasure therein; let 
the current of the business conduct you onward, as the current of a stream 
carries down a straw in its course. 


18. Take to thy heart no pleasure or pain, in the discharge of the work in 
which thou art employed; but remain insensible of both like a wooden 
machine which works for others. (Because, says the commentary, it is the dull 
head of people only, that are elated or dejected in the good or bad turns of the 
affairs of life). 


19. Remain insensible of pleasure or pain, in thy body and mind and all the 
organs of senses; like the sapless trees and plants in winter, when they bear 
their bare trunks without the sensitiveness of their parts. 


20. Let the sun of thy good understanding, suck up the sensibility of thy six 
external senses, as the solar rays dry up the moisture of winter plants; and 
continue to work with the members of thy body, as an engine is set to work. 
(Work as a brute with thy bodily powers, or as a machine with its mechanical 
forces; but keep thy inner mind aloof from thy outer drudgeries). 


21. Restrain thy intellectual pleasures from their inclination to sensual 
gratifications, and retain thy spiritual joy in thyself, for the support of thy life; 
as the ground retains the roots of trees in it very carefully in winter for their 
growth in the season of spring. 


22. It is the same whether you continually gratify or not the cravings of 
your senses, they will continue insatiate notwithstanding all your supplies, and 
the vanities of the world will profit you nothing. 


23. If you move about continually like a running stream, or as the 
continuous shaking of the water in an aerostatic or hydraulic engine, and be 
free from every desire and craving of your mind, you are then said to advance 


towards your endless felicity. (So the adage is: — All desire is painsome, and 
its want is perfect freedom). 


24. Know this as a transcendent truth, and capable of preventing all your 
future transmigrations in this world, that you become accustomed to the free 
agency of all your actions, without being dragged to them by your desires. 


25. Pursue your business as it occurs to you, without any desire or purpose 
of your own towards its object; but continue to turn about your callings, as the 
potter’s wheel revolves round its fulcrum. 


26. Neither have in view the object of your action, nor the reward of your 
action; but know it to be equally alike whether you refrain from action, or do 
it without your desire of fruition. 


27. But what is the use of much verbiology, when it can be expressed in 
short and in a few words, that the desire of fruition is the bondage of your 
soul, and your relinquishment of it is fraught with your perfect freedom. 


28. There is no business whatever for us in this world, that must be done or 
abandoned by us at any time or place; everything is good that comes from the 
good God, therefore, sit you quiet with your cold indifference as before the 
occurrence of any event. 


29. Think thy works as no works, and take thy abstinence from action for 
thy greatest work, but remain as quiet in your mind in both your action and 
inaction, as the Divine Intellect is in ecstasies amidst the thick of its action. 


30. Know the unconsciousness of all things to be the true trance- Yoga, and 
requiring the entire suppression of the mental operations. Remain wholly 
intent on the Supreme spirit, until thou art one and the same with it. 


31. Being identified with that tranquil and subtle spirit, and divested of the 
sense of dualism or existence of anything else; nobody can sorrow for ought, 
when he is himself absorbed in his thought, in the endless and pure essence of 
God. 


32. Let no desire rise in thy indifferent mind, like a tender germ sprouting 
in the sterile desert soil; nor allow a wish to grow in thee, like a slender blade 
shooting in the bosom of a barren rock. 


33. The unconscious and insensible saint, derives no good or evil by his 
doing or undoing of any deed or duty in his living state, nor in his next life. 
(Duties are not binding on the holy and devout sages and saints). 


34. There is no sense of duty nor that of its dereliction neither, in the minds 
of the saintly Yogis, who always view the equality of all things and acts; and 


never consider their deeds as their own doings, nor think themselves as the 
agents of their own actions. 


35. The consciousness of egoism and the sense of meiety of selfishness, 
will never release a man from the miseries of life; it is his unconsciousness of 
these, that can only save him from all sorrow, wherefore it lies in the option of 
everybody, to choose for him either of these as he may best like. 


36. There is no other ego or meiety excepting that of the one self-existent 
and omniform Deity; and besides the essence of this transcendent being, it is 
hard to account anything of the multifarious things that appear to be otherwise 
than Himself. 


37. The visible world that appears so vividly to our sight, is no more than 
the manifestation of the One Divine Essence in many, like the transformation 
of gold in the multiform shapes of jewels; but seeing the continual decay and 
disappearance of the phenomenals, we ignore their separate existence. We 
confess the sole existence of the One that lasts after all and forever. 


CHAPTER II. 


Burning of the Seeds of Action for Prevention 
of their vegetation. 


Argument: — Concerning the seeds and fruits of action, and the mode of 
their extirpation by the root. 


Vasishtha continued: — Think not of unity or duality, but remain quite calm 
and quiet in thy spirit and as cold hearted as the dank mud and mire, as the 
worlds are still with unstirry spirit of the divinity working in them. (This is a 
lesson of incessant work without any stir and bustle). 


2. The mind with its understanding and egoism and all its thoughts, are full 
of the divine spirit in its diversified forms, (vivarta-ruipa); and time and its 
motion and all sound, force and action, together with all modes of existence, 
are but manifestations of the Divine Essence. 


3. The Divine Spirit, being of the form of gelatinous mud (or plastic 
nature), all things with their forms and colours, and the mind and all its 
functions also, upon its own mould of endless shapes and types beyond the 
comprehension of men. 


4. It is the Divine Essence which forms its own substance as upon a mould 
of clay, the patterns and forms and the shapes of all things, together with the 
measurements of space and time and the position of all the quarters and 
regions of the earth and heavens; so all things existent or inexistent, are the 
produce and privation of the formative mud and mould of the Divine Spirit. 


5. Do you remain indifferent about the essence of your egoism and 
selfishness, which is no other than that of the Supreme Spirit; and live 
unconcerned with everything, like a dumb insect in the bosom of stone. (This 
is the Vajra-Kita, which perforates the sdlagram stone in the river Gandak in 
Bihar). (The dumbness of silent munis was occasioned by their inability to 
speak with certainty anything regarding the abstruse spiritual subjects). 


6. Rama asked: — Sir, if the false knowledge of egoism and selfishness, be 
wanting in the wise and God knowing man, then how comes it, that the 
dereliction and renunciation of his duties, will entail any guilt or evil upon 
him, and his full observance of them, is attended with any degree of merit or 
reward? (This is the main question of the necessity of the observance of 
duteous and pious acts by the wise, which is after so long mooted by Rama, in 
continuation of the last subject under discussion). 


7. Vasishtha replied: — I will ask you also one question, O sinless Rama! 
and you should answer it soon, if you understand well what is rightly meant 
by the term duty and that of activity. 


8. Tell me what is the root of action and how far it extends, and whether it 
is destructible at last or not, and how it is totally destroyed at the end. 


9. Rama replied: — Why Sir, whatever is destructible must come to be 
destroyed at last, by means of the act of rooting it out at once, and not by the 
process of lopping the branches or cutting off the tree. 


10. The acts of merit and demerit are both to be destroyed, together with 
their results of good and evil; and this is done by eradicating and extirpating 
them altogether. 


11. Hear me tell you, Sir, about the roots of our deeds, by the rooting out of 
which the trees of our actions are wholly extirpated, and are never to vegetate 
or grow forth any more. 


12. I ween Sir, the body of ours to be the tree of our action, and has grown 
out in the great garden of this world, and is girt with twining creepers of 
various kinds. (i.e., The members of the body). 


13. Our past acts are the seeds of this tree, and our weal and woe are the 
fruits with which it is fraught; it is verdant with the verdure of youth for a 
while, and it smiles with its white blossoms of the grey hairs and the pale 
complexion of old age. 


14. Destructive death lurks about this tree of the body every moment, as the 
light-legged monkey lights upon trees to break them down; it is engulphed in 
the womb of sleep, as the tree is overwhelmed under the mists of winter, and 
the flitting dreams are as the falling leaves of trees. 


15. Old age is the autumn of life, and the decaying wishes are as the 
withered leaves of trees, and the wife and members of the family, are as thick 
as grass in the wilderness of the world. 


16. The ruddy palms and soles of the hands and feet, and the other reddish 


parts of the body (as the tongue and lips), resemble the reddening leaves of 
this tree; which are continually moving in the air, with the marks of slender 
lines upon them. 


17. The little reddish fingers with their flesh and bones, and covered by the 
thin skin and moving in the air, are as the tender shoots of the tree of the 
human body. 


18. The soft and shining nails, which are set in rows with their rounded 
forms and sharpened ends, are like the moon-bright buds of flowers with their 
painted heads. 


19. This tree of the body is the growth of the ripened seed of the past acts 
of men; and the organs of action are the knotty and crooked roots of this tree. 


20. These organs of action are supported by the bony members of the body, 
and nourished by the sap of human food; they are fostered by our desires, 
resembling the pith and blood of the body. 


21. Again, the organs of sense supply those of action with their power of 
movement, or else the body with the lightness of all its members from head to 
foot, would not be actuated to action without the sensation of their motion. 
(Hence a dead or sleeping man having no sensation in him, has not the use or 
action of his limbs). 


22. Though the five organs of sense, grow apart and at great distances from 
one another, like so many branches of this tree of the body; they are yet 
actuated by the desire of the heart, which supplies them with their sap. 


23. The mind is the great trunk of this tree, which comprehends the three 
worlds in it, and is swollen with the sap which it derives from them through 
its five-fold organs of sense; as the stem of a tree thrive with the juice it draws 
by the cellular fibres of its roots. 


24. The living soul is the root of the mind, and having the intellect 
ingrained, it is always busy with its thoughts, which have the same intellect 
for their root; but the root of all these is the One Great Cause of all. 


25. The intellect has the great Brahma, which has no cause of itself; and 
which having no designation or termination of it, is truth from the purity of its 
essence. 


26. The consciousness of ourselves in our egoism, is the root of all our 
actions; and the internal thought of our personal entity is the root of our 
energy, and gives the impulse to all our actions. (Therefore, as long as one has 
the knowledge of his personality, he is prone to action, and without it, 


everybody is utterly inert). 


27. It is our percipience, O Sage, which is said to be the source and root of 
our actions and whenever there is this principle in the mind, it causes the body 
to grow in the form of the big Sirsapatra. (It is the intellect which is both the 
living soul as well as its percipience). 


28. When this percipience, otherwise called consciousness (of the soul), is 
accompanied with the thoughts (of egoism and personality in the mind), it 
becomes the seed of action; otherwise, mere consciousness of the self is the 
state of the supreme soul. 


29. So also when the intellect is accompanied with its power of intellection, 
it becomes the source and seed of action; or else it is as calm and quiet as it is 
the nature of the Supreme soul. (The self-perception and pure intelligence, are 
attributes of the Divine soul, and not productive of action; but these in 
company with the operations of the mind, become the causes of the activity of 
both). 


30. Therefore, the knowledge of one’s personality in his own person, is the 
cause of his action, and this causality of action, as I have said herein, is quite 
in conformity with your teachings to me. 


31. Vasishtha said: — Thus Rama, action in the discreet being based on the 
knowledge of one’s personality; it is no way possible to avoid our activity, as 
long as the mind is situated in the body, and has the knowledge of its 
personality. 


32. Whoever thinks of anything, sees the same both within as well as 
without himself; and whether it is in reality or not, yet the mind is possessed 
with chimera of it. 


33. Again, whoever thinks of nothing, verily escapes from the error of 
mistaking a chimera for reality; but whether the reality is a falsity, or the 
falsity of anything is a sober reality, is what we are not going to discuss about 
at present. 


34. It is this thinking principle, which presents the shadow of something 
within us, and passes under the various designations of will or desire, the 
mind and its purpose likewise. 


35. The mind resides in the bodies of both rational as well as irrational 
beings, and in both their waking and sleeping states; it is impossible therefore, 
to get rid of it by anybody at any time. 


36. It is neither the silence nor inactivity of a living body, that amounts to 


its refraining from action, so long as the mind is busy with its thoughts; but it 
is only the unmindfulness of the signification of the word action, that amounts 
to one’s forbearance from acts. 


37. It is the freedom of one’s volition or choice either to do or not to do 
anything that is meant to make one’s action or otherwise; therefore, by 
avoiding your option in the doing of an act you avoid it altogether; otherwise, 
there is no other means of avoiding the responsibility of the agent for his own 
acts; (except that they were done under the sense of compulsion and not of 
free choice. — Gloss). 


38. Nobody is deemed as the doer of an act, who does not do it by his 
deliberate choice; and the knowledge of the unreality of the world, leads to the 
ignoring of all action also. (If nothing is real, then our actions are unreal also). 


39. The ignoring of the existence of the world, is what makes the 
renunciation of it; and the renunciation of all associations and connections, is 
tantamount to one’s liberation from them. The knowledge of the knowable 
One, comprehends in it the knowledge of all that is to be known. (Because the 
One is all, and all existence is comprised in that only knowable One). 


40. There being no such thing as production, there is no knowledge of 
anything whatever that is produced; abandon therefore, your eagerness to 
know the knowable forms (of things), and have the knowledge of the only 
invisible One. 


41. But there is no knowing whatever of the nature and actions of the 
quiescent spirit of Brahma, its action is its intellection only, which evolves 
itself in the form of an infinite vacuum, (showing the shapes of all things as in 
a mirror). 


42. “That utter insensibility is liberation,” is well known to the learned as 
the teaching of the Veda; hence no one is exempted from action, as long as he 
lives with his sensible body. 


43. Those who regard action as their duty, are never released from their 
subjection to the root (principle) of action; and this root is the consciousness 
of the concupiscent mind of its own actions. (The desire is the motive of 
actions, and the consciousness of one’s deeds and doings, is the bondage of 
the soul. Or else a working man is liberated, provided he is devoid of desire 
and unmindful of his actions). 


44. It is impossible, O Rama, to destroy this bodiless consciousness, 
without the weapon of a good understanding; it lies so very deep in the mind, 
that it continually nourishes the roots of action. 


45. When by our great effort, we can nourish the seed of conscience, why 
then we should not be able to destroy the keen conscience by the same 
weapon that is effort. 


46. In the same manner, we can destroy also the tree of the world with its 
roots and branches. 


47. That One is only existent, which has no sensation and is no other than 
of the form of an endless vacuum; it is that unintelligible vacuous form and 
pure intelligence itself, which is the pith and substance of all existence. 


CHAPTER III. 


Disappearance of the Phenomenals. 


Argument: — Admonition for ignoring the visibles, and the means of 
attaining the insensibility and inactivity of the wise. 


Rama said: — Tell me, O Sage, how it may be possible to convert our 
knowledge to ignorance, since it is impossible to make a nothing of 
something, as also to make anything out of a nothing. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Verily, a nothing or unreality cannot be something 
in reality; nor a real something can become an unreal nothing; but in any case, 
where both of these, (namely, reality as well as unreality of a thing) are 
possible, there the cognition and incognition of something, are both of them 
equally palpable of themselves. (This is termed a Chdtushkotika Sunsaya or 
quadruplicate apprehension of something, consisting of the reality or unreality 
of a thing, and the certainty or uncertainty of its knowledge). 


3. The two senses of the word knowledge, (i.e., its affirmative and negative 
senses), are apparent in the instance of “a rope appearing as a snake;” here the 
knowledge of the rope is certain, but that of the snake is a mistake or error. 
And so, in the case of a mirage presenting the appearance of water. (Here the 
things snake and water prove to be nothing, and their knowledge as such, is 
converted to error or want of knowledge). 


4. It is better therefore, to have no knowledge of these false appearances, 
whose knowledge tends to our misery only; wherefore, know the true reality 
alone, and never think of the unreal appearance. (Do not think the visibles 
either as real or unreal, but know the deathless spirit that lies hid under them). 


5. The conception of the sense of sensible perceptions, is the cause of woe 
of all living beings; therefore, it is better to root out the sense of the 
perceptibles from the mind, and rely in the knowledge of the underlying 
universal soul only. (Taking the particulars in the sense of individual souls, is 


the cause of misery only). 


6. Leaving aside the knowledge of parts, and the sense of your perception 
of all sensible objects, know the whole as one infinite soul, in which you have 
your rest and nirvana extinction. 


7. Destroy all your acts of merit and demerit, by the force of your 
discrimination; and your knowledge of the evanescence of your deeds, aided 
by your knowledge of truth, will cause the consummation of Yoga, (Siddhi). 


8. By rooting out the reminiscence of your acts, you put a stop to their 
results and your course in the world; and if you succeed to gain the object of 
your search, (i.e., your spiritual knowledge), by means of your reason, you 
have no more any need of your action. 


9. The divine intellect, like the Be/ fruit, forms within itself its pith and 
seeds (of future worlds), which lie hid in it, and never burst out of its bosom. 
(So all things are contained in divine mind). 


10. As a thing contained in its container, is not separate from the containing 
receptacle, so all things that lie in the womb of space, are included in the 
infinite space of the universal soul (or the divine mind), which encompasses 
the endless vacuity in it. 


11. And as the property of fluidity is never distinct from the nature of 
liquids; so the thoughts (of all created things), are never apart from the 
thinking principle of the Divine mind. (The words Chittam and Chittwam, and 
their meanings of the thought and mind, appertain to their common root the 
chit or intellect with which they are alike in sound and sense). 


12. Again, as fluidity is the inseparable property of water, and light is that 
of fire; so the thoughts and thinking, inhere intrinsically in the nature of the 
Divine Intellect, and not as its separable qualities. 


13. Intellection is the action of the intellect, and its privation gives rise to 
the chimeras of error in the mind; there is no other cause of error, nor does it 
last unless it rises in absence of reason. 


14. Intellection is the action of the intellect, as fluctuation is that of the 
wind; and it is by means of their respective actions, that we have our 
perceptions of them. But when the soul ceases from action, then both of these, 
(namely, our intellection and perceptions) are at an utter stop within and 
without us. (i.e., The soul is the prime mover of our inward and outward 
senses). 


15. The body is the field and scope of our actions, and our egoism spreads 


itself over the world; but our insensibility and want of egoism, tend to put 
away the world from us as want of force puts down the breeze. 


16. Insensibility of the body and mind, renders the intelligent soul, as dull 
as a stone; therefore, root out the world from thy mind, as a boar uproots a 
plant with its tusk; (by means of your insensibility of it, and the full sense of 
God alone in thee). 


17. In this way only, O Rama, you can get rid of the seed vessel of action in 
your mind; and there is no other means of enjoying the lasting peace of your 
soul besides this. 


18. After the germinating seed of action is removed from the mind, the 
wise man loses the sight of all temporal objects, in his full view of the holy 
light of God. 


19. The holy saints never seek to have, nor dare to avoid or leave any 
employment of their own choice or will; (but they do whatever comes in their 
way, knowing it as the will of God and must be done). They are therefore, 
said to be of truly saintly souls and minds, who are strangers to the preference 
or rejection of anything; (Jit., to the acceptance or avoidance of a thing). 


20. Wise men sit silent where they sit and live as they live, with their hearts 
and minds as vacant as the vacuous sky; they take what they get, and do what 
is destined to them as they are unconscious of doing them. (The vacant mind 
without any care or thought, is like a clear mirror of the untainted seat of the 
Holy God). 


21. As sediments are swept away by the current of the stream, so the saintly 
and meek minded men are moved to action by a power not their own; they act 
with their organs of action with as much unconcern, as babes have the 
movements of their bodies, in their half-sleeping state. 


22. As the sweetest things appear unsavoury to those that are satiate and 
sated with them; so do the delights of the world, seem disgusting to them, that 
are delighted with divine joy in themselves; and with which they are so enrapt 
in their rapture, as to become unconscious of what is passing in and about 
them like insane people. 


23. The unconsciousness of one’s acts, makes the abandonment of his 
action, and this is perfected when a person is in full possession of his 
understanding (or else the unconsciousness of a dead man of his former acts, 
does not amount to his abandonment of action). It matters not whether a man 
does ought or naught, with his unsubstantial or insensible organs of action. (It 
is external consciousness that makes the action, and not the external doing of 


it, with the insensible organs of the body; because the mental impressions 
make the action and not its forgetfulness in the mind). 


24. An action done without a desire, is an act of unconsciousness; and they 
are not recognized as our actions, which have no traces of them in our minds. 
(Hence all involuntary acts and those of insanity, are reckoned as no doings of 
their doer). 


25. An act which is not remembered, and which is forgotten as if it were 
buried in oblivion, is as no act of its doer; and this oblivion is equal to the 
abandonment of action. 


26. He who pretends to have abandoned all action, without abandoning (or 
effacing) them from his mind, is said to be a hypocrite, and is devoured by the 
monster of his hypocrisy. (Of this nature are the false fakirs, who pretend to 
have renounced the world). 


27. They who have rooted out the prejudice of actions from their lives, and 
betaken themselves to the rest and refuge of inaction, are freed from the 
expectation of reward of whatever they do, as also from the fear of any evil 
for what they avoid to perform. 


28. They who have extirpated the seeds of action, with their roots and 
germs, from the ground of their minds, have always an undisturbed tranquility 
to rest upon, and which is attended with a serene delight to those that have 
made hebetude their habit. 


29. The meek are slightly moved in their bodies and minds, by the current 
of business in which they have fallen; but the reckless are carried onward 
whirling in the torrent, like drunken sots reclining on the ground, or as 
anything moved by a machine, (or as the machines of an engine). 


30. Those who are seated in any stage of Yoga, and are graced with the 
calmness of liberation, appear as cheerful as men in a play house, who are half 
asleep and half-awake over the act in this great theatre of the world. 


31. That is said to be wholly extirpated, which is drawn out by its roots, or 
else it is like the destroying of a tree by lopping its branches which will grow 
again, unless it is uprooted from the ground. 


32. So the tree of acts, (the ceremonial code), though lopped off of its 
branches, (of particular rites and ceremonies), will thrive again if it is left to 
remain, without uprooting it by the ritual (of achdras). 


33. It is enough for your abandonment of acts, to remain unconscious of 
your performance of them; and the other recipes for the same (as given 


before) will come to you of themselves. 


34. Whoever adopts any other method of getting rid of his actions, besides 
those prescribed herein; his attempts of their abandonment are as null and 
void, as his striking the air, (in order to divide it). (Outward abandonment of 
anything is nothing, unless it is done so from the mind). 


35. It is the rational abandonment of a thing, that makes its true 
relinquishment, and whatever is done unwilfully, is like a fried grain or seed, 
that never vegetates nor brings forth its fruit. (The rational renouncement of a 
thing, is said in the Veda, to mean its resignation to God, to whom belongs 
everything in the world, and is lent to man for his temporary use only. And 
fruitless actions are those that are done unwillingly, and are not productive of 
future births for our misery only). 


36. But the act that is done with the will and bodily exertion, becomes 
productive with the moisture of desire; but all other efforts of the body 
without the will, are entirely fruitless to their actor. 


37. After one has got rid of his action, and freed himself from further 
desire; he becomes liberated for life, (Jivan-mukta), whether he may dwell at 
home or in the woods, and live in poverty or affluence. 


38. The contented soul is as solitary at home, as in the midst of the farthest 
forest; but the discontented mind finds the solitary forest to be as thickly 
thronged with vexations as the circle of a family house. 


39. The quiet and calmly composed spirit, finds the lonely woodland, 
where a human being is never to be seen even in a dream, to be as lovely to it 
as the bosom of a family dwelling. 


40. The wise man who has lost the sight of the visibles, and of the endless 
particulars abounding in this forest of the world, beholds on every side the 
silent and motionless sphere of heaven spread all around him. 


41. The thoughtless ignorant, whose insatiate ambition grasps the whole 
universe in his heart, rolls over the surface of the earth and all its boisterous 
seas with as much glee as upon a bed of flowers. 


42. All these cities and towns, which are so tumultuous with the endless of 
men, appear to the ignorant and moneyless man as a garden of flowers; where 
he picks up his worthless penny with as much delight as holy men cull the 
fragrant blossoms to make their offerings to holy shrines. 


43. The wide earth with all her cities and towns, and distant districts and 
countries, which are so full of mutual strife and broil, appear to the soiled soul 


of the gross-headed and greedy, as if they are reflected in their fair forms in 
the mirror of their minds; or painted in their bright colours upon the canvas of 
their hearts. (Worldly men are so infatuated with the world, that they take side 
of things for fair and bright). 


CHAPTER IV. 


Annihilation of Egoism. 


Argument: — Egoism is shown as the root of worldliness and _ its 
extirpation by spiritual knowledge. 


Vasishtha continued: — The abandonment of the world, (which is otherwise 
termed as liberation, — moksha), is effected only upon subsidence of one’s 
egoism and knowledge of the visibles in the conscious soul; in the manner of 
the extinction of a lamp for want of oil. (The knowledge of the phenomenal is 
the root of illusion, and it is the removal of this that is called the abandonment 
of the world, and the cause of liberation). 


2. It is not the giving up of actions, but the relinquishment of the 
knowledge of the objective world, that makes our abandonment of it; and the 
subjective soul, which is without the reflexion of the visible world, and the 
objective-self, is immortal and indestructible. 


3. After the knowledge of the self, and this and that, with that of mine and 
thine, becomes extinct like an extinguished lamp, there remains only the 
intelligent and subjective-soul by itself alone; (and it is this state of the soul 
that is called its extinction, — nirvana and its liberation or moksha). 


4. But he whose knowledge of himself and others, and of mine and thine, 
and his and theirs, has not yet subsided in his subjectivity, has neither the 
intelligence nor tranquility nor abandonment nor extinction of himself. (It is 
opposite of the preceding). 


5. After extinction of one’s egoism and meism, there remains the sole and 
tranquil and intelligent soul, beside which there is nothing else in existence. 


6. The egoistic part of the soul being weakened by the power of true 
knowledge, everything in the world wastes away and dwindles into 
insignificance; and though nothing is lost in reality, yet everything is buried in 
and with the extinction of the self. (So, the Hindi adage: — Apduba to 


jagduba, — the self being lost, all things are lost with it). 


7. The knowledge of the ego is lost under that of the non-ego, with any 
delay or difficulty; and it being so easy to effect it, there is no need of 
resorting to the arduous methods for removal of the same. (It being easy to 
ignore the silver in a shell, it is useless to test it in the fire). 


8. The thoughts of ego and non-ego, are but false conceits of the mind; and 
the mind being as void as the clear sky, there is no solid foundation for this 
error. 


9. No error has its vagary anywhere, unless it moves upon the basis of 
ignorance, it grows upon misjudgment, and vanishes at the light of reason and 
right judgment. 


10. Know all existence to be the Intellect only; which is extended as an 
unreal vacuity; therefore, sit silent in the empty space of the Intellect, wherein 
all things are extinct as nothing. (The reality of the Divine Mind, containing 
the ideal world which appears as a reality). 


11. Whenever the idea of ego comes to occur in the mind, it should be put 
down immediately by its negative idea of the non-ego or that I am nothing. 


12. Let the conviction of the non-ego supplant that of the ego, as a 
meaningless term, or as untrue as empty air, or a flower of the aerial arbour; 
and being fixed as an arrow in the bow-string of holy meditation, strive to hit 
at the mark of the Divine Essence. 


13. Know always your ideas of ego and tu, — I and thou, to be as unreal as 
empty air; and being freed from the false idea of every other thing, get over 
quickly across the delusive ocean of the world. 


14. Say, how is it possible for that senseless and beastly man, to attain to 
the highest state of divine perfection, who is unable to overcome his natural 
prejudice of egoism. 


15. He who has been able by his good understanding, the six-fold beastly 
appetites of his nature; is capable of receiving the knowledge of great truths; 
and no other asinine man in human shape. 


16. He who has weakened and overcome the inborn feelings of his mind, 
becomes the receptacle of all virtue and knowledge, and is called a man in its 
proper sense of the word. 


17. Whatever dangers may threaten you on rocks and hills and upon the 
sea, you may escape from the same by thinking that they cannot injure your 
inward soul, though they may hurt the flesh. 


18. Knowing that your egoism is nothing in reality, except your false 
conception of it, why then do you allow yourself to be deluded by it, like the 
ignorant who are misled by their phrenzy? 


19. There is nothing (no ego) here, that is known to us in its reality; all our 
knowledge is erroneous as that of an ornament in gold (and springs from the 
general custom of calling it so), so is our knowledge of the ego which we 
know not what, and may be lost by our forgetfulness of it. (So the different 
names and shapes of golden ornaments being forgotten, we see the substance 
of gold only common in all of them). 


20. Try to dislodge the thoughts that rise in your mind, in the manner of the 
incessant vibrations in the air, by thinking that you are not the ego, nor has 
your ego any foundation at all. 


21. The man who has not overcome his egotism, and its concomitants of 
covetousness, pride and delusion, doth in vain attend to these lectures which 
are useless to him. 


22. The sense of egoism and tuism which abides in thee, is no other than 
the stir of the Supreme spirit, which stirs alike in all as motion impels the 
winds. 


23. The uncreated world which appears as in act of creation, is inherent and 
apparent in the Supreme soul, and notwithstanding all its defects and frailty, it 
is fair by being situated therein. (Because a thing, however bad, appears 
beautiful by its position with the good). 


24. The Supreme soul neither rises nor sets at any time; nor is there 
anything else besides that One, whether existent or inexistent. (All real and 
potential entities are contained in the mind of God). 


25. All this is transcendental in the transcendent spirit of God, and 
everything is perfect in his perfection. All things are quiet in his tranquility, 
and whatever is, is good by the goodness of the Great God. 


26. All things are extinct in the unextinguished spirit of God, they are quiet 
in his quiescence, and all good in his goodness; this extinction in the inextinct 
or ever existent soul of God, is no annihilation of any; it is understood as the 
sky, but is not the sky itself. 


27. Men may bear the strokes of weapons and suffer under the pain of 
diseases; and yet how is it that nobody can tolerate the thought of his 
unegoism or extinction. 


28. The word ego is the ever-growing germ of the significance of 


everything in the world. (i.e., our selfishness gives growth to our need and 
want of all things for our use); and that (egoism or selfishness) being rooted 
out of the mind, this world also is uprooted from it. (i.e., Think neither of 
thyself or anything in the world as thine but of the Lord, and be exempt from 
thy cares of both). 


29. The meaningless word ego, like empty vapour or smoke, has the 
property of soiling the mirror of the soul, which resumes its brightness after 
removal of the mist. 


30. The significance of the word, I, or ego, is as force or fluctuation in the 
calm and quiet atmosphere; and this force being still, the soul resumes its 
serenity, as that of the unseen and imperceptible and one eternal and infinite 
air. (Here is Vasishtha’s vacuism again). 


31. The significance of the word ego, produces the shadow of external 
objects in the mind; and that being lost, there ensues that serenity and 
tranquility of the soul, which are the attributes of the unknowable, infinite and 
eternal God. 


32. After the cloudy shadow of the sense of the word ego, is removed from 
the atmosphere of mind; there appears the clear firmament of transcendent 
truth, shining with serene brightness throughout its infinite sphere. 


33. After the essence of the soul is purged of its dross, and there appears no 
alloy or base metal in it; it shines with its bright lustre as that of pure gold, 
when it is purified from its mixture with copper or other. 


34. As an insignificant term, (nirabhidhdrtha), bears no accepted sense, 
(vypadesdartha); so the unintelligible word ego, bearing no definite sense of 
any particular person, is equal to the non-ego or impersonal entity of Brahma. 


35. It is Brahma only that resides in the word ego. (i.e., the word ego is 
applicable to God alone). 


36. The meaning of the word ego, which contains the seed of world in it, is 
rendered abortive by our ceasing to think of it. Then what is the good of using 
the words, I, and thou, that serve only to bind our souls to this world. (Forget 
yourselves, to be free from bondage). 


37. The essence is the pure and felicitous spirit, which is afterwards soiled 
under the appellation of ego, which rises out of that pure essence, as a pot is 
produced from the clay; but the substance is forgot under the form, as the gold 
is forgotten under that of the ornament. 


38. It is this seed of ego, from which the visible plant of creation takes its 


rise; and produces the countless worlds as its fruits, which grow to fade and 
fall away. 


39. The meaning of the word ego, contains in it like the minute seed of a 
long pepper, the wonderful productions of nature, consisting of the earth and 
sea, the hills and rivers, and forms and colours of things, with their various 
natures and actions. 


40. The heaven and earth, the air and space, the hills and rivers on all sides, 
are as the fragrance of the full-blown flower of the Ego. 


41. The Ego in its widest sense, stretches out to the verge of creation, and 
contains all the worlds under it, as the wide spread day light comprehends all 
objects and their action under it. 


42. As the early daylight brings to view the forms and shapes and colours 
of things; so it is our egoism, (which is but another name for ignorance), that 
presents the false appearance of the world to our visual sight. 


43. When egoism, like a particle of dirty oil falls into the pellucid water of 
Brahma, it spreads over its surface in the form of globules, resembling the 
orbs of worlds floating in the air. 


44. Egoism sees at a single glance the myriads of worlds spread before its 
visual sight; as the blinking eye observes at a twinkling thousands of specks 
scattered before its sight. 


45. Egoism (selfishness) being extended too far, perceives the furthest 
worlds lying stretched before its sight; but the unegotist or unselfish soul, like 
a sleeping man doth not perceive the nearest object, as our eyes do not see the 
pupils lying within them. 


46. It is only upon the total extinction of our egoistic feelings, by the force 
of unfailing reasoning; that we can get rid of the mirage of the world. 


47. It is by our constant reflection upon our consciousness only, that it 
becomes possible for us to attain the great object of our consummation, — 
Siddhi; and the attainment of the perfection of our souls; we have nothing 
more to desire or grieve at nor any fear of falling into error. 


48. It is possible by your own endeavour, and without the help of any 
person or thing, to attain to thy perfection; and therefore, I see no better means 
for you to this than the thought of your unegoism. 


49. Now Rama, this is the abstract of the whole doctrine, that you forget 
your ego and tu, and extend the sphere of our soul all over the universe, and 
behold them all in yourself. Remain quite calm and quiet and without any 


sorrow, and exempt from all acts and pursuits of the frail and false world, and 
think the soul as one whole and not a part of the universe. (Samashti and not 
Vyashta). 


CHAPTER V. 


Narrative of a Vidyadhara and his Queries. 


Argument. — Vasishtha relates the tale spoken to him by Bhusunda, and 
efficacy of divine knowledge in dispassionate souls and not in ungoverned 
minds. 


Vasishtha continued: — The sensible man who employs himself in his inquiry 
after truth, after controlling his nature, and restraining his organs of sense 
from their objects, becomes successful in them at last. 


2. But the man of perverted understanding, that has no command over his 
own nature, finds it as impossible for him to gain any good or better state, as it 
is in vain to expect to obtain any oil from pressing the sands. 


3. A little instruction even is as impressive in the pure mind, as a drop of 
oil sticks to the clean linen; but no education has any effect on the hard heart 
of fools, as the most brilliant pearl makes no impression in the gritty glass 
mirror. (It casts but a shadow which never lasts). 


4. I will here cite an instance to this purport, from an old anecdote related 
to me by the aged Bhusunda in by gone days; when I was living with him on 
the top of Sumeru mountain. (This proves the longevity of the Aryans in the 
ancient homestead beyond the Altain chain). 


5. I had once in times of old, mooted this question among other things to 
the time worn Bhusunda, when he was dwelling in his solitary retreat in one 
of the caves of Meru, saying: — 


6. O long living seer, do you remember to have ever seen, any such person 
of infatuated understanding, who was unconscious of himself and ignorant of 
his own soul? (The mugdha or infatuated is explained as one of ungoverned 
mind and senses and employed in vain labour and toil). 


7. Bhusunda replied: — Yes, there lived a Vidyadhara of old, on the top of 


the mountain on the horizon; who was greatly distressed with incessant toil, 
and yet anxious for his longevity (by performance of his devotion for 
prolongation of life). 


8. He betook himself to austerities of various kinds, and to the observance 
of abstinence, self-restraint and vows of various forms; and obtained thereby 
an undecaying life, which lasted for many ages of four kalpas of four Yugas 
each. 


9. At the end of the fourth kalpa he came to his sense, and his percipience 
burst forth on a sudden in his mind, as the emeralds glare out of ground in the 
distant country (of Burmah), at the roaring of clouds. (Emeralds are called 
vaidtiryas below from their production in the vidura or distant land of 
Burmah; where there are many ruby mines also; but vaidtryas are the sky 
coloured sapphire or lapis lazuli; and often called as emeralds). 


10. He then reflected in himself saying: — What stability can I have in this 
world, where all beings are seen to come repeatedly into existence, to decay 
with age, and at last to die and dwindle away into nothing? I am ashamed to 
live in this state of things and under such a course of nature. 


11. With these reflections he came to me, quite disgusted in his spirit at the 
frailties of the world, and distasteful of banefull vanities; and then proposed to 
me his query regarding the city with its eighteen compartments. (i.e., The 
body with its ten organs, five vital airs, the mind, soul, and body). 


12. He advanced before me, and bowed down profoundly; and after being 
honoured by me, he took the opportunity to propose his questions to me. 


13. The Vidyadhara said: — I see these organs of my body, which though 
so frail, are yet as hard and strong as any weapon of steel; they are capable of 
breaking and tearing everything, and hurtful in their acts of injuring others. 


14. I find my senses to be dim and dark, and always disturbed and leading 
to dangers (by their mistake of things). Again, the passions in the heart, are 
setting fire to the forest of our good qualities, and boiling with the waves of 
sorrow and grief; while the dark ignorance of our minds, envelops everything 
in the deepest gloom. Hence it is that the control, over our bodily organs, 
senses and the passions and feelings of the heart and mind, is only attended 
with our real happiness, which is not to be had from any object of sense. 


CHAPTER VI. 
Description of Disaffection and Disgust to the 
World. 


Argument: — Indifference and Apathy to the world, based on the Doctrines 
of the stoics and cynics, and the religious Recluses of all nations and 
Countries in every age. 


The Vidyddhara continued: — Tell me even now, what is that most noble 
state (or highest category), which is devoid of increase or decrease or any pain 
whatever; which is without beginning and end, and which is most sanctified 
and sanctifying. 


2. I had been so long sleeping as an inert soul, and now I am awakened to 
sense by the grace of the Supreme Soul; (displayed in the present vairdgya or 
dispassionateness of the speaker). 


3. My mind is heated with the fervour of the fever of my insatiate desire, 
and is full of regret at the state of my ignorance; now raise me from the depth 
of darkness in which I am grovelling under my delusion. 


4. Many a time doth misfortune overtake the fortunate, and bitter sorrows 
betide the wise and learned; just as the hoar-frost falls on the tender leaves of 
lotuses, and discolours them at the end. 


5. We see the frail living beings springing to birth, and dying away at all 
times to no purposes, they are neither for virtuous acts nor their liberation, but 
are born to die only, as the gnats and ephemera of dirt. (The Vidyadhara, like 
the cynic, finds fault with every earthly thing). 


6. How have I passed through different stages of life, how with one state of 
things and then with another, and deceived by the gain of paltry trifles. We are 
always discontent with the present state, and cheated repeatedly by the 
succeeding one. 


7. The unwearied mind, ever running after its frail pleasures, and floating as 


it were upon the breakers of its enjoyments, has no end of its rambling, nor 
rest after its toils; but wanders onward in the desert paths of this dreary world. 


8. The objects of enjoyment, that are the causes of our bondage in this 
world, and appear as very charming and sweet at first; are all frail and ever 
changeful in their natures, and prove to be our bane at last. 


9. Actuated by our consorting egoism, and led by the sense of honour to 
live in dishonour, I am degraded from the dignity my high birth as a 
vidyadhara, and am not pleased with myself. 


10. I have seen the pleasure garden of Chitra-ratha, (the chief of the 
Gandharva tribe); and all the sweet and soft flowery beds on earth; I have 
slept under the bowers of Kalpa Creepers in paradise, and have given away all 
my wealth and property in charity. 


11. I have sported in the groves of Meru, and about the cities of the 
Vidyddharas; I have wandered about in heavenly cars, and in the aerial 
regions on all sides (in balloons or aerial cars). 


12. I have halted amidst the heavenly forces, and reposed on the arms of 
my consorts; I have joined the bands of Haris in their jocund frolic and music, 
and have promenaded through the cities of the rulers of mankind. 


13. I saw nothing of any worth among them, except the bitter sorrow of my 
heart in all; and I come now to find by my best reason, that everything is burnt 
down to ashes before me. 


14. My eyes, which by their visual power, are ever inclined to dwell upon 
the sights of things, and to dote with fondness upon the face of my mistress, 
have been the cause of great affliction to my mind. 


15. My eye-sight runs indiscriminately after all beautiful objects, without 
its power of considering, whether this or that is for our good or bad. (i.e., 
Without the power of penetrating into and distinguishing the properties and 
qualities of objects). 


16. My mind also, which is ever prompt to meet all hazards, and to expose 
itself to all kinds of restraints, never finds its rest until it is overwhelmed 
under some danger, and brought under the peril of death. 


17. My scent likewise, is ever alert in seeking after fragrant and delicious 
things to its own peril, and it is difficult for me to repress it, as it is hard for 
one to restrain an unruly horse. 


18. I am restrained by the sense of my smelling to the two canals of my 
nostrils, bearing the putrid breath and cough and cold of the body; and am 


constrained like a prisoner or captive of war to the dungeon by my jailer or 
captor. 


19. It is on account of this lickerish tongue of mine, that I am forced to seek 
for my food in these rugged and dreary rocks, which are the haunt of wild 
elephants, and where the wolves are prying for their forage. (From this it 
appears that, the Vidyddharas were a tribe of mountaineers in the north of the 
Himalayas). 


20. I am to restrain the sensitiveness of my body, and to make my skin, (the 
twak indreya or the organ of feeling), to endure the heat of the hot weather of 
the kindled fire and of the burning sun, (all which it is necessary to be 
undergone in the austere devotion known as Panchatapa). 


21. My ears, Sir, which ought to take a delight in the hearing of good 
lectures, are always inclined to listen to talk that are no way profitable to me; 
but mislead me to wrong; as the grassy turf covering a well, tempts the silly 
stag to his ruin. 


22. I have listened to the endearing speeches of my friends and servants, 
and attended to the music of songs and instruments, to no lasting good being 
derived therefrom. (Sensuous pleasures are transient, and are not attended 
with any permanent good). 


23. I have beheld the beauty of beauties, and the natural beauty of objects 
on all sides; I have seen the sublimity of mountains and seas, and the grandeur 
of their sides and borders; I have witnessed the prosperity of princes and the 
brilliancy of gem and jewels. 


24. I have long tasted the sweets of the most delicious dishes, and have 
relished the victuals of the six different savours, that were served to me by the 
handsomest damsels. 


25. I have associated with the lovely damsels clad in their silken robes, and 
wearing their necklaces of pearls, reclined on beds of flowers and fanned by 
soft breezes; I have had all these pleasures of touch, and enjoyed them 
unrestrained in my pleasure gardens. 


26. I have smelt the odours on the faces of fairy damsels, and have had the 
smell of fragrant balms, perfumeries and flowers; and I have inhaled the 
fragrance, borne to me by the breath of the soft, gentle and odoriferous 
breezes. 


27. Thus have I seen and heard, felt and smelt, and repeatedly tasted 
whatever sweets this earth could afford. They have now become dry, 
distasteful, stale and unpleasurable to me; say what other sweet is there left 


for me yet to enjoy. 


28. I have enjoyed all these enjoyments of my senses for a full thousand 
years, and still, I find nothing either in this earth or in heaven, which is able to 
yield full satisfaction to my mind. 


29. I have reigned for a long time over a realm, and enjoyed the company 
of the courtezans in my court, I have vanquished the forces of my enemies in 
battle, but I know not great gain I have gained thereby. (All is vanity of 
vanities only). 


30. Those (demons) that were invulnerable in warfare, and usurped to the 
dominion of the three worlds, even those invincible giants, have been reduced 
to ashes in a short time. 


31. I think that to be the best gain, which being once gained by us, there 
remains nothing else to be desired or gained herein; I must now therefore, 
remain in quest of that precious gain, however it may be attended with pain. 


32. What difference is there between those, who have enjoyed the most 
delightful pleasures, and others that have never enjoyed them at all; nobody 
has ever seen the heads of the former kind crowned with kalpa laurels, nor the 
latter with diminished heads. 


33. I have been long led by my organs of sense, to the enjoyment of 
beautiful objects in the wilderness of the world, and have been quite deceived 
by them like a child by cheat. (All enticements are deceitful at the end). 


34. I have come too late and today only to know, that the objects of my 
senses are my greatest enemies; and this I have known after being repeatedly 
deceived by my organs of sense. 


35. I see the deceitful organs of sense like so many sly huntsmen, have laid 
their snares about the wild forest of this world, only to entrap all unwary 
people in them, as they do the silly stags or beasts of prey by enticements. 


36. There are but very few men in this world, who are not found to be 
envenomed by the deadly poison of their serpent-like organs of sense. 


37. The forest of the world is full with the furious elephants of enjoyments, 
and surrounded by the snare of our desire, wherein our greediness is roving 
rampant with sword in hand, and our passions are stirring like keen spearmen, 
and rending our hearts and souls every moments. 


38. Our bodies are become as a field of battle, where the commanding 
charioteer of our egoism hath spread the net of duplicity, by employing our 
efforts as horsemen, and setting our desires as boisterous rioters. 


39. The organs of sense are set as flag-bearers, at the extremities of the 
battle-field of our bodies; and they are reckoned as the best soldiers, who are 
able by their prowess to overtake these staff-bearers in the field. 


40. It may be possible for us, to pierce the frontal bone even of the furious 
Airavata elephant of Indra in war; but it is too hard for anybody to repress the 
aberrant senses within their proper bounds. 


41. It is reckoned as the greatest victory, that may be won by the valour, 
magnanimity, and fortitude of great men, if they can but conquer the 
unconquerable organs of sense, which makes the utmost glory of the great, (or 
which redounds with the greatest to the great). 


42. So long as a man is not flung and carried about as a light and trifling 
straw, by the irresistible force of his sensual appetites, he is said to have 
attained to the perfection and excellence of the deities of heaven. 


43. I account men of well governed senses and those of great fortitude, to 
be truly men in their sense, or else all other men of ungoverned minds, are 
mere moving machines of the flesh and bones that compose their bodies. 


44. O Sage! I think I can overcome all things, if I can but reduce the force 
of the five external organs of sense, which form the battalion under the 
command of the mind, (and is led against the province of the soul). 


45. Unless you can heal your sensual appetites, which forms the great 
malady of the mind, by the prescriptions of your reason, you cannot get rid of 
them by any medicine or mantra, or by holy pilgrimage or any other remedy. 
(The subjection of the senses, is the first step to holiness). 


46. I am led to great distress by the joint force of my senses, as a lonely 
traveller is waylaid in his journey by a gang of robbers. (It may be possible to 
withstand any particular appetite, but not all at once). 


47. The organs of sense are as dirty canals of the body, with their stagnate 
and foul watery matter, they are filled with noxious and hairy moss, and emit 
a malarious stink. 


48. The senses seem to me as so many deep and dark forests, covered with 
impervious snows, and full of terrors that render them impassable to 
travellers. 


49. The organs of the outward senses resemble the stalks of lotuses, 
growing upon the dirt of the body with holes in them, but without any visible 
thread therein. They are knotty on the outside, and without any sensibility of 
their own; (except what is supplied to them by the soul). 


50. Our sensualities are as so many seas with their briny waters, and huge 
billows dashing on every side; they abound with various gems and pearls, but 
are full of horrible whales and sharks at the same time. 


51. Sensual pleasure brings on the untimely death of the sensualist, and 
causes the grief and sadness of his friends therein; it makes others to take pity 
on his state, and mourn at his fate, which conducts him to repeated 
transmigrations only. 


52. The senses are as vast and unlimited wilderness to men, which prove 
friendly to the wise, and inimical to the unwise. 


53. The sphere of the senses is as dark as that of the clouded sky, where the 
black clouds of distress are continually growling, and the lightnings of joy are 
incessantly flashing with their transient glare. 


54. The organs of sense are as subterranean cells or mounds of mud upon 
earth; these are resorted to by inferior animals, but shunned by superior and 
intelligent beings. 


55. They are like hidden caves on earth overspread with thorns and 
brambles, and inbred with venomous snakes, in which the unwary fall to be 
smitten and bitten to death. 


56. All sensualities are as savage Rdakshasas or cannibals, that rove and 
revel about in their venturous excursions in the darkness of night; and glut 
themselves with human victims. 


57. Our organs of sense are as dry sticks, all hollow and pithless in the 
inside; they are crooked and full of joints all along, and fit only as fuel for fire. 


58. The bodily organs are the instruments of vice, and are as pits and 
thickets on our way; they are fitted with dirt within, like the notes of canes and 
reeds that are full of useless stuff. 


59. The organic limbs and members are the implements of action, and the 
apparatus for producing an infinite variety of works. They are like the potter’s 
wheels, turning and whirling with their mud, in order to produce the fragile 
pottery of clay. 


60. Thus Sir, I am plunged in the dangerous sea of my sensual appetites, 
and you alone are able to raise me out of it by your kindness to me; because 
they say, that holy saints only are victorious over their senses in this world, 
and it is their society only that removes the griefs of mankind, and saves them 
from the perilous sea of sensuality. 


CHAPTER VII. 
Description of the Seed of the Arbour of the World. 


Argument: — The arbor of the world as growing from the seed of 
Ignorance in the soil of Ignorance. 


Bhusunda replied: — Having heard the aforesaid holy speech of the 
Vidyadhara, I answered to what he asked in plain words as follows. 


2. Well said, O chief of the Vidyadharas, and it proves thee to be awakened 
to thy good sense by thy good fortune for thy edification, that thou dost after 
so long desire to be raised, out of the dark pit and dungeon of the world. 


3. Thy holy intentions shine as bright as the blazing clouds in the midday 
light; and as pure liquid gold melted down by the fire of right reasoning. 


4. Thy clear mind will be able to grasp the meaning, of my admonition to 
you with ease; as the clean mirror is capable of receiving the reflexion of 
every object set before it. (The clear mind, like a clear mirror, reflects 
everything in it). 


5. You must give your assent to what I say, by uttering the syllable Om, — 
yes to the same; as you can have no doubt to take for certain truth, what I have 
come to know by my long research. 


6. Know well and by giving up your ignorance, that what thou feelest 
within thee, (i.e., thy egoism), is not thy very self; and it is hard to have it, 
(your soul or self), notwithstanding your long search after the same. 


7. Know it for certain that there is no egoism or tuism, (i.e., subjective or 
objective knowledge), nor even this phenomenal world, that may be called the 
real entity; but all this is the blissful God, who is no cause of either thy 
happiness or misery, (but reigns absolutely supreme in himself). 


8. Whether this world is a creation of our ignorance, or whether it is 
ignorance itself, is what we cannot ascertain by our reasoning; because there 
being but one simple entity alone, there is no possibility of the co-existence of 


the duality (of subjective and objective). 


9. The world appears as the water in the mirage; it is unsubstantial and 
though appearing as something real, it is in reality nothing at all. The 
phenomenon that appears to view, is himself and nothing otherwise. 


10. The world being as the water in the mirage, (a mere nullity); there is 
neither its existence nor its inexistence neither, there can be no reflexion of it 
either, (because a void has no shadow); and therefore, it must be but God 
himself. 


11. The seed of the world is the Ego or the subjective self, and the Tu or the 
objective world, is to be known as derived from the subjective self or egoism. 
Such being the case, the visible world with all its lands and seas, its mountains 
and rivers and gods also, is the huge tree growing out of the same seminal 
source of egoism. 


12. The great arbour of the worlds, grows out of the particle of egoism; the 
organs of sense are the succulent roots of this tree; and the far overspreading 
orbs of the sky, are the many divergent branches of the main arbor of the 
mundane world. 


13. The starry frame in the sky, is the netted canopy over this arbour on 
high; and the groups of constellations, are bunches of blossoms of this tree; 
the desires of men are as the long fibres and lengthening filaments of the tree, 
and the lightsome moons are the ripe fruits thereof. 


14. The many spheres of heaven, are the hollows of this large and great 
tree; and the Meru, Mandara and other mountains, are its protuberant boughs 
and branches. 


15. The seven oceans are the ditches of water, dug at the foot and root of 
this tree; and the infernal region is the deep pit underlying the root of this tree; 
the Yugas and cycles of periods are its knots and joints, and the rotation of 
time over it, is as the circle of worms sucking up its juice for evermore. 


16. Our ignorance is the ground of its growth, and all peoples are as flights 
of birds hovering upon it; its false apprehension forms its great trunk, which is 
burnt down by the conflagration of nirvana or our knowledge of the utter 
extinction of all things. 


17. The sights of things, the thoughts of the mind, and the various pleasures 
of the world, are all as false as a grove or forest in the sky; or as silver in the 
face of the hoary clouds, or in the coating of conch and pearl shells. 


18. The seasons are its branches (in which they grow and wither away); and 


the ten sides of the air are its smaller boughs; because they spread themselves 
in all directions; self-consciousness is the pith and marrow of this tree (and of 
all sensible creatures), and the wind of the air is the breath of life, that 
fluctuates in every part of this tree of the world. 


19. The sun-shine and moon-beams, are the two flowers of this tree; their 
rising and setting represent the opening and closing of blossoms; and the 
daylight and darkness of night, are as butterflies and bumble bees fluttering 
over them. 


20. Know at last, that one all-pervading ignorance, extends all over this tree 
of the world; stretching from its root in the Tartarus, on all sides of the 
compass and its top in the heavens above. It is all an unreality appearing as 
real existence, and egoism which is the seed of this fallacy, being burnt up by 
the fire un-egoism, it will no more vegetate in the form of this arbour of the 
world; nor put forth itself in future births and continuous transmigrations in 
this visionary world. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
Description of the Temple of Illusion. 


Argument: — Destruction of the arbor of the World by the fire of reason, 
and description of the fabric of the world as the mansion of Delusion, — 
Mayd-mandapa. 


Bhusunda continued and said: — Now Vidyadhara! You have heard, how the 
mundane arbor comprises the earth with her mountains and cavern abodes, 
and stretches to all sides and touches the skies, bearing all living being 
continually moving and living upon it; (i.e., its produce). 


2. Such is the mundane tree, growing out of the seed of egoism; but this 
seed being roasted by the fire of reason, ceases to sprout forth anymore; (i.e., 
into new life in future births). 


3. The visibles are not existent, nor is I, or thou, (i.e., the subjective or 
objective), ever a positive reality, and this fallacy of their positivity is wholly 
burnt away by the knowledge of tajjndna or their identity with God; (i.e., in 
the extinction of all distinctive knowledge in the entity of the sole unity). 


4. As it is the thought of I, and thou, that begets the idea of egoism and 
tuism, which becomes the seed of the world; so it is the thought of non-ego et 
tu, that removes the idea of egoism and tuism, and this is the true and best 
knowledge of God. 


5. Think of the inexistence of the world before its creations, and say where 
was then this knowledge of egoism and tuism, or this delusion of the unity or 
duality. 


6. Those who strive diligently to get rid of their desires altogether, 
according to the instructions of their preceptors (as given before); verily, they 
become successful in obtaining the supreme state (of the knowledge and 
presence of God). 


7. As the confectioner becomes skilful in his profession, by his learning 
and practice of the art of confectionary; so the inquirer after truth becomes 


successful by constant application to it and by no other means. (So also doth 
the Yogi thrive in his Yoga, by and under the direction of his spiritual guide). 


8. Know the world to be the wonderful phenomenon of the intellect, and it 
does not exist in the outer space as it appears to the naked eye, but in the inner 
mind (which bears the prototype of the world). 


9. As a picture is the facsimile of the pattern, which is inscribed in the 
painter’s mind; so it is the twinkling of our thought only, that unfolds or 
obscures the world unto us by its opening and closing. 


10. This thought or fancy of the mind, portrays to sight a large edifice 
supported upon big and huge columns, and studded with gems and pearls; and 
gilt over with gildings of bright gold. 


11. It is surrounded by a thousand pillars of precious stones, rising high like 
the pinnacles of Sumeru; and emitting the various of the rainbows, and 
glittering with the brightness of the evening sun on the clouds. 


12. It is furnished with many a fountain (of the seas and rivers), for the 
sport of men, women, and children living under it; and amidst the decorations 
of all kinds of animals in it. 


13. It is full of elements, with its enemy of darkness that is light, darkness 
and light are its alternate result, hence it has derived its name, — chitra 
picture. 


14. There were lakes of lotuses with kalpa trees, beside them for the sport 
of women, who plucked their flowers for their decorations of them, and which 
scattered about their fragrance as plentifully; as the clouds sprinkle their rain- 
waters all around. 


15. Here the great kuldchalas or boundary mountains, were as light as toys 
in the hands of boys; and they were tossed and whirled about as play things, 
by the breath of little lads. (7.e., Mountains are minute things with respect to 
the great fabric of the universe). 


16. Here the bright evening clouds were as the glittering earrings of the 
ladies, and the light and fleet autumn clouds like flying fans and flappers; the 
heavy clouds of the rainy season, moved as slow as the waving fans of palm 
leaves; and the orb of the earth moved about as a dice on the chessboard, 
under the canopy of the starry heavens. 


17. Here all living creatures and the sun and moon, are moving about as the 
dice and king and queen on the chessboard; and the appearance and 
disappearance of the world in the arena of vacuum, are as the gain or loss in 


the chess play of the gods, (Brahma and others). 


18. As a thought that is long dwelt upon and brooded over in the mind, 
comes to appear as really present before the sight of its entertainer, (i.e., as the 
imagination assumes the shape of an apparition to sight). 


19. So is this formal world a visible representation of the thoughts or 
workings of the mind, it is as an exquisite performance of the mind of the 
artist, from the prototype ingrafted in the soul. 


20. It is the apparition of an unreality, and is present in appearance but 
absent in substance; it is verily the appearance of an unreality, by whatever 
cause it may have come to appear. (The Cause is said to be the original 
ignorance or delusion, (ddi-avidyd or mdyd)). 


21. It is as the sight of the forms of ornaments, in the same substance of 
gold; and the vault of the world, is as full of ever-changing wonders, as the 
changeful and wondrous thoughts of the mind. Wherefore it is the cessation of 
thought, that causes the extinction of the world. (Nothing exists to us whereof 
we have no thought). 


22. Hence it lies entirely in your power, to have or leave the world as you 
may like; either disregard your temporal enjoyments, if you have your final 
liberation; or continue in your acts and rites, in order to continue in your 
repeated transmigrations through endless births and deaths. 


23. I understand you have attained your state of rationality; and have 
purified your soul in this your second or third stage of Yoga; I believe you will 
not fall back or come down to a lower order, therefore, hold your silence and 
rely in the purity of the soul and shut out invisibles from your sight. 


CHAPTER IX. 
On the Development of Intellect. 


Argument: — Description of the Intellect, as cause of the appearance and 
disappearance of the World. 


Bhusunda said: — The unintelligible objects of thought are phenomena of the 
intellect; they lie as calmly in the great mass or inert body of the intellect, as 
the sunbeams shine in the bosom of a clear basin of water, (where they retain 
their light without their heat). 


2. The unintelligent world subsists in the intelligent intellect, by its power 
of intellection; and remains alike with the unlike, (i.e., matter with the mind), 
as the sub-marine fire resides in the water, and the latent heat with cold. 


3. The intelligent and the unintelligent, (i.e., the subjective, I, and the 
objective, — these), have both their source in the intellection of the intellect, 
which produces and reduces them from and into itself, as it is the same force 
of the wind, which kindles as well as extinguishes the fire. 


4. Do you rest in the intellect, which remains after negation of your egoism, 
(which is the cause of both the subjective and the objective); and remain in 
that calm and quiet state of the soul, which results from your thinking in this 
manner. (i.e., By forgetting yourself, you forget everything else besides the 
wakeful intellect). 


5. Thou art settled in thy form of the intellect, both within and without 
everything; as the sweet water remains in and out of a raining cloud. (The 
gloss explains it saying that, after you are freed from all thoughts, you see the 
sole Brahma only). 


6. There is nothing as, I, or thou, but all are forms of one intellect, and 
connected with the same which is Brahma itself; there is none else besides 
which is endued with intelligence, but the whole is one stupendous 
intelligence, with which nothing can be compared. 


7. It is itself the earth, heaven and nether world, with their inhabitants of 


men, gods and demi-gods; and exhibits in itself the various states of their 
being and actions (as upon its stage). 


8. As the world is seen to remain quietly, in its representation map; so doth 
the universe appear from its portraiture in the vacuum or ample space of the 
divine mind. 


9. Hence we see the various appearances, as the divine mind unfolds from 
itself and exhibits to view; as it depends on your option, either to view them 
as animated or inanimated beings; (as you may choose to do the figures of 
animals, drawn in a picture). 


10. These are the wondrous phenomena of the intellect, which appear as so 
many worlds in the open sky; they are as the mirage spread over by the sun- 
beams for delusion of the ignorant; while they appear as empty air to the 
learned, who view them in their true light. 


11. As the blinded eye, beholds spectres and spectrums in the clear sky; so 
doth the world appear as a phantom and phantasmagoria, before the purblind 
sight of the unspiritual and ignorant people in general. 


12. Thus the knowledge of the objective world, and that of the subjective 
ego, are mere reflexions of the ideas in the mind, which appear and disappear 
by turns; just as a city is gilded or shaded by the falling and failing of the 
sunbeams thereon; but in this case city houses are realities, but the apparitions 
of the mind, are as baseless as garden in the empty sky. 


CHAPTER X. 
Description of Creation as an Emanation from 
Brahma. 


Argument: — Brahma existing without attributes and functions, and the 
inexistence of the world at any time or any where beside him. 


Bhusunda continued: — Know, O Vidyadhara! the world as an evolution of 
Divine intelligence, and not as an inert mass and distinct from that 
intelligence as it appears to be. And as the reflexion of fire (or fiery sunbeams) 
in water, is nothing different from the nature of the cold water; so the 
reflexion of the world in the Divine intelligence, is not at all distinct from the 
substance of that Intelligence itself. 


2. Therefore, remain at rest without making any distinction, between your 
knowledge of the world or its absence; (because the refutation of the existence 
of gross matter altogether, refutes the existence of the gross world also); and 
because a picture drawn only on the tablet of the painter’s mind, and not 
painted on an outward plate, is as false as the knowledge of the fairy land in 
the empty air or vacuum. 


3. The omnipotence of Brahma contains also the insensible (or gross) 
matter in his intelligence; as the calm and clear water of the sea contains the 
matter of the future froth and foam within itself. 


4. As the froth is not produced in the water, without some cause or other; so 
the creation never proceeds from the essence of Brahma, without its particular 
cause also. (This cause is said to be Maya). 


5. But the uncaused and causeless Brahma, can have no cause whatever for 
his creation of the world; nor is anything at this world or other, ever born or 
destroyed in himself. (No material substance is ever born or lost in the 
spiritual essence of God). 


6. The entire want of a cause, (either material or formal), makes the growth 
and formation of the world an utter impossibility, it is as impossible as the 


growth of a forest or the sight of a sea in the mirage of a desert as it appears to 
be. 


7. The nature of Brahma is being the same as infinity and eternity, it is 
tranquil and immutable at all times; and is not therefore, liable to entertain a 
thought or will of the creation at any time. Thus, there being no temporary 
cause for such, the world itself must be identic with Brahma himself. 


8. Therefore, the nature of Brahma is both as empty as the hollow vacuity 
of air, as also as dense as the density of a rock; so it is the solidity of Brahma 
that represents the solid cosmos, as his tenuity displays the inane atmosphere. 


9. Whether you can understand anything or nothing, regarding the 
mysterious nature of the Deity, remain quite unconcerned about it; and rest 
your soul in that Supreme spirit, wherein all intelligence and its absence are 
both alike. (To him no great or small but are all alike). 


10. The everlasting bliss of the uncreated God, has no cause for his creation 
of the world, which cannot augment his bliss; therefore, know all that is and 
exists to the increate God himself, from the improbability of his making a 
creation to no purpose whatsoever. 


11. Of what use is it to reason with the ignorant, concerning the production 
and destruction of creation, (i.e., about the existence or inexistence of the 
objective world); when they have not the Divine Intellect in their view, (as all 
in all or as both the subjective and objective in itself). 


12. Wherever there is the Supreme being, there is the same accompanied 
with the worlds also, (as it is impossible to have the idea of God, without the 
association of the world); because the meaning of the word world, conveys 
the sense of their variety. 


13. The supreme Brahma is present in everything in all places, such as in 
the woods and grass, in the habitable earth and in the waters likewise. So the 
creatures of God teem in every part of creation together with the all-creative 
power. 


14. It is improper to ask, what is the nature and constitution of Brahma; 
because there is no possibility of ascertaining the essence and absence of the 
properties of that infinite and transcendental entity. 


15. All want, — abhdva, being wanting in him, who is full, — purna in 
himself; and any particular nature, — bhava, being inapplicable to the infinite 
One, who comprehends all nature in him; all words significant of his nature 
are mere paralogism. 


16. Inexistence and non-entity being altogether impossible, of the 
everlasting and self-existent being; who is always existent in his own essence, 
any word descriptive of his nature, is but a misrepresentation of his true nature 
and quality. 


17. He is neither, I, nor thou, (the subjective or the objective); who is 
unknowable to the understanding, and invisible to the people in all the worlds; 
and yet He is represented as such and such, as false phantoms of the brain 
which presents themselves as ghosts to boys. 


18. That which is free from or beyond the sense of, I, and thou, — the 
subject and object, is known as the truly Supreme; but what is seen under the 
sense of, I, and thou, proves to be null and void. 


19. The distinction of the world from the essence of Brahma, is entirely lost 
in the sight of them, that have unity of Brahma only before their view. The 
subjective and objective are of equal import to them, who believe all sensible 
objects as mere productions of fancy from the very substance of Brahma, as 
the various ornaments are but transformations of the same material of gold, 
etc. 


CHAPTER XI. 
On Truth and Right Knowledge. 


Argument: — Subjection of the senses followed by the government of the 
Mind; and Indifference to visible objects. 


Bhusunda continued: — He is said to be situated in the seat of the Supreme, 
who has his mind unmoved at the stroke of a weapon of his bare body, as also 
at the touch of a form with his naked person. (One must practice his self- 
controul until he attains to this state of insensibility of both his body and 
mind). 


2. One must strive by exercise of his manly powers and patience, to 
practice his rigid hebetude or stoicity, as long as he attains to his somnolence 
or hypnotism over all visible appearances. (Hypnotism is asleep over the 
phenomenal, but wakeful to the spiritual). 


3. The wise man who is acquainted with the truths of nature, is not to be 
thwarted back by the severest tribulation and persecution; as the heaving 
waves of the lake, cannot submerge the lotus that stands firm amidst its water. 


4. He who is impassive as the empty air, to the strokes of weapons on his 
person, and unaffected by the embraces of beauties; is the only person who 
sees inwardly what is worth seeing; (though he is outwardly as insensible as a 
block of stone). 


5. As poison breeds the rust in itself, which is not different from the nature 
of poison. 


6. So the infinity of souls which are produced in the Supreme spirit, retain 
the nature of their original; and which they are capable of knowing. 


7. As the insect that is born in the poison, does not die by the same; so the 
human soul which is produced by the eternal soul, is not subject to death, nor 
does it forsake its own nature, though it takes a grosser form like the vile 
figure of the poisonous insects. 


8. Things born in or produced by Brahma, are of the same nature with 
itself, though different from it in appearance; such is the rust and mustiness of 
meat, which adheres to the food and appears as otherwise. So the world 
subsisting in Brahma, seems as something without it. (The fruit is alike its 
tree, though unlike to it in its shape and size). 


9. No worm is born in poison, that does not retain the nature of poison; it 
never dies in it without being revivified in the same. (All things that are seen 
to die in nature, have only to be regenerated in another form, or as it is said, 
“we die but to be born again.”) 


10. It is owing to the indestructible property of self-consciousness, that all 
beings pass over the great gulph of death, as they leap over a gap in the 
ground hide by the foot mark of a bull, (goshpad). 


11. Why is it, that men neglect to lay hold on that blessed state, which is 
beyond and above all other states in life, and which when had, infuses a cool 
calmness in the soul? 


12. What a great stain it is to the pure soul, to neglect the meditation of the 
glorious God, before which our mind, egoism and understanding, do all 
vanish into nothing or insignificance. 


13. As you look upon a pot and a piece of cloth as mere trifles, so should 
you consider your body as brittle as glass, and your mind, understanding and 
egoism also as empty nothing. 


14. Therefore, it is for the wise and learned, to divert their attention from 
all worldly things, as also from their internal powers of the mind and 
understanding; and to remain steadfast in their consciousness of the soul. 


15. The wise man takes no notice of the faults or merits of others; nor does 
he take heed of the happiness or misery of himself or anybody; knowing well 
that no one is the doer or sufferer of anything whatever. 


CHAPTER XII. 
On the Identity of the Will and its Work of the 
Desire and its Production. 


Argument: — The falsity of egoism, and the futility of the expansion of the 
intellect in creation. Ignorance as the cause of this fallacy and the manner of 
its removal. 


Bhusunda continued: — As the supposition of one vacuity, (as that subsisting 
in a pot or any spot), to be a part or derived from the universal vacuum, is 
false and wrong; so the conception of the visionary ego (as produced from the 
unknown vacuum Brahma), is altogether an error. (i.e., The error of 
conceiving a subtle or gross spirit called the ego, proceeds from ignorance of 
the True Spirit). 


2. The erroneous conception of limited vacuities, being produced from the 
unlimited vacuum, has given rise to the mistaken belief of unreal and 
individual souls, as proceeding from the one universal and undivided soul of 
God. 


3. The divine intellect exists in the form of air in air, which it takes for its 
body; it is manifest throughout the aerial sphere and therefore, I am neither 
the ego nor the non-ego either. (Man is the ego in his intellectual part, and the 
non-ego in his material frame). 


4. The unity of the subtle intellect is of such a nature, that it contains the 
gravity of the immense world in it, (i.e., in its thought); in the same manner as 
a ponderous mountain is contained in an atom, (or as it is composed of atomic 
particles). The conscious intellect is of the form of air, (empty and all- 
pervading in its nature). (This is another instance of the vacuous essence of 
God, according to the vacuistic theory of Vasishtha). 


5. The intellect, which is rarer than subtle air, thinks in itself the gross 
nature of unintellectual matter; which exhibits itself in the form of the world. 
(The dull external world, is a counter part of the internal conception of the 


mind). 


6. It is well known to the spiritualist, that the egoism of ourselves and the 
materialism of the world, are but dilations of the intellect; as the currents and 
curlings of streams in eddies are but dilations of water. (This process of the 
Divine spirit is called its vivarta rupa). 


7. When this process of the intellect is at a stop, the whole course of nature 
is at a stand-still, like the liquid water of the lake without its undulation; or 
like the quiet sphere of the sky, without the stir or agitation of winds in it. (It 
means to say that, as the motion of the spirit causes the action of the world, so 
its cessation, nivarta-rupa, put an end to the course of nature). 


8. Thus there is no other cause of any physical action, in anything in any 
part or period of the world; except what is derived from the agitation of the 
Intellect, without which this whole is a shapeless void and nil. 


9. It is the action of the intellect, that makes the world to appear to us at all 
times and places; whether in the sky, water or land, as also when we wake, 
sleep or dream, (and this action of the mind being put to a stop in death deep 
sleep, the world ceases to exist both in the mind and to our external senses 
also). 


10. The action and inaction of the intellect, is imperceptible to our 
understanding, owing to the extreme tenuity of the mind, which is more 
transparent than the clear sky. 


11. The knowing soul that is unified or settled as one with the Supreme 
spirit, is unconscious of its pleasure or pain and the sense of its egoism; and 
being melted down into the divine essence, it resides as the fluidity of the 
psychic fluid. 


12. The sapient mind is regardless of all external intelligence, fortune, 
fame, or prosperity; and having no desire or hope to rise or fear or shame to 
fall, he sees none of these things before him, as one sees no object of broad 
daylight in the gloom of night. (The holy man has lost sight of all worldly 
things). 


13. The moonlight of the intellect which issues forth from the moon like 
disk of the glory of God, fills the universe with its ambrosial flood; and there 
is no other created world, nor its receptacles of time and space, except the 
essence of Brahma, which fills the whole. 


14. Thus the whole universe being full with the glorious essence of God, it 
is the mind which revolves with the spheres of the worlds on itself, like the 
curling circles on the surface of waters. 


15. The revolving world, is evanescently rolling on like a running stream to 
its decay, with its ever rising and sinking waves, and its gurgling and whirling 
eddies and whirlpools. 


16. As the moving sands appear as water (in the mirage of the desert), and 
as the distant smoke seems as a gathering clouds to the deluded; so doth this 
world appear to them as a gross object of creation, and a third thing beside the 
Divine spirit and Mind. 


17. As the wood pared by the saw appear as separate blocks, and as the 
water divided by the winds has the appearance of detached waves; so doth this 
creation in the Supreme spirit, seem to be something without and different 
from it. 


18. The world is as unsolid and unsubstantial, as the stem of a plantain tree, 
and as false and frail as the leaves of the arbour of our desire; it is plastic in its 
nature, but as hard as stone in the substance. (Being like the shadow of 
something in the hard crystal of the Divine Mind). 


19. It is personified in the form of Virdj, with his thousand heads and feet, 
and as many arms, faces and eyes; and his body filling all sides, with all the 
mountains, rivers and countries situated in it. 


20. It is empty within and any pith in it, it is painted in many colours and 
having no colour of itself. 


21. It is studded all over with bodies of gods and demi-gods, gandharvas, 
vidyadharas and great serpents; it is inert (dull matter of itself), and is moved 
by the all moving air of sutrdtma, — the all connecting spirit of God; and is 
animated by the all enlivening anima of the Supreme soul. 


22. As the scene of a great city appears brilliant to sight, in a painting 
which is well drawn on a canvas, so does the picture of the world, which is 
displayed by imagination in the retina of the mind, appear charming to them, 
who do not deign to consider (to examine) it in its true light. 


23. The reflexion of the unreal and imaginary world, which falls on the 
mirror of the fickle and fluctuating mind; appears to swim upon its surface, as 
a drop of oil floats over the face of water. 


24. This world is overspread with the network of the feelings imprinted in 
the heart, and interspersed with winding eddies of mistake and misery; it runs 
with the flood of our affections, and with silent murmurs of sorrow. 


25. The understanding is apt to attribute optionally, the predicates, I, thou, 
and so forth, to the original and prime Intellect; but none of these is apart from 


the Supreme one, as the fluid is no other than the water itself. (Jiva, — the 
living soul and Brahma, — the universal being synonymous terms, there is no 
distinction whatever between them). 


26. The luminous Intellect itself is styled the creation, (after it has assumed 
to itself the title of ego or its personality); or else there is no other creation or 
any creator thereof, (beside the everlasting intellect, which is represented as 
the personal God-Ego and personified as the creation itself). 


27. As the power of impulsion is inherent in every moving substance, like 
the blowing of winds and flowing of water; so the intellectual soul, being of a 
vacuous form, knows all things in their vacuous or ideal states only. 


28. As seas and oceans are becoming the seeming cause of separate name 
of countries, by separating the connection from one land to another, though 
the vacuum remains ever the same; so delusion is the cause of different ideas 
and dreams of material objects, but spirit remains unchangeful forever. 


29. Know the words, mind, egoism, understanding, and such other terms, 
which are significant of the idea of knowledge, to proceed from ignorance 
alone, and are soon removed by proper investigation into them. 


30. It is by means of conversation with the wise, that it is possible for us to 
remove one half of this ignorance, and it is by investigation into the Sdstras, 
that we are enabled to remove a quarter of it, while our belief of and reliance 
in the Supreme spirit, serves to put down the remaining fourth part of it 
altogether. 


31. Having thus divided yourself into the said four-fold duties, and 
destroyed by degree the four parts of ignorance by each of them; you will find 
at last a nameless something which is the true reality itself. 


32. Rama said: — I can understand Sir, how a moiety of our ignorance is 
removed by conversation with the wise, as also how a fourth part of it driven 
by the study of Sdstras, but tell me Sir, how the remainder of it is removed by 
our belief and reliance in the spirit. 


33. Tell me Sir, what you mean by the simultaneous and gradual removal 
of ignorance, and what am I to understand by what you call the nameless one 
and the true reality, as distinguished from the unreal. 


34. Vasishtha replied: — It is proper for all good and virtuous people who 
are dispassionate and dissatisfied with the world, to have recourse to wise and 
holy men, and argue with them regarding the course of nature, in order to get 
over the ocean of this miserable world. 


35. It is proper also for intelligent persons, to be in diligent search after the 
passionless and unselfish men wherever they may be found; and particularly 
to find out and reverence such of them, as are possessed with the knowledge 
of the soul, and are kindly disposed to impart their spiritual knowledge to 
others. 


36. The acquisition of such a holy sage, takes away one half of one’s 
temporal and spiritual ignorance; by setting him on the first and best step of 
divine knowledge. (The subsequent stages of Yoga, are based upon the 
initiatory step or stage). 


37. Thus, half of one’s spiritual gloom being dispelled by association with 
the holy; the remaining two fourths are removed, by religious learning and 
one’s own faith and devotion. 


38. Whenever any desire of any enjoyment whatever, is carefully 
suppressed in one’s self by his own endeavour; it is called his self-exertion, 
which destroys one fourth of spiritual ignorance. 


39. So it is the society of the holy, the study of Sdstras and one’s own 
exertion, which tend to take away one’s sins, and it is done by each of these 
singly or all of these conjointly, either by degrees or at once and at the same 
time. 


40. Whatever there remains either as something or nothing at all, upon the 
total extinction of ignorance, the same is said to be the transcendent and 
nameless or unspeakable something or nothing, (owing to its being beyond all 
conception). 


41. This is verily the real Brahma, the undestroyed, infinite and eternal one; 
and which being but a manifestation of the unsubstantial will, is understood as 
an inexistent blank likewise. By knowing the measureless, immeasurable and 
unerring being, do you rely in your own nihility of nirvana, and be free from 
all fear and sorrow. (He who thinks himself as nothing, has no care or fear for 
anything). 


CHAPTER XIII. 
Anecdote of Indra, and an account of the 
Atomic World. 


Argument: — The acts of Delusion, and Deception of senses, and Indra’s 
Vision of the World in an Atom. 


Bhusunda Said: — The universe, which contains the totality of existence, and 
appears as a wide extended sphere; is not in need of any pre-existent place or 
time as recipients of its substance just as the ethereal light (of the twilight), 
requires no prop or pillar in the heavens for its support. (The simultaneity of 
the seeming containers, — time and space, and their apparent contents, — the 
wide world and the broad light, disproves the priority of the receptacles with 
regard to their occupants, as it is commonly understood to be. So the verse: — 
Here there is no container or contained, nothing first or last; But all is one that 
fills and contains this all. — Gloss). 


2. The fabrication of this triple world (containing the celestial, terrestrial 
and infernal regions), is the mere thought or working of the mind; and all this 
is more quiet and calm, more minute and light, and much more translucent 
than the odor residing in the air. 


3. The world is a wondrous phenomenon of the intellect, which though it is 
as minute as a particle of fragrance borne by the wind; appears yet as big as a 
mountain to the sensation of the outward organs of sense. (This is the effect of 
the deception of the senses). 


4. Everyone, (animal beings), views and thinks the world, in the same form 
and light as it presents unto him; just as the operations of the mind and visions 
in a dream, appear as they occur to their recipients and to no other besides. 
(The deceptive senses and dreams, depict objects in different aspects to 
different persons). 


5. Here I will instance an old legend, of what happened to Indra, — the lord 
of Gods, when he was confined in a minute particle in times of yore. 


6. It came to pass once upon a time, that this world grew up as a small fig 
fruit on a branch of the Yuga tree, in the great arbour of a Kalpa age. (The 
periods of a Yuga and Kalpa are represented as a tree and forest by metaphor). 


7. The mundane fruit was composed of the three compartments of the earth, 
sky and infernal regions, containing the gods and demi-gods of heaven, the 
hills and living creatures on earth, the marshy lands below, with troops of 
gnats and flies (fluttering about the fig tree of the world, and representing the 
diseases and dangers that hover over it). 


8. It is a wondrous production of the intellect, (which is its architect); and is 
as high as handsome full-blown buds with the juice of desire. (i.e., it is full of 
all delights, that the heart can desire). It is odorous with all kinds of 
flavourous fragrances, that we can feel and tempting to the mind by the 
variety of its savours that are sweet to taste. (Does it allude to the forbidden 
fruit which was enticing to sight and sweet to taste, and meant the world itself 
that was to be avoided)? 


9. This tree grew upon the Brahma tree, (otherwise called the udumvara or 
fig tree), which was over hung by millions of creepers and orchids; egoism is 
the stalk of the fruit, which appeared beautiful to sight. 


10. It is encompassed around with oceans, seas and arteries, and whose 
face-light is the principal door. It is salvating the starry heaven above and the 
moist earth below. 


11. It is ripened at the end of the Kalpa age, when it becomes the food of 
black crows and cuckoos; (messengers of darksome death); or if it falls below 
there is an end of it, by its absorption in the indifferent Brahma. 


12. There lived at one time the lord of Gods, — the great Indra in that fruit, 
just as a big mosquito resides in an empty pot in company with the small 
gnats as their great leader. 


13. But this great lord was weakened in his strength and valour by his study 
of and the lectures of his preceptor on spiritualism; which made him a 
spiritualist, and seer in all past and future matters. 


14. It happened once on a time, when the valiant god Narayana and his 
heavenly host, had been reposing in their rest; and their leader Indra was so 
debilitated in his arms; that the demi-gods rose in open rebellion against God. 


15. Then Indra rose with his flashing arms and fire, and fought with the 
fighting Asuras for a long time; but being at last defeated by the superior 
strength, he fled away in haste from the field. 


16. He ran in all the ten directions, and was pursued by the enemy 
wherever he fled; he could get no place of rest, as a sinner has no resting place 
in the next world, (but continues to rove about in never ending 
transmigrations of his soul). 


17. Then as the enemy lost sight of him for a moment, he availed to himself 
of that opportunity; he compressed the thought of his big body in his mind, 
and became of a minute form on the out-side of himself. (It is the inner 
thought that moulds the outer body, according to the inner type). 


18. He then entered into the womb of an atom, which was glittering amidst 
the expanse of solar rays; as a bee enters into the cup or seed vessel of a lotus 
bud, by means of the consciousness of his personal minuteness. 


19. He had his instant rest in that state, and then his hope of final bliss in 
the next; by utter forgetfulness of the warfare, and attainment of the ultimate 
beatitude of the nirvana torpitude in the end. (All action is warfare, and 
cessation from it gives peace and rest). 


20. He instantly conceived in his imagination, his royal palace in that lotus, 
and he sat upon his lotiform seat, (padmdsana), within it, as if he was resting 
on his own bed. 


21. Then Indra, otherwise called Hari, being seated in that mansion, saw an 
imaginary city in it, containing a grand edifice in the midst; with its walls 
studded with gems, pearls and corals. 


22. Hari, (the Indra), beheld from within the city, a large country extending 
about it, and containing many hills and villages, pasture grounds for kine, 
forests and human habitations. 


23. Indra then felt the desire of enjoying that country, with all the lands and 
hills, the seas to their utmost boundaries, as he had formed in his imagination. 


24. Shakra, (Indra), afterwards conceived the desire, of possessing the three 
worlds to himself, together with all the earth and ocean, sky and the infernal 
regions, the heavens, planetary spheres above and the ranges of mountains 
below. 


25. Thus did Indra remain there as the lord of gods, and in possession of all 
abundance for his enjoyments; and there was born to him afterwards, a son 
named Kunda of great strength and valour. 


26. Then at the end of his life time, this Indra of unblemished reputation, 
forsook his mortal frame, and became extinct in his nirvdna dissolution, as 
when a lamp is extinguished for want of oil. 


27. Kunda reigned over the three worlds (of and like his father), and then 
having given birth to a boy he departed to his ultimate state of bliss, after 
expiration of the term of his life. 


28. That son also reigned in his time, (like the sire), and then departed at 
the end of his life time, to the holy state of supreme felicity, by leaving a son 
after him. 


29. In this manner a thousand generations of the grandsons of the first 
Indra, have reigned and passed away in their time; and there is still a prince by 
name of Ansaka, reigning over the state of the lord of gods. 


30. Thus the generations of the lord of immortals, still hold their 
sovereignty over the imaginary world of Indra; in that sacred particle of 
sunbeam in empty air, although that atomic particle is continually going to 
decay and waste in this long course of time, (yet the imagination of its 
existence has laid a firm hold on the minds of their posterity forever). 


CHAPTER XIV. 
Story of Indrani; and Establishment of the Identity 
of the Acts of Creation and Imagination. 


Argument: — Origin of Sakra race and of the World like the fibres of 
Lotus-stalks and its spiritual sense. 


Bhusunda continued: — There was one prince born of the race of that Indra; 
who had also become the lord of gods; He was endowed with prosperity and 
all good qualities, and devoted to divine knowledge. 


2. This prince of Indra’s race, received his divine knowledge from the oral 
instruction of Vrihaspati, (the preceptor of the gods). 


3. He knowing the knowable-one, persisted in the course of knowledge as 
he was taught and being the sovereign lord of gods, he reigned over all the 
three worlds. 


4. He fought against the demi-gods, and conquered all his foes; he made a 
hundred sacrifices, and got over the darkness of ignorance by his enlightened 
mind. 


5. He remained long in meditation, having his mind fixed in his cerebral 
artery, resembling the thread of a tubular stalk of the lotus, and continued to 
reflect on hundreds of many others matters. (i.e., On the imaginary world and 
its kingdom and conquests together with many other things). 


6. He had once the desire of knowing by the power of his understanding, 
how he could see the essence of Brahma in his meditation, (or how he could 
have a sight of the nature of God, manifest before him. — Gloss). 


7. He sat in his solitary retirement, and saw in this silent meditation of his 
tranquil mind, the disappearance of the concatenation of causes all about and 
inside himself. 


8. He beheld the omnipotent Brahma, as extended in and about all things; 
and presenting all times and places and existing as all in all, and pervading all 


things in all places. 


9. His hands stretch to all sides, and his feet reach to the ends of the worlds; 
his face and eyes are on all sides, and his head pierces the spheres; his ears are 
set in all places, and he endures by encompassing all things everywhere. 


10. He is devoid of all the organs of sense, and yet possessed of the powers 
of all senses in himself; he is the support of all, and being destitute of 
qualities, is the source and receptacle of all quality. (The qualities of finite 
bodies are of a finite nature, but the infinite are infinite, eternal and 
immutable). 


11. Unmoved and unmoving by himself, he is moving in and out of all 
things, as well as moveth them all both internally and externally (that is to 
say, He is the moving force of dull matter). He is unknowable owing to his 
minuteness, and appears to be at a distance, though he is so near us. 


12. He is as the one sun and moon in the whole universe, and the same land 
in all the earth; He is the one universal ocean on the globe, and one Meru 
Mountain (of the sun’s path) all about. 


13. He is the pith and gravity of all objects, and he is the one vacuum 
everywhere; he is the wide world and the great cosmos, that is common to all. 


14. He is the liberated soul of all, and the primary intellect in every place; 
he is every object everywhere, and beside all things in all places. 


15. He is in all pots and huts, in all trees and their coatings; he moves the 
carts and carriages, and enlivens alike all men and other animals likewise. 


16. He is in all the various customs and manners of men, and in all the 
many modes of their thinking; he resides equally in the parts of an atom, as 
also in the stupendous frame of the triple world. 


17. He resides as pungency in the heart of pepper, as vacuity in the sky; and 
in his intellectual soul the three worlds, whether they are real entities or mere 
unrealities. 


18. Indra beheld the lord in this manner, and then being liberated from his 
animal state by the help of his pure understanding; he remained all along in 
the same state of his meditation as before. 


19. The magnanimous god sees in his revery, all things united in his 
meditative mind; and beheld this creation in the same light as it appears to us, 
(as a real entity). 


20. He then wandered in his mind all over this creation, and believing 


himself as the lord of all he saw in it, became the very god Indra; and reigned 
over the three worlds and their manifold pageantries. 


21. Know, O chief of the race of vidyadharas, that the same Indra who was 
descended of the family of Indras, has been still holding his reign as the lord 
of gods to this day. 


22. He then perceived in his mind, by virtue of his former habit of thinking, 
the seed of his remembrance sprouting forth with the lotus stalk, wherein he 
thought to have lain before. 


23. As I have related to you of the reign of the former Indra, in the bosom 
of an atom in the sunbeam; and of the residence of his last generation, — the 
latter Indra, in the hollow fibre of the lotus stalk. 


24. So have thousands of other Indras gone by, and are going on still in 
their fancied realm in the empty sky, in the same manner and mode as 
observed by their predecessors. 


25. So runs the course of nature in ceaseless succession, like the current of 
a river running onward to the sea; and so do men whether acquainted or not 
with the divine knowledge, flow on as streams to the abyss of eternity, (which 
is tatpada or state of the Deity). 


26. Such is lengthening delusion of the world appearing as true; but 
vanishing to nothing at the appearance of the light of truth, (which is the sight 
of God in everything). 


27. From whatever cause, and in whatever place or time, and in whatever 
manner this delusion is seen to have sprung, it is made to disappear by 
knowledge of the same. 


28. It is egoism alone, which produces the wonderful appearance of 
delusion; as the cloud in the sky causes the rain; it spreads itself as a mist, but 
disappears immediately at the sight of light. 


29. He who has got rid of his belief of the looking and sight of the world, 
(i.e., Of both the subjective and objective, as well as of his action and 
passion); and has attained the knowledge of self-reflecting soul; and who has 
placed his belief in one vacuous form of empty air; which is devoid of all 
properties and beyond all categories, is freed from all option and settled in the 
only One. 


CHAPTER XV. 
The Final Extinction of the Vidyadhara. 


Argument. — Description of Egoism as the productive seed of the world, 
and its extinction as the cause of emancipation from it. 


Bhusunda resumed, and said: — Wherever there is the thought of egoism of 
anyone, the idea of the world will be found to be inherent in it; as it appeared 
to Indra within the bosom of the atomic particle. 


2. The error of the world, (the false conception of its reality), which covers 
the mind as the green verdure of grass overspreads the face of the ground; has 
for its origin the idea of one’s egoism, which takes its root in the human soul. 


3. This minute seed of egoism, being moistened with the water of desire, 
produces the arbor of the three worlds, on the height of Brahma in the great 
forest of vacuum. 


4. The stars are the flowers of this tree, hang on high on the branches of the 
mountain craigs; the rivers resemble its veins and fibres, flowing with the 
juicy pith of their waters, and the objects of desire are the fruits of this tree. 
(The objects of desire are the enjoyments and fruition of life). 


5. The revolving worlds, are the fluctuating waves of the water of egoism; 
and the profluent current of desire, continually supplies with varieties of 
exquisite symposiums, sweet to the taste of the intellect. (i.e., The pleasures of 
desire are sweet to the mind, and afford intellectual delight). 


6. The sky is the boundless ocean full of ethereal waters, and teeming with 
showering drops of star light in it; plenty and poverty are the two whirlpools 
in the ocean of the earth, and all our woes are the mountainous waves on its 
surface. (i.e., The heaven and earth are the two oceans above and below; the 
one shining with starry light, and the other gliding with waves of woe. So says 
the Bible: — And God made the firmament, to divide the waters above from 
the waters below. — Genesis). 


7. The three worlds are presented as a picture of the ocean, with the upper 


lights as its froths and foams swimming upon it; the spheres are floating as 
bubbles upon it, and their belts are as the thick valves of their doors. 


8. The surface of the earth is as a hard and solid rock, and the intellect 
moves as a black crow upon it; and the hurry and bustle of its people, are 
conformable with the incessant rotation of the globe. 


9. The infirmities and errors, old age and death, are as billows gliding on 
the surface of the sea; and the rising and falling of bodies in it, are as the 
swelling and dissolving of bubbles in water. 


10. Know the world to be a gust of the breath of your egoism, and know it 
also as a Sweet scent proceeding from the lotus like flower of egoism. 


11. Know the knowledge of your egoism and that of the objective world, 
are not two different things; but they are the one and same thing; as the wind 
and its breath, the water and its fluidity, and the fire and its heat. 


12. The world is included under the sense of ego, and the ego is contained 
in the heart of the world; and these being productive of one another, are 
reciprocally the container and contained of each other. 


13. He who effaces the seed of his egoism from his understanding, by 
means of his ignoring it altogether; has verily washed off the picture of the 
world from his mind, by the water of ignorance of it. 


14. Know Vidydadhara, there is no such thing as is implied by ego; it is a 
causeless nothing as the horn of a hare. 


15. There is no egoism in the all-pervading and infinite Brahma, who is 
devoid of all desire; and therefore, there being no cause nor ground of it, it is 
never anything in reality. 


16. Whatever is nothing in reality, could not possibly have any cause in the 
beginning of creation; therefore, egoism is a nihility, as the son of a barren 
woman is a nullity in nature. 


17. The want of egoism on the one hand, proves the privation of the world 
also on the other; thus, there remains the Intellect or the one mind alone, in 
which everything is extinct. 


18. From the proof of the absence of ego and the world, the operations of 
the mind and the sight of visibles, all come to an end, and there remains 
nothing for thee to care for or fear. 


19. Whatever is not is a naught altogether, and the rest are as calm and 
quiet as nil in existence; knowing this as certain, be enlightened, and fall no 


more to the false error which has no root in nature. 


20. Being purged from the stain of fancy, you become as purified and 
sanctified as the holy lord Siva forever, and then the sky will seem to thee as a 
huge mountain, and the vast world will dwindle to an atom. (This is done by 
two powers of adhydropa and vyapadesa, or expansion or contraction in 
Yoga). 


CHAPTER XVI. 
Extinction of Vidyadhara (Continued). 


Argument: — Entrancement of the Vidyadhara at the end of the Discourse 
in favour of Non-egoism. 


Bhusunda continued: — As I was lecturing in this manner, the chief of the 
vidyadharas became dull in the consciousness, (i.e., unconscious of himself), 
and fell into the trance of samddhi, — anaesthesia. 


2. And notwithstanding my repeated attempts, to awaken him from that 
state (of insensibility); he did not open his eyes to the sight lying before him, 
but was wholly absorbed in his nirvdna-extinction. 


3. He attained the supreme and ultimate state, and became enlightened in 
his soul (by what I had instructed him); and made no other further attempt to 
know what he sought. (The attempts to know God, besides sravana or 
attending to the lectures of the guru, are reflection, meditation, efc.). 


4. (Here Vasishtha said to Rama:) — It is therefore, Rama, that I related 
this narrative to exemplify the effect of instruction in pure hearts, where it 
floats like a drop of oil on the surface of water; (i.e., where it does not sink 
down nor is lost). 


5. This instruction consists in forgetting the existence of the ego in the 
Supreme spirit, this is the best advice and there is no other like this; and this is 
calculated to give peace and comfort to your soul. 


6. But when this advice falls in the soil of evil minds, it is choked up and 
lost in the end; as the purest pearl falls from the surface of a smooth mirror (or 
piece of glass). 


7. But good advice sticks fast in the calm minds of the virtuous, and it 
enters into their reasoning souls; as the sunlight enters and shines in the 
sunstone. 


8. Egoism is verily the seed of all worldly misery, as the seed of the thorny 


simul tree grows only prickles on earth; so is meity or the thought that this is 
mine, the out stretching branch of this tree. 


9. First the seed ego, and then its branch of meity or mineness, produce the 
endless leaves of our desires; and their sense of selfishness, is productive of 
the burthensome fruits of our woe and misery. 


10. Then the vidyadhara said; I understand, O chief of sages, that it is in 
this manner, that dull people also become long living in this world; and it is 
this true knowledge, which is the cause of the great longevity of yours and 
other sages. 


11. Those who are pure in their hearts and minds, soon attain to their 
highest state of fearlessness, after they are once admonished with the 
knowledge of truth. 


12. Vasishtha said: — The chief of the birds of air, spoke to me in this 
manner on the summit of the Sumeru Mountain; and then held his silence like 
the mute clouds on the top of Rishyasringa chain. (It is said that the clouds 
never roar when they rove over this hill). 


13. Having taken leave of the sagely bird, I repaired to the abode of the 
Vidyadhara (in order to learn the truth of the story); and then returned to my 
place, which was graced by the assemblage of sages. 


14. I have thus related to you, O Rama, the narration of the veteran bird, 
and the sedateness which was attained by the Vidyadhara with little pain and 
knowledge. It is now the lapse of the long period of eleven great Yugas, since 
my said interview with Bhusunda, — the veteran chief of the feathered tribe. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
Lecture on the Annihilation of Egoism. 


Argument: — The Yoga or mode of consuming egoism by the fire of Non- 
egoism. 


Vasishtha said: — It is by means of the knowledge of one’s want of egoism, 
that the arbor of his desire, which is productive of the fruit of worldliness, and 
which is fraught with the taste of all kinds of sweet and bitterness; may be 
checked in its growth. 


2. It is by one’s habit of thinking his unegoism, that he comes to view both 
gold and stone, as well as all sorts of rubbish in the same light; and by being 
calm and quiet at all events, has never any cause of sorrow at anything 
whatsoever. 


3. When the cannon-ball of egoism, is let to fly out from the gun of the 
mind by force of divine knowledge; we are at a loss to know, where the stone 
of egoism takes its flight. 


4. The stone of egoism being flung from the balustrade of the body, by the 
gigantic force of spiritual knowledge; we know not where this ponderous 
egoism is driven and lost. 


5. After the stone of egoism is flung away, by the great force of the 
knowledge of Brahma only; we cannot say where this engine of the body 
(with its boast of egoism in it), is lost forever. (Here are three comparisons of 
egoism, — 1. of a gunshot; 2. of a balustrade stone; 3. of a pebble in a sling). 


6. The meaning of ego is frost in the heart of man, and melts away under 
the sunshine of unegoism; it then flies off in vapour, and then disappears into 
nothing we know not where. 


7. The ego is the juice of the inner part of the body, and the unego is the 
solar heat without; the former is sucked up by the latter, and forsakes the dried 
body like a withered leaf, and then flies off where we know not. 


8. The moisture of egoism, being sucked up from the leafy body of the 
living, flies by the process of its suction by the solar heat, to the unknown 
region of endless vacuum. 


9. Whether a man sleeps in his bed or sits on the ground, whether he 
remains at home or roves on rocks, whether he wanders over the land or 
water, wherever he sits or sleeps or is awake or not: — 


10. This formless egoism abides in it, either as gross matter or the subtle 
spirit, or in some state or other; which though it is afar from it, seems to be 
united with it. (The true ego of the far distant Divine spirit, seems to be 
incorporated with the material body). 


11. Egoism is seated as the minute seed, in the heart of the fig tree of the 
body; where it sprouts forth and stretches its branches, composing the 
different parts of the world. (i.e., The seed of egoism develops itself in the 
form of the creation, which is a creature of its own). 


12. Again, the big tree of the body, is contained within the minute seed of 
egoism; which bursts out in the branches forming the several parts of the 
universe. 


13. As the small seed is seen by everyone, to contain within it a large tree, 
which develops itself into a hundred branches, bearing all their leaves, flowers 
and abundance of fruits; so doth the big body reside with the atomic seed of 
egoism, with all its endless parts of corporeal organs and mental faculties, 
which are discernible to the sight of the intelligent. 


14. Egoism is not to be had in the body by reasoning, which points out the 
mind of everybody, to seek it in the sphere of the vacuous Intellect; the seed 
of egoism does not spring from the bosom of unreality, and the blunder of the 
reality of the world, is destroyed by the fire proceeding from the spirituality of 
the wise. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
Description of the Universal Sphere. 


Argument: — How the material world is framed by intellect, its formation 
and destruction, one by reminiscence and the other by forgetfulness. 


Vasishtha related: — There is never and nowhere an absolute death or total 
dissolution of the body together with the mind, soul and egoism; but it is the 
cessation of the inward imagery of the mind, that is called its quietus. 


2. Look at these sights of the Meru and Mandara mountains, which are born 
before thy presence; they are not carried to and fro to everybody, but are 
reflected in the minds of all, like the flying clouds of autumn in the water of a 
river. 


3. These creations are placed over and above and below and under one 
another, like the coatings of a plantain tree; and they are either in contact with 
or detached from one another like clouds in the sky. 


4. Rama said: — Sir, I do not fully comprehend the sound sense of what 
you say by the words, “Look at these flying sights,” and therefore, I beg to 
you to explain this clearly unto me. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — Know, Rama, that the life contains the mind, and 
the mind is the container of the worlds within it; as there are various kinds of 
trees and their several parts, contained in the bosom of a small berry. (And 
this is meant by one thing being contained within another). 


6. After a man is dead, his vital airs fly to and unite with the ethereal air; as 
the liquid water of streams flows to and mixes with the main ocean. (This is 
by attraction of things of the same kind). 


7. The winds of heaven then disperse on all sides, his vital airs together 
with the imaginary worlds of his life time, which subsisted in the particles of 
his vital breath. 


8. I see the winds of heaven, bearing away the vital airs, together with their 


contents of the imaginary worlds; and filling the whole space of air with vital 
breath on all sides. 


9. I see the Meru and Mandara mountains, wafted with the imaginary 
worlds before me; and you also will observe the same, before the sight of your 
understanding. (The whole vacuum teeming with life). 


10. The ethereal airs are full with the vital airs of the dead, which contain 
the minute particles of mind in them; and these minds again contain the types 
of the worlds in them, just as the sesame seeds contain the oil in them. 


11. As the ethereal airs bear the vital airs, which are of the same kind with 
them, (both being airy substances); so are the vital breaths accompanied with 
particles of the mind (which is equally an airy substance also), these again 
bear the pictures of the worlds in them, as if they are ingrafted upon them. 


12. The same vacuum contains the whole creation and the three worlds 
with the earth and ocean, all which are borne in it, as the different odors are 
borne by the winds. 


13. All these are seen in the sight of the understanding, and not by the 
vision of the visual organs; they are the portraiture of our imagination, like the 
fairy lands we see in our dreams before us. 


14. There are many other things, more subtle than the visible atmosphere, 
and which owing to their existence in our desire or fancy only, are not borne 
upon the wings of the winds as the former ones. (Though it is said in ordinary 
speech, that our desires and fancies are borne by our internal humour of vayu 
or wind). 


15. But there are some certain truths, which are derived from the intellect, 
and are called intellectual principles, which have the power to cause our 
pleasure and pain, and lead us to heaven or hell; (Such as virtue and vice). 
(These are the immutable principles of right and wrong, abiding in and 
proceeding from the intellect). 


16. Again, our desires are as the shadows of cities, floating on the stream of 
life; and though the current of life is continually gliding away, yet the 
shadowy desires whether successful or not, ever remain the same. (Lit., are 
never carried away by the current). 


17. The vital breath carries its burden of the world, along with its course to 
the stillness of endless vacuity; as the breezes bear away the fragrance of 
flowers, to the dreary desert where they are lost forever. 


18. Though the mind is ever fickle, changeable and forgetful in its nature; 


yet it never loses the false idea of the world which is inherent in it, as a pot 
removed to any place and placed in any state, never gets rid of its inner 
vacuity. (The idea of the world is carried by reminiscence, in every state and 
stage of the changeful mind). 


19. So when the fallacy of the false world has taken possession of the 
deluded mind, it is alike impossible either to realize or set it at naught, like the 
form of the formless Brahma. 


20. Or if this world is a revolving body, carried about by the force of the 
winds; yet we have no knowledge of its motion, as when sitting quiet in a 
boat, though carried afar to the distance of miles by the tide and winds. 


21. As men sitting in a boat, have no knowledge of the force which carries 
the boat forward; so we earthly beings have no idea of the power that is 
attached to it in its rotatory motion. 


22. As a wide extending city, is represented in miniature in a painting at the 
foot of a column; so is this world contained in the bosom of the minute atom 
of the mind. 


23. A thing, however little or insignificant, is taken to be too much and of 
great importance, by the low and mean; as a handful of paddy is of great value 
to the little mouse than gems, and a particle of mud to the contemptible frog, 
than the pearls under the water. (So a particle of the mind is enough for the 
whole world). 


24. Again, a trifle is taken as too much, by those who are ignorant of its 
insignificance; as the learned in the error of their judgement, mistake this 
visionary world as preparatory to their future happiness or misery. (The world 
being nothing in reality, cannot lead to anything, to real good or evil). 


25. The inward belief of something as real good, and of another as positive 
evil, is a mistake common to the majority of mankind, and to which the 
learned also are liable, in their conduct in this world. (The wise man is 
indifferent to everything, and neither likes nor takes the one, nor hates or 
rejects the other). 


26. As the intelligent and embodied soul, is conscious of every part of the 
body in which it is confined; so the enlightened living soul, — jiva, beholds 
all the three worlds displayed within itself, (as in the God Virdj). 


27. The unborn and ever-lasting God, who is of the form of conscious soul, 
extending over the infinity of space, has all these worlds, as parts of his all- 
pervading vacuous body. 


28. The intelligent and ever living soul (of God), sees the uncreated worlds 
deeply impressed in itself; as a rod of iron (were it endowed with 
intelligence), would see the future knives and needles in itself. 


29. As a clod of earth, whether endowed with intelligence or not knows the 
seed which is hidden in it, and which it grows to vegetation afterwards; so 
doth the ever-living soul know the world which is contained in it. 


30. As the sensitive or insensitive seed, knows the germ, plant and tree, 
which it contains within its bosom; so doth the spirit of God, perceive the 
great arbor of the world conceived in its profoundest womb. 


31. As the man having his sight, sees the image of something reflected in a 
mirror, which the blind man does not; so the wise man sees the world in 
Brahma, which the ignorant does not perceive (but think the world as distinct 
from him). 


32. The world is nothing except the union of the four categories of time, 
space, action, and substance; and egoism being no way distinct from the 
predicates of the world, subsists in God who contains the whole in Himself. 
(God is not predicable by any particular predicate; but is the congeries of all 
the predicates taken collectively in his nature). 


33. Whatever lesson is inculcated to anybody by means of a parable, i.e., 
whatever thing is signified to someone by a comparison, know that the simile 
relates to some particular property of the compared object and not in all 
respects. (So the similitude of iron rod given to god in the sruti and this book, 
regards only its material causality, and not its insensibility with the sensible 
spirit of God). 


34. Whatever is seen to be moving or unmoving here in this world; is the 
vivarta or expanded body of the living soul, without any alteration in its 
atomic minuteness. (Nature is the body, and God the soul. — Pope). 


35. Leaving the intelligence aside, (which is wanting in created objects); 
and taking the force only, (which actuates all nature); we find no difference of 
this physical force from the giver of the force. 


36. Again, whatever alteration, is produced in the motion or option of 
anything or person, at any time or place or in any manner; is all the act of that 
Divine Intellect. 


37. It is the intellect which infuses in the mind the power of its option, 
volition, imagination and the like; because none of these can spring as a 
sprout in the mind, which is without intelligence and without an intelligent 
cause of it. 


38. Whatever desires and fancies, rise in the minds of the unenlightened; 
are not of the nature of the positive will or decree of the Divine Mind, owing 
to the endless variety and mutuality of human wishes. 


39. The desires rising in the minds of the enlightened, are as they were no 
desires and never had their rise; because — 


40. All thoughts and desires being groundless, they are as false as the idle 
wishes of boys; for who has ever obtained the objects of his dream? (or that 
he has beheld in his dream)? 


41. Sankalpa with its triple sense of thought, desire and imagination, is 
impressed by the intellect on the living soul (which is the image of God) from 
its past reminiscence; and though we have a notion of this ideal soul, yet it is 
as untrue and unsubstantial as a shadow; but not so the original Intellect, 
which is both real and substantial. 


42. He who is freed from the error of taking the unreal world for real, 
becomes as free as the god Siva himself; and having got rid of the corporeal 
body, becomes manifest in his spiritual form. 


43. The imagination of the ignorant, whirls about the worlds, as the wind 
hurls the flying cotton in the air; but they appear to be as unmoved as stones to 
the wise, who are not led away by their imagination. 


44. So there are multitudes of worlds, amidst many other things in the vast 
womb of vacuum which nobody can count; some of which are united with one 
another in groups, and others that have no connection with another. 


45. The supreme intellect being all in all, manifests itself in endless forms 
and actions, filling the vast space of infinity, some of which are as transient as 
rain drops or bubbles in air and water, which quickly burst out and disappear; 
and others appearing as the great cities (of gods, efc.), situated in the heart of 
the Infinite one. 


46. Some of these are as durable as rocks, and others are continually 
breaking and wearing out; some appearing as bright as with their open eyes, 
and others as dark as with their closed eyelids; some of these are luminous to 
sight and others obscured under impenetrable darkness; thus, the bosom of the 
intellect resembling the vast expanse of the ocean, is rolling on with the waves 
of creation to all eternity. 


47. Some, though set apart, are continually tending towards another; as the 
waters of distant rivers are running to mix with those of seas and ocean; and 
as the luminous bodies of heaven, appearing together to brighten its sphere. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
Description of the Form of Viraj or the all 
Comprehending Deity. 


Argument: — The Essence of the Living soul, and of the undivided and 
Individual bodies; and Distinction of things with regard to their distinct 
natures and actions. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, regarding the nature of the living soul, and the 
manner of its assuming its different forms; and tell me also its original form, 
and those which it takes at different times and places. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The infinite intelligence of God, which fills all 
space and vacuum; takes of its own will a subtle and minute form, which is 
intelligible under the name of Intellect; and it is this which is expressed by the 
term living soul, — jiva or zoa. 


3. Its original form is neither that of a minute atom, nor a bulky mass; not 
an empty vacuity, nor anything having its solidity. It is the pure intellect with 
consciousness of itself, it is omnipresent and is called the living soul. (It is 
neither the empty space, nor anything contained therein). 


4. It is the minutest of the minute, and the hugest of the huge; it is nothing 
at all, and yet the all, which the learned designate as the living soul. (The 
preceding one is a negative proposition, and this an affirmative one). 


5. Know it as identic with the nature, property and quality, of any object 
whatever that exists anywhere; It is the light and soul of all existence, and 
self-same with all, by its engrossing the knowledge of everything in itself. 
(Because nothing is existent in reality but in its idea, and the soul having all 
ideas in itself, is identic with all of them). 


6. Whatever this soul thinks in any manner, of anything at any place or 
time, it immediately becomes the same by its notion thereof. (i.e., Being full 
with the idea of a thing, it is said to be identified with the same). (The 
collective soul becomes all whatever it thinks or wills, as the soul of God; but 


the individual soul thinks as it becomes at any place or time, — as the soul of 
man or any particular being. — Gloss). 


7. The soul possesses the power of thinking, as the air has its force in the 
winds; but its thoughts are directed by the knowledge of things (that it derives 
by means of the senses); and not by the guidance of anyone, as the appearance 
of ghosts to boys. 


8. As the existent air appears to be inexistent, without the motion of the 
wind; so the living soul desisting from its function of thinking, is said to be 
extinct in the Supreme Deity. 


9. The living soul is misled to think of its individuality as the ego, by the 
density or dullness of its intellect; and supposes itself to be confined within a 
limited space of place and time, and with limited powers of action and 
understanding. (Thus the infinite soul mistakes itself for a finite being, by the 
dullness of its understanding). 


10. Being thus circumscribed by time and space, and endowed with 
substance and properties of action, efc., it assumes to itself an unreal form or 
body, with the belief of its being or sober reality. (Thus, the incorporeal soul, 
is incorporated in a corporeal frame). 


11. It then thinks itself to be enclosed in an ideal atom; as one sees himself 
in his dream to be involved in his unreal death. 


12. And as one finds in its mind his features and the members of his body, 
to another form in his dream; so the soul forgets her intellectual entity in her 
state of ignorance, and becomes of the same nature and form, as she 
constantly thinks upon. (It forgets its pure spiritual form, and becomes a dull 
material body of some kind). 


13. Thinking itself to be thus transformed to a gross and material form, as 
that of Virdj, the macrocosm, (who combines the whole material universe in 
himself); it views itself as bright and spotted, as the disk of the moon with the 
black spot upon it. 


14. It then finds in its person resembling the lunar disk, the sudden union of 
the five senses of perception, appearing in him of themselves. 


15. These five senses are then found to have the five organs of sensation for 
their inlets, by which the soul perceives the sensation of their respective 
objects. 


16. Then the Purusha or first male power known as Virdj, manifests 
himself in five other forms said to be the members of his person; and these are 


the sun, the sides, water, air, and the land, which are the objects of five senses 
said before. He then becomes of endless forms according to the infinity of 
objects of his knowledge; (ie., the thoughts in this mind). He is thus 
manifested in his objective forms, but is quite unknown to us in his subjective 
or causal form, which is unchangeable and undecaying. 


17. He sprang up at first from the supreme being, as its mental energy or 
the mind; and was manifest in the form of the calm and clear firmament, with 
the splendour of eternal delight. 


18. He was not of the five elemental forms, but was the soul of the five 
elements, he is called the Virdj Purusha, — the macrocosm of the world, and 
the supreme lord of all. (He was the collective body of all individual ones). 


19. He rises spontaneously of himself, and then subsides in himself; he 
expands his own essence all over the universe, and at last contracts the whole 
in himself. 


20. He rose in a moment with his power of volition, and with all his desires 
in himself; he rises of his own will at first, and after lasting long in himself, 
dissolves again in himself. 


21. He is the self-same one with the mind of God, and he is the great body 
of the material world; and his body is called the puryashtaka or container of 
the eight elementary principles, as also the dtivdahika or of the spiritual form. 


22. He is as the subtle and gross air, manifest as the sky, but invisible as the 
subtle ether; he is both within and as well as without everything, and is yet 
nothing in himself. 


23. His body consists of eight members, namely, — the five senses, the 
mind, the living principle and egoism, together with the different states of 
their being and not being, i.e., of their visible and invisible form, (such as 
outward and inward organs of perception, efc.). 


24. He (in the form of Brahma), sang at first the four vedas with his four 
mouths; he determined the significations of words, and it was he who 
established the rules of conduct, which are in vogue to this time. 


25. The high and boundless heaven, is the crown of his head; and the lower 
earth is the footstool of his feet; the unbounded sky is his capacious belly, and 
the whole universe is the temple over his body. 


26. The multitudes of worlds all about, are the members of his body on all 
sides; the waters of seas are the blood of the scars upon his body; the 
mountains are his muscles, and the rivers and streams are the veins and 


arteries of his body. 


27. The seas are his blood vessels, and the islands are the ligatures round 
his persons; his arms are the sides of the sky, and the stars are the hairs on his 
body. 


28. The forty-nine winds are its vital airs, the orb of the sun is its eye-ball, 
while its heat is the fiery bile inside its belly. 


29. The lunar orb is the sheath of his life, and its cooling beams are the 
humid humours of his body; his mind is the receptacle of his desires, and the 
pith of his soul is the ambrosia of his immortality. 


30. He is the root of the tree of the body, and the seed of the forest of 
actions; he is the source of all existence, and he is as the cooling moonlight 
diffusing delight to all beings by the heating beams of that balmy planet 
oshadhisa. 


31. The orb of the moon, is said in the sruti as the lord of life, the cause of 
the body and thoughts and actions of all living beings (by growing the 
vegetable food for their subsistance and sustenance of their lives). 


32. It is from this moon-like Virdj, that contains all vitality in himself, that 
all other living beings in the universe take their rise; hence the moon is the 
container of life, mind, action and the sweet ambrosia of all living beings. 


33. It is the will or desire of Virdj, that produced the gods Brahma, Vishnu 
and Siva from himself; and all the celestial deities and demons, are the 
miraculous creation of his mind. 


34. It is the wonderful nature of the intelligent Intellect, that whatever it 
thinks upon in its form of an infinitesimal atom, the same appears 
immediately before it in its gigantic form and size. 


35. Know, Rama, the whole universe to be seat of the soul of Virdj; (i.e., 
the whole universe to be teeming with life), and the five elements to compose 
the five component parts of his body. (Whose body is all nature and whose 
soul is God). 


36. Virdj that shines as the collective or universal soul of the world, in the 
bright orb of the moon, diffuses light and life to all individuals by spreading 
the moon-beams which produces the vegetable food for the supportance and 
sustenance of living beings. 


37. The vegetable substances, which supply the animal bodies with their 
sustenance; and thereby produce the life of living beings; produce also the 
mind which becomes the cause of the actions and future births of persons by 


its efforts towards the same. 


38. In this manner, a thousand virdjs and hundreds of Mahd-kalpa periods 
have passed away; and, there many such still existing and yet to appear, with 
varieties of customs and manners of peoples in different ages and climes. 


39. The first and best and supremely blest Virdj, — the male Deity, resides 
in this manner of our conception of him, and indistinct in his essence from the 
state of transcendent divinity; with his huge body extending beyond the limits 
of space and time. (This Virdj or Brahma is the Demiurgus of platonic 
philosophy). 


CHAPTER XxX. 
Lecture on the Extinction of the Living Soul. 


Argument: — Extinction of individual souls in the universal, by their 
abandonment of desires. 


Vasishtha continued: — This primary Purusha or the Male agent, — Virdj, is 
a volitive principle; and whatever he wills to do at any time, the same appears 
instantly before him in its material form of the five elements. 


2. It is this will, O Rama! that the sages say to have become the world; 
because by its being intent upon producing the same, it became expanded in 
the same form. (The will of the Deity is the deed itself). 


3. Virdj is the cause of all things in the world, which came to be produced 
in the same form as their material cause. (Because the product is alike its 
producing cause, being a facsimile of the same). 


4 As the great Virdj is collectively the aggregate of all souls, so is he 
distributed likewise into the individual soul of everybody. (Hence, every soul 
knowing itself to be a particle of the Divine, cannot think itself as otherwise). 


5. The same Virdj is manifest in the meanest insect as also in the highest 
Rudra, in a small atom as in the huge hill, and expands itself as the seed vessel 
to a very large tree, (all which are mistaken as parts of the illusive world). 


6. The great Virdj is himself the soul of every individual, from the creeping 
insect to the mighty Rudra of air; and his infinite soul extends even to atoms, 
that are sensible and not insensible of themselves. 


7. In proportion as Virdj expands and extends his soul to infinity, so he fills 
the bodies of even the atomic animalcules with particles of his own essence. 


8. There is nothing as great or small in reality in the world, but everything 
appears to be in proportion as it is filled and expanded by the Divine spirit. 


9. The mind is derived from the moon, again the moon has sprung from the 
mind; so doth life spring from life and the fluid water flows from the 


congealed snow and ice and vice versa. (So there is nothing as greater or less 
or as the source and its outlet). 


10. Life is but a drop of the seminal fluid, distilled as a particle by the 
amorous union of parents. (This life being transmitted from generation to 
generation, there is no one greater or less than another). 


11. This life then reflects in itself, and derives the properties of the soul, 
and likens it in the fulness of its perfections. (Hence, the soul and life are 
identified to one and the same principle by many). 


12. The living soul has then the consciousness of itself, and of its existence 
as one pure and independent soul; but there is no cause whatever, as to how it 
comes to think itself a material being composed of the five elements. 


13. It is through opposition of nature that leads one into error, but in fact 
nature ever remains the same; as wrong interpretation of language imbues bad 
ideas whereas character remains the same. 


14. The living soul is conscious of its self-existence, by its knowledge of 
living by itself; it is the instinct of the perception of things by the mind, and 
not merely as the breath of life or external air, which is devoid of 
consciousness. 


15. But being beset by the frost of ignorance, and confined to the objects of 
sense, the living soul is blinded of its consciousness and is converted to the 
breathing soul or vital life, and so loses the sight of its proper course. 


16. Being thus deluded by the illusion of the world, the soul sees the 
duality instead of its unity, and being converted to the breathing of vital life, it 
is lost to the sight of the soul which is hidden under it. 


17. We remain confined to this world of ignorance, as long we enjoy the 
idea of ego; but as soon as we give up the idea of ego, we become a free man. 


18. Therefore, O Rama! When you will be able to know that there is no 
salvation and confinement in this world, as well as no sat and asat, then and 
there you will be a true free man. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
What Constitutes True Knowledge. 


Argument: — Amateurs of learning of two kinds, the real and the affected 
or Description of the two kinds of the lovers of knowledge, namely, the real 
and the Fictitious. 


Vasishtha continued: — The wise man must always conduct himself wisely, 
and not with mere show or affectation of wisdom; because the ignorant even 
are preferable to the affected and pretended lovers of learning. (According to 
the maxim which says that, if the show of anything be good for anything, 
surely the Reality must be better). 


2. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, what is meant by true wisdom, and by the 
show or affectation of it; and what is the good or bad result of either. (i.e., 
What kind of men they are, their signs and their respective ends). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — He who reads the Sdstras, and practices his 
learning as a practitioner for earning his livelihood, without endeavouring to 
investigate into the principles of his knowledge, is called a friend to learning. 


4. Whose learning is seen to be employed in busy life only, without 
showing its true effect in the improvement of the understanding; such learning 
being but an art or means of getting a livelihood, its possessor is called a 
fellow of learning; (and no doctor in it). 


5. He who is satisfied with his food and dress only, as the best gain of his 
learning; is known as an amateur and novice in the art of explaining the Sdstra 
(or as mere teachers and pedagogues). 


6. He who persists in the performance of his righteous and ceremonial acts, 
as ordained by law (Srouta Sdstra) with an object of fruition, is termed a 
probationer in learning, and is near about to be crowned with knowledge. 


7. The knowledge of the soul, (spiritual knowledge), is reckoned as the true 
knowledge; all other knowledge is merely a semblance of it, being void of the 
essential knowledge (necessary for mankind). 


8. Those who without receiving the spiritual knowledge, are content with 
bits of their secular learning; all their labour is in vain in this world, and they 
are styled as mere noviciates in learning. 


9. Rama, you must not rest here with your heart’s content, unless you can 
rest in the peace of your mind, with your full knowledge of the knowable one; 
you must not remain like a novice in learning, in order to enjoy the fruitions 
of this deleterious world. (Here all pleasure is palpable pain). 


10. Let men work honestly on earth to earn their bread, and let them take 
their food for sustenance of their lives; let them live for the inquiry after truth, 
and let them learn that truth, which is calculated to prevent their return to this 
miserable world. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
The Yoga Conducive to Happiness or the 
way to Happiness. 


Argument: — The signs and characters of wise men and of their wisdom; 
together with a disquisition into the nature of the world, soul and the Supreme 
spirit or Brahma. 


Vasishtha resumed: — The man who by his knowledge of the knowable one, 
hath placed his reliance in him; who hath set his mind to its pristine purity, by 
purging it from its worldly propensities, and has no faith in the merit of acts; 
is one who is called the truly wise. (This chapter is in answer to Rama’s 
question about who is a wise man, etc.). 


2. The learned, who knowing all kinds of learning, and being employed in 
acts, yet observe their indifference in everything, are called to be truly wise. 
(It is wisdom to act, and not expect). 


3. He whose heart is observed by the wise, to retain its coldness in all his 
acts and efforts; and whose mind is unaffectedly calm and quiet at all times; is 
said to be the truly wise man. 


4. The sense of one’s liberation from the doom of birth and death, is the 
true meaning of the word knowledge; or else the art of procuring simple food 
and raiment, is the practice of artificers only. 


5. He is styled a wise man, who having fallen in the current of his 
transactions, remains without any desire or expectation, and continues with as 
vacant a heart as the empty air. 


6. The accidents of life come to pass, without any direct cause and to no 
purpose; and what was neither present nor expected, comes to take place of its 
own accord. (All accidents are caused by an unknown and unforeseen fate or 
chance). 


7. The appearance or disappearance of an event or accident proceeds from 


causes quite unknown to us, and these afterwards become causes of the effects 
produced by them. 


8. Who can tell what is the cause of the absence of horns in hares, and the 
appearance of water in the mirage, which cannot be found out or seen at the 
sight of those objects. 


9. Those who explore in the causality of the want of horns in hares, may 
well expect to embrace the necks of the sons and grandsons of a barren 
woman. 


10. The cause of the appearance of the unreal phenomena of the world to 
our sight, is no other than our want of right sight, (.e., our ignorance), which 
presents these phantoms to our view; and which disappear at a glance of our 
acute vision (of reason). 


11. The living (or human) soul appears as the Supreme spirit, when it is 
viewed upon by the sight of our blended intellect; but no sooner does the light 
of Divine intellect dawn in our minds, than the living or animal soul dwindles 
into nothing. 


12. The insensible and unconscious Supreme soul, becomes awakened to 
the state of the living soul; just as the potential mango of winter, becomes the 
positive mango fruit in the genial spring. 


13. The intellect being awakened, becomes the living soul; which in its 
long course of its living, becomes worn out with age and toil, and passes into 
many births in many kinds of beings, (animal, vegetable as well as insensible 
objects). 


14. Wise men that are possessed of their intellectual sight, look internally 
within themselves in the recesses of their hearts and minds; without looking at 
the lookables without, or thinking of anything or many efforts whatever; but 
move on with the even course of their destiny, as the water flows on its course 
to the ocean of eternity. 


15. They who have come to the light of their transcendent vision, fix their 
sight to brighter views beyond the sphere of visibles; and discern the invisible 
exposed to their view. 


16. They who have come to the vision of transcendent light, (the glory of 
God), have their slow and silent motion like that of a hidden water course; 
owing to their heedlessness of everything in this world. 


17. They who are regardless of the visibles and thoughtless of the affairs of 
the world, are like those that disentangled from their snares; and they are truly 


wise, who meddle with their business as freely, as the free airs of heaven 
gently play with and move the leaves of trees. 


18. They who have come to sight of the transcendent light, athwart the 
dizzy scenes of mortal life; are not constrained to the course of this world, as 
seafarers are not to be pent up in shallow and narrow pools and streams. 
(Sailors are glad to be in the wide ocean, than to ply in the waters of inland 
creeks). 


19. They that are slaves of their desire (of enjoyment in this and next life), 
are bound to the thraldom of works ordained by law and sruti; and thus pass 
their lives in utter ignorance of truth. (Hence knowledge and practice are 
opposed to one another, the one being a state of bondage for some frail good 
and gain, and the other of freedom and lasting bliss). 


20. The bodily senses fall upon carnal pleasures, as vultures pounce upon 
putrid carrion; curb and retract them therefore with diligence, and fix thy mind 
to meditate on the state of Brahma and the soul. 


21. Know that Brahma is not without the creation, as no gold is without its 
form and reflection; but keep yourself clear from thoughts of creation and 
reflexion, and confine your mind to the meditation of Brahma, which is replete 
with perfect bliss. 


22. Know the nature of Brahma to be as inscrutable, as the face of the 
universe is indiscernible, in the darkness of the chaotic state at the end of a 
Yuga age; when there was no appearance of anything, nor distinction of 
conduct and manners. (See Manu’s institutes I. 2). 


23. And the elements of production existing in the consciousness of divine 
nature, were in their quiescent agitation in the divine spirit; as the movements 
of flimsy vapours amidst the darkness of an immovable and wide spreading 
cloud. (So are the fickle thoughts of the firm mind, and the moving engines of 
the fixed machine). 


24. And as the particles of water are in motion, in a still pond and in the 
standing pool; so are the changing thoughts of the changeless soul, and so the 
motions of the element bodies in unchanging essence and nature of God. 


25. As the universal and undivided sky and space, take the names of the 
different sides of heaven (without having any name or side of its own); so the 
undivided and partless Brahma, being one and same with the creation, is 
understood as distinct and different from it. 


26. The world contains the egoism, as the ego contains the world in it; they 
contain the one within the other, as the coats of the plantain tree contain and 


are contained under one another. 


27. The living soul or jiva being possessed of its egoism, sees its internal 
world, (which lies in its egoism), through the pores of the organs of sense, as 
lying without it; in the same manner, as the mountains look upon the lakes 
issuing out of its caverns, as if they outward things altogether. (So the mental 
and internal world appears as a visibly external phenomenon). 


28. So when the living soul sees itself by mistake, to anything in the world, 
(i.e., in the light of an object); it is the same as one takes a ball or bar of gold, 
for an ornament which was or is to be made of it. (So the soul residing in any 
body at any time, is not that body itself but the indwelling power thereof). 


29. Hence they that are acquainted with the soul, and are liberated in their 
life time, (or become jivanmukta); never think themselves to be born or living 
or dying at any time (though they are thought and looked upon as such by 
others. The soul being eternal and unchangeable). 


30. Those that are awakened to the sight of the soul, are employed in the 
actions of life without looking at them; (without taking heed of them in their 
hearts); just as a house-holder discharges his domestic duties, while his mind 
is fixed at the milk pot in the cowstall. 


31. As the God Virdj is situated with his moon-like appearance, in the heart 
of the universal frame, so does the living soul reside in the heart of every 
individual body like a little or large dew drop, according to the smallness or 
bigness of the corporeal body. 


32. This false and frail body believed to be a solid reality, on account of its 
tripartite figure; and is mistaken for the ego and soul, owing to the intelligence 
that is displayed and dwells in it. 


33. The living soul is confined like a silkworm, in the cell of its own 
making, Karma-Kosha, by acts of its past life, and resides with its egoism in 
the seed of its parents, as the floral fragrance dwells in the honey cups of 
flowers. 


34. The egoism residing in the seminal seed, spreads its intelligence 
throughout the body from head to foot; as the moon-beams are scattered 
throughout the circumference of the whole universe. 


35. The soul stretches out the fluid of its intelligence, through the openings 
of its organs of sense; and this being carried to a sides through the medium of 
air, extends all over the three worlds, as the vapour and smoke fill and cover 
the face of the sky. 


36. The body is full of sensibility, both in its inner as well as outer parts; 
but it is in the viscera of the heart, where our desires (vdsand) and egoism 
(abhimdna) are deeply seated. 


37. The living soul is composed of its desires only, and consists of and 
subsists under its hearty wishes alone, the same soon come out of themselves 
from within the heart, and appear on the outside in the outward conduct of the 
person. (Whatever is in the heart, the same appears also in action). 


38. The error of egoism is never to be suppressed, by any other means 
whatsoever; save by one’s unmindfulness (nis-chitta) of himself, and fulness 
of divine presence (Brahmai karasya) in his calm and quiet soul. 


39. Though dwelling on your present thoughts, yet you must rely in your 
reflection of the vacuous Brahma; by suppression of your egoism by degrees 
and your self-controul betimes. 


40. They who have known the soul, manage themselves here without 
fostering their earthly thoughts anymore; and remain as silent images of 
wood, without looking at or thinking of anything at all. 


41. He who has less of earthly thoughts in him, is said to be liberated in the 
world; and though living in it, he is as clear and free in his mind as the open 
air; (no earthly affections, tie down his rising soul). 


42. The egoism which is bred in the pith, grows into intelligence extending 
from head to foot; and circulates throughout the whole body, as the sun-beams 
pervade all over the sphere of heaven. 


43. It becomes the sight of the eyes, the taste of the tongue and hearing in 
the ears; then the five senses being fastened to the desires in the heart, plunge 
the ego into the sea of sensuality. 


44. Thus the omnipresent intellect, becomes the mind after losing its purity; 
and is employed with one or other of the senses, as the common moisture of 
the earth, grows the sprout in the vernal season. 


45. He who thinks on the various objects of the senses, without knowing 
their unreality and the reality of the only one; and does not endeavour for his 
liberation here, has no end of his troubles in life. (Because sensible objects, 
afford no intellectual or spiritual happiness). 


46. That man reigns as an emperor, who is content with any kind of food 
and raiment; and with any sort of bedstead at any place. (And is not confined 
to any particular mode of life). 


47. Who, with all his desires of the heart, is indifferent to all the outward 


objects of desire; who, with his vacant mind is full with his soul and being as 
empty vacuum, is filled with the breath of life. 


48. Who, whether he is sitting or sleeping, or going anywhere or remaining 
unmoved, continues as quiet as in his sleeping state; and though stirred by any 
one, he is not awakened from his slumber of nirvdna, in which his mind and 
its thoughts, are all drowned and have become extinct. (This is the state of the 
sixth stage of Yoga meditation). 


49. Consciousness, though common to all, resides yet in each breast, like 
fragrance in flowers and flavour in fruits. 


50. It is self-consciousness only, that makes an individual person, and its 
extinction is said to form the wide world all about; but being confined to the 
soul or one’s self, it vanishes the sight of the world from view. (i.e., The 
subjective consciousness is the soul or self, and its objectivity makes the 
world; and this is the abstract of this doctrine). 


51. Be unconscious of the objects on earth; and remain insensible of all 
your prosperity and affluence; make your heart as hard as impenetrable as 
stone, if you will be happy forever. 


52. O righteous Rama! convert the feeling of your heart to unfeelingness, 
and make your body and mind as insensible as the hardest stone, (upala or 
opal). 


53. Of all the positive and negative acts, of the wise and unwise sets of 
men, there is nothing that makes such a marked difference between them, as 
those proceeding from the desire of the one, and those from want of the desire 
of the other. 


54. The result of the desired actions of the unwise, is their stretching out of 
the world before them; while that of the acts done without desire by the wise, 
serves to put an end to the world before them. (The acts of desire produce 
repeated births in the world, while the other puts an end to the future 
transmigrations of the soul). 


55. All visibles are destructible, and those that are destroyed come to be 
renewed to life; but that which is neither destroyed nor resuscitated, is thyself, 
— thy very soul. 


56. The knowledge of existence (of the world), is without its foundation; 
and though it is thought to be existent, it is not found to be so in reality; it is as 
the water in the mirage, which does not grow the germ of the world. 


57. The right knowledge of things, removes the thought of egoism from the 


mind; and though it may be thought of in the mind, yet it takes no deep root in 
the heart, as the burnt seed or grain does not sprout forth in the ground. 


58. The man that does his duties or not, but remains passionless and 
thoughtless and free from frailty; has his rest in the soul, and his nirvdna is 
always attendant upon him. 


59. Those who are saintly calm and quiet by the controul of their mind, and 
by suppression of the bonds, (appetites), for enjoyments; but not having 
weakened, (governed), their natures, have in their hearts a mine of evils. 


60. The wise soul is full of light like the cloudless sky, and is distinguished 
from others by its brightness; but the same soul which is alike in all, appears 
as dim as the evening twilight in the ignorant. 


61. As a man seated in this place, sees the light of heaven, (heavenly 
bodies), as coming to him from a great distance, and filling the intermediate 
space; so the light of the Supreme soul fills and reaches to all. 


62. The infinite and invisible intellect, which is as wondrous as the clear 
vacuum of the sky; conceives and displays this wonderful world, within the 
infinitude of its own vacuity. 


63. The world appears to the learned and unerring, and those who have got 
rid of the error of the world, and rest in their everlasting tranquility, as a 
consumed and extinguished lamp; while it seems to all common people, to be 
placed in the air, by the will of God and for the enjoyment of all. (The two 
opposite views of the world with the learned and ignorant). 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
Story of a Pious Brahmana and his Nirvana 
Extinction. 


Argument: — Account of Vasishtha’s meeting a hermit named Manki in a 
desert land; and their mutual conversation with regard to self-resignation and 
liberation. 


Vasishtha said: — (I have delivered to you my lectures) on dispassionateness, 
inappetence and resignation of worldly desires; rise therefore, and go beyond 
the material world after the example of one Manki, (as related herein, — 
below). 


2. There lived once on a time before, a Brahmana named Manki, who was 
applauded for his devotion and steadfastness to holy vows. 


3. It happened at one time, that I was coming down from the vault of 
heaven, upon an invitation from your grandfather Aja, on some particular 
occasion. 


4. As I then came to wander on the surface of the earth, in order to reach at 
the realm of your grandsire; I happened to meet before me a vast desert, with 
the burning sunshine over it. 


5. It was a dreary waste without its boundary on any side, filled with 
burning sands and obscured by grey and flying dust over it; and marked by a 
few scattered hamlets here and there. 


6. The extended waste appeared as the boundless and spotless immensity of 
Brahma, by its unrestricted vacuity, howling winds, burning heat and light, its 
seeming water in the sand, and untrodden ground resting in peace. 


7. It seemed as delusive as the appearance of avidyd or illusion itself; by 
the deceptive waters of mirage upon the sand, by its dullness and empty space 
and the mist overhanging on all sides of it. 


8. As I was wandering along this hollow and sandy wilderness, I saw a 


wayfarer sauntering before me and muttering to himself in the travail of his 
wearisome journey. 


9. The Traveller said: — O the powerful sun! That afflicts me with his 
blazing beams, as much as the company of evil-minded men is for our 
annoyance. 


10. The sunbeams seem to pour down fire on earth, and melt down the pith 
and marrow of my body and bones; as they have been drying up the leaves 
and igniting the forest trees (for a conflagration). 


11. Therefore, it behoves me to repair to yonder hamlet, to allay the 
weariness of my journey, and recover my strength and spirits for travelling 
onward. (So it is said: — the shady bower invites the dry, and drives out the 
cooled). 


12. So saying, he was about to proceed towards the village, which was an 
habitation of the low caste Kiratas. (The kerrhoids of Ptolemy, and the present 
Kerantes of the Himalayas). When I interrupted him by saying: — 


13. Vasishtha said: — I hail thee, O thou passenger of the sandy desert, and 
may all be well with thee, that art my fellow traveller on the way, and art so 
good looking and passionless: — 


14. O traveller of the lower earth! who have long lived in the habitations of 
men, and have not found your rest, how is it now that you expect to have it, in 
this solitary abode of this mean people? 


15. You can have no rest at the abode of the vile people in yonder village, 
which is mostly peopled by the Pamara villains; thirst is not appeased, but 
increased by a beverage of briny water. (So it is said: — The unquenchable 
appetite of the greedy, is never quenched by nourishment, but it nourishes it 
the more, as the fuel and butter serve to kindle and feed the fire). 


16. These huts and hamlets shelter the cowardly cow-herds, (Pallava 
Gopas), under them, and them that are afraid to walk in the paths of men, as 
the timid deer are averse to rove beyond their own track. (So these solitary 
swains are as the savage beasts of the forests). 


17. They have no stir or agitation of reason, nor any flash of understanding 
or mental faculties in them; they are not afraid of or averse to base actions, but 
remain and move on as stone-mills and wheels: — 


18. Their manliness consists in the emotions of their passions and 
affections, and in exhibitions of the signs of their cupidity and aversion, and 
they delight mostly in actions, that appear pleasant at the time being or present 


moment. (They are occupied with the present only, being forgetful of the past 
and careless of the future). 


19. As there is no appearance of a body of rainy clouds, over the dry and 
parched lands of the desert, so there is no shadow of pure and cooling 
knowledge ever stretched out on the minds of these people. (i.e., They have 
never come under the benign influence of civilization). 


20. Rather dwell in a dark cave as a snake, or remain as a blind worm in the 
bosom of a stone; or limp about as a lame stag in the barren desert, than mix 
in company of these village people. 


21. These rude rustics resemble the potions of poison, that are mixed with 
honey; they are sweet to taste for a moment, but prove deadly at last. (Such 
are the robbers of deserts and woods). 


22. Again, these villainous villagers are as rude as the rough winds, which 
are blowing with gusts of dust amidst the shattered huts, built with grassy 
turfs and tufts of the dried leaves of trees. (The word trina means straw also or 
a straw built hut). 


23. Being thus spoken unto by me, the traveller felt himself as glad, as if he 
was bathed in ambrosial showers. 


24. The passenger said: — Who art thou Sir, with thy magnanimous soul, 
that seemest to me to be full and perfect in thyself, and full of Divine spirit in 
thy soul. Thou lookest at the hustle of the bustle of the world, as a passer is 
unconcerned with the commotion of the villages beside his way. 


25. Hast thou Sir, drunk the ambrosial draught of the gods, that gave thee 
thy Divine knowledge? and art infused with the spirit of the sovran Virdj, that 
is quite apart from the plenum it fills, and is quite full with its entire voidness 
(stretches through all, and unmixed with any). 


26. I see thy soul to be as void and yet as full as his, and as still and yet as 
moving as the Divine spirit; it is all and not all what exists, and something yet 
nothing itself. 


27. It is quiet and comely, shining and yet unseen; it is inert and yet full of 
force and energy, it is inactive with all its activity and action; and such soul is 
thine. (These antithetic attributes of the Divine soul, are applied objectively to 
that of Vasishtha in the second person, as they are subjectively put to one’s 
ownself in the first person in many other places. Thus in the Bhagavad Gita 
where Krishna assumes to himself the title of Brahma and says, “Resort to Me 
alone;” so says the Sufi Mansur, “I am the true one;” so says Hastamulaka in 
his celebrated rhapsody, “I am that eternal that is conceived by everyone.”) 


28. Though now journeying on earth, you seem to range far above the 
skies; you are supportless, though supported on a sound basis (of the body or 
Brahma). (i.e., The spirit and mind range freely everywhere, though they 
appear to be confined within the limits of the body, or to proceed from and 
rest in the eternal essence of Brahma). 


29. Thou art not stretched over the objects, and yet no object subsists 
without thee; thy pure mind like the beauteous orb of the moon, is full of the 
nectarous beams of immortality. (The moon is called the lord of medicinal 
plants, having the virtues of conferring life and health to the body). 


30. Thou shinest as the full-moon, without any of her digits or blackish 
spots in thee; thou art cooling as the moon-beams, and full of ambrosial juice 
as the disk of that watery planet. 


31. I see the existence and non-existence of the world, depend upon thy 
will, and thy intellect contains in it the revolving world, as the germ of a tree 
contains within it the would be fruit. 


32. Know me Sir, as a Brahmana sprung from the sage Sandilya’s race; my 
name is Manki, and am bent on visiting places of pilgrimage. 


33. I have made very long journeys, and seen many holy places in my 
peregrinations all about; and have now after long bent my course to revisit my 
native home. (The toils being over, the traveller returns home, and there to 
die. — Goldsmith). 


34. But my mind is so sick of and averse to the world, that I hesitate to 
return to my home, after having seen the lives of men passing away as flashes 
of lightning from this world. 


35. Deign now Sir, to give me a true account of yourself, as the minds of 
holy men are as deep and clear as limpid lakes. 


36. When great men like yourself show their kindness, to one as mean as 
myself at the first sight of him, his heart is sure to glow with love and 
gratitude to them, as the lotus buds are blown (by the premature gleams of the 
rising sun), and are led to be hopeful of their favour towards him. 


37. Hence I hope Sir, that you will kindly remove the error, which is bred 
in me by my ignorance of the delusions of this tempting world. (Lit., I believe 
you are able to do so, etc.). 


38. Vasishtha replied: — Know me, O wise man, to be Vasishtha, — the 
sage and saint, and an inhabitant of the ethereal region; and am bound to this 
way, on some errand of the sagely king, (Aja by name). 


39. I tell you Sir, not to be disheartened at your ignorance, as you have 
already come to the path of wisdom, and very nearly got over the ocean of the 
world, and arrived at the coast of transcendental knowledge. 


40. I see you have come to the possession of the invaluable treasure, of 
your indifference to worldly matters; for this kind of speech and sentiments, 
and the sedateness of disposition which you have displayed, can never 
proceed from a worldling, and bespeak your high-mindedness. 


41. Know that as a precious stone is polished, by gentle abrasion of its 
rubbish; so the mind comes to its reasoning, by the rubbing off of the dross of 
its prejudice. 


42. Tell me what you desire to know, and how you want to abandon the 
world; it is in my opinion done by practice of what one is taught by his 
preceptor, or by interrogatories of what he does not know or understand. 


43. It is said that whoso has a mind, to go across the doom of future birth or 
transmigration of his soul, should be possessed of good and pure desires in his 
mind, and an understanding inclined to reasoning under the direction of his 
spiritual guide. Such a person is verily entitled to attain to the state, which is 
free from future sorrow and misery. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
Indifference or Insouciance of Manki to 
Worldliness. 


Argument: — Manki’s relation of the miseries of his life and of this world, 
together with the evils attendant on Human body and its senses and 
understanding. 


Vasishtha said: — Being thus accosted by me, Manki fell at my feet (in 
salutation); and then shedding the tears of joy from both his eyes, spoke to me 
on our way, with due respect (to my rank). 


2. Manki said: — O venerable Sir, I have been long travelling in all the ten 
sides of the earth; but I have never met a holy man like yourself, who could 
remove the doubts arising in my mind. 


3. Sir, I have gained today the knowledge which is the chief good of the 
body of a Brahmana, whose sacred person is more venerable and far more 
superior in birth and dignity, than the bodies of all other beings in heaven and 
on earth; but Sir, Iam sorry at heart, at seeing the evils of this nether world. 


4. Repeated births and deaths, and the continued rotations of pleasure and 
pain, are all to be accounted as painful, on account of their terminating in 
pain. (Pain is pain, and pleasure too ends in pain). 


5. And because pleasure leads to greater pain (at its want), it is better, O 
sage, to continue in one’s pain (which becomes a pleasure by long habit). The 
sequence of fleeting pleasure being but lasting pain, it is to be accounted as 
such even as long as it lasts. 


6. O friend! all pleasures are as painful to me, as my pains have become 
pleasurable at this advanced age of mine; when my teeth and the hairs of my 
body, are falling off with the decay and wearing out of my internal parts also. 


7. My mind is continually aspiring to higher stations in life, and is not 
persevering in its holy course; and the germ of my salvation, is choked by the 


thorns and thistles of my evil and worldly desires. 


8. My mind is situated amidst its passions and affections, within the covert 
of my body, as the banian tree stands amidst its falling leaves in the interior of 
a rustic village; and the desires are flying like hungry vultures all over its 
body, in search of their abominable sustenance. 


9. My wicked and crooked thoughts are as the brambles of creeping and 
thorny plants, and my life is a weary and dreary maze, as a dark and dismal 
night, (where and when we are blind-folded to descry our right way). 


10. The world with all its people, being parched and dried up like withered 
plants, without the moisture of true knowledge, and decaying day by day with 
incessant cares, is fast advancing towards its dissolution, without being 
destroyed all at once. 


11. All our present acts are drowned in those of our past lives, and like 
withered trees bear no flower or fruit in our present life; and actions done with 
desire, terminate with the gain of their transitory objects. (Therefore, no action 
nor meritorious deeds of religion, can ever tend to our salvation. (Which is 
had by our faith alone)). 


12. Our lives are wasted in our attachment to family and dependents, and 
never employed to lead our souls across the ocean of the world; the desire of 
earthly enjoyments are decaying day by day, and a dreadful eternity awaits 
before us. 


13. Our prosperity and possessions, whether they are more or less, are as 
noxious to our souls, as the thorny and poisonous plants growing in the 
hollow caves of earth; again, they are attended with thoughts and cares 
causing fever heat in the soul, and emaciating the body. 


14. Fortune makes the brave and fortunate people, fall sometimes in the 
hands of foes; as the man ardent with the desire of gems in his mind, is 
tempted to catch the gemming serpents, lying in dark caves, (and lose his life 
in attempting to seize the treasure). 


15. I being entirely inclined or given up to the objects of sense, am 
abandoned by the wise, (who hate to touch the vile); and my mind which is 
polluted by worldly desires, and is all hollow within, is shunned by them as a 
dead sea with its troubled and turbid waters. 


16. My mind is turning also about false vanities, as the rheumatic pains all 
about the body. 


17. And I am also even with my innumerable deaths hunting after desired 


vacuity for sorrow, though my mind is purged from the dross of ignorance by 
reading the Sdstras and associating with good men; as the moon and stars, 
which with its power of removing darkness, stand good in vacuity. 


18. There is no end of the dark night of my ignorance, when the gloomy 
spectre of my egoism is playing its part; and I have not the knowledge, which 
like a lion may destroy the furious elephant of my ignorance, and burn down 
as fire the straws of my actions. 


19. The dark night of my earthly desire or cupidity is not yet over, and the 
sun of my disgust of the world is not risen as yet; I still believe the unreal as 
real, and mind is roving about as an elephant. 


20. My senses have been continually tempting me, and I know not what 
will be the end of these temptations, which prevent even the wise people, 
from observing precepts of the Sdstras. 


21. This want of sight or disregard of the Sdstras, leads to our blindness by 
kindling our desires, and by blinding our understanding; — 


22. Therefore, tell me Sir, what am I to do in this difficulty, and what is that 
may conduce to my chief good, that I am asking thee to relate. 


23. It is said that, the mist of our ignorance flies like the clouds, at the sight 
of wise men and purification of our desires; now Sir, verify the truth of this 
saying of wise men, by your enlightening my understanding, and giving peace 
to my mind. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
Vasishtha’s Admonition to Manki. 


Argument: — The avarana sakti or all-enfolding power of God is called 
ignorance, his vikshepa sakti or delusive power is the cause of error, and the 
combination of both cause the world. 


Vasishtha said: — Consciousness (of the objects of perception), their 
reflection, the desire of having them and their imagination, are the four roots 
of evil in this world; and though these words are meaningless, yet 
considerable sense is attached to them (as categories of some schools of false 
philosophy); as the four sources of knowledge. 


2. Know that knowledge (of externals) is their reflexion also, which is the 
seat (or root) of all evils; and all our calamities proceed therefrom, as thickly 
as vegetation springs out of the vernal juice (or breath of spring). 


3. Men garbed in the robes of their desires, walk in the dreary paths of this 
world, with very many varieties of their actions, (both temporal and ritual), as 
there are circles drawn under a circle. (i.e., one circle of duty enclosing many 
others under it). 


4. But these aberrations and wanderings over the earth, are at an end to the 
wise together with their desires; as the moisture of the ground, is dried up and 
diminishes at the end of the vernal season. 


5. Our various desires, are the growers of the very many thorny plants and 
brambles in the world; as the vernal moisture is the cause of growing the thick 
clumps of kadai or plantain trees. 


6. The world appears as a dark maze to the mind, that is cloyed in the 
serum of its lickerish appetites; as the ground is shaded under the bushy trees, 
by the sap supplied by the vernal season. 


7. There is nothing in existence except the clear and vacuous intellect, as 
there is nothing in the boundless sky, beside the hollow vacuity of the air. 
(This is another passage of the vacuistic theory of Vasishtha). 


8. There is no intelligent soul beside this one, and all else is the everlasting 
reflexion of this one alone. This it is which is styled ignorance and error, and 
the world also. 


9. He is seen without being seen, and is lost upon being seen. (that is, the 
Lord is seen in the spirit and not by the visual sight). On looking to it an 
unreal or evil spirit appears to sight instead of the true and holy spirit, like 
ghosts and goblins appearing before children. (Whoever wishes to the spirit of 
God, sees the spirit of the devil only). 


10. It is by rejecting all visible sights, the understanding views the one 
essence of all, and all things dwindle into it, as all the rivers on earth, run and 
fall into one universal ocean. (The one invisible unity is the essence of 
multiplicity). 


11. As an earthen ware cannot be without its earth; so all intelligent beings, 
are never devoid of their intelligence or the intellect. (This couplet 
corroborates the eighth verse, where it is said that, there is nothing except the 
intellect). 


12. Whatever is known by the understanding, is said to be our knowledge; 
but the understanding has no knowledge of the unknowable, nor want of 
understanding can have any knowledge, owing to their opposite natures. 
(Because understanding and knowledge are of the same nature, but 
understanding and unknowable are contraries, and want of understanding and 
the knowable are sub-contraries). (The plain meaning is that the 
understanding knows the knowable and not the unknowable; while want of 
understanding knows neither the one nor the other). 


13. As there is the same relation of knowledge between the looker, his 
seeing and sight, (ie., the subject, act, and object of seeing); so it is 
omniscience of Brahma which is the only essence. (Sdraikarasyam), all else is 
as null as an aerial flower (Kha-pushpa) which never exists. 


14. Things of the same kind bear an affinity to one another, and readily 
unite in one, (as water with water, efc.); so the world being alike to its notion, 
and all notions being alike to the eternal ideas in the mind of God, the world 
and the divine mind, are certainly the same thing and no other. 


15. If there be no knowledge or notion of wood and stone in us, then they 
would be the same as the non-existent things of which we have no notion: — 
(such as the horns of a hare or a flower in the air). 


16. When the outward and visible features of things, are so exactly similar 
to the notions and knowledge of them that we have in our minds; therefore, 


they appear to be no other than our notions or knowledge of them. (Because 
things agreeing in all respects with one another, must be the same and very 
thing). 


17. All visible appearances in the universe, are only the outstretched 
reflexions of our inner ideas; their fluctuation is as that of the winds, as their 
motion is as that of the waters in the ocean. 


18. All things are mixed up with the omnipresent spirit, as a log of wood is 
covered over by lac-dye; both of which appear to be mixed together to the 
unthinking, but both are taken for the one and same thing by the thinking part 
of mankind; (who believe the spirit to exhibit itself in all shapes, Apna 
jathaika bhuvana). 


19. The idea of reciprocity is unity, and the knowledge of mutuality is 
union also; such as the interchange of water and milk, and so the correlation 
of vision and visibles; and not as the union of the wood and lac-dye with one 
another. (This means unity to consist in the interchangeableness and 
interdependence of two things as of the spirit and matter, and not as sticking 
the lac-dye upon wood, but as fire inhering in every particle of the wood, as it 
is expressed in the afore cited sruti): — 


20. The knowledge of one’s egoism is his bondage, and that of his 
unegoism is his emancipation from it; thus one’s imprisonment in and 
enfranchisement from the confines of his body and the world; being both 
under his subjection, why is it that he should be slack to sit himself at freedom 
from his perpetual thraldom? 


21. Like our sight of two moons in the sky, and our belief of water in the 
mirage, we believe in the reality of our egoism, which is altogether an 
unreality. (Lit., We think it present without its presence). 


22. The disbelief in one’s self or his egoism, removes his meity, (mdmatd), 
or selfishness also; and it being possible to everyone to get rid of them, how is 
it that he should be ignorant of it? 


23. Why do you maintain your egoism only, to be confined in the cell of 
your body, like a plum drowned in a cup of water, or like the air confined in a 
pot? your relation to God is to be no other but like himself and to be one with 
him, is to have the reciprocal knowledge of yourself in the likeness of God; 
(i.e., to be like the image of God in perfection). 


24. It is said that the want of reciprocal knowledge, makes the union of two 
things into one; (i.e., the entire commingling of two things together makes 
them one); but this is wrong in both ways, because neither doth any dull 


material thing or any spiritual substance, lose its own form, (however mixed 
up with one or the other). 


25. Neither is force converted into inertness, (i.e., the spirit never becomes 
matter), from the indestructibility of their nature, and whenever the spiritual is 
seen or considered as the material, it becomes a duality, and there is no unity 
in this view of the two. (Hence there is no union or entire assimilation either 
of the spirituals or materials). 


26. Thus, men being under the influence of their desires, and beset by their 
vanities of various kinds (altogether) are going on downward still, as a stone 
torn from the head of a cliff, falls from precipice to precipice headlong to the 
ground. 


27. Men are as straws carried here and there by the current of their desire, 
and whirled about in its eddy; they are overtaken by and overwhelmed in an 
endless series of difficulties which are impossible for me to enumerate. (The 
Sanskrit na pdrjate is the Bengali pdrdjdyanda). 


28. Men being cast like a ball flung from the palm of fate, are hurried 
onward by their ardent desires till they are hurled headlong into the depth of 
hell; where being worried and worn out with hell torments, they take other 
forms and shapes after lapses of long periods (to undergo fresh toils and 
troubles on earth). 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
Manki’s Attainment of Final Extinction or Nirvana. 


Argument: — The vanity of Human wishes, and the Tranquility of Rational 
and spiritual speculation. 


Vasishtha said: — Thus the living soul, being let fall in the mazy path of his 
world, is encompassed by calamities and accidents as countless as the 
animalcules, which are generated in the rainy season. 


2. All these accidents though unconnected with one another, follow yet so 
fast and closely upon each other, as the detached stone lying scattered and 
close together in the rocky desert, and linked in a lengthening chain of thought 
in the mind of man. 


3. The mind blinded of its reason, becomes a wilderness overgrown with 
the arbour of its calamities, and yet appearing to be smiling as a vernal grove 
before men, by its feigned merriment and good humour. (Mirth and sorrow 
are both of them the effects of unreasonableness). 


4. O how pitiable are all those beings! Who being bound to their subjection 
to hope, are subjected to divers states of pain and pleasure, in their repeated 
births in various forms on earth. 


5. Alas, for those strange and abnormal desires, which subject the minds of 
men, to the triple error of taking the non-existent to be actually present before 
them. (The triple error, (Triputi bhrama), consists in the belief of the visibles, 
their vision and the viewer of them, that is, in the subject, act and objects of 
sight, which are all viewed as unreal in the light of vedanta). 


6. Those who have known the truth, are delighted in themselves, they are 
immortal in their mortal life, and are diffusers of pure light all about them. 
What then is the difference between the sapient sage who is cold-hearted in all 
respects, and the cooling moon, (who cools and enlivens and enlightens the 
world with her ambrosial beams’). 


7. And what is the difference between a whimsical boy and a covetous fool, 


who covets anything whatever at hand without any consideration of the past 
and future (good or evil which attends upon it). 


8. What is the difference between the greedy fool and voracious fish or 
whale, that devour the alluring bait of pleasure or pain; and will not give up 
the line until they are sure to give up their lives for the same. (All seeming 
pleasure is real pain, and bane of both the body and soul of men). 


9. All our earthly possessions whether of our bodies or lives, our wives, 
friends and properties, are as frail as a brittle plate made of sand, which no 
sooner it is dried and tried than it spurts and breaks to pieces. 


10. O my soul! Thou mayst forever wander, in hundred of bodies of various 
forms in repeated births; and pass from the heaven of Brahma to the empyrean 
of Brahma; yet thou canst never have thy tranquility, unless thou attainest the 
even insouciance of thy mind. (The stoic impassivity is the highest felicity). 


11. The ties and bondage of the world, are dispersed by mature 
introspection into the nature of things; as the uneven ruggedness of the road, 
does not retard the course of the wayfarer walking with his open eyes. 


12. The negligent soul becomes a prey to concupiscence and unruly 
passions, as the heedless passenger is caught in the clutches of demons; but 
the well-guarded spirit is free from their fright. 


13. As the opening of the eyes, presents the visibles to sight; so doth the 
waking consciousness introduce the ego and phenomenal world into the mind. 
(i.e., Consciousness is the cause of both the subjective and objective). 


14. And as the shutting of the eyelids, shuts out the view of the visible 
objects from sight; so, O destroyer of enemies, the closing of consciousness, 
puts out the appearance of all sights and thoughts from your eyes and mind, 
(and this unmindfulness of everything besides, prepares the soul for the sight 
of the most high). 


15. The sense of the existence of the external world, together with that of 
one’s ego or self-existence, is all unreal and inane, it is consciousness alone 
that shows everything in itself and by the fluctuation of its erroneous; as the 
motion of winds displays the variegated clouds in the empty air. (It is the 
imaginative faculty of the mind, that creates and presents these phantoms 
before it). 


16. It is the divine consciousness only, which exhibits the unreal 
phenomenals as real in itself, without creating anything apart or separate from 
its Own essence; in the same manner as earth or any metal produces a pot or a 
jar out of itself, and which is no wise distinct or separate from its substance. 


17. As the sky is only a vacuity, and the wind is a mere fluctuation of air; 
and as the waves are composed of nothing but water; so the world is no other 
than a phenomenon of consciousness; (because we have no knowledge of it 
without our consciousness of it). 


18. The world subsists undivided in the bas-relief of consciousness, and 
without a separate existence of its own apart or disjoined in any part, from its 
substance or substratum of the conscious soul, which is as calm and clear as 
the empty air, and the world resembles the shadow of a mountain in the 
bosom of water, or a surge or wave rising on the surface of the sea. 


19. There rises a calm coolness in the souls of wise and inexcitable sages, 
when the shining worlds appear as the cooling moon beams falling on the 
internal mirror of their minds. 


20. How is it and by what means and in what manner, is this invisible 
supreme light, produced in the calm and quiet and all-pervading auspicious 
soul, amidst the empty expanse of the universe. (Here is a double question of 
the production of uncreated light in creation and of the manifestation of divine 
and spiritual light in the quiet soul). 


21. That essence which is expressed by the term Brahma, forms the 
essential nature and form of everything besides; and the same is permeated 
throughout all nature, except where it is obstructed by some preventive cause 
or other, — bdadhd. 


22. Anything which presents a hindrance to this, and whatever is preventive 
of the pervasion of divine essence, is a nullity in nature like a sky flower, — 
dkdsa pushpa, which is nothing at all in nubibus. 


23. The wise man sits quietly like a stone, without the action of even his 
inner and mental faculties; because the lord is without the reflection or 
sensation of anything, and without birth or decay at any time. (Here the mind 
and its workings, are explained as vikalpand or changing thoughts, which are 
wanting in the eternal mind). 


24. He who remains insensible and unconscious of everything, like the 
empty state of the open sky; arrives by his constant practice to his state of 
sound sleep or hypnotism without the disturbance of dreams. 


25. But how is it to be known that the world is the mere thought or will of 
the Divine mind? Whereto it is said: — It is the creative power of Brahma 
(called Brahma or Hiranyagarbha, — the demiurgus), thought of forming the 
wondrous world in his mind (as it were he pictured it in himself), without the 
aid of any tool or instrument or means or ground for its construction; hence, 


(it is plain), the world is merely ideal and nothing real, nor is there any cause 
or creator of it whatsoever. 


26. As the lord stretches out the world in his thought, he or it instantly 
becomes the same; and as the lord is without any visible form, so this seeming 
world has no visible nor material form whatever; nor is there any framer of 
what is simply ideal. 


27. So all men are happy or unhappy, as they think themselves to be one or 
the other in their minds; they all abide in the same universal soul, which is 
common to all; and yet believe themselves every one of his own kind in his 
mind. 


28. Therefore, it is as vain to view anything, or any intellectual being, in 
the light of an earthly substance, as it is false to take the visionary hills of 
one’s dream, in the light of their being real rocks situated on earth. 


29. By assigning egoism to one’s self, he becomes subject to error and 
change; but the want of egoism, places the soul to its invariable identity and 
tranquility. (7.e., The sense of one’s personality, subjects him to change and 
misery). 


30. As the meaning of the word bracelet, is nothing different from the gold 
(of which it is made); so the sense of thy false egoism, is no other than that of 
the tranquil soul. (The soul, self, and ego are all the one and same thing). 


31. The anaesthetic sage, that is cold-blooded and sober minded as a silent 
muni, is no voluntary actor of any act, although he may be physically 
employed in his active duties; and the quiet saint carries with him an empty 
and careless mind, although it may be full of learning and wisdom. (Lit., the 
knower of God is as quiet, as the calm vacuum of heaven). 


32. The wise man manages himself as a mechanical figure or puppet, never 
moving of its own motion but moving as it is moved, and having no impulse 
of his desire within him, he sits as quiet as a doll without its mobility. 


33. The wise man that knows the soul, is as quiet as a babe sleeping in a 
swinging cradle, and which is moved without moving itself; or he moves the 
members of his body like a baby, without having any cause for his doing so. 


34. The soul that is intent on the thought of the one (Supreme) only, and is 
as calm and quiet as the infinite spirit of God; becomes unconscious of itself 
and all other things, together with all its objects of desire, and expectations of 
its good and bliss. 


35. He that is not the viewer himself, nor has the view before him, and is 


exempt from the triple condition, (triputi bhdba), of the subjective, objective 
and action; can have no object in his view; which is concentrated in the vision 
of the invisible one. 


36. Our view or regard of the world, is our strict bondage, and disregard of 
it, is our perfect freedom; he who rests therefore, in his disregard of (or 
indifference to) whatever is expressed by words, has nothing to look after or 
desire. 


37. Say, what is it that is ever worth our looking after, or worthy of our 
regard; when these material bodies of ours, are as evanescent as our dreams, 
and our self-existence is a mere delusion. (There is nothing therefore, worthy 
of our inquiry beside the divine intellect. — Gloss). 


38. Therefore, the wise man rests only in his knowledge of the true one, by 
subjection of all his efforts and desires, and quelling all his curiosity; and 
being devoid of all knowledge, save that of the knowable one. 


39. Hearing all this, Manki was released from his great error; as a snake 
gets loose from its slough by which it has been fast bound. 


40. He retired from there to a mountain, on which he remained in his deep 
meditation for a century of years; and discharged the duties that occurred to 
him of their own accord, without his retaining any desire of any (or 
expectation of fruition). 


41. He resides there still, unmoved and insensible as a stone, quite callous 
in all his senses and feelings, and wakeful with his internal sensibility by the 
light of his Yoga contemplation. 


42. Now Rama, enjoy your peace of mind, by relying in your habit of 
reasoning and discrimination; do not deprave your understanding, under the 
fits of your passion; nor let your mind turn to its levity like a fleeting cloud, in 
the unrainy season of autumn. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 
Sermon on the Superior Sort of Yoga Meditation. 


Argument: — Mistake of the action of the Intellect in the action of the 
mind, as the cause of the phenomenal world; and the removal of this error of 
the mind, as the cause of the intellectual peace and rest in its real state. 


Vasishtha continued: — Be dead to your sensibility, and retain the tranquility 
of your soul, by conforming with whatsoever thou gettest or is meted out to 
thy lot; or else the fair (order of nature and ordinance of God), will appear as 
foul, as a pure crystal shows itself as black in the shade. 


2. All and everything being contained in the only one, all extended soul, we 
cannot conceive how the conception of variety or multiplicity can rise from 
the unity. (To Him no high, no low, no great, no small; He fills, he bounds, 
connects, and equals all. — Pope). 


3. The category of the intellect is entirely of a vacuous nature, and having 
neither its beginning nor end; and is neither produced nor destroyed, with the 
production and destruction of the body. (And though it is diffused all over the 
body and its various powers and senses, yet there is variation of its own 
essence. — Gloss). 


4. All insensible and material bodies, are moved by the miraculous power 
of the intellect or mind; which being unmoved of itself gives motion to 
bodies, as the still waters of the sea gives rise to the waves. (Here the intellect 
is explained as the mind in the gloss). 


5. As it is an error to suppose a sheet of cloth in a cloud, so the supposition 
of egoism in the body, is altogether erroneous; (since one’s personality 
consists in the soul and not in the person). 


6. Do not rely in the unreal body, which is of this world, and grows to 
perish in it; but depend on the real essence of the endless spirit, for thy 
everlasting happiness (in both worlds). 


7. The vacuous intellect, is the essential property of the immortal soul; this 


is the transcendent reality in nature, and may this super-excellent entity be thy 
essence likewise. 


8. If you are certain of this truth, you become as glorious as that essence 
also; because the deep meditator loses himself in the meditated object, in his 
intense meditation of the same. (This assimilation of the triputi or triple 
condition of the thinker and his act and object of thought in one, is the 
meaning and main end of the Yoga meditation of union). 


9. The triple condition of the viewer, view and act of viewing, are the three 
properties of the one and same intellect; and there is nothing which is any 
other than (or not the same with) the knowledge thereof, as there is no thought 
unlike the act of its thinking. (This shows the agreement of the cause, its 
causation and effect). 


10. The soul is ever calm and clear and uniform in its nature, it does not 
rise and fall like the tides by the lunar influence, nor is it soiled like the sea 
waters by tempestuous winds. (The soul is ever unruffled at any event). 


11. As a passenger in a boat beholds the rocks and trees on the bank to be 
in motion, and as one thinks a shell or conch to be composed of silver; so the 
mind mistakes the body for reality, (which in truth is an unreal appearance). 


12. As the sight of the material dismisses the view of the intellectual, so 
doth intellectuality discard the belief of the material; and so the knowledge of 
the living soul being resolved in the supreme soul, there remains nothing at 
last, except the unity of the all-pervading spirit. 


13. The knowledge that all this (world), is quite calm and quiet (in its 
nature); and the whole is an evolution of the divine spirit, takes away the 
belief in everything else, which is naught but the product of error and illusion. 


14. As there is no forest in the sky, nor moisture in the sands; and as there 
is no fire in the disk of the moon, so there is no material body in the sight of 
the mind. (Mentally considered, there is no matter). 


15. Rama, fear not for this world, — the mere creation of thy error, and 
without its real existence whatsoever, know this transcendent truth, O thou 
best amongst the inquirers of truth, that this world is a nullity and void. 


16. Your mistake of the existence of the visible world, and the disbelief 
which you fostered with regard to the entity of the invisible soul, must have 
been removed this day by my preaching, say now what other cause there may 
be of your bondage in this world. 


17. As a plate, water-pot and any other earthenware, is no more than the 


earth (of which it is made); so the outer world is no other than the inner 
thought of the mind, and it wears away under the power of reasoning. 


18. Whether exposed to danger and difficulty, or placed in prosperity or 
adversity, or betided by affluence or penury; you must preserve, O Rama, your 
even disposition amidst the consciousness (or knowledge) of your joy and 
grief; be gladly free from the knowledge of your egoism, and remain as you 
are sedate by your nature, and without your subjection in any state. 


19. Remain, Rama, as thou art, like the moon in the sphere of thy race, with 
thy full knowledge of everything in nature; avoid thy joy and grief at every 
occurrence, and give up thy desire and disgust for anything in the world. Do 
so or as you may choose for yourself. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 
Demonstrated conclusion of the doubtful truth. 


Argument: — Act, actor and action are one the same, the word Daiva and 
its explanation; oscillation of intellect is the cause of creation. 


Rama said: — Please Sir, explain to me moreover regarding the acts of men, 
which become the causes of their repeated births, as seeds are sources of the 
germs of future trees; and those to which the word daiva or divian is applied, 
imply the Divine dispensation, destiny or fate. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The meaning of daiva or destiny, is as that of a 
potter in producing the pottery; it is the act of intelligence, (samvid), and not 
of blind chance, nor of human effort or manliness. 


3. How is it possible for any action to be done by manly exertion only, 
without some effort of the understanding directing human energy to action; it 
is this intelligent power that makes the world and all what it contains. 


4. The prosperity of the world depends on the understanding, exerting itself 
with a desire to bring about some certain end; and it ceases with the course of 
the course of the world, upon the exertion of the understanding to no purpose. 


5. The insouciance or want of desire in the mind, is called its negative act, 
and the mind that merely moves on without engaging in any pursuit, is as a 
current stream without its undulation. (So mere living is no life without its 
action). 


6. There is no difference between a thinking and unthinking soul, unless the 
mind of one is actuated by its imagination, to the invention of some manly art 
or work. 


7. As there is no essential duality or difference in the water and its waves, 
and between desire and its result; so there is no distinction betwixt the 
intellect and its function, nor is there any difference in the actions from the 
person of their agent. 


8. Know, Rama, the action as the agent, and the actor the same with his 
action; both these are quite alike as the ice and coldness. (i.e., Man is known 
by his act, and the actions bespoke the man). 


9. As the frost is cold and coldness the same with frost, so the deed is the 
same as its doer, and the doer is alike the deed done by him. (Everyone is 
accountable for his deed, and the deed recurs to the doer of it). 


10. The vibration of the Intellect, (i.e., the divine will), is the same as 
destiny which is also the agent of action; these are synonymous terms 
expressing the same thing, and destiny, deed and other words have no distinct 
meaning. 


11. The oscillation of the intellect is the cause of creation, as the seed is the 
source of the germ of a tree; want of this vibration is productive of nothing, 
wherefore, intellectual activity contains in it the germinating seed of the 
whole world. (i.e., The action of the mind causes all things, and its inaction is 
the cause of total suspense). 


12. The divine mind contains in its infinite expanse all the ample space of 
time and place; and is of its own nature sometimes in its fluctuation, and at 
others at a stand-still like the vast ocean on earth. 


13. The causeless and uncausing seed of the intellect, being moved by 
desire, becomes cause of the minutiae of material bones, as the seed becomes 
productive of its germs and sprouts. 


14. All vegetable productions as the grass and all sorts of plants and 
creepers, vegetate from within their particular seeds as their origin; and these 
seed originate from the pulsation of the divine mind, which is increate and 
without any for it. (The pulsation of the divine mind is its creative will, which 
is the seed or source of creation). 


15. There is no difference between the seed and its sprout, as there is no 
distinction of the heat from fire; and as you find the identity of the seed and its 
sprout, so must you know the identity of man with his acts. (ie., Actions 
make the man, and the man does his actions like himself). 


16. The divine Intellect exerts its power in the bosom of the earth, and 
grows the sprouts of the unmoving vegetable creation as from its seed; and 
these become great or small, straight or crooked as the waves of the sea as it 
would have them to be. 


17. What other power is there beside that of the intellect, to grow the sturdy 
oaks and arbors from the soft clay and humid moisture, which compose the 
bosom of the earth? 


18. It is this Intellect that fills the seeds of living beings with the vital fluid, 
as the sappy juice abiding in the inside of plants, gives growth to the flowers 
and fruits on the outside. 


19. If this all-inhering intellect, were not almighty also at the same time, 
say then what other power is there, that could produce the mighty gods and 
demi-gods in air, and the huge mountains on earth. 


20. The divine mind contains in it the seeds of all moving and unmoving 
beings, which have their being from the movement of this intellectual power, 
and from no other source whatever. 


21. As there is no difference in the alternate production of the seed and the 
germ or fruit from one another, so there is no difference in the commutual 
causation of man and his acts and the vice versa. In this manner also there is 
no shade of difference, betwixt the swelling waves and the sinking waters of 
the sea. (Man is but a bubble of its own blowing in the vast ocean of Eternity). 


22. Fie to that silly and beastly being, who does not believe in the 
reciprocality of man and his action or of the agent and the act, by the law of 
mutatis mutandis inculcated in the vedas. 


23. The prurience that is inherent in one’s consciousness, is the embryonic 
seed of his resuscitation to life; in the manner of the germination of plants; it 
is therefore meet to render this seed abortive by frying it in the fire of 
inappetency. 


24. The doing of a thing with listlessness, and the performance of an act 
whether good or bad without taking it to the mind, is what is called 
lukewarmness by the learned. 


25. Or it is exemption from desire, that is said to loosen a man from all 
connection; therefore, try by all means in your power, to create in your mind a 
total unconcern for everyone, and indifference to all things whatsoever. 


26. In whatever manner you think it possible for you to rid of your lickerish 
desires, whether by means of your theoretical or practical Yoga, (the rdja and 
hatha yogas), or by means of your manly exertion; you must root every desire 
from your heart, in order to secure your best welfare and perfect felicity. 


27. But then you must endeavour to the utmost of your manly power, to 
suppress some portion of your egoism, in order to prevent the rise of selfish 
passions and desires within your health. 


28. There is no other course of fording the unfordable expanse of the world, 
save by the exercise of our manly virtues; nor is there any other way of 


extinguishing our ardent desires, except by the extinction of egoism. 


29. It is the inherent consciousness of the ever-existent soul, which is both 
the prime seed as well as the first germ of the world; the same is the source 
both of action as also of its cause and effect of the person of man. It is that 
which is designated as destiny and the weal and woe of all. 


30. In the beginning, there was no other seed nor its sprout, nor even any 
man nor his action; nor was there any such thing as destiny or doom or any 
other prime cause, but all that existed was the Supreme intellect which is all in 
all. 


31. There is neither any seed nor its germ in reality, nor is there any action 
or its active agent de facto; but there only one Supreme intellect in absolute 
and positive existence, and it is under the auspices of this hallowed name, that 
you see, O sage! all these gods and demi-gods, and all men and women, are 
performing their respective parts as actors on the stage of the world. 


32. Knowing this certain truth, and thinking thyself as the imperishable 
one, be freed from thy thoughts of the agent and action; give up all thy desires 
and false imagination, and live to reflect with thy body of self-consciousness 
alone. (Consider thyself as an intellectual being, and not the dull corporeal 
body). 


33. Remain fearless, O Rama, and be more graceful with the calm 
composure of thy mind. Allay all thy desires and lay aside thy fears with 
them. Rely on thy clear intellect and continue to do thy endless acts (by 
guidance of the same). Be full in thyself with the Supreme soul, and thus thou 
shalt have the fulness of thy desires fulfilled in thee. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
Sermon on Holy Meditation. 


Argument: — Necessity of discharging our social duties, as they occur unto 
us at any time; and that of conducting our contemplation in solitude. 


Vasishtha continued to say: — Remain always to look inwardly in thyself, by 
being freed from the feelings of passion and desire, continue in the 
performance of thy actions everywhere, but reflect always upon the quiet and 
spotless intellect within thyself. 


2. The mind which is as clear as the open sky, and is full of knowledge and 
settled in the divine intellect; which is ever even and graceful and replete with 
joy, is said to be highly favoured of heaven and expanded by Brahma. 


3. Whether be taken by pain and grief, or exposed to dangers and 
difficulties, or attended by pleasure or prosperity, in a greater or less degree. 


4. In whatever place and in whatsoever state thou art placed, bear with thy 
afflictions with an unsorrowful heart; and whether thou weepest or criest, or 
becomest a play of opposite circumstances, be joyous in both for both are 
meant for thy good. 


5. You are delighted in the company of your consorts, and feel joyous at 
the approach of festivity and prosperity; and it is because you are tempted like 
ignorant people, by your fond desire of pleasure. 


6. Fools that are allured by their greediness of gain, meet with their fate in 
hazardous exploits and warfare; and it is fit that they should burn with the fire 
of their desire, like straws consumed in a conflagration. 


7. Earn money by honest means and with the circumspection of a crane, in 
whatever chance presents itself before thee; and do not run in pursuit of gain, 
like the ignorant rabble. 


8. O thou destroyer of thy foes, drive away by force all thy desires as the 
greatest enemies, and as winds of heaven drive afar the rainless and empty 


clouds of the sky. 


9. Be tolerant, O Rama, towards the ignorant people, that are led away by 
their desires and deserve thy pity; be reverent of high-minded men, and 
delighted in thyself by observing the taciturnity of thy speech, and without 
being misled by thy desires like the ignorant mob. 


10. Congratulate with joy and sympathise with sorrow, (whether of thyself 
or others); pity the sorrows of the poor, and be valiant among the brave. 


11. Turn your eyes into your heart, and be always joyous by communing 
with yourself (or soul); and then whatever you do with a liberal mind, you are 
not to answer for the same as its agent. 


12. By remaining fixed in the meditation of your soul, and by having your 
eyes always turned within yourself; you shall be invulnerable even at the 
stroke of a thunderbolt, (darted by the hand of Indra). So saith the sruti: — 
The Gods have no power to hurt the holy. Tasya hana devdscha nd bhiitya 
ishate. 


13. He is said to be master of himself, who is freed from the delusion of 
desire, and lives retired in the cave of his consciousness; who is attached to 
his own soul and acts at his own will, and has his delight in his very self. 
(Because says the sruti, — Whoso goes out of himself, loses his very self). 


14. No weapon can wound the self-possessed man, nor fire can chafe his 
soul; no moisture can damp the spirit, nor the hot winds can dry it up. (No 
elemental influence can prevail on the spiritual soul). 


15. Lay hold on the firm pillar of your soul, which is unborn or increate, 
undecaying and immortal; adhere steadfastly to thy soul, as one clings to the 
prop or column of his house. 


16. The world is an arbor, and all things in it are as the flowers of this tree; 
our knowledge of all things, is as the fragrance of these flowers; but our self- 
consciousness is the essence of them all; therefore, look internally to this 
inward essence before you mind the externals. 


17. All outward affairs, are brought about by their inward reflection in the 
mind; but it is as hard to bring about a desire into being, as to raise a stone to 
life. 


18. Get rid of your bodily exertions and lull your mind to sleep; be doing 
all your duties, as a tortoise with its contracted limbs. (ie, Act with 
indifference, and without being moved). 


19. Manage thine affairs with a half-sleeping and half awakened mind, (like 


a waking sleeper); and do thy outward functions (without the exertion of your 
mental faculties). 


20. As babes are possessed of their innate knowledge, and dumb creatures 
are endowed with their instinct, without the feeling of any desire rising in 
them; so they live and act with their minds unattached to anything, and as 
vacant as the empty air. 


21. Remain untroubled and free from care, with entirely sleepy and 
comatose mind within thyself; a mind devoid of all its functions and quite 
absorbed in itself, and slightly acting on the members of the body. 


22. You may continue to discharge or dispense with your duties altogether, 
by impairing your mind with knowledge, and resting quietly in your pure 
consciousness, after it is purged from the stain of appetence. 


23. Go on managing your outward affairs in your waking state, as if your 
faculties were dormant in sleep; and never hanker to have anything, nor let go 
aught that presents itself to thee. 


24. If you are dormant when waking, by your inattention to all about you; 
so are you awake when sleeping by your trance in the bosom of the Supreme 
soul; and when you are in the condition of the union of the two, you attain to 
the state of perfect consummation. 


25. Thus, by your gradual practice of this habit of insouciance, you reach to 
that state of unity, which has neither its beginning nor end, and which is 
beyond all other things. 


26. The world is certainly neither a unity nor duality, (but is composed of a 
plurality in its totality, or the one in many A han Bahushaym), leaving 
therefore the inquiry into its endless varieties, resort to your Supreme bliss, 
with a mind as clear as the translucent sphere of empty air. 


27. Rama rejoined: — If it be so, O great sage! (That there is no ego or tu 
as you say), then tell me, why are we conscious of ourselves, and how are you 
sitting here under the name of the sage Vasishtha. 


28. Valmiki said: — Being thus interrogated by Rama, Vasishtha, the best 
of speakers, remained silent for a moment, pondering on the answer he should 
make. 


29. This silence of his created some anxiety in the royal audience, and 
Rama too, being perplexed in his mind, repeated his question to the sage and 
said: — 


30. Why Sir, are you silent like myself? I see there is no such argument in 


the world, which sages like yourself are unable to solve and expound: — 


31. Vasishtha replied: — It is not owing to my inability to speak, nor want 
of argument on my part that made me hold my tongue; but it is the wide scope 
of your question that withheld me from giving its answer. (Or from answering 
to it). 


32. Rama! There are two kinds of querists, namely, the ignorant inquisitor 
and the intelligent investigator; and so there are two modes of argumentation 
also for them respectively; the simple mode for simpletons, and the rational 
form for intelligent and reasonable men. 


33. You had been so long, Rama, ignorant of superior knowledge, and fit to 
be taught in ordinary equivocal language. 


34. But now you have become a connoisseur of superior truth, and found 
your rest in the state of supreme felicity; and are no longer to benefit by the 
ambiguous language of common speech. 


35. Whenever a good speaker wishes to deliver an eloquent speech, 
whether it be a long or short one, or relate to some abstruse or spiritual subject 
(he must satisfy himself first). 


36. The ego being the counterpart or privation of all representation, is 
inexpressible by representative sounds and words; and being beyond the 
predicaments of number and other categories, is not predicable by any of them 
or other fiction of fancy. It is the totality of all, as light is composed of 
innumerable particles of rays. 


37. It is not right, O Rama, that one who has known the truth, (the gnostic), 
should give an imperfect or defective answer to a question (proposed to him). 
But what can he do, when no language is perfect or free from defect, as you 
know it well. 


38. It is right, O Rama, that I who know the truth, should declare it as it is 
to my pupils; and the knower of abstract truth is known to remain as mute as a 
block of wood, and the soundness of whose mind is hard to sound. (So says 
the Persian mystic: — He who has known the unknowable, has become 
unknown to himself and others). 


39. It is want of self-cogitation that causes one to speak, (i.e., unsoundness 
of thought sounds in high sounding words); but they hold their silence who 
know the Supreme excellence; and this is the best answer that is given thy 
inquiry into this truth. 


40. Every man, O Rama, speaks of himself as he is (or thinks himself to 


be); but I am only my conscious self, which is unspeakable in its nature, and 
appertains to the unbespeakable one. 


41. How can that thing admit the application of a definite term to give it 
expression, which is inexpressible by words (and beyond our conception); I 
cannot therefore, express the inexpressible by words. I have already said, all 
are but fictitious signs; (representative of our certain ideas). 


42. Rama rejoined: — You Sir, that disregard everything that is expressed 
by words, and regard these as imperfect and defective symbols of their 
originals; must tell me now, what you mean by your, “privation of 
representation,” and what you are yourself. 


43. Vasishtha replied: — It being so, (that there no determinate person 
expressed by the word egoism); hear me to tell you now, O Rama, that art the 
best among the enquirers of truth, what thou art and what am I in truth, and 
what is world in reality. 


44. This Ego, my boy, is the empty intellect and imperishable in its nature; 
it is neither conceivable nor knowable, and is beyond all imagination. 


45.1 am the clear air of the intellect, and so art thou the empty sky also; the 
whole world is an entire vacuity, and there is nothing else except an 
everlasting and infinite vacuum (beom) everywhere. 


46. The soul is identic with pure knowledge, it is free from sensational 
knowledge, and beyond the conscious knowledge of others. I cannot call it 
anything otherwise than the self or soul. 


47. Yet it is the fashion of disputants in order to maintain their own ground, 
or for the salvation of their pupils to multiply the egoism of the one soul, and 
to distribute it into a thousand branches. 


48. When a living soul remains calm and quiet notwithstanding the 
management of its worldly affairs; and is as motionless as a living carcass, it 
is said to have attained its perfect state. 


49. This state of perfection consists in refraining from external exercise and 
devotion, and persistence in continual meditation; feeling no sensation of pain 
or pleasure, and being unconscious of one’s self-existence, and the co- 
existence of all others besides. 


50. Freedom from egoism and the consciousness of all other existence, 
brings on the idea of a total inexistence and emptiness, which is altogether 
beyond thought and meditation. (For none can think of a nothing). All attempt 
to grasp a nullity, is as vain as a blind man’s desire to see a picture. 


51. The posture of sitting unmoved as a stone, at the shocks and turn backs 
(or drakes and ducks) of fortune; is verily the state of nirvana or deathless 
coma of a sensible being. (The figures of saints are as unmoved as statues). 


52. This state of saintly anaesthesia is not marked by others, nor perceived 
by the saint himself; because the knowing sage shuns the society of men in 
disgust, and is enlightened with his spiritual knowledge within himself. 


53. In this state of spiritual light, the sage loses sight of his egoism and 
tuism and all others and beholds the only one unity, in which he is extinct and 
absorbed in pure and unsullied felicity. 


54. It is the intellection of the intellect, that is said to be conversant with the 
intelligibles (or the operation of the subjective soul on the objective); this is 
the cause of the creation of the world, which is the cause of our bondage and 
continual woes (in our repeated births and deaths). 


55. It is said to be the dormancy or insensibility of intellection, when it is 
not employed about the intelligible objects; it is then called the supremely 
calm and quiet state of liberation (both for thought and action); and is free 
from decay. 


56. The soul being in its state of peaceful tranquility, its ideas of space and 
time fly from it like clouds in autumn; and then it has no thought of anything 
else for want of its power of thinking. 


57. When the sight of the soul is turned inwards, (antar mukha), as in sleep, 
it sees the world of its desires rising before its consciousness in their aerial 
forms; but, O ye princes, the sight of the soul being directed to the outside, 
(bahir mukha), as in its waking state, it views the inward objects of his desire, 
presented before its sight in the gross forms of the outer world. (This passage 
shows the contrariety of the spiritual philosophy to the material; the former 
maintaining the material world to be a shadow of the ideal, and the latter 
asserting the intellectual as a representation of the visible world). 


58. The mind, understanding and the other faculties, depend upon the 
consciousness of the soul, and are of the same nature as the intellect; but 
being considered in their intimate relation with external objects, bahir- 
mukhatd, they are represented as grossly material. (In the doctrines of 
materialist, — the sankhya and others). 


59. The self-same intellect being spread over our consciousness, of all 
internal and external feelings and perceptions; it is in vain to differentiate this 
one and undivided power, by the several names (of spiritual, mental, and 
bodily faculties). 


60. There is nothing which is set apart, from the percipience of the 
conscious intellect; which is as pure and all-pervading as the empty vacuum, 
and which is said by the learned to be undefinable by words. (So says the 
sruti: — No speech can approach to it). 


61. Being seen very acutely, the world appears as hazy in the divine 
essence, as it were something between a reality and unreality; and so dost thou 
appear to sight, as something real and unreal at the same time. (All things 
appear as evanescent shadows in the clear mirror of the Divine Mind). 


62. So am I the empty air, if can be free from desire; and so also art thou 
the pure intellect, if thou canst but restrain thy desires. 


63. He who is certain of this truth, (that he is the intellect), knows himself 
in reality; but whoso thinks himself as somebody under a certain appellation, 
is far from knowing the truth. Again, anyone remaining in his unreal body, but 
relying in his intellectuality, is sure to have his tranquility and salvation. (So 
the sruti: — Anyone awakened to truth is sure to be saved, whether he is a 
God, rishi or sage, or a vile man). 


64. Man’s exercise of the intellectual faculty, ameliorates the love of union 
with the original intellect by removing the ignorance; as heat of the fire mixes 
with the primitive heat, when wind ceases to blow. 


65. Living beings who are converted to the state of patient trees and stones, 
by insouciance or insensibility of themselves, are said to have attained their 
liberation which is free from disturbance, and to be situated in their state of 
undecayableness. 


66. A man having obtained his wisdom by means of his knowledge, is said 
to have become a muni or sage, but growing an ignoramus owing to his 
ignorance, he becomes a brute creature, or degraded even lower to some 
vegetable life. 


67. The knowledge that, “I am Brahma,” (because I am a man), and this 
other is the world, (because it is inanimate), is a gross error proceeding from 
gross ignorance; but all untruth flies away before investigation, as darkness 
vanishes before the advance of light. 


68. He is wise who with the perception and actions of his outward organs, 
is simply devoid of his inward desires; who does not think or feel about 
anything in his mind, and remains quite calm and composed in his outward 
appearance. 


69. The samddhi-trance of a wise man, is as his sound sleep uninfested by a 
dream; and wherein the visibles are all buried within himself, and when he 


sees naught but his self or soul. 


70. As the blueness of the sky is a false conception of the brain, so the 
appearance of the world is a fallacy of the silent soul; they are no more than 
mists of error, that obscure the clear and vacuous sphere of the soul. 


71. He is the true sage who though surrounded by the objects of wish, is 
still undesirous of any; and knows them all as mere unrealities and false 
vanities. 


72. Know, O intelligent Rama, that all objects of desire in this world, are as 
marvellous as those seen in our imagination, dream and in the magic of 
jugglers; such also are all the objects of our vision, on which you can place no 
trust nor reliance. 


73. Know also, there is no pain or pleasure, nor any act of merit or demerit, 
(i.e., any moral virtue and vice); nor anything which anybody, owing to the 
impossibility of there being any agent or patient, (i.e., any active or passive 
agent). 


74. The whole (universe) is a vacuum and without any support at all; it 
appears as a secondary moon in the sky or a city in one’s dream or 
imagination, none of which has its reality in nature. 


75. Abide only by the rules of the community, or observe strictly thy mute 
taciturnity; and by remaining as a block of wood or stone, be absolved in the 
Supreme. 


76. The tranquility and intellectuality of the Supreme deity, do not admit of 
any diversity in his nature; and his incorporeality does not admit of the 
attribution, of a body or any of its parts unto him. 


77. There can be no nature whatever, whereof we have any conception, that 
can be attributed to the pure spirit (which is free from all stain and foulness); 
and this Divine spirit being inherent in all bodies, there can be no body for its 
nature ever imputed to him. 


78. The existence of consciousness in the uncreated spirit, or in other 
words, the existence of a self-conscious eternal Intellect, cannot be denied of 
God; according to sophistry of Atheists; for though our knowledge of 
recipient and received, (i.e., of the container and contained), is very imperfect, 
yet there is someone at the bottom that is ever perfect. 


79. O Rama! do you rely in that increate and indestructible Supreme being, 
which is ever the same and pure, irrefutable and adored by the wise and good; 
it is the irrefutable, (i.e., demonstrable), verity, on which you should quietly 


depend for your liberation. And though you may eat and drink and play about 
like all others, yet you must know that all this is nothing. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
Sermon on Spirituality. 


Argument: — Removal of the Error of plurality arising from the conviction 
of Egoism, and inoculation of spiritual knowledge for Reunion of the soul 
with the Divine Spirit. 


Vasishtha continued: — Egoism is the greatest ignorance, and an insuperable 
barrier in the way of our ultimate extinction; and yet are foolish people seen to 
pursue fondly after their final felicity with their egoistic efforts, which is no 
better than the attempt of madman. 


2. Egoism is the sure indicator of the ignorance of unwise people, and no 
cool-headed and knowing man is ever known in his egoship or the persuasion 
of his self-agency. (But this an article of the Christian creed). 


3. The wise and knowing man, whether he is embodied or liberated state, 
renounces the dross of his egotism, and relies in the utter extinction or nullity 
of himself, which is as pure and clear as the empty vacuity of heaven, and free 
from trouble and anxiety, (which await on self-knowledge and selfish 
activities in general). 


4. The autumnal sky is serene and clear, and so are the waters of the calm 
and unperturbed sea; the disk of the full-moon is fair and bright, but none of 
these is so cool and calm and full of light, as the face of the wise and knowing 
sage, (shining with the radiance of truth and holy light). 


5. The features of the sage and wise, are ever as sedate and steady, even in 
the midst of business and trifles; as the figures of warriors in battle array in a 
painting, even when engaged in the bustle of warfare and fury of fight. 


6. All worldly thoughts and desires are nothing to the anaesthetic spirit of 
the self-extinct sage (in his nirvana); they are as imperceptible as the slender 
lines in a painting, and as lean as the rippling curls on the surface of the sea, 
which are not distinct and disjoined from its waters. 


7. As the rolling waves of the sea, are no other than its heaving water, so 


the visible phenomena in the world, are no other than the spirit of Brahma 
disporting in itself. 


8. Hence, the soul that is undisturbed by the wave like perturbations, and is 
calm and quiet both in the inside and outside of it as the still ocean, and which 
is raised above temporal matters in its holy devotion, is said to be freed from 
all worldliness. 


9. The ego rises of itself as an uncreated thing, and in the form of 
consciousness in the all-comprehensive intellect of God, just as the waves rise 
and fall in the waters of the deep, and have no difference in their nature. 


10. As the rising smoke exhibits in the sky, the various forms of forts, war- 
cars and elephants; and as none of them, is any other than the self-same 
smoke; so are all these phenomena and notions, no way different from the 
nature of their Divine origin, (but mere evolutions or vivartaruipas of the 
same). 


11. By considering the fallacy of your consciousness (of the ego), you will, 
O ye my royal hearers, get rid of your error; and then you will exult in your 
knowledge of truth, and be victorious (over yourself). Do not despair, for ye 
are wise enough to know the truth. 


12. As the growing sprout conceives in it, the would-be tree with all its 
future flowers and fruits; so the ignorant man conceives in his vacant mind, 
the false ideas of himself, — his soul, his ego and of everything else 
according to its fancy. 


13. The conceptions of the mind are as false as the sight of things, such as 
the sight of a rod in a rising flame, (and that of a circle in the twirling of a 
lighted torch). And though the presiding soul is always true, yet these 
thoughts of the mind are as untrue as its fancy of fairies in the orb of the 
moon. 


14. Now my royal hearers, do you continue to enjoy your peace, by 
considering at your pleasure, about the rise, end, and continuance of the 
world; and remain from disease in all places and times. 


15. Conduct yourselves with calmness, in whatever turns to be favourable 
or unfavourable to you; for unless you deport yourselves as dead bodies, you 
cannot perceive the felicity of your final extinction, — nirvdna or hebetude. 
(Be as a dead man, in order to taste the bliss of your spiritual deadness). 


16. He who lives long in this world, by giving up his egoism and egoistic 
desires from his mind; and renounces the animality of his life to live and lead 
an intellectual life, attains verily the state of Supreme felicity. 


17. Living the animal life (for the gratification of carnal appetites), leads 
only to the bearing of woes and misery; and men thus bound by the chain of 
their animal desires, are as big boats, burdened with loads of their ballast and 
cargo. 


18. They are never blest with liberation, who are strangers to reasoning and 
addicted to the gross thoughts of ignorance; for how is it possible to obtain in 
this life, what is attainable only by the deceased in the next world. (This 
means the disembodied liberation, — Videha mukti, which is to be had after 
one’s death). 


19. Whatever a man fancies in this life, and desires to have in the next, (as 
his hopes of heavenly rewards); he dies with the same and finds them in his 
future life; but where there is no such fancy, desire or hope, that is truly the 
state of everlasting bliss. 


20. Therefore, be fearless with the thought of there being no such thing, as 
yourself or anyone else (that you may believe as a real entity); by knowing 
this truth, you will find this poisonous world, turn to a paradise to you. (Think 
of nothing, and you will have no fear for anything). 


21. Examine your whole material body, as composed of your outer frame 
and the inner mind; and say in what part you find your egoism to be situated; 
if nowhere, then own the truth of your having no ego anywhere. 


22. Seeing all and every part of it up to the seat of your egoism, and finding 
it to be seated nowhere; you see only an open space (which is identic with the 
soul), and whereof no part is ever lost or destroyed. 


23. In this (attainment of liberation) you are required to do no more, than to 
exert your manliness in relinquishing your enjoyments, cultivating your 
reasoning powers, and governing yourself by subduing the members of your 
body and mind. Therefore, ye ignorant men, that are desirous of your 
liberation, delay no longer to practice the government of yourselves (by 
shunning everything that relates not to yourselves). 


24. The learned explain liberation to consist in the meditation of God, 
without any desire of the heart or duplicity in the mind; and this they say is 
not possible to do, without the assistance of spiritual knowledge. But the 
world being full of error, it is requisite to derive this knowledge from spiritual 
works moksha sdstras, or else it is very likely to be entrapped in the very 
many snares, which are forever set all about this earth. 


25. Knowing full well the unreality of the world, and the uncertainty of 
one’s self and body, and of his friends, family and wealth and possessions; 


whoso is distrustful of them and identifies himself with his intelligence and 
pure vacuity, verily finds his liberation in this, and in no other state 
whatsoever. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 
Sermon on the means of attaining the Nirvana 
Extinction. 


Argument: — Refutation on the falsity of imagination, and the ideal 
creation of the world; establishing the true God, who is all in all, and who 
remains ever the same. 


Vasishtha said: — He who has devoted his whole soul to the contemplation of 
the Intellect, and feels the same stirring within himself, and knows in his mind 
the vanity and unreality of all worldly things, (is the person whose soul is said 
to be extinct in the deity). 


2. By habituating himself to this sort of meditation, and seeing the outward 
objects in his perceptive soul, he views the external world, as an appearance 
presenting before him in his dream. 


3. All this is verily the form of the Intellect, represented in a different garb. 
The intellect is rarer than the pure air, but collects and condenses itself as the 
solid world, and recognizes itself as such; wherefore, the world is no other 
than the consolidated intellect, and there is nothing beside this anywhere. 


4. It has no dissolution or decay, nor it has its birth or death; it is neither 
vacuity nor solidity, it is neither extension nor tenuity, but it is all and the 
Supreme one and nothing in particular. 


5. Nothing is lost by the loss of egoism, and of this world also; the loss of 
an unreality is no loss at all, as the loss of anything in our dream, is attended 
with loss of nothing. 


6. Nothing is lost at the loss of an imaginary city, which is altogether a 
falsity; so nothing is destroyed by the destruction of our egoism and this 
unreal world. 


7. Whence is our perception of the world, but from a nullity; and if it is 
granted as such, then there is nothing that can be predicated of it, any more 


than that of a flower growing in the air (which is a nullity). 


8. The conclusion arrived at last after mature thought in respect to this is, 
that you must remain as you are and as firm as a rock in the state in which you 
are placed, and in the conduct appertaining to your own station in life. 


9. The world is the creation of thy fancy as thou wishest it to be, and there 
are the peculiar duties attached to thy station in all thy wonderings through 
life; but all these cease at once at the moment (of your divine meditation), and 
this is the conclusion arrived at (by the joint verdict of the Sdstras). (Every 
one cuts his own course in life, which ceases no sooner he thinks of its 
nihility. So it is said: — do thy duties till thy death but the thought of thy 
living in death, puts a stop to thy course all at once. Sanchintya mrituyncha 
tamugra dantang, sarvey projutnd shithild vabanti). 


10. All this is inevitable and unavoidable in life, and is avoided only by 
divine meditation; in which case the whole creation vanishes into nothing, and 
there is no more any trace of it left behind. (ie, In a future life or 
transmigration). 


11. The unholy souls that view the creation, appearing before them like the 
dreams of sleeping men; are called sleeping souls, which behold the world 
rising before them, like the waving waters in a mirage. 


12. Those who consider the unreality (of the world) as a reality, we know 
not what to speak of them, than with regard to the offspring of barren women. 
(i.e., the impossibility of the existence of either of them). 


13. The souls of those that have known the true God, are as full as the 
ocean with heavenly delight; because they do not look upon the visible 
objects, nor do the visible ever fall under sight or notice. 


14. They remain as calm as the still air, and as sedate as the unshaking 
flame of a lamp; and they continue to be quite at ease both as they are 
employed or unemployed in action. 


15. As a minute atom makes a mountain, so the atomic heart becomes full 
when it is employed in business; and yet the cold-heartedness of the wise seer, 
continues the same as ever before. (i.e., The mind of the wise man, is not 
ruffled by the bustle of business). 


16. The wish makes the man, though it is not seen by anyone; it is the cause 
of the world, (worldly affairs), though it is not perceived by anybody. (The 
wish being master to the thought, — the master of action). 


17. What is done by oversight or in ignorance, is undone or foiled by sight 


or knowledge of it; as for instance the thefts and other wicked acts, which are 
carried on in the darkness, disappear from sight before the blaze of daylight. 


18. All beings composed of the fleshy body and the five elemental 
substances, are altogether unreal as the gross productions of error only; and so 
are the understanding, mind, egoism and other mental faculties, of the same 
nature and not otherwise. 


19. Leaving aside both the elemental and mental parts and properties of 
your body, you attain to the purely intellectual state of your soul, which is 
called to be your liberation. 


20. Attachment to the intellect and adherence to the intellectual thoughts, 
being once secured there will be end to the view of visibles, and there will be 
no more any appearance of fancy in the mind, nor any desire or craving rising 
in the heart. 


21. But who has fallen into the error of taking the visibles for true, his sight 
of the unreal prevents his coming to the view of the true reality; and he finds 
at the end, that the visible world is but a mirage, and is never faithful to 
anybody at any place. 


22. So he finds the falsity of the world, whose soul has risen to its 
enlightenment within himself; but who ever happens to have the remembrance 
of the world in him, he comes to fall to the error of its reality again. 


23. Therefore, avoid your reliance in all worldly objects, and rely only on 
one who is simply as mere vacuum; and mind that is good you not to 
remember the world any more, and that your forgetfulness of it altogether is 
best for you. 


24. In your forgetfulness of the world you will find nothing to be seen or 
enjoyed in it, and nothing of its entity or nullity whatsoever; it is as well as it 
is all quiet and still as the calm and unruffled ocean forever. 


25. The whole visible world is Brahma himself, and as such, the ocean of it 
is to be understood as a positive reality; it is a bubble in His eternity, which is 
all quiet and calm after immersion of bubbles and waves. 


26. Meek and tolerant men, are seen to be sedate and dispassionate in their 
worldly transaction; and to be resigned to the Supreme spirit in their souls. 
(Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven). 


27. Or the saint whose soul is extinct in his god, has only his meekness 
remaining in him; and being devoid of all desire, he is unfit for all worldly 
concerns. (It is hard to attend equally to one’s secular and spiritual concerns). 


28. As long as one is not perfect in the extinction of his soul in the deity, he 
may be employed in the practice of his secular duties, by being devoid of 
passions, animosity and fear of anyone. (This is enjoined for a devotee, till he 
reaches the seventh stage of his devotion). 


29. The saint being freed from his passions and feelings of anger and fear 
and other affections, and getting the tranquility of nirvdna extinction in his 
mind, becomes as frigid as snow and remains as a block of stone forever. 


30. As the pericarp contains the seed of the future flower in it, so the saint 
has all his thoughts and desires quite concealed in his inmost soul, and never 
gives any vent to them on the outside. 


31. The mind wanders on the outside by thinking about the outer world, 
and so is it confined within itself by its meditation on the inner soul; such is 
the contemplation of the Supreme being, either as he is thought of or seen in 
spirit in the inner soul, or viewed himself to be displayed in his works of 
creation in the outer world. (The spiritual and natural adoration of God). 


32. The outer world is no other than an external representation of the 
delusive dream, which is in the inside of ourselves; there is not the slightest 
difference between them, as there is none in the same milk, contained in two 
different pots only. 


33. The motion or inertness and the fickleness or steadiness of the one or 
other of them, are no more than the effects of our lengthened delusion; and the 
state of one being the container of the other, makes no difference in them, as 
there is none between the containing ocean and the waves it contains. 


34. The dreams that we see in sleep, are no other than operations of the 
mind, though they are supposed in our ignorance to be quite apart from 
ourselves. 


35. He that remains in the manner of the Supreme soul, quite calm and 
tranquil and free from all fancy and desires, becomes (extinct in) the very 
soul, by thinking himself as such; but he never becomes so unless he thinks 
himself to be as so; (Hence the formula of daily meditation soham, “I am he,” 
Atman bramatvena sambhavan). 


36. The divine state is that of the perfect stillness of the soul (as in sound 
sleep), when there is not even a dream stirring in the mind; but what that state 
is or is not, is incomprehensible in the mind, and inexpressible in words. (It is, 
because we know it in our consciousness and it is not, because we know it not 
by the predicaments of space and time, and those of the container, contained, 
or any other category whatsoever). 


37. Yet is this state made intelligible to us by instructions of our preceptors, 
and by means of the entire removal of our error as well as by our intense 
meditation of it; else there is no body to tell us what it really is. (The Sdstras 
tell us, what it is not; by their dogmas, neti neti and tanna tanna; but never say 
a word about its real nature as idamasti). 


38. It is therefore proper for you to remain entirely extinct in the external 
one and tranquil as the Divine spirit by giving up all your fear and pride, your 
griefs and sorrows, and your covetousness and all errors besides. You must 
forsake with these the dullness of your heart and mind, as also of your body 
and all its members, together with the sense of your egoism and the 
distinctions of things from the one perfect unity. (Knowing that, “all are but 
parts of the one undivided whole’). 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
Sermon inculcating the Knowledge of Truth. 


Argument: — Liberation depends on self-exertion; and upon good 
company, study of good books, and the habit of reasoning. 


Vasishtha continued: — Soon as intellection commences to act, it is 
immediately attended by egoism, — the cause of the erroneous conception of 
the world; and this introduces a train of unrealities, as the stirring of air causes 
the blowing of winds. (It means to say that being misguided by avidyd or 
ignorance, we are liable to fall into all sorts of error). 


2. But when intellection is directed by vidyd or reason, its fallacy of the 
reality of the world, does not affect us in any manner, if we but reflect it as a 
display of Brahma himself, (that he is all in all); but we are liable to great 
error, by thinking the phenomenal world as distinct from Him. 


3. As the opening of the eyes receives the sight of external appearance, the 
opening of intellection doth in like manner receive the erroneous notion of the 
reality of the phenomenal world. 


4. What appears on the outside, being quite distinct from the nature of the 
inner intellect, cannot be a reality as the other; and therefore, this unreal show 
is no more, than the dancing of a barren woman’s boy before one’s eyes. 
(Which is nothing). 


5. The intellect is perceived by its conception of the notions of things, but 
when we consider the fallacy of its conceptions, and its notion of the unreal as 
real, it appears to us as a delusion like the appearance of a ghost to boys. 


6. Our egoism also is for our misery, from the knowledge that, “I am such a 
one;” but by ignoring (or the want of) this knowledge of myself, that I am not 
this or that, loosens me from my bondage to it. Therefore, I say, that our 
bondage and liberation, are both dependent on our own option. (But as the 
innate consciousness of the self or ego is impossible to ignore, yet it is 
possible to everybody, to ignore his being any particular person whatsoever). 


7. Therefore, the meditation which is accompanied with self-extinction and 
forgetfulness of one’s self, and the remaining of the moving and quick in the 
manner of the quiet and dead, is the calm tranquility of holy saints, which is 
ever the same, unaltered and without decay. 


8. Therefore, ye wise men, do not trouble yourself as the unwise with the 
discrimination of unity and duality, and the propriety or impropriety of 
speech, all which is wholly useless and painful frivolity. 


9. The covetous man with his thickening desires, meets with a train of ideal 
troubles, gathering as thickly about him, as the thronging dreams assailing his 
head at night. These proceeding from his fondness of outward and visible 
objects, and from the fond desires inwardly cherished within his heart, grow 
as thickly upon him as the creation of his wild fancy. 


10. But the meek man of moderate desire, remains dormant in his waking 
state (as a waking sleeper); and does not feel the pain or fear the pangs of his 
real evils, by being freed from his hankering after temporary objects. 


11. Hence, the desire being moderated and brought under proper bounds, 
bears resemblance even to our freedom from its bonds; as we get rid of our 
once intense thought of something, by our neglect of it in course of time and 
changing events. 


12. The entire curtailment of desires, is sure to be attended with liberation; 
as the total disappearance of frost and clouds from the sky, leaves the empty 
vacuum to view. 


13. The means of abating our desires, is the knowledge of ego as Brahma 
himself (and particular person or soul); and this knowledge leads to one’s 
liberation, as study of science and association with the wise, serve to convert 
ignorant men to sapience and knowledge. 


14. In my belief there is no other ego but the one Supreme ego, and this 
belief is enough to bring men to the right understanding of themselves, and 
make their living souls quite calm and tranquil, and dead to the sense of their 
personality and self-existence. 


15. The world appears as a duality or something distinct from the unity of 
God, just as the motion of the wind seems to be something else beside the 
wind itself, or the breathing as another thing than the breath; but this fallacy 
of dualism will disappear upon reflection of, “how I, or anything else could be 
something of itself,” (and unless it proceeded from the One everlasting unity). 


16. That I am nothing is what is meant by extinction, and why then remain 
ignorant (of this simple truth); go, associate with the wise and argue with 


them, and you will so come to learn it, (i.e., this truth). 


17. It is in the company of those who are acquainted with truth, that you 
loosen the bonds of your worldly errors; just as darkness is dispelled by light, 
and the night recedes from before the advancing of the day. 


18. Make it the duty of your whole life, to argue with the learned, 
concerning such like topics, as, “what am I,” and what are these visible 
objects; what is life and what this living soul, and how and whence they come 
into existence. 


19. The world is seen to be full of animal life, and I find my egoism is lost 
in it; the truth of all this is learnt in a moment in the society of the learned, 
therefore, betake thyself to the company of those luminaries of truth. 


20. Resort one by one to all those that are wiser than thee in the knowledge 
of truth, and by investigation into their different doctrines, the spectre of your 
controversy, (i.e., error), will disappear forever. (Because the maxim says, “as 
many heads so many minds, and as many mouths so many verdicts,” 
therefore, examine them all and glean the truth). 


21. As the spectre of controversy rises before the learned, in the manner of 
an apparition appearing before boys; so the error of egoism rises before them, 
in their attempt to maintain their respective arguments. 


22. Let therefore the diligent inquirer after truth, attend separately to the 
teaching of every professor of particular doctrines; and then taking them 
together, let him consider in his own mind, the purport of their several 
preachings. 


23. Let him weigh well in his own mind, the meanings of their several 
sayings, for the sharpening of his own reasoning, and accept the doctrine 
which is free from the flights of imagination and all earthly views. 


24. Having sharpened your understanding by associating with the wise, do 
you cut short the growth of the plant of your ignorance by degrees, and by 
little and little. (dit., — bit by bit). 


25. I tell you to do so, because I know it is possible to you to do so; we tell 
you boys, accordingly as we have well known anything, and never speak what 
is improper or impracticable to you. 


26. As the gathering or dispersion of the clouds in the sky, and the rising 
and sinking of the breakers in the sea, is no gain or loss to either, so the 
attainment or bereavement of any good whatever, is of no concern to the 
unconcerned sage or saint. 


27. All this is as false as the appearance of water in the mirage, while our 
reliance in the everlasting and all-pervading One, is as firm, secure and certain 
(as our supportance on a solid rock). By reasoning rightly in yourself, you will 
discover your egoism to be nowhere; how and whence then do you beget this 
false phantom of your imagination. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 
Sermon on the True Sense of Truth. 


Argument: — Causes of erroneous conceptions and false Imagination, our 
hankering for the future world and its remedy. 


Vasishtha continued: — Rama, if a man will not gain his wisdom by his own 
exertion, by his own reasoning and by the development of his understanding 
in the company of good men, then there is no other way to it. 


2. If one will try to remove his mis-apprehensions and the false creations of 
his imagination, by the prescribed remedies of the Sdstras, he will succeed to 
change and rectify them himself, as they remove or remedy one poison by 
means of a counter poison. 


3. All fancies and desires are checked by unfancying them, and this 
unfancifulness or undesirousness is the cause of liberation, by relinquishment 
of worldly enjoyment, which is the first step to it. (So says the sruti: — 
Renunciation of enjoyments, is the leader to liberation). 


4. First consider well the meanings of words, both in your mind and 
utterance of them; and all the habitual and growing misconceptions will 
slowly cease and subside of themselves. 


5. There is no greater error or ignorance in one’s self, except the sense of 
his egoism; and this error having subsided by one’s disregard of its accepted 
sense, it is not far from him to arrive at his liberation. 


6. If you have the least reliance in your body and egoism, you surely lose 
the infinite joy of your unbounded soul; but by forsaking the feeling of your 
egoism or personality, you are freed from the bondage of your fondness for 
anything of this world, and become perfected in divine knowledge and 
blissfulness. 


7. It is from want of understanding, that all these unrealities appear as real 
to the ignorant; but we venerate and bow down to the sage, who remains 
unmoved as a stone at all this. 


8. Who from want of his sense of external objects, remains as cold as a 
stone, and being reclined in the Supreme spirit by the meditation of the Divine 
Mind in his own mind; sees but an empty void both within and all around 
himself. (This is called perfect liberation of the soul). 


9. Whether there be or not be all these visibles, they tend alike to our 
misery; it is our thoughtlessness of them alone that conduces to our happiness, 
wherefore it is better to remain insensible of them, by shutting our senses 
against them. (Our happiness or misery does not depend on the presence or 
absence of things, but upon our disregard of or concern for them). 


10. There are two very serious diseases waiting on mankind, in their cares 
for this as well as those of the next world; and both of these are attended with 
intolerable pains to the patients of both their temporal as well as spiritual 
maladies. 


11. In this world the intelligent are seen to try all their best medicines in 
vain, to remove their inveterate diseases of hunger and thirst, by means of 
their remedies of food and drink, during the whole period of their lives; but 
there is no remedy whatever for to heal their spiritual maladies of sin and vile, 
and avert their inevitable fate of death and rebirths in endless succession. 


12. The best sort of men are trying to heal their spiritual maladies, and 
avert their future fate, by means of the ambrosial medicines of 
dispassionateness, keeping good company and improvement of their 
understanding. 


13. Those who are careful to cure their spiritual complaint, become 
successful to get their riddance, by means of their desire of getting better, and 
by virtue of the best medicine of abstinence and refraining from evil. (Gloss. 
apathya tydga, etc.). 


14. Whoever does not heal even now his deadly disease of sin, which is his 
leader to hell fire on future; let him say what remedy is left for him to try, 
after he has gone to the next world, where there is no balsam to heal the sickly 
soul. 


15. Try all earthly medicines to preserve your life, from being wasted away 
by earthly diseases; and keep your souls entire for the next world, by the 
healing balm of spiritual knowledge in this life. 


16. This life is but a breath, alikens a tremulous dew drop, hanging at the 
end of a shaking leaf, and ready to fall down; but your future life is long, and 
enduring under all its variations, therefore, heal it for the everlasting futurity. 


17. By carefully attending to the treatment of spiritual diseases at present, 


you will not only be hale and holy in your soul in the next world, but evade all 
the diseases of this life, which will fly off afar from you. 


18. Know thy conscious soul as an animalcule, which evolves itself into the 
form of this vast world; just as an atom contains a huge mountain in it, which 
evolves from its bosom in time. 


19. As the evolution of your consciousness, presents to your view the forms 
that you have in your mind, (i.e., ideals); so doth the phenomenon of the 
world appear in the womb of vacuum, and is no more real than a false 
phantasy. 


20. Notwithstanding the repeated deluge and destruction of the visible 
earth, there is no change nor end of the false phantom of our mind, where its 
figure is neither destroyed nor resuscitated, owing to its being a phantasy only 
and no reality whatever. (It is possible to destroy the form of, a, but not its 
idea in the mind). 


21. Should you like to lift up your soul, from the muddy pit of earthly 
pleasures and desires, wherein it drowned forever; you must put forth your 
manly virtues, as the only means to this end, and without which there is no 
other. 


22. The man of ungoverned mind and soul, is a dull-headed fool, and fallen 
in the miry pit of carnal desires; he becomes the receptacle of all kinds of 
danger and difficulty, as the bed of the sea is the reservoir of all the waters 
falling to it. 


23. As boyhood is the first stage of the life of a man, and introduces the 
other ages for perfection of human nature; so the first step to one’s self- 
extinction, is the renunciation of his carnal enjoyments, conducing to the 
subjection of passions. 


24. The stream of the life of a wise man, is ever flowing onward with the 
undulations of events, without overflowing its banks or breaking its bounds; 
and resembles a river drawn in a picture, which is flowing without the current 
of its waters. 


25. The course of the lives of ignorant people, runs with tremendous noise, 
like the precipitate current of rivers; it rolls onward with dangerous 
whirlpools, and flows on with its rising and setting billows (till it mixes with 
the sea of eternity). 


26. Continuous creations and course of events, are transpiring with the 
succession of our thoughts; and appearing before us like the illusive train of 
our dreams, and the false appearance of two moons in the sky, and the 


delusion of mirage and apparitions rising to the sight of children. 


27. So the incessant waves raised by the undulating waters of our 
consciousness, appears as the endless chain of created objects, rising in reality 
to our view; but being taken into mature consideration, they will appear to be 
as false and unreal, as they seem true and real to our erroneous apprehension 
of them. 


28. It is said that are worlds and the cities of Gandharvas and Siddhas, 
contained in the concavity of the firmament, and it is supposed also that, the 
cavity of the sky is a reservoir of waters; but all these are but creations of the 
mind, and there no such things in reality. 


29. The worlds are as bubbles of water, in the ocean of the conscious mind; 
they are only the productions of the fanciful mind, and no such things, as they 
are thought to be; and the idea of ego, is but forms of our varying thoughts. 


30. The expansion of consciousness is the course of unfolding the world, 
and the closing of it conceals the phenomenals from view; therefore, these 
appearances are neither in the inside nor outside of us; and they are neither 
realities, nor altogether unreal also (but effects of the opening and shutting of 
our minds only). 


31. There is one thing alone of the form of the intellect, which is unborn 
and unknown (in its true nature), and is the undecaying, (i.e., everlasting), lord 
of all; it is devoid of substance and property, and is called Brahma or 
immensity, and tranquil spirit, which is as quiet and calm as the infinite void, 
are rarer than even the empty atmosphere. 


32. There is no cause whatever, which can be reasonably assigned to the 
agitation, consciousness and creations of the spirit of Brahma; which being 
above nature is said to have no nature at all. Its agitation is as that of the air; 
whose cause is beyond all conception. 


33. Brahma has his thoughts rising in him, as waves in the ocean of 
himself, and as our consciousness of the dreams rising in our soul; and the 
nature of this creation is in reality, neither as that of his dream, or the wave 
produced from his essence. (It is hard to say, whether this is a thought of 
himself as a dream, or a part of him like a wave). 


34. This much therefore can only be said of him that, there is only an 
unknowable unity, which is ever the same and never as quick as thought, nor 
even as dull as matter; it is not a reality or unreality, nor any thing this 
positive or negative. (In a word, it is nothing that conceivable by the human 
mind). 


35. The Yogi that remains in this insouciant state of Brahma, and insensible 
of his own consciousness, (i.e., who is inexcitable both in his body and mind), 
such a person is said to be the best of sages and saints. 


36. Who becomes inactive and inert as a clod of earth, even while he is 
alive; who becomes unconscious of himself and the outer world, and thinks of 
nothing (except the Supreme soul); he is said as the best of sages and saints. 


37. As we lose sight of wished for objects, by ceasing to wish for them 
(such as the sights of fairy lands, efc.); so we get rid of our knowledge of 
ourselves and the world, by our ceasing to think about them (by confining our 
thoughts in God alone). 


38. All things expressed, in words have certain causes assigned to them; 
but the cause of their nature remains inexplicable, (whence nature, — 
swabhdva, is said to be avidyd or hidden ignorance). It is the cause of this 
prime nature, (i.e., God), whose knowledge alone conduces to our liberations 
(from ignorance). 


39. Nothing whatever has its particular nature of itself, unless it were 
implanted in it by the intelligence of God, as it were by infusion of the 
moisture of divine intelligence. 


40. All our thoughts, are agitated by inspiration of the breath of the great 
intellect; know them therefore, as proceeding from the vacuum of the entity of 
the supreme Brahma. 


41. There is no difference whatever, in the different nature of the creator 
and creation; except it be as that of the air and its agitation, which are the one 
and same thing and of the same nature. The thought of their difference is as 
erroneous, as the sight of one’s death in his dream. 


42. An error continues so long, as the blunder does not become evident by 
the light of reasoning; when the error being cleared of its falsity, flies to and 
vanishes into the light and truth of Brahma. 


43. Error, being the false representation of something, flies away before a 
critical insight into it; and all things being but productions of our error, like 
our conception of the horns of hare, they all vanish before the light of true 
knowledge, which leaves the entity of Brahma only at the end. 


44. Therefore, give up all your errors and delusions, and thereby get rid of 
the burden of your diseases and decay; and meditate only on the One, that has 
no beginning, middle, or end, is always clear and the same, and full of bliss 
and felicity, and assimilate yourself to the nature of the clear firmament; 
(which according to Vasishtha is the nature and form of God). 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
Sermon on the Practice of Spiritual Yoga or 
Intellectual Meditation. 


Argument: — Elucidation of the doctrine that, the best way of avoiding 
worldly affairs, is to refrain from mixing with them. 


Vasishtha continued: — The man who is lost in the pleasure or under the 
pains, which fall to his share in this life, is lost forever for the future; but he 
who is not thus lost (by keeping his soul aloof from the vicissitudes of life), is 
pronounced to be imperishable by the verdict of the Sdstras. 


2. He who has his desires always rising in his mind, is ever subject to the 
changes of his fortune; therefore, it is proper to give up desire at first, in order 
to prevent the alternation of pain and pleasure. 


3. The error that, this is I, and that the world, does not attach to immortal 
soul; which is tranquil and unsupported, quite dispassionate and undecaying 
in itself. 


4. That this is I, that is Brahma, and the other is the world, are verbal 
distinctions that breed error in the mind; by attributing different appellations, 
to one uniform and invariable void that is ever calm and quiet. (This is the 
eternal vacuum of Vasishtha, beside which there is nothing else in existence). 


5. Here there is no ego nor world, nor the fictitious names of Brahma and 
others; the all-pervading One being quite calm and all in all, there is no active 
or passive agent at all in this place (or vacuity). 


6. The multiplicity of doctrines and the plurality of epithets, which are used 
to explain the true spirit and inexplicable One, are null and refutable, and 
among them the word ego in particular, is altogether false and futile. 


7. The man absorbed in meditation does not see the visibles, as the 
thoughtless person has no perception of the ghost standing in his presence; 
and as one sleeping man does not perceive the dreams, occurring to another 


sleeping by his side, nor hear the loud roar of clouds, in the insensible state of 
his sound sleep. 


8. In this manner, the courses of the spirits are imperceptible to us, though 
they be continually moving all about us; because it is our nature to perceive 
what you know of, and never know anything, which is without or beyond our 
knowledge. 


9. Knowledge also being as our soul, shows all things like itself; (7.e., as we 
have their ideas or representations of them in our mind); therefore, our 
knowledge of the ego and the world beside, is not separate from the soul and 
the Supreme soul also. 


10. So our knowledge, (idea or notion), manifests itself in the form of the 
world before us; in like manner as our dreams and desires (or imaginations), 
represent the same as true to us. These various manifestations of the inward 
soul, are no way different from it, as the waves and bubbles are no other than 
the water, whence they take their rise. 


11. Notwithstanding the identity of the soul, and its manifestations of 
knowledge, notion, idea and others; they are considered as distinct things by 
ignorant thinkers, but the learned make no distinction whatever, between the 
manifestation and its manifesting principle. 


12. As the integral soul becomes a component body, by its assuming to 
itself all its members and limbs; so the eternally undivided spirit of God, 
appears to be multiplied in all parts of the world, and various works of 
creation. 


13. So the intellect contains numberless thoughts in itself, as a tray holds a 
great many golden cups in it; and whenever this intellect is awake, it sees 
innumerable worlds appearing before it. 


14. It is Brahma himself that shines in his brightness, in the form of this fair 
creation; by being dissolved throughout the whole, in his liquified form of the 
Intellect, as the sea shows itself in the changing forms of its waves. 


15. Whatever is thought of in the mind, the same (thought or idea) appears 
in the form of the world, efc., and the formless thought takes a definite form; 
but what is not in the mind, never appears to view. 


16. The word intellection and want of thought, are both applied to the 
Supreme Intellect, from its almighty power to assume either of them to itself; 
this sort of expression is for the instruction of others, or else there are no such 
states, appertaining to the ever-intelligent soul in reality. 


17. The world is neither a reality nor unreality, but exhibits itself as such by 
intellection of the intellect; but as it does not appear in absence of intellection, 
the same is inculcated in this lecture. (i.e., Never think of the world or 
anything at all, and it will vanish of itself withal). 


18. Intellection and its absence, are as the agitation and stillness of the soul; 
and both of these being under your subjection, it is quite easy and never 
difficult for you to restrain yourself, by remaining as still as a piece of stone. 


19. An appearance which has neither its essence or substance, and any 
assignable cause for its existence, is the very nature of this egoism of ours, 
which we know not whence it has appeared as an apparition before us. 


20. It is very strange that this apparition of your ego, which has no entity in 
reality; should take such possession of your mind, as to make you insensible 
of yourself. 


21. It is by accident that one happens to observe (or resolve) the ego, in the 
person of the impersonal Brahma; just as a man by deception of his eye sight, 
comes to descry an arbour in the sky. 


22. If my ego and the world are really the same with Brahma, then how and 
whence is it that come to have their production and dissolution, and what is 
the cause of our joy or sorrow in either of these cases. 


23. It is by the almighty power of God, that this world of thought (or the 
ideal world), comes to be visible to sight; but as the absence of thought of it, 
prevents its appearance into us; there be thoughtless of it in order to avoid its 
(repeated) sight (in repeated births). 


24. It is by mere accident that the vacuous (empty) mind of Brahma, 
exhibits the ideal world in itself; just as any man dreams a fairy city, or sees 
the objects of his desire and fancy in his mind. How then is it possible to 
separate the contained from the containing mind? 


25. The creation abides in the divine mind, in the same manner, as the 
waves appertain to the sea and statue inheres in the wood; and as the relation 
of pots and other things is with the earth, so do all things pertain to the nature 
of Brahma. 


26. As all things appear in their formless (immaterial) state, in the 
unsubstantial and transparent vacuity of the mind; so doth the ego and this 
world also appear in the divine mind; (in the same manner as the shapeless 
clouds appear in the clear and empty sky, and exhibit afterwards their various 
shapes). 


27. As the air by its natural inflation, breathes out in various sorts of 
breezes, so One whose nature is unknown, evolves himself in every form of 
the ego of each individual and of the world. (The breezes are said to be forty- 
nine in number. The nature of God is called avidyd, — ignorance or what we 
know not). The meaning is that, as the formless and vacuous air produces all 
sorts of winds. So doth God who is nihsabhdva without and beyond sabhdva 
nature produce all natures. 


28. As the formless smoke or vapour, presents the forms of elephants, 
horses, efc., in the empty clouds; so doth the unsubstantial spirit of God, 
represent the formless ego, tu and all things beside in itself. 


29. The creation is a component part, of the unknown body of Brahma, as 
the leaves and branches are those of the tree; and it contains both its cause and 
effect of the other. 


30. Knowing the impossibility of the existence of the world, beside the self 
ever-existent soul; remain at peace and without trouble within thyself. Be free 
from attributes and errors, and remain as free and detached as the free, open 
and void space. 


31. Know that neither you nor ourselves, nor the worlds nor the open air 
and space, are ever in existence; and that Brahma alone is ever existent, in his 
eternal tranquility, calmness and fulness. 


32. Seeing the endless particulars in the universe, do thou remain free from 
all particularities as I, myself, thou, thyself, etc., and think thyself in the sole 
and Supreme One, if thou shalt have thy liberation. 


33. Know the knowledge of the particulars, is for thy bondage alone to 
them, and thy ignorance of them lends only to thy liberation (from all these 
trammels). Sit as thou art and doing thy business, in thy state of tranquility 
and total nescience of everything. 


34. Let not the visibles attract thy sight, nor allow their thoughts engross 
thy mind; thus the world disappearing with thy thoughtlessness of it, say what 
else have you to think about. 


35. The absence of the states of the visible and its looker, i.e., of the 
subjective and objective, resembling the state of the waking sleeper, will 
make remain as void of thoughts, as the vault of the autumnal sky is devoid of 
clouds. 


36. The Knowledge of the action of the divine Intellect, as distinct from the 
invariable of Brahma, is the cause of our making a distinction of the creation 
from its creator; just as our knowledge of the difference of the wind from air, 


causes us to think of their duality. It is therefore our want of this distinction, 
and the knowledge of the unity of Brahma, that leads us to our liberation. 


37. The knowledge of the inflation of the divine spirit, is verily the cause of 
our knowledge of the world; whereas the absence of this knowledge, and want 
of our own intellection, is what is called our nirvdna or utter extinction in 
God. 


38. As the seed is conscious of the sprout growing out of it to be of its own 
kind, so the divine Intellect knows the world that is produced from it, to be 
self-same with itself. 


39. As the seed becomes the plant from its conception of the same in itself, 
so the divine Intellect becomes the creation itself from its concept of the same. 


40. As the thoughts are but the various modifications of the mind, so the 
creation is a modality of the divine Intellect; and in this case all kinds of seeds 
serve as instances, of having their products of the same nature. 


41. The world is the changeless form of the unchanging essence of One, 
and know to be as unchangeable and undecaying as One, himself, who is 
without beginning and end. 


42. The divine soul is replete with its innate will, whereby it produces and 
destroys the world out of and into itself; this form of unity and duality, is as 
the appearance and disappearance of an imaginary city. 


43. As you have no distinct idea of the things, expressed by the words sky 
and vacuum; so must you know the words Brahma and creation to bear no 
distinction in the divine spirit. (Creation being but the breathing or inflation of 
the spirit and inseparable from it). 


44. The great Intellect or omniscience, which is the sempiternal form of 
divine essence, has the knowledge of the ego coeternal with itself, which men 
by ignorance assume to themselves. 


45. There is nothing that ever grows or perishes in the mundane form of 
Brahma, but everything rises and falls in it like the undulation of the sea, to 
rise and fall in all way and never to be lost in any way. 


46. All things being of the form of Brahma, remain in the self-same 
Brahma; as all spaces remain in the infinite space and all waves and billows 
rise and fall in the same sea. 


47. Wherever you are placed and whenever you have time, attend but for a 
moment to the (subjective) nature of the soul in your consciousness (without 
minding any of the objects), and you will perceive the true ego. 


48. The sages, O Rama, have said of two states of our consciousness, 
namely its sensible and insensible states; now therefore, be inclined to that 
which thou thinkest to be attended with thy best good, and never be forgetful 
of it. (ie., Attach thyself to the subjective side of it, in disregard of the 
objective). 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
Description of the Supreme Brahma. 


Argument: — The One undivided Brahma with and without his attributes 
and his real and unreal forms. 


Vasishtha continued: — The state of the soul is as placid, as that of the 
untroubled mind in the interval of one’s journey from one place to another, 
when it is free from the cares of both places (of trouble). 


2. Be therefore quite unconcerned in your mind in all states of your life, 
whether when you sit or walk or hear or see anything, for the purpose of 
securing your unalterable composure. 


3. Being thus devoid of your desires, and undistinguished in society, 
continue as steadfast as a rock, in the particular conduct of your station in life. 


4. Being placed in this manner beyond the reach of ignorance, one is blest 
with the light of knowledge in his mind. 


5. After disappearance of ignorance from the mind, there can be no trace of 
any thought left in it; nor can the mind think of anything, when tranquility has 
got her ascendency in it. 


6. Brahma is verily one with the world, and the self-same one appearing as 
many to our ignorance; which represents the plenitude of Brahma as a 
multitude, and his pure spirit as extended matter. 


7. The plenum (of creation) appears as vacuum (of annihilation), and 
vacuity appearing as substantiality; brightness deemed by darkness, and what 
is obscure is brought to light. 


8. The unchangeable is seen as changing and the steady appearing as 
moving; the real appears as unreal, and the unreality as reality; so that 
seeming as otherwise, and so the vice versa also. 


9. The indivisible appears as divided, and energy appearing as inertia; the 
unthinkable seems as the object of thought, and the unparted whole seeming 


to shine in innumerable parts. 


10. The unego appears as the very ego, and the imperishable One appearing 
as perishable; the unstained seem as tainted, and the unknowable known as 
the knowable-all of the known world. 


11. The luminous One appearing as deep darkness of chaos, and the oldest 
in time manifested as the new born creation; and the One minuter than an 
atom, bearing the boundless universe in its bosom. 


12. He the soul of all, is yet unseen or dimly seen in all these his works; 
and though boundless and endless in Himself, he appears as bounded in the 
multitudinous works of his creation. 


13. Being beyond illusion, He binds the world in delusion; and being 
ineffable light, he centres his brightness in the dazzling sun. Know then, O 
best of inquirers, that Brahma resembles the endless expanse of the vast 
ocean. 


14. This immense treasure of the universe, so enormous in its bulk, appears 
yet as light as a feather, when put into balance with the immensity of Brahma; 
and the rays of his illusion, eluding the moon-beams in their transparency, are 
as invisible as the glare of the mirage. 


15. Brahma is boundless and unfordable (as the ocean), and is situated in 
no time nor place nor in the sky, where he has set the forests of the clusters of 
the stars, and the huge mountains of the orbs of planets. 


16. He is minutest of the minute (by his inhering in the bodies of the 
smallest minutiae); and the bulkiest of the bulky. He is the greatest among the 
great, and the chiefest of the chief. 


17. He is neither the doer, deed nor instrument of doing anything; and 
neither is the cause of another, nor has he any cause for himself. (In Vedanta, 
all causality is denied of the all-pervading Brahma). And being all empty 
within, Brahma is full in Himself. 


18. The world which is the great casket of its contents, is as void as a vast 
desert; and notwithstanding its containing the countless massy and stony 
mountains in it, it is as ductile as the plastic ether and as subtle as the rarefied 
air. 


19. All things however time worn appear anew every day; the light 
becomes dark by night, and darkness is changed to light again. 


20. Things present become invisible to sight, and objects at a distance 
present themselves to view, the intellectual changes to the material, and the 


material vanishes to the superphysical (thought or spirit). 


21. The ego becomes the non-ego, and the non-ego changes to the ego; one 
becomes the ego of another, and that other and the ego, become as something 
other and different than the ego. 


22. The full ocean of the bosom of Brahma, gives rise to the innumerable 
waves of world; and these waves like worlds evolve from and dissolve into 
the ocean of Brahma’s breast, by their liquid like and plastic nature. 


23. The vacuous body of Brahma bears a snow-white brightness over all its 
parts, whence the whole creations is full of a light as fair as snow and frost. 
(Light is the first appearance or work of God, and envelopes the whole 
universe that was formed in and after it). 


24. This God being beyond the space of all time and place, and without all 
forms, figures, and shapes whatever; stretches out in space and all times of 
day and night, the unreal figures in the world like the unstable waves of the 
sea. 


25. In this light there shines the bright filament of the worlds, in the ample 
space of the sky; appearing as so many ancient arbours standing in a long and 
large forest, and bearing the five elements as their pentapetalous leaves. 


26. The great God has spread out this light, as a clear mirror before his 
sight; in order as he wished to see the shadow of his own face, represented in 
the pellucid twilight, (which proceeded at first from him). 


27. The unbounded intellect of God, produced of its own free will the 
spacious firmament, wherein the lord planted the tree of his creation, which 
brought forth the luminous orbs as its fruits in different parts of it. 


28. The lord created a great many varieties of things, both in the inside as 
well as outside of himself; which appear as internal thoughts in his intellect, 
and as all entities and non-entities in his outer or physical world. 


29. In this manner, the divine mind exhibits the different forms of things, in 
itself and of its own will, as the tongue displays the varieties of speech within 
the cavity of the mouth. 


30. It is the flowing of the fluid of divine will, which forms the worlds; and 
it is the conception of pleasant sensations in the mind, that causes these 
torrents and whirlpools in the ocean of the world. (i.e., The will is the cause of 
creation, and the feelings and passions are as whirlwinds and whirlpools in the 
mind). 


31. It is from the divine mind that all things proceed, as the light issues 


from fire; as it is the lulling of the creative mind to rest, that the glow of all 
visible objects are extinguished and put out of sight. 


32. All the worlds appertain to the divine intellect, as the property of 
whiteness adheres to the substance of snow; and all things proceeded from it, 
as the cooling moon-beams issue out of the lunar orb. 


33. It is from flush of the hue of this bodiless intellect, that the picture of 
the world derives its variegated colouring; and it is this intellect alone which 
is to be known, as an infinite extension without its privation or variation at 
any time. 


34. This stupendous Intellect, like the gigantic fig-tree, (ficus religiosa), of 
the forest, stretches out its huge branches on the empty air of heaven, bearing 
the enormous bodies of orbs of worlds, like clusters of its fruits and flowers. 


35. Again, this colossal intellect appears as a huge mountain, firmly fixed in 
the air, and letting down many a gushing and running stream, flowing with 
numberless flowers, falling from the mountain trees. 


36. In this spacious theatre of vacuum, the old actress of destiny, acts her 
part of the representation of worlds in their repeated rotations and succession. 


37. In this stage, the player boy, — time, is also seen to play his part, of 
producing and destroying by turns an infinity of worlds, in the continued 
course of Kalpa and Mahd-kalpa ages, and in the rotation of the parts of time. 


38. This playful time remains firm in his post, notwithstanding the repeated 
entrances and exits of worlds in the theatre of the universe; just as a fixed 
mirror ever remains the same, though shadows and appearance in it, are 
continually shifting and gliding through it. 


39. The Lord God is the causal seed of the worlds, whether existing at 
present or to come into existence in future; just in the same manner as the five 
elemental principles are causes of the present creation. (Here Brahma is 
represented, as in all other passages, as the material cause of the world). 


40. The twinklings of his eye cause the appearance and disappearance of 
the world, with all its beauty and brightness; but the Supreme soul having no 
outward eye or its twinkling, is confined in his spirit only. (The physical 
actions which are attributed to God, are always taken in their figurative sense). 


41. The very many great, and very great creations and dissolutions of 
worlds, and the incessant births and deaths of livings, which are continually 
going on in the course of the nature; are all the various forms of the One 
unvaried spirit, whose breath, like the inflation of air, produces and reduces all 


from and into itself. Know this and be quiet and still. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 
Sermon on the Seed or Source of the World. 


Argument: — Description of Avarice as the great Bondage of life and 
harmlessness of the common blessing of life obtained without avarice. i.e., 
Prohibition of avariciousness and not of ordinary enjoyments. 


Vasishtha continued: — The false varieties of the world take us by surprise, as 
the eddies attract to them the passing vessels; but they are all found to be of 
the same nature, as the various waves of the sea. (As all the waves are but 
water, so all worldly appearances are mere enticing delusions). 


2. The nature of the whole world, is as unknowably known to us; as that of 
the universal vacuum which rests in God alone, is imperceptibly perceptible to 
our eyes. (All we see of the sky, is but a blank which is nothing). 


3. As I find nothing in the fancied cities of boys in the air, (which they 
think to abound with ghosts, efc.); so doth this really ideal world, appear to be 
in real existence to boys alone. (But the wise know it as unreal). 


4. The sight and thought of visible appearances, are as the visions and 
remembrances of objects in dream; and so is this world but an appearance to 
the sight, and a phantom and phantasy in the mind. 


5. The phenomenal and the fancy, have no pith nor place except in the 
intellect; beside which there is nothing to be had save an unbounded vacuity 
only. Where then is the substantiality of the world? 


6. The error of the world consists in the knower’s knowledge of it, and it is 
the ignorance (of the existence) of the world, that is free from this error; and 
the knowing or ignoring of it is dependent to thee, as the thinking or 
unthinking of a thing, is entirely in thy power. (Everyone is master of his 
thoughts). 


7. The vacuous intellect being of the form of the transcendent sky, is of the 
state of an extended space, to which it is impossible to impute any particular 
nature or quality whatsoever. (The gloss explains it by saying that, the 


intellect is neither any extended matter, nor entirely an empty vacuity, since it 
is the source of all intellectual powers and mental faculties). 


8. The world also being of the form of the intellect, (@e., a formal 
representation of it); has no particular character or variable property 
assignable to it. It is seen to be existent, but having no particular feature of its 
own, it is not subject to any variation in its nature. (i.e., Being a formless 
thing, it can have no vikdra or change of form at all). 


9. All this being a representation of the vacuous intellect, has no 
substantiality whatever in it; it is the substance and not the knowledge of a 
thing, that is subject to any change in its form, because knowledge appertains 
to the intellect, which is always unchangeable. 


10. I see all quiet and calm, and the pure spirit of God; I am without the 
error of ego, tu, etc., and see nothing about me, in the same manner as we can 
never see a forest growing in the air. 


11. Know this my voice to be the empty air as my conscious thought, and 
know also these words of mine to proceed from my empty consciousness, 
which resides in the empty spirit likewise. (i.e., Sound proceeds from the 
empty spirit and not from the material body) (as some would have it). 


12. That which they designate the transcendent essence, is the eternal and 
involuntary state of rest of the Divine soul, and not what it assumes to itself of 
its own volition (as that of the creative energy of Brahma, — the Demiurge). 
That state resembles that of a slab of stone, with the figures naturally marked 
upon, or as the pictures drawn in a plate or chart. 


13. The silent man, (muni), whose mind is calm and quiet in the 
management of his ordinary business, remains unmoved as a wooden statue, 
and without the disturbance of any desire or anxiety. 


14. The living wise and listless man sees all along his life time, the world 
resembling a hollow reed, all empty within and without it, and having no pith 
or juice in the inside of it. (The wise well know the vanity of the world). 


15. He who is not delighted with the outer world, reaps the pleasure of his 
inner meditations; but he who is indifferent to both in his mind, is said to have 
gone over the ocean of the world (and set free from all his cares). 


16. Give out the words from your lungs, like a sounding reed from its 
hollow pipe; and clear your mind from its thoughts, by keeping your body 
intact from busy affairs, and employing no other member of it after them 
(except your tongue). 


17. Touch the tangibles as they come to thee without thy desiring them; and 
remain in thy solitary cell without thy wishing for or minding about them, or 
grieving at their want. 


18. You may relish the various flavours, which are offered to you; and take 
them to your mouth in the manner of a spoon without wishing for or taking a 
delight in their sweet taste. 


19. You may see all sights, that appear before you; without your desiring 
for or delighting in them. 


20. You can smell the sweet perfumes and flowers, that fall in your way 
without your seeking them, take the scents only to breathe them out, as the 
odoriferous winds scatter the flowers all around. 


21. In this manner if you go on to enjoy the objects of sense with utter 
indifference to them, and neither longing after or indulging yourself in any; 
you shall in that case have nothing to disturb your peace and content at any 
time. 


22. But whoso finds a zest for the poisonous pleasures of life, increasing in 
himself day by day; casts his body and mind to be consumed in their burning 
flame, and loses his endless felicity. 


23. Want of desire in the heart, is said to constitute the obtuse insensibility 
of the soul, called samadhdna by dispassionate sages; and there is no other 
better lesson to secure the peace of mind, than the precept of contentment, 
(lit., absence of desire). 


24. The increasing desire is as painful, as one’s habitation in hell fire; while 
the subsidence of desires in the mind, is as delightsome as his residence in 
heaven. 


25. It is desire alone, which constitutes the feelings of the heart and mind; 
and it is this, which actuates mankind to the practice of their austerities and 
penances, according to the Sdstras. 


26. Whenever a man allows his desire, to rise in any manner in his heart; 
even then he scatters a handful of the seeds of affliction, to sprout forth in the 
fair ground of his mind. (The more desire the more pain). 


27. As much as the craving of one is lessened by the dictates of this reason, 
so much do the pain of his avaricious thoughts cease to molest them. (Nothing 
to desire nothing to fear). 


28. The more doth a man cherish his fond desire in his mind, the more does 
it boil and rage and wave in his breast. 


29. If you do not heal the malady of your desire, by the medicine of your 
own efforts; then I think you will never find a more powerful balsam to 
remedy this your inveterate disease. 


30. Should you be unable to put a check to your desire altogether, you must 
still try to do it by degrees, as a passenger never fails to get his goal even by 
slow paces in time. 


31. He who does not try to diminish his desires day by day, is reckoned as 
the meanest of men, and is destined to live in misery every day. 


32. Our cupidity is the causal seed of the crop of our misery in this world; 
and this seed being fried in the fire of our best reason, will no more vegetate 
in the ground of our breast. 


33. The world is the field of our desires and the baneful sources of misery 
only, it is the extinction of them which is called nirvana; therefore, never be 
tempted by the delusion of desire for your utter destruction. 


34. Of what avail are the dictates of the Sdstras, and the precepts of our 
preceptors; if we fail to understand that, our samddhi or final rest consists in 
the extinction of our temporary desires. 


35. He who finds the difficulty of checking his desires in his mind, it is 
hopeless for him to derive any good from the instructions of his preceptors, or 
the teachings of the Sdstras whatever. 


36. It is the poison of avarice which proves the bane of human life, as the 
native forests of stags prove destructive to them, by being infested by 
huntsmen. (Hearts infested by avarice, are as detrimental to men; as forests 
infested by hunters are baneful to stags). 


37. If one would not deal frivolously, with the acquisition of his self- 
knowledge, (spirituality); he may but learn to extenuate his cravings, and he 
will thereby be led insensibly, to the acquirement of his spiritual knowledge. 


38. Extinction of wish is the extirpation of anguish, and this is the sense of 
the nirvana bliss; therefore, try to curtail your desires, and thereby to cut off 
your bondage, which will not be difficult for you to do, if you will but try to 
do so. 


39. The evils of death and decrepitude, and the weeds of continued woes, 
are the produce of secret seed of desire, which to be burnt betimes by the fires 
of equanimity and insouciance. 


40. Wherever there is inappetency, the liberation from bondage is found to 
be even there also; therefore, suppress always your rising desires, as you 


repress your fleeting breath (in the practice of ajapd or suppression of 
breathings). 


41. Wherever there is appetence, even there is our bondage in this world; 
and all our acts of merit or demerit and all our distresses and diseases, are the 
invariable companions of our worldly wishes. 


42. The dominant desire being deprived of its province, and the indifferent 
saint being freed from its bondage; it is made to weep and wail, as when a 
man is robbed by a robber. 


43. As much as a man’s desire is decreased in his breast, so much so does 
his prosperity increase, leading him onward towards his liberation. 


44. A foolish man that is ignorant of himself, (i.e., of his soul and spirit), 
and fosters his fond desire for anything; is as if he were watering at the root of 
the poisonous arbour of this world, only to bring his death by its baneful 
fruits. 


45. There is the tree of desire growing in the human heart and yielding the 
two seeds (fruits) of happiness and misery, (i.e., of good and evil); but the 
latter being fanned by the breeze of sin, bursts out in a flame which burns 
down the other, and together with it its possessor also. (The evil desire 
supercedes the good one). 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 
A Lecture on the Visibles and Visible World. 


Arguments: — Arguments to show that the world is no production of 
Divine will or volition, but a reproduction of Brahma himself. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear me explain to you more fully, O Rama! what I 
have already told you in brief, regarding the treatment of the malady of desire, 
which forms also an article of the practice of Yoga asceticism. 


2. Tell me if the will is anything, beside the soul in which it subsists; and if 
it is nothing apart from the soul, how do you wish to attribute an agency to it, 
other than that of the soul? 


3. The divine intellect being a thing; more subtle in its nature than the rarity 
of open air, is consequently without any part, and indivisible into parts. It is of 
itself an integrant whole, and one with myself, thyself and the whole world 
itself. 


4. This intellect is of the nature of vacuum, and the infinite vacuum itself; it 
is the knower and the known or the subjective and objective world likewise. 
What then is that other you call the will? 


5. There is no relation of the container and contained, or of the subject or 
object between it and ourselves; nor do we know those saintly men, who 
know it as any object of their knowledge. 


6. We are at a loss to determine the relation, of the subjectivity and 
objectivity of our; (as when I say, I am conscious of myself, here “I am” is the 
subject of myself, — the object). It is just as impossible to find out my egoism 
and meity, as it is to expect to see a potential black moon in the sky. (Here is a 
long note on the subjective and objective of my knowledge of myself). 


7. Such is the case with all the triple conditions of the subject, object and 
predicate (as the beholder, beholden and beholding); which having no 
existence of their own in the nature of things, I know not how they may 
subsist elsewhere except in the essence of the very soul. 


8. In the nature of things, all unrealities are referred to the reality of the 
soul, as our egoism and tuism, the subjective, objective, etc.; and so all things 
liable to destruction are said to become extinct in the self-existent and 
everlasting soul. 


9. In extinction there is no presence of anything, nor anything present is 
said to become extinct; the idea of the simultaneous presence and absence of a 
thing, is as absurd as the sight of light and darkness together in the same place 
at the same time. 


10. Neither can these abide together, on account of the repugnance of their 
nature; nor can they both be extinct at the same, as we see the presence of the 
one and the absence of the other before our eyes. So there is no nirvana in the 
living, because the one is a state of rest, and the other of pain and misery. 


11. The phenomenals are fallacies, and afford no real happiness; think them 
as unreal, and rely solely in the increate lord, by thy nirvana or extinction in 
him (through the medium of thy devout meditation). 


12. The pearl-shell looks like a silver, which is not likely to be realized 
from it; it is of no use or value, why then do you deceive yourself, with such 
like baubles of the world? 


13. Therefore, their presence or possession is full of misery, as their want 
or absence is fraught with felicity; want being had with the knowledge of the 
term, proves a substantive good in thy thought, nididhydsana, of it. (Want 
importing the absence both of good and evil, is a certain blessing. It may 
mean also want (of riches) with the gain of knowledge, is a certain good in the 
province of thought). 


14. Why then the vile do not come to perceive their bondage in riches? and 
why is it that they slight to lay hold on the treasure of their eternal welfare, 
which is even now offered before them? 


15. Knowing the causes, effects, and states of things, to be full of the 
presence of the One only; why do they fail to feel his immediate presence in 
their consciousness, which spreads alike through all? 


16. Mistaken men like the stray deer, are seeking Brahma in the causes and 
states of things; not knowing that the all-pervading spirit, spreads undivided 
and unspent throughout the whole vacuum of space (or throughout the infinite 
vacuity of space). 


17. But what is end of the doctrine of causation, unless it to establish the 
cause as the primary source of all; but how can force which is the cause of 
ventilation, and fluidity the causal principle of liquid bodies, be accounted as 


the creator of wind and water? (In this case, every cause becomes a separate 
Deity which is absurd). 


18. It is absurdity to say that, vacuity is the cause of vacuum, and the 
creative power is the cause of creation, when One alone, is the cause, effect, 
state and all of everything himself. (One-God is the primary, formal and final 
cause of all). 


19. It is therefore absurd to attribute the terms, importing causality and 
creativeness of creations to Brahma, who is identic with all nature, is 
unchangeable in his nature, and derives neither pleasure nor pain from his act 
of the creation of worlds. (What changed through all yet in all the same, etc., 
and without the feelings of pleasure or pain). 


20. Brahma being no other than the intellect (or omniscience), can have no 
will or volition stirring in his nature; as a doll soldier or painted army, are no 
other than the mud or plate and without any motion or movement of them. 


21. Rama said: — If there is no reality of the world, and our ego and tu are 
all unreal, and the phenomenal is no other than the noumenal Brahma; then it 
is the same thing, whether there be any will stirring in the Divine mind or not, 
since God is always all in all. 


22. Again, if the rising will (to create) be identic with the nature of God, as 
the rising wave is the same as the sea water; then what mean the precepts of 
controlling the will (such as the enforcing a good and restraining a bad 
desire)? 


23. Vasishtha replied: — It is true, O Rama, as you have understood it, that 
the divine will is no other than the divinity itself, in the knowledge of those, 
who are awakened to the light of truth. But hear me tell you further on this 
subject. 


24. Whenever a wish rises in the breast of the ignorant, it subsides of itself 
from their knowledge of the nature of the wished for object; just as the gloom 
of night, departs before the advance of sun-light. 


25. But the rising wish sets of itself in the heart of the wise man, as the 
doubt of duality vanishes from the minds of learned, upon the rise of the light 
of their understanding. 


26. No one can wish for anything, whose desires of all things are already 
dead within himself; and who is freed from his ignorance, and is set in the 
pure light of his liberation. 


27. The wise man is neither fond of, nor averse to the sight of the 


phenomenals; he views the beauties of nature, (/it., of the visibles), as they 
appear before him, without relishing (or delighting) in them of his own nature. 


28. If anything offer itself to him, by some or by means or causality of 
others; and if he find it right for him to take the same, he may then have the 
option, either to accept or refuse it, as he may like. 


29. Verily the will or desire and the unwillingness of the wise, are actuated 
by and proceed from Brahma himself; they have no uncontrollable or 
inordinate desire, but pursue their own course, and have nothing new or 
inordinary to wish for. (Pleased with their simple living, they have nothing 
anew to wish for or accept). 


30. As wisdom rises on one side, so the wish sets down on the other (side); 
nor can they combine to dwell together, as there is no chance of their uniting 
in the mind of any body, as there is no possibility of light and darkness 
meeting at the same place. 


31. The wise man, is not in need of any exhortation or prohibition in any 
act; because his heart being quite cool in itself in all his desires, there is 
nobody to tell him anything to any purpose. 


32. This is the character of the wise man, that his desires are imperceptible 
in his heart, and while he is full of joy in himself, he is complacent to all 
others about him. 


33. There is also a shade of heavenly melancholy settled in the outward 
countenance, and a distaste or indifference to everything in his mind; it is then 
that the current of desires ceases to flow in his heart, and his mind is elevated 
with the sense of his liberation. 


34. Whose soul is serene, and his intellect unclouded by the doubts of unity 
and duality; his desires turned to indifference and all his thoughts 
concentrated in the Lord. 


35. Whose knowledge of duality, has entirely subsided in his intellect; and 
whose belief of unity is without the alloy of the union of any other thing (in 
the sole and perfectly pure One); who is quite at ease and without any 
uneasiness, and resides calmly in the tranquility of the Supreme soul. 


36. He has no object to gain by his acts, nor anything to lose by their 
omission; he has no concern whatever with any person or thing either for 
aught of his good or otherwise. 


37. He is indifferent both to his desire as well as to his coolness, nor has he 
any care for the reality or unreality of things; he is not concerned about 


himself or others, nor is he in love with his life nor fear of death. 


38. The self-extinguished soul of the enlightened, never feels any desire 
stirring in itself; and if ever any wish is felt to rise in his breast, it is only an 
agitation of Brahma in it. 


39. To him there is no pleasure or pain, nor grief or joy; but he views the 
world as the quiet and increate soul of the Divinity manifest by itself; the man 
that goes on in this manner, like the course of a subterranean stream, is truly 
called the enlightened and awakened. 


40. He who makes a pleasure of his pain in his thought, is as one who takes 
the bitter poison for his sweet nectar; the man who thus converts the evil to 
good, and thinks himself happy in his mind is said by the wise, to be 
awakened to his right sense (to wit that all partial evil is universal good). 


41. Thinking one’s self as vacuity, with the vacuum of Brahma; and as 
quiet as the tranquility of the Divine spirit; and the thought of everything 
resting in the spacious mind of God, is tantamount to the belief of the world as 
one with Brahma himself. (This is the doctrine of pantheism of vedanta and 
all mysticism). 


42. In this manner all consciousness is lost in unconsciousness, and the 
knowledge of the world, is lost in the infinity of empty air. The error of our 
egoism is likewise drowned in the depth of the even and vast expanse of the 
Divine unity. 


43. All that is seen here in the forms of the moving and fixed bodies of the 
world, (the roving and fixed stars, efc.); are all as quiet as quiescent empty sky 
which contains them, or as a visionary utopia of imagination. 


44. As there is a free intercourse of the thoughts, of one person with those 
of another, and there is no interposition in their passage from one mind to 
another; in the same manner there is the same reflection of this shadowy 
world in the minds of all at once. 


45. The earth, heaven and sea, with the hills and all other things, appear 
before our empty minds, exactly as the false sights of water, efc., appear in a 
mirage to our eyes. 


46. The phantasmagoria of the world, appearing visibly before us, is as 
false as a vision in our dream, and as delusive as a spectre appearing in the 
imaginations of little boys. 


47. Our egoism or consciousness of ourselves, which seems as a reality 
unto us, is no other than a delirium of our brain, and an erroneous conception 


of the mind. 


48. The world is neither an entity nor non-entity either, nor a substantiality 
and unsubstantiality both together; it is not to be ascertained by the sense nor 
explained by speech, and yet it exhibits itself as the fairy land or air drawn 
castle in empty air. (Its nihility is the doctrine of vacuists and its substantiality 
is supported by materialists; that it is neither is tenet of sceptics, and therefore, 
it is but an empty dream). 


49. Here our wish and effort as well as our want of both, are all alike in the 
opinion of the learned, (who maintain the doctrine of irrevocable fate); but in 
my opinion it is better to remain in cool indifference, (owing to the vanity of 
human wishes). 


50. The knowledge of, “I and the world,” (i.e., of the subjective and 
objective), is as that of air in the endless vacuity; it is the vibration of the 
intelligent soul, like the breath of air in vacuum, that causes this knowledge in 
us, beside which there is no other cause (of the subjective self or the objective 
world). 


51. The aptitude of the intellect or the intelligent soul, to its thoughts or 
longing after external objects, makes it what we call the mind, which is the 
seat of same with what is called the world; but the soul getting released from 
this leaning, is said to have its liberation. Follow this precept and keep 
yourself quiet. 


52. You may have your desire or not, and see the world or its dissolution; 
and come to learn that neither of these is either any gain or loss to thee, since 
there is nothing here in reality, and everything is at best but the shadowy and 
fleeting form of a dream. (So likewise, the production and annihilation of the 
world, which are the products of divine will, is of any consequence to the 
unconnected deity). 


53. The nolens and volens, or the will and no will, the ens and non ens, or 
the entity and non-entity, the presence or absence of anything, and the feeling 
of pain and pleasure at the loss or gain of something, are all but ideal and 
mere aerial phantasies of the mind. 


54. He whose desires are decreased day by day, becomes as happy as the 
enlightened wise man, and has like him his share in the liberation of his soul. 


55. When the sharp knife of keen desire pierces the heart, it produces the 
sorely painful sores of sorrow and grief, which defy the remedies of mantras, 
minerals and all sorts of medicament. 


56. Whenever I look back into the vast multitude of my past actions, I find 


them all to be full of mistakes, and not one which was not done in error, and 
appears to be without a fault or blunder. 


57. When we meet only with the erroneousness of our past conduct, and 
find them all to have been done for nothing; how then is it possible for us to 
discern the hearts of others, which are as inaccessible hills unto us. (How can 
we discern another’s mind, when we to our own are so grossly blind). 


58. Our dealing with the unreal world, (as with untruthful men), is lost in 
the glancing or twinkling of an eye; for who can expect to hold the horns of a 
hare in his fingers. 


59. The belief of our egoism or personality consisting in our gross bodies, 
serves to convert the aerial intellect to a gross substance in a moment; and 
make our mind as a part of the solid body, just as the rain drop is congealed to 
the hailstone. 


60. It is owing to our intellect, that we have the conception of the reality of 
our unreal bodies; just as the undying principle of the intellect, happens to see 
its own death in our sleep. 


61. As the unreal and unsubstantial vacuum, is said to be the blue or azure 
sky by its appearance; so is this creation attributed to Brahma by supposition, 
which is neither real nor quite unreal. 


62. As vacuity is the inseparable property of vacuum, and fluctuation is that 
of air; so is creation an inseparable attribute of God, and is one and same with 
the essence of Brahma himself. 


63. There is nothing produced here as the world, efc., nor is anything lost or 
annihilated in it; all this is as a dream to a sleeping man, which is a mere 
appearance and nothing in reality. 


64. So the inexistent earth and others, are apparent in their appearance 
only; then why need you care or fear about the being or not being of this 
world, which is no more than a production and subversion of it in the region 
of the Intellect. 


65. The apparent body, is no reality by the causality of the elements as the 
earth, efc.; it is only a formation of the Divine intellect, and situated in the 
divine spirit. (The body is neither formed out of the dust of the earth, nor by a 
combination of the five elements; but is a shadow of its form in the Divine 
mind). 


66. The instrumentality of the mind, efc., in the causation of the world, is 
also untrue and absurd, owing to the union of two causes in one, (i.e., the 


combination of the primary and instrumental causes together). (The unity of 
God consists in his being the original and material cause, and not as a formal 
or instrumental one). 


67. All things are uncaused and unconsecutive in the divine mind, where 
they are eternally present at one and the same time; as the whole series of the 
actions of a man from his birth to death, appear in an instant of his dreaming 
states. (All is ever present before the omnipresent and omniscient). 


68. All things are contained in and as inane as the vacant Intellect, where 
this spacious earth with her high hills of solid bases, and all her peoples with 
their actions and motions, are ever existent in their aerial forms in the 
knowledge of the aeriform intellect of God. 


69. The world is a picture painted on the airy surface of the divine mind, 
with the various colours derived from the intellect of God; it never rises nor 
sets, nor does it ever become faint, nor does it fade nor vanishes away. 


70. The world is a huge wave of fluidity in the water of the Intellect, why is 
it so and how produced, and how and when it is subside, is what nobody can 
say. (The world is once compared to breath of air and here to a liquid, to mean 
its having no solidity in it). 


71. When the great vacuity of the intellect is calm and quiet, then the world 
remains in its form of an empty void also; just as the soul being quite 
thoughtless in itself; there can be no rise or fall of any object before it. (Hence 
the alternate action and rest of the divine spirit, is said to cause the appearance 
and disappearance of the world by turns. — Manu). 


72. AS we imagine the mountains to touch the skies, and the sky to present 
the figures of mountains in it; it is in the like manner that we suppose the 
presence of Brahma in all things of creation. (But all this supposititious 
knowledge proceeds from error). 


73. It is by the application of a jot of their intelligence, that Yogis convert 
the world to empty air, as also fill the hollow air with the three worlds up and 
down. (i.e., They are practised to produce everything as also to reduce it to 
nothing in their thought). 


74. As we imagine thousands of the elysian cities (or seats) of the siddha 
deities, to be situated in the different regions of heaven; so are the numberless 
worlds scattered apart from one another in the infinite space of divine 
intellect. 


75. As the eddies in the ocean whirl apart from one another, and seem to 
make so many seas of themselves; though they are composed of the same 


water. 


76. So the numerous worlds, revolving separately in the vacuity of the 
Divine Intellect, are all of the same nature (with their intellectual reservoir), 
and not otherwise. 


77. The awakened (or enlightened) Yogi, views worlds above worlds in his 
clairvoyance; and to pass to the ethereal regions of the perfected Siddhas, as it 
is related by sages (in the story of Lila narrated before). 


78. There are numberless imperishable beings and immortal spirits, which 
are contained in the Supreme spirit; as the endless worlds are situated in the 
hollow sphere of heaven. 


79. It is the intrinsic pleasure of the divine soul, to scatter the wandering 
worlds about it, as the odorous flower diffuses its immanent fragrance, and 
spreads its flying farina all around; they are not extrinsic or adventitious, but 
are born within itself like the lines and marks in a diamond or crystal. 


80. The fragrance of flowers though mixed up together in the air, are yet 
separate from one another; so are all the created bodies existing together in 
the air, all distinct in their natures; (such is the union of the different elements 
in one body, and as every flower has a vassal breeze to bear its own perfume). 


81. Our fancies though of the form of air, assume different shapes in the 
minds of men; such as those of gross natures have them in their gross material 
forms, while the holy saints view them in their pure forms in the mind. (This 
means the two views of things in their concrete and abstract forms). 


82. Neither are the gross materialists nor pure spiritualists, right in their 
conceptions of things; but everyone has to feel according to his particular 
view and belief of a thing. (i.e., The materialist is subject to material pain and 
pleasure, from which the idealist is entirely free). 


83. By thinking the world to be contained in the thought of the Intellect, it 
will be found to be no way different from it, than the water is from its 
liquidity. (The mind and its thought, being the one and same thing). 


84. Know chronos, — the time, and cosmos, — the universe, with all the 
worlds contained in it together with the ego and tu or myself and thyself and 
all others, to be the One and very unity; which is the calm and quiet vacuum 
of the great Intellect, which is same with the very self of the unborn and 
undecaying soul of God. Be not therefore subject to passions and affections, 
which do not appertain to the nature of the self-same Deity. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
Disquisition of Nirvana — Quietism. 


Argument: — Exposition of the Error of the Duality of the Intellect and 
Intelligibles, and establishment of the unity of the world with the Intellect by 
legitimate Reasoning. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Intellect perceives the world raised before it, by 
the fallacy of its understanding; as a man beholds mountains in the sky, by the 
delusion of his eye sight. 


2. The doctrines that the world is the creation of Brahma or of the mind, are 
both alike in substance; in as much as they regard it in an immaterial and not 
physical sense. 


3. The world subsisting in our knowledge or consciousness of it, is same 
with its internal knowledge, and not as existing externally or out of our 
consciousness; and although it appears to be situated out of it, like the features 
of a picture appearing as prominent above their base, it is on a level with its 
plane. The original figure being contained in the substratum of our inner 
knowledge, the outward appearance is to be likewise known as the same also. 


4. In our opinion there is no difference, between the two systems of the 
interior and exterior knowledge of the world; because both of them being of 
the form of our knowledge of them, the exterior shape is no reality at all. 


5. Hence, all things being the same with our intellectual knowledge of 
them, and this knowledge being indistinct and invariable in its nature, the 
distinctions of the changing scenes of the world can have no place in it (and 
must therefore, be false and unreal). 


6. Therefore, I adore that omniscience which is the soul of all, in which all 
things exist and whence they all come to existence; which is all and displays 
all things in itself and pervades all infinity forever. 


7. When the subjective intellectual power, chinmaya, becomes united with 
the objective Chitya or intelligible world, by means of the intrinsic Chit or 


intellect; it is then that the visible or objective organs of sense, drishyangas, 
get the sensation chaitanya of their objects and not otherwise. 


8. As it is the intellect alone which is both the subjective as well as the 
objective, that is both the viewer and the view, the seeing and the sight also; it 
comes to the same effect, that the knowledge of all these, is derived from and 
dependent upon the main intellect. 


9. If the subjective and objective be not alike in the intellectual soul, then 
the subjective and intellectual soul, can have no perception of the objective 
and material world. (Because matter cannot enter into the intellect, but by the 
ideas of things which are of an intellectual nature). 


10. It is from their intellectual nature, that the objective world is perceived 
in the subjective soul; just as a drop of water mixes with the body of waters, 
owing to the similarity of the natures. (Things of the same kind easily 
combine with one another, by their natural affinity), otherwise, there is no 
combination of them as of two pieces of wood. 


11. When there is no homogeneous affinity between two things as between 
the intellect and a log of wood, there can be no union between them; nor can 
two pieces of wood know one another, owing to their want of intellect. 


12. As the two pieces of wood have no knowledge of one another, owing to 
their dull insensibility; so nothing insensible can be sensible of anything, save 
the intellect which is conversant with intellectuals only. 


13. The great intellectual soul, beholds the world as one with itself in its 
intellectual light; and sees the material bodies settled as a rock in it, without 
their properties of life or motion. 


14. Life, understanding and other faculties, are the products of intellection, 
which the wonderful property of the intellect, rises spontaneously in itself. 


15. The essence of Brahma exists and exhibits itself in the form of the 
quiescent universe, and is personified as the male agent of creation, by his 
seminal seed resembling the minute seed of a fig fruit. 


16. There is first of all a small seed, which develops itself to a tree; but that 
first seed had another smaller seed before, from which it was produced. Thus, 
the primary or initial seed being the minutest of the latter ones, is contained in 
and let out as an effluvium of the Supreme soul. 


17. Brahma is the first and minutest soul of all, which gives to innumerable 
souls as its seeds; the inner ones abiding in the spirit of God, are known as 
spirit; and the grosser sorts known as things, are wrongly considered as 


otherwise, though they are of the same nature with their original. 


18. As a thing is the same thing and not different from itself, whether it is 
placed above or below; so everything is the self-same Brahma, in whatever 
state or form it may appear unto us. 


19. As gold is no other than gold, in the various, (/it., a hundred different) 
forms of golden trinkets; so the invariableness of the unchangeable spirit of 
God, continues the same in all the changing scenes and varieties in nature. 


20. As the clouds of the shadowy dreams that hang over your mind, are in 
no way related to you; so the great bustle of creation and its dissolution, bear 
no relation to my vacuous soul, nor disturb the even tenor of my mind. 


21. As the blueness and moistness, which are attributed to the vacuous 
atmosphere of heaven, are nothing in reality; and as the legions of siddha 
spirits, which are supposed to traverse the regions of air, are but deceptions of 
our eye sight; such is the pageant of the world but an empty air and fallacy of 
our vision. 


22. It is the desire of the heart and the false fancy of the mind, that leads 
out within us and brings forth the fruit of the world; just as the dirty water at 
the bottom of the earth, moistens the seed that produces a big tree in time. 


23. The wise man that forgets his egoism, becomes one with the Supreme 
spirit; and by reducing himself like a bit of rotten straw, becomes an anima or 
a minimum particle of the divine soul. 


24. I find no one among the gods, demi-gods and mankind in the three 
worlds, who wishes to approach to that Great Spirit, who has the whole world 
as a hair upon his body. 


25. He who knows the unity of the soul of the universe, is free from the 
thought of a duality, in every state of his life, and wherever he may be 
situated. (The monotheist sees the One soul in all places and all kinds of 
beings). 


26. Who has a great soul, and views the world and all as a mere vacuity and 
nothing in reality; how can he have any desire for unspiritual and sensible 
objects. 


27. He who is indifferent to, and unconcerned with the endless particulars 
of the world; and who views the existent and inexistent in the same light, is 
truly a great soul and beyond all praise. 


28. There is no living being that lives, or has any property forever, it is only 
the inner consciousness that shows the various appearances in the empty 


space of the mind. (Note. Our friends and properties are no lasting realities, 
except that our minds paint them as such unto us). 


29. In vain do men think of their life and death, in this world of nullity; 
neither of them is anything in reality, but as false as the flowing and ebbing of 
waters in the mirage of life. 


30. Upon due examination, this error vanishes from view with its cause 
also; and then it appears that there is nothing as life or death, beside the 
existence of the imperishable one. (Note. Our life is no life, since we live in 
death; and our death is no death, since we die to live again). 


31. That man is said to have gone across the ocean of the world, who has 
withdrawn himself from the sight of visibles; who is quiet and content with 
himself, and who while he is living, reckons himself with the dead and as 
nothing. 


32. Our nirvdna extinction is said to be the cessation of our mental actions, 
like the extinguishing of a burning flame or lamp; it is assimilation into the 
quiescent spirit of God, and continuance in the hebetude of a holy saint. 


33. Again, he is called the mukta or liberated, who finds no delight either in 
the noumenal or phenomenal, (i.e., either in his mental functions or visual 
operations); but remains as quiet and quite aloof from all as the intangible 
vacuum. 


34. I speak of my ego from my want of reason, but reason points out no 
egoism in me; hence the want of any sense in the word ego, makes the 
existence of the world quite null and void to me, (who am a mere nullity 
myself). (So says the Persian mystic, — Ke man Khodra nameddnam, 1 know 
not my very self). 


35. The intellect is a mere vacuum, and our consciousness, (which is also a 
vacuous substance), gives us the knowledge of the nature of our inner 
understanding; the mind (which is a void likewise), views the external 
appearances agreeably to its internal ideas (Hence, all things are but airy 
nothing without their substantiality). 


36. Now the real entity of your soul, will become truly blessed in itself, by 
your getting the mind, freed from all its objects at all places and times. (The 
mind being the mirror of soul), and by thy doing everything in the name of 
God. (In every work begin and end with God). 


37. Whatsoever thou doest or eatest, anything thou givest or offerest in 
sacrifice; and whatever thou seest, killest or desirest know them all to proceed 
from God. (Here man’s free will is denied, and all human actions are believed 


as ordained by God). 


38. All that we call as ourselves or yourselves and all others, what we name 
as space, time and the sky, mountains, efc.; all these together with the actions 
of all, are supported by and full of the power and spirit of God. 


39. The vision of our eyes and the thoughts of the mind, the world and its 
three times; and all our diseases, death and decay, are all the phenomena 
appearing in the vacuity of the Divine Intellect. 


40. Remain if you can as a silent sage, unseen and unknown by men, and 
without any desire, thought or effort on your part; remain as a lifeless thing, 
and this is the extinction of a living being. (The torpidity of the body 
combined with mental inactivity constitutes the coolness of the soul). 


41. Be freed from your thoughts and desires, and remain fixed in the eternal 
One without any care for anything; you may be busy or sit easy, like the air 
when it breathes or is calm and still. 


42. Let your manliness be above the feelings of desire and affections, and 
let your thoughts be directed by rules of the Sdstras, and your action by the 
motion of a clock or watch, which act their outward movement. 


43. Look on all beings, without the show of fondness or disfavour (or love 
or hatred) to anyone; be you an inconspicuous light of the world, resembling a 
lighted lamp in a picture (which never burns). (Here the hidden light is 
opposed to the sacred text. No one lights a lamp to put it under a bushel). 


44. The man that has no desire nor any object in view, and has no relish in 
carnal and sensual enjoyments; can have no other delight except in his 
inquiries after truth by the light of the Sdstras. He who has his mind purified 
by the teachings of the Sdstras and the precepts of holy men, finds the 
inscrutable truth shining vividly in his consciousness of it. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
Vasishtha’s Gita or Sermon on the Sweet Peace of 


Mind. 
Argument: — The inward composure of the enlightened soul and its view 
of the outer World. 
Vasishtha continued: — The man whose reliance in this world is really 


lessened, who is free from desire and unobservant of his religious vows (for 
the sake of future reward), knowing them to be all in vain; (i.e., the vanity of 
human wishes). 


2. Our egoism is as the vapour of our breath, falling and sticking on the 
surface of glass; which when taken under consideration, proves to be a 
causeless sight, and vanishes to nothing at all in a moment. 


3. He who is unloosed from the veil of delusion, who has numbed his rising 
wishes and efforts; whose soul is filled with heavenly ambrosia, (i.e., full of 
holy delight), it is he who is said to be happy in his very nature and essence. 
(Blest is the enlightened and contented soul). 


4. The enlightened mind, that is unshrouded from the mist of doubts or 
scepticism; bears resemblance with the full-moon, by illuming the sphere of 
its circle, with the splendour of its intelligence. 


5. The intelligent man who is freed from his worldliness and doubts, who 
has come out of the curtain of ignorance and received the light of truth; is 
known as the knowing soul, shining in the sphere of the autumnal sky. (So the 
sruti: — the knower of the soul, is as luminous as the very soul). 


6. The holy man likens the pure breeze of heaven, that blows freely from 
the region of Brahma, without any aim and without its support; it is cool in 
itself and cooling and purifying everything by its touch. 


7. The desire to have an unreality, is to expect something that is a nullity in 
nature; such as the dreaming of heaven, and seeking for the son of a barren 


woman. (The belief in a future heaven, which is countenanced in every 
scheme of religion, is negatived by Vasishtha). 


8. So also is the belief of this imaginary world, which appears as something 
in existence; such is the nature of our desire also, which attributes a 
substantiality to an aerial nothing. 


9. Thus, the world being an unreality even at present, there can be no 
reality in a heaven or hell in future; and yet the use of these words is as false, 
as the negative expression of a barren woman’s son, or a flower of the ethereal 
arbour. 


10. The world is truly the form of Brahma himself, and is neither an actual 
or ideal existence, nor does it rest on any support; so we are at a loss to 
understand what is in reality. 


11. By relying in the tranquil nature of the soul, you lose your reliance in 
the natures of things, and your confidence in yourself; whereby you come to 
avoid the troubles concomitant with the whole creation and created beings. 
(Reliance in the soul, relieves the miseries of the world). 


12. The sight of the intellect, like the eye-sight of men, and the light of the 
luminaries of heaven, passes in a moment to the distance of millions of miles; 
just so does the sight of the divine intellect, stretch all over the unlimited 
space of creation in an instant. 


13. The divine intellect is as unconceivable as the womb of vacuum, and as 
imperceptible as the calm and breathless air of the sky; and yet it is as joyous 
as a plant in full-bloom and blossom. 


14. The learned know all living beings, to appertain the nature of that 
intellect; wherefore men of good intellect and judgment, place no faith in the 
creation of the world. 


15. As we have no knowledge of the dreaming state in our sound sleep, nor 
that of sound sleep in our state of dreaming; just so is our error of creation and 
annihilation of the world. (That is to say: — creation is as false as a dream, 
and extinction a quietus as sound sleep, neither of which relates to the ever- 
wakeful intellect of God). 


16. Error is incidental to the nature of things, and sleeping and dreaming 
are properties accidental to the material body; hence neither do these nor the 
acts of creation and annihilation, (which are likened to them), relate to the 
omniscient and self-sufficient intellect. 


17. Error is the unreal appearance of something, which flies before 


examination, and vanishes ere it may be laid hold upon. The shell appearing 
as silver is an unreality, because you cannot get your expected silver from it. 
(All is not gold that glitters). 


18. Whatever is not obtained and unattainable is a nullity, and whatsoever 
is wrongly supposed (as obtainable), is impossible to be had; the thing that is 
unobtainable by its very nature, is never to be expected, as anything which is 
otherwise than and contrary to nature. 


19. It is the nature of a thing, that agrees well with it at all times; and the 
invariability of anything, can never admit of variety under any circumstance. 


20. All that is natural, is attended with ease and delight; but the unnatural, 
is full of pain and misery; know and consider it well, and do what you think 
best. (i.e., prefer the one or the other). 


21. A minute seed containing a large tree, is an instance applying to the 
formless spirit of God, containing the form of the universe in itself. This is a 
dictum of the Veda. 


22. Hence, visual sight and sensations, mental thought and understanding, 
consciousness of ego or self, and all other properties belonging to intellectual 
man, are the original types of the transcendent spirit, as fluidity is immanent 
in water. All these intellectual and spiritual properties are of an airy or 
vacuous nature. (The properties of the adhyatma or intellectual soul, are but 
reflexions of the pratyangatmad or the spiritual soul of God). 


23. As an embodied being discharges his bodily functions, by means of his 
material members and limbs, so doth spirit and spiritual beings conduct their 
spiritual functions like the air, without actually doing them? (Here hangs a 
long note on the mode of the spiritual actions). 


24. It is by force and power of the spirit, that we mute creatures are enabled 
to utter the words, I, thou, efc.; which are mere meaningless sounds, as those 
emitted by a drum and bear no sense. (Sound is the gift of God, but its sense is 
conventional, and determined by consent of a people). 


25. An appearance which vanishes on our insight into it, must be held as no 
appearance at all; so the formal and phenomenal world, which vanishes into 
the formless and invisible spirit of God, is nothing real or substantial of itself. 


26. Those who are possessed of the dream of the world, are dreaming men, 
who being joined together with their dreams, are never united with the spirit 
of God, nor do they join the society of holy divines like ourselves. 


27. All these men are identic with myself in spiritual light, being one with 


Brahma in the tranquil and vacuous nature of the self-same spirit (pervading 
alike in all). But physically considered they are different from me, in as much 
as they are fluctuating in their busy course, like the vacillating winds in air, 
(while the spirit of Yogis is calm and quiet). 


28. I, who am full of the True One, appear as a dream or dreaming man to 
these day dreamers; while they are in reality as nil and naught to me, as the 
dream of a man drowned in the depth of his sleep. (A deep or sound sleeper, 
sees no dream at all). 


29. Whatever be their conduct in life, my business is but with Brahma, and 
my living and reliance in Brahma only. Let others think and see whatsoever 
they like and do, they are all nil and nothing to me. (Care not about what 
others may think of or do to you). 


30. I am nothing myself, but belong to the all-pervading essence of 
Brahma, it is by means of the divine spirit, that the body appears as something 
and utters the word, I, etc. 


31. The soul that is of the nature of pure consciousness, and not subject to 
the contrary sense (of its materiality), hath neither its desire for enjoyments or 
liberation; and so also they that know the Lord, have nothing else to desire. 


32. The bondage and liberation of men, being dependent to their own 
dispositions; it is folly to foster a great ambition here, as it is foolishness to 
look for a sea in a cow’s hoof-hole on the ground. 


33. It is by restraining our natures, and mitigation of our wants, that it is 
possible for us to obtain our liberation here; or else no riches nor friends nor 
any of our endeavours, can serve to bring about the emancipation that is so 
eagerly sought by us. 


34. The Intellect is stretched over all our thoughts about this imaginary 
world, as a drop of oil spreads over and diffuses itself in circles upon the 
surface of water. 


35. As the scenes seen in a dream, seem pleasant in their recollection in the 
waking state; so the wise sage sees the worldly sights and his egoism also in 
the same light of a dream. 


36. By practice of the conditions of Yoga meditations alone, that the 
impressions of the world are so effaced from the mind, as not to leave behind 
any trace of them, save that of an infinite and still vacuity. 


37. Whenever the true nature of the soul, appears with its solar blaze within 
us; it then dispels the mists of our irrational appetites, and displays an empty 


nihility of all entity. 


38. After the desires are dead and gone and the understanding is cleared 
from its ignorance, the soul shines forth with the light of a burning lamp 
within us. 


CHAPTER XL. 
On the Quiescence of the soul. 


Argument: — God is not manifest in the world, nor is the world manifested 
in God; but both these appear by turns in the soul of the living-liberated 
person. 


Vasishtha continued: — The sight of things, actions of the mind, the internal 
faculties and perceptions of the senses, being all of a superphysical nature, the 
true states of these categories are far removed from our knowledge, and 
present but a faint appearance of theirs unto us. 


2. The minuteness of the superphysical or in totals, is outstretched in the 
forms of external or physical objects; but this extended appearance of the 
outer world, is a mere error (and creation of our false imagination). 


3. But when this external nature disappears and subsides in the inner soul, it 
is then that this phenomenal world is absorbed like a dream in the sound 
sleeping state of the soul. 


4. Our enjoyments and our greatest ailments on earth, and our kindred and 
relations are our strongest bondages here; our wealth is for our bale and woe, 
therefore, hold yourself to yourself alone, (and mind not about all others). 


5. Know your felicity to consist, in your communion with yourself; and that 
you lose yourself, by your familiarity with the world. Participate with the 
supreme vacuum, be calm and quiet like it, and do not disturb yourself like the 
turbulent air or wind. (So Hafiz and the Persian mystics: — If thou seekest 
thyself, then seek not but forsake all others). 


6. I know not myself, nor do I understand what this visible and mistaken 
world may mean; I am absorbed in the calm and quiet Brahma, and feel 
myself as the sound Brahma himself. 


7. You behold me as another person, and address me with words, thou, etc., 
in the second person; but I find myself as calm and quiet as the transcendent 
vacuum itself. 


8. It is in the vacuous sphere of the divine soul, that you view the false 
appearances (of things), as are produced therein by the misconceptions of 
your mind; and these errors are continually rising in your mind, in the manner 
of the erratic trepidations in the mind. 


9. The tranquil soul of Brahma, knows (has) no effort of creation in it; nor 
doth the nature of creation, know the quiescent nature of Brahma. It is as the 
soundly sleeping soul knows no dream, nor does the dreaming man know the 
state of sound sleep. (The nature of Brahma is one of profound sleep, and that 
of creation is no other than a dream). 


10. Brahma is ever wakeful, and the world is no other than a waking dream, 
and the living liberated man knows, the phenomenon as a reflexion of the 
noumenon in his tranquil understanding. 


11. The intelligent man well knows the true state of things in the world, and 
holy men are as quiet in their souls as the autumnal sky with a moving cloud. 


12. The erroneous conception of one’s egoism or personality, and that of 
the existence of the world; is like the impression of the relation of a battle, 
preserved in one’s memory or as pictured in his imaginations; in both cases 
truth and falsehood are found to be blended together. 


13. The phenomena of the world, which is neither exhibited in the divine 
spirit, as an intrinsic or subjective part of itself nor has it a viewer (or 
subjective framer) for itself; which is neither a vacuity nor even a solidity of 
its nature; cannot be otherwise than an erroneous conception of the mind. 


CHAPTER XLI. 
Repose in one’s Essential nature. 


Argument: — The enlightenment of the understanding, accompanied by 
indifference and distaste of the world, is the cause of removing the ego, when 
the looker, looking or view of it, is one the same. 


Vasishtha continued: — It is absurd to find the sense of egoism or self- 
personality, so deeply rooted in human nature, (when the real ego of the 
divine soul, is known to pervade all over the universe). It is therefore right, 
that you should extinguish this unnatural egoism of yours by correcting your 
own nature. 


2. This is done by enlightenment of the understanding, accompanied by 
indifference and distaste of the world; which are associated with one another 
as the orb of the sun with its light. 


3. There is no making or maker or act of this world, nor any looker, looking 
or view of it; this stupendous world is altogether inadmissible, it being but a 
picture on the plane of vacuum. 


4. There is nothing prominent in it (as it appears to the naked eye); but all is 
situated on a perfect level, which is the calm intellect of one unvarying 
Brahma. 


5. The divine soul exhibits the wonders of its Intellect, in the variegated 
colours of its imaginations; and there is nobody who can count the pictures of 
worlds, which are painted on the plane of the infinite space of vacuity. 


6. All these aerial bodies which are countless as the flying atoms, are 
continually in the act of dancing and playing their parts in the open arena of 
Brahma; as the players exhibit their various passions and emotions and 
gestures and gesticulations in a theatre. 


7. The seasons are dancing in circles with their towering heads, and the 
points of compass are turning rotund with their encircling arms; the lower 
region is the platform of this stage, and the upper sky is the awning stretched 


on high. (The great vacuum is the stage, and all the worlds are as players in 
it). 

8. The sun and moon are the two playful and rolling eyes, and the twinkling 
stars are glistening hair on their bodies; the seven regions of air are the 
members of the body, and the clear and all investing firmament, is the clean 
apparel on it. 


9. The encircling seas about the islands, are as bracelets and wristlets round 
their arms; and the girding mountains of lands, are as girdles around their 
loins; the fleeting airs are as the winds of their breath, which are constantly 
breathing to sustain lives of living beings, and support their bodies thereby, 
(i.e., by the vital breath). 


10. The flowers, groves and forests form the wreathed decorations on their 
persons; the sayings of the Sdstras, — vedas and purdanas, are their recitations, 
the ceremonial acts are their action, and the results of their actions, (viz., 
happiness and misery), are the parts that all have to play (in the theatre of the 
world). 


11. Thus is all this but a dance of puppet show presented before us, with the 
sport of the waters gliding with the fluidity of Brahma, and the oscillation of 
the playful breezes. 


12. The cause of causes, is the cause of unnatural (unquiet) movements of 
bodies; and it is the ever-wakeful intellect, that remains sleepless in the 
sleeping state of nature, and is waking awakener of dreams in the 
swapnavastha or hypnotic state of man. 


13. Do you remain, O Rama! thus sleepless in your sleeping state, and 
reflect on the nature of things as you see them in your dream. Be steady when 
you are awake, and never be drowned in your sleep nor deceived by your 
beguiling dreams. (swap, — Persian khwab, means sleep as well as dream). 


14. The waking which has the semblance of sound sleep and has no liking 
nor cringing for anything; is said to be the idiosyncrasy of man by the wise 
and the harbinger of human liberation. 


15. The living liberated man, sees his God as diffused throughout the 
universe; and not as the cause or instrument of its causation; and neither as 
witness of its sight. He does not leave to look on the outward phenomena, nor 
think of the inward noumenon that has displayed the whole. 


16. He sees the world shining in and with the glory of God, and beholds it 
fair and perfect with the beauty and perfection of the Deity. (These so 
wondrous fair, thyself how wondrous then! — Milton). 


17. Viewed in the reality of Brahma, the unreal world becomes a reality; it 
seems then to be as tranquil as the nature of God, and the creation is seen in 
himself till at last all is lost in the womb of a void, — vacuum, as it were hid 
in the hollow cavern of a rock. 


18. The universe seems as womb of a luminous gem, and though it is 
thickly peopled everywhere, yet it is as void as empty air; it is a nil and ens at 
the same time, and as something and nothing of itself. (Here is a play of 
antithetical words and attributes applied to the world). 


19. It is in esse and in posse to the minds of many, but to one who bears no 
duplicity in his mind, it appears as an extended reflexion of the infinite mind 
of One. 


20. As an imaginary city, never disappears from the imagination; so the 
reflexion never vanishes from the mind of God; wherein all things are present 
at all times. 


21. As the glistening gold glitters with and scatters its rays all around, 
without changing or wasting itself; so Brahma appearing to shine in his 
creation, is yet quiet and undecaying in himself. 


22. The phenomenal world ever continues the same, though it is subject to 
incessant productions and destructions of all beings; it appears as unproduced 
and indestructible, and as various and variegated as the very many beings in 
it. 

23. Brahma is seated in his impenetrable tranquility and in the form of the 
rising world, without ever rising or setting himself; He is as free and void as 
vacuity and without any nature or property of his own, and is known to the 
enlightened understanding. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
A Lecture on Nirvana — Extinction. 


Argument: — A full exposition of the identity of God and the world, and 
the adorableness of our soul as one with God. 


Vasishtha continued: — The mind being as calm and quiet as the Intellect, 
there can be no difference between them; and it is impossible to assign the 
creation to the divine mind, in its undeveloped and tranquil state. (The 
difference of the mind and intellect, consists in their activity and inactivity). 


2. The lighted lamp of the understanding being extinguished, the erroneous 
conceptions of the world vanishes into the air; and the ocular vision and 
mental operations, are as undulations of consciousness. (i.e., The conscious 
acts through all the sensible organs, mental faculties and bodily members). 


3. The world bears the same relation to the supreme soul, as the fluctuation 
of the winds bear to air, and as the radiation of rays bears to light, which have 
no other causality except in themselves. 


4. The world is inherent in the Supreme, as fluidity is connate with water, 
and vacuity is connatural with air. But why and how they are so intimately 
connected with one another, is quite inconceivable to us. 


5. The world which is thus immanent in the vast vacuity of the great 
intellect, is manifest to our minds as brilliancy in a gem. (The appearance of 
light or lustre in a gem is no other than a property of them itself). 


6. The world therefore, appertains to the supreme intellect, in the same 
manner, as liquidity is related with water and fluctuation pertains to air, and as 
vacuity belongs to the infinite void. 


7. As ventilation has its relation with air, so doth the world bear upon the 
supreme intellect; so there is no reason of supposing a duality to subsist in the 
unity of any two of these. 


8. The world is manifest to the sight of the ignorant, but it is frail and 


nebulous in the estimation of the intelligent. It is however, neither manifest 
nor mysterious to the sapient, who believe it as an existence subsisting in the 
entity of the self-existent unity. 


9. It is well ascertained (in every system of philosophy), that there is 
nothing else in existence, beside the sole intellect, which is pure intelligence, 
and having no beginning, middle or end of it. 


10. This is the great intellect of some, and the holy spirit of others; it is the 
eternally omniscient Brahma according to some, and the infinite void or 
vacuum of vacuists. It is also called jnapti, — knowledge or science by 
scientists. 


11. Now people understand this infinite and intellectual spirit, in the sense 
of an intelligible being; while others suppose him as knowable in themselves, 
and thus trying to know, become quite ignorant of him. 


12. Without the intellect, there is no knowledge of the intelligibles, neither 
is there the faculty of intellection unless there be the intellect; as there is no 
air without vacuum, nor is there any air without its ventilation. 


13. So it is the shadow of the great intellect, that makes our consciousness 
to perceive the existence of the world; and whether the world is an entity or 
non-entity, there is no other cause of its knowledge than the intellect. 


14. It is owing to the unity of this duality, (viz., of the world and the spirit), 
that this sense of their identity is verified; nor is there anyone who can make 
unity or duality the all-pervading vacuity. 


15. There is but one universal concavity, of the whole sphere of the 
vacuous sky, and the dualism of the air and its fluctuations, is only in words 
and nominal and not in reality. 


16. The duality of the universe and its universal Lord, is a mere verbal and 
no real distinction of the one positive unity of God. It is impossible for the 
self-existent soul to have a counterpart of itself, except its own intellect. 


17. That which has the appearances of the world, is no world in reality, but 
a shadow of it; and that which is limited by space and time, cannot be the 
infinite and external sphere. 


18. As the different forms of jewels, are related to the substance of gold, 
(out of which they are made), so doth the world bear its relation to Brahma; 
whose unity admits of neither duality, nor the attribute of cause and effect; 
(i.e., of the creator and creation). 


19. If it be only a creation of the imagination, it is then no other than a 


nothing and no such thing; it is just as well as the vacuity of the firmament, 
and the fluidity of water and liquids. 


20. As the sky bears the appearance of the sky, so doth Brahma present the 
sight of the world; and both of them being of the same kind (of vacuum), there 
can be no duality nor unity of the two in one. 


21. All these are of the like kind, as the vast vacuum of itself; they are self- 
same in their nature with the one all extended and transparent essence of the 
interminable intellect of God. 


22. As all pebbles and dolls and marble statues, have the stony substance in 
them; and there is no relation of cause or effect in anyone of them, so these 
varieties of beings have no difference in them from the nature of divine 
essence. 


23. As it is impossible for vacuity to be another thing than vacuum, and the 
reflexion of light is no other than the very light; so this creation resides in and 
radiates from the great intellect. 


24. As the images carved in a stone, are of the same sort being hewn of the 
same substance; so, O wise Rama, all these various forms of things in the 
world, are lost upon their insight, into the substantiality of the all engrossing 
intellect of the great Deity. 


25. It is the delusion of your mind, that presents to your sight all this bustle 
and commotion of the world, which upon your right inspection of them, must 
remain as mute and motionless as a block of wood or stone, and as 
imperceptible as the prospect of things to a man with his closed eyes. 


26. As things absent from sight, appear to be present before one in his 
thought of them, both in his waking and sleeping states; so it is the 
misconception of the mind, that presents the phenomenals to the sight of the 
open-eyed man. 


27. As it is by the hallucination of your mind, that you see the absent 
objects as present before you, both when you are awake as well as asleep; but 
suppress your thoughts, and you will be as inert as a stone, as in the abstracted 
and sound sleeping states of your mind. 


28. You must not however allow your mind, become as insensible as a 
stone; but remain in your natural state and employ it in the service of your 
adorable object, with the best offerings of your reason on all things about you. 


29. Adore the Supreme God of nature; for the enlargement of your 
understanding; and He being worshipped with your right reason and good 


sense, will soon reward you with the best boon of your transcendent felicity, 
— neratisaydnanda. 


30. The adoration of Indra, Upendro and the other gods, is as the 
worshipping rotten straws with respect to that of the God in spirit; and the 
offering of flowers and sacrifices, are nothing in comparison to your 
cultivation of reason, and association with wise and learned men. 


31. The Supreme God who is the giver of all blessings, being worshipped 
in the true light of the spirit in one’s own soul, confers his best blessing of 
liberation in an instant. 


32. Why does the ignorant man resort to another, when his soul is the sole 
lord; Do you associate with the good and have your equanimity and content, 
and adore the Supreme soul with your best reason. 


33. The worship of idols, pilgrimages and all sorts of devotion, together 
with all your charities, are as useless as the offering of scentless Sirisha 
flowers, and injurious as fire, poison and the wounds of weapons are to the 
body. 


34. The actions of mean-minded men, are as useless as ashes on account of 
their unreasonableness; let them therefore, act with reason in order to render 
their deeds fruitful. 


35. Why therefore, don’t you foster your reasoning powers in your mind, 
by means of your knowledge of the true natures of things, and the 
concentration of your desires in the Supreme spirit. 


36. It is by divine grace only, that the reasoning faculty has its exercise in 
the mind, therefore, the power of reasoning is to be fostered in the mind, by 
sprinkling the ambrosial water of equanimity over it. 


37. Until the fountain of error in the mind, is dried up by the blaze of right 
knowledge, so long the tendency towards the corporeal, continues to run over 
it in all directions. 


38. Equanimity overcomes the sense of shame, sorrow, fear and envy; as 
the conviction of the nihility of the world and all corporeal things, removes 
the possibility of their existence at any time. (According to the dictum, — 
nydya, — ndsato vidyate vdba. Ex nihilo nihil fit, nothing comes from 
nothing). 


39. And if it be the work of a cause, it must be the self-existent Brahma that 
both at once; as the reflexion is alike the reflector, and the reflected knowledge 
of a pot or picture is nothing in reality. (The effect is akin to the cause 


agreeably to the maxim, — “similes similibus”). 


40. Know this world to be the shadow of the intellect, as one’s feature is 
seen within a mirror; but the idea of the shadow of both, vanishes when one 
acquainted with the original. 


41. For want of the knowables or objects of objective knowledge, there 
remains the only unknowable One, who is of the form of everlasting felicity; 
and this soul of the incorporeal spirit, is extended all over the infinite space in 
its form of perfect tranquility. 


42. All knowledge, knowable and knowing, are said to be quite mute and 
silent in their nature, (being confined in the mind); therefore, it behoves you to 
remain as quiet and calm, as stones and pebbles and the caverns of rocks. 


43. Remain as knowing and wise man, both when you are sitting or doing 
anything; because wise men are persons who know the unknown, and 
personifications of true knowledge. 


44. Remain as clear as the sphere of the sky, and be content with whatever 
may happen to you; when you are sitting quiet, or moving about or doing 
anything, and in every state of your life. 


45. It is for wise men to be doing what they have to do, and whatever 
comes in their way; or to give up and renounce all and everything, and remain 
with their quiet and peaceful minds at every place. 


46. Whether sitting in solitude or in silent meditation, let the wise man 
remain as quiet as a statue or a picture; and having repressed his imagination, 
let him view the world as an imaginary city or an airy nothing. 


47. The waking wise man sees the rising world, as sitting down in his state 
of sleep; and let him view the spectacles before his eyes, as the born-blind 
man has no sight of anything before him. 


48. The ignorant man resorting to his nirvana, has more cause of regret 
than the peace of his mind, at his renunciation of the world; and the preaching 
of bon-ideals, serves rather to increase their ignorance, than enlighten in the 
path of truth. 


49. The ignorant man who thinks himself wise in his own conceit, is 
deluded to greater ignorance, by thinking himself successful with his ill 
success. 


50. The man comes to meet with his ill success, who strives to thrive by 
improper means; because the learned reckon all fanciful steps, as no steps at 
all to successfulness. 


51. It is wrong to resort to nirvdna-resignation, on account of some 
transitory mishap which ever happens to humanity. But that is known as true 
resignation by the wise, which a man has recourse to after his full knowledge 
of the errors of the world, and the indifference which he lays hold upon, at his 
entire disgust with and distaste of all worldly affairs. 


52. Rama, as you are delighted at the recital of tales, so should you take a 
pleasure in your spiritual instructions, with a melted heart and mind; unless 
you know the transparent intellect, and view it as diffused in the form of the 
infinite world, you cannot attain to your nirvdna-extinction into it. 


53. The knowledge of God, that you have gained from the vedas, is sheer 
ignorance, and resembles the false notion of the world, that is born blind on 
earth. Trample over that knowledge, and do not fall into its errors; but know 
God in spirit, and by your nirvdna-extinction into it, be exempt from future 
births and transmigrations. 


CHAPTER XLII. 
On the Infinite Extension of Brahma. 


Argument: — The mind likened to the fairy land, full with the world of its 
ignorance; and these being rubbed out from it, there remains but an infinite 
expanse of the essence of one Brahma only. 


Vasishtha continued: — The internal sense of egoism and the outward 
perception of the world, vanishes into unreality upon right inspection of them; 
and then truth of self-consciousness appears even to the dull headed after 
removal of their dullness. 


2. He who is freed from the fever of ignorance, and whose soul is cooled by 
the draught of good understanding, is known by the indication, that they bear 
no further thirst for worldly enjoyments. 


3. It is useless to use many words by way of logomachy, when the 
knowledge of one’s unegoism only, is enough to lead him to the nirvdna- 
extinction of himself. 


4. As waking men do not relish the pleasure of things seen in their dream, 
so wise people feel no zest either for themselves or the world, which they 
know to be as erroneous as the sight in their sleep. 


5. As one sees the chimera of a magic city in a forest, and filled with the 
families of Yakshas all about; so doth the living soul, look upon this world 
and all its contents. 


6. As the deluded soul sees the Yakshas and their place of abode, as 
realities and stable in their nature; so it believes its egoism or personality as a 
reality, and the unreal world as a substantiality. 


7. As the phantoms of Yakshas are seen with their false shapes in the open 
desert, so we see all these creatures in the fourteen worlds around us. 


8. He who knows himself as nothing, and the knowledge of his ego a mere 
error; finds his phantasm of Yaksha to be no such thing in reality; and that of 


his mind melts into the predicament of his intellect; (i.e., both of them to be 
the one and same thing). 


9. Be you as quiet in your mind, as you are sitting still before us; by 
relinquishing all your fears and fancies, and renouncing all your givings and 
takings (to and from all persons), together with the suppression of all your 
desires. 


10. The visible phenomenon is neither in esse nor in posse, and the whole 
extent of the objective world, is identic with the subjective spirit of God; or if 
it be impossible for the subjective reality to become the objective unreality, 
say then how the objective could come to being or exist. 


11. As it is the humidity of the vernal season, that produces and diffuses 
itself in the verdure of the ground; so it is the pith and marrow of the intellect, 
which fills and exhibits itself in the form of creation. 


12. If this appearance of the world, is no other than reflection of the 
intellect; why then speak of its unity or duality than knowing its identity with 
the sole entity, and holding your peace and tranquility. 


13. Be full with the vacuous intellect, and drink the sweet beverage of 
spirituality, (.e., be an intellectual and spiritual being); and sit without any 
fear and full of joy in the blissful paradise of nirvana-extinction. 


14. Why do ye men of erroneous understandings, rove about in the desert 
ground of this earth like the vagrant stags, that wander about the sandy deserts 
(appearing as sheets of sweet water). 


15. O ye men of blinded understandings! Why do ye run so hurriedly with 
your insatiable thirst after the mirage of the world; only to be disappointed in 
your most sanguine expectations. 


16. Why do ye, O foolish men! thirst after the mirage of the appearances 
and the fancies of your minds; do not waste your lives in vain toils, nor fall 
victims to your desires like the deluded deer. 


17. Demolish the magic castle of worldly enticements, by the stronger 
power of your reason; and see how you can destroy the train of evils, which 
appear as pleasure at the first sight. (All apparent good is latent evil). 


18. Do not look at the blue vault of heaven as a reality by thy error, it is a 
mere show amidst the great void of Brahma, wherefore, thou shouldst fix the 
sight on its true aspect of vacuity (which is the real form of Brahma). 


19. O ye men that are as frail and fickle and liable to fall down, as the 
tremulous dew-drop hanging on the edge of a leaf on high; do not sleep 


regardless of your fates, in the womb of this frail and mortal world (or in this 
world of mortality). 


20. Remain always from first to last, in your true nature of calmness, 
without ever being unmindful of thyself; and remove the faults of the 
subjective and objective from thy nature. 


21. The world known as a reality to the ignorant, is an utter nihility to the 
wise; the other one which is the true reality bears no name for itself (being 
called a nullity and void). 


22. Break the iron fetters of appetency, which bind you fast in this world; 
and rise high above the heaven of heavens, as the lion mounts on the towering 
tops of mountains, by breaking loose from his imprisoning cage by force. 


23. The knowledge of self and meity (or selfishness) is an error, and it is 
the peace of mind only which makes liberation; it is the essence of the Yogi, 
wherever and however he may be situated. 


24. The weary pilgrim of the world, has the following five stages for his 
rest; namely his nirvana or self-resignation, his nirvdsana, want of any desire, 
and the absence of his triple sorrow-tritadpa; occasioned by his own fault and 
those of others, and the course of nature. 


25. The wise man is unknown to the ignorant, and the ignorant are not 
known to the wise; and the world is viewed in two opposite lights by them 
respectively, which are quite unknown to one another. (Namely, that it is a 
vale of tears to one, and a pleasure garden to the other. The one of the school 
of Heraclitus or the crying philosopher, and of that of Democritus the 
laughing philosopher). 


26. The fallacy of the world having once fallen off from the mind, there is 
no more the appearance of any worldly thing before it; as a seafarer seeing 
one vast expanse of water about him, does not see the inland arms which gush 
out of it as its offspring. 


27. After disappearance of the error of the world, from the awakened mind 
of the anaesthetic Yogi; he sits quite insensible of it, as if it were melt into 
eternity. 


28. As the grass and straws being burnt to ashes, we know not whether they 
fly and vanish away with the winds of the air; so the nature of the sage being 
numbed to callousness, his knowledge of the world goes to nothing. 


29. It is good to know the world, as the ectype of the essence of Brahma; 
but the meaning of the word Brahma, being the universal soul, it does not 


apply in that sense to the changing world, and as the work of God. 


30. As the world appears to be everlasting and unchanging to the ignorant 
lad, so doth it seem to the listless sage to be co-existent with its eternal cause, 
(to whom everything is eternally present). 


31. The wakeful sage keeps his vigils at that time, when it is the night of all 
beings to lie down in sleep; and the daytime when all creation is awake, is the 
night of retired saints. (The wise and ignorant are opposed to one another in 
their knowledge of things). 


32. The wise man is active in his mind, while he seems to be sitting still 
and inactive in his body; and when he is waking, his organs of sense are as 
dormant as those of figures in a painting. 


33. The wise man is as blind as one who is born blind, in his knowledge of 
the outer world, and has merely a faint notion of it in his mind; where it 
appears or not at times, like a dream in his slight and sound sleep; (swapna 
and susupti). 


34. All the worlds and worldly things, conduce to the woe of the ignorant, 
who are unacquainted with and delight in untruth, and are busy with the 
visibles and their thoughts about them, as one with the visions in his dream. 


35. As the wise man tastes no pleasure in his waking state, so must he 
remain insensible of them in his sleep also; but continue with undivided 
attention, in the meditation of the Supreme being. 


36. The wise man who has curbed his desire of worldly enjoyments, and is 
liberated from its bonds; remains with his cool and composed mind, and 
enjoys the tranquility of nirvdna, without his efforts of Yoga meditation. 


37. As the course of water is always to run downward, and never to rise 
upward; so the course of the mind is ever toward the objects of sense, and 
sensible objects are the only delight of the mind. 


38. The nature of the mind, with all its thoughts of internal and external 
objects, is of the same kind as that of the great ocean, which is full with the 
waters of its tributary rivers as well as those of the internal waters. 


39. As a river flows in one united course, of the waters of all its confluent 
streams; so doth the mind run in an unvaried course, with all its internal and 
external, and righteous and unrighteous thoughts. 


40. Thus the mind appears as a vast and wide extended sea, and rolling on 
with all its indistinct thoughts and feelings, as the inseparable waters and 
waves of the sea. 


41. In this manner, the absence of one thing causes the extinction of both, 
as in the case of the air and its fluctuation; either of which being wanting, 
there is neither the wind nor its ventilation. (Such is the intimate connection 
between the mind and its thought). 


42. The mind and its working being one and the same thing, they are both 
controuled at once by bringing the other under subjection; know this well, 
nobody should cherish any earthly desire in order to foster his mind. 


43. The mind may get its peace by true knowledge, and the mind of the 
wise man is destroyed of itself with all its desires, without the aid of 
austerities to destroy them. 


44. As a man gets freed from the fear of the enmity of an enemy, by 
destroying his effigy made of mud by himself, so is one enabled to kill his 
mind, by committing himself to the Divine spirit. 


45. The wise man sees the cosmos and chaos as concomitant with each 
other, though appear as separate. The birth and death as well as prosperity and 
adversity are mere error, there is nothing else beside one infinity. 


46. As one has no knowledge of the dream of another sleeping by his side, 
and as the adult man has no fear of Yaksha like timid boy; and as a giant 
knows no Pisacha or demon, so the wise sees no insensible world before him, 
(but all full of the Intellect of God). 


47. The ignorant think the wise as fools, and the old barren woman thinks 
of her conception; so one unacquainted with the meaning of a word, attempts 
to explain its sense (all which is absurd). 


48. The understanding is ever existent, and without having its beginning 
and end; and nature is known to exist ever since creation has begun. The word 
mind is meaningless and is undivided and unbounded in its nature. (The mind 
or understanding is everlasting but nature is not so). 


49. The understanding resembles the water of the sea, and the mind and 
intelligence are likened to its limpid waves; how can this fluid have an end, 
and what is the meaning of mind, but a shape of this psychic fluid. (Here is a 
similarity of Vasishtha’s intellectual liquid to Stahl’s psychic fluid). 


50. For all error is useless, and live to your nature for your good; and being 
of the nature of pure understanding, you will become as perspicacious as the 
clear autumnal sky. (Here is Vasishtha’s vacuism again as the ultimate 
perfection of men). 


51. After passing the three states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep (to 


the fourth state of turiya or nirvdna insensibility), there is no more any 
perception of the mind or mental operation to the abstracted Yogi; and then 
the knowledge of the endless varieties of unrealities of creation, is blown 
away and lost in the sight of the everlasting One. 


52. Forsake the endless chain of knowables, and be attached to thy nature 
of the solid intellect; because all things whether internal or external, are 
comprehended under its knowledge. 


53. Say how can you separate the objects from the mind, as you do the 
seed, branches and fruits from one another; the knowables are unknowable 
without their knowledge, and knowledge is no known category (apart from the 
mind). 


54. The endless varieties and particulars are still and quiet in the Divine 
soul, which is the only entity and manifest of itself as all. The objects being 
but ideas in the mind and this being a negative also, they are all but errors of 
the brain. (The mind and its objective ideas being dependent to and identic 
with one another, the conception of them is altogether erroneous). 


55. The mind which is the framer of objective thoughts, is a nihility of 
itself and an error also. The eternal spirit being the sole soul of all, it is useless 
to imagine the entity of the mind. 


56. The objective being an erroneous notion, is but a false apparition 
appearing to sight, the objects also having no cause for their creation, prove 
the subjective mind to be a falsity likewise. 


57. The mind is as fickle as the flickering lightning, and deludes us by the 
flashes of things of its own making. 


58. The mind is nothing before knowledges of the self-existence One, nor 
does it then deceive us with its false shows; and this world which is the 
creation of the mind, disappears before the knowledge of the soul. 


59. Men in vain wish to take the shell for silver, and believe the negative 
world as a positive one, and is found to be nothing before the light of reason. 


60. The error of egoism is opposed to the verity of nirvdna, and is the cause 
of misery only to mankind; the ego is verily a falsity as mirage, and a non- 
entity as vacuity itself. 


61. The knowledge of the self or soul, removes the error of egoism; and by 
knowing and being full with the knowledge of the soul, one is incorporated 
with it, both internally as well as externally. 


62. One who is unified with the universal soul, resembles a wave that mixes 


altogether with the main water; because the Divine soul sends its essence to 
all, as a tree supplies its marrow to all parts of it from top to foot. 


63. There is one unchanging soul, that shines afar above the reach of our 
knowledge; in the same manner as the clear vault of heaven, appears at the 
distance of millions of miles from us. 


64. There is only one unknowable and infinite Being, that is far beyond our 
knowledge of the knowables, and is purer and more rarefied than the all- 
pervading vacuum. 


65. Therefore, knowing that pure and holy One, as both the states of 
knowledge and knowables, (i.e., the subjective and objective); just as the 
clarified butter is consolidated to the compactness of stone. (The soul is 
solidified to matter). 


66. The Divine intellect makes itself the object of its thought as a thinkable 
being; and the soul thinks in itself as the mind, from eternity to eternity, 
throughout the infinity of space. (The soul reflects in itself, as the congeries of 
all things of its omniscience). 


67. The unintelligent Nyaya School maintains the unity and positive rest of 
God; and although there may be no mistake of theirs in this position, yet it is 
wrong to separate omniscience from the entity of Divine unity. 


68. All great minded souls that are free from pride, melt away into the 
inscrutable quiescence of God; and those that unerring in divine knowledge, 
find their eternal rest in the samddhi or resignation of themselves to the 
Supreme spirit. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
Dangers to which the wandering (staglike) Mind is 
exposed. 


Argument: — The tree of samddhi; its roots and filaments, its leaves and 
branches, its blossoms and flowers, its barks and fruits, its piths and marrows, 
its heights and moistures. 


Rama said: — Relate to me at length, O holy sage, the form of the arbour of 
samadhi, together with all its creepers, flowers and fruits, which supply holy 
men with good and refreshment, all along their lives. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me relate to you about the tree of samadhi, 
which always grows in the forest of holy people, and is ever fraught with its 
luxuriant foliage and flowers and its luscious fruits. 


3. The learned say, that it is somehow or other, either by culture or its own 
spontaneity, that there grows a dissatisfaction with the wilderness of this 
world, in the heart of the reasonable man. 


4. Its field is the heart of the wise man, furrowed by the plough of 
prosperity, (i.e., which has had better fortune); which is watered with delight 
by day and night, and whose conduit is now flowing with sighs. 


5. It is the heart’s regret at the world, which is the seed of samddhi or self- 
resignation; and it grows of itself in the ground of the contrite heart of the 
wise, in the forest land of reasonable men. 


6. When the seed of contrite reflection, falls in the minds of magnanimous 
men; it must be watered with diligence and indefatigableness with the 
following articles. viz: — 


7. The society of pure, holy and complacent men, who speak sweetly and 
kindly for the good of others; and whose speech serves as the sprinkling of 
fresh water or milk or dewdrops on the seeding grounds. 


8. And by shedding the sacred waters of the sayings of the holy Sdstras, all 


about the aqueduct, which may serve to grow the seed, by their cool and 
ambrosial moisture. 


9. When the magnanimous soul, perceives the seed of contrite reflection 
fallen in the mind; he must try to preserve and foster the same with all 
diligence. 


10. This seed is to be grown by the manure of austerities, and by the power 
of using other means; by resorting to and resting in places of pilgrimage and 
holy shrines, and by stretching his perseverance as his defence, (or a fence 
about the seed-ground). 


11. It is the duty of the well taught man, after the sprouting forth of the 
seed, to preserve it always with the assistance of his two consorts, — 
contentment and cheerfulness. 


12. He should then keep off the aerial birds of his expectations and the 
fowls of his affection for others, and the vultures of his desire and cupidity, 
from darting upon and picking up the seed. 


13. Then the rajas or dust of vanity, is to swept away (from this field), by 
gentle acts of piety, serving as sweepers of vice and unrighteousness; and then 
the tamas or shades of ignorance are to be dispelled from this ground, by the 
ineffable light of the sun of reason, — viveka. 


14. Wealth and women, and all sorts of frail and fleeting enjoyments; 
overtake this rising germ (of godliness), as darts of lightning issuing from the 
cloud of unrighteousness. 


15. It is by the iron rod of patience and gravity, by the muttering of 
mantras, and by holy ablutions and austerities, as also by the trident of the 
triliteral Om, that these thunderbolts are averted. 


16. In this manner the seed of meditation also, being carefully preserved 
from neglect, sprouts forth in the germ of discrimination, (viveka), with its 
handsome and thriving appearance. 


17. The ground of the mind shines brightly, with this brilliant germ; and it 
gladdens the hearts of men in veneration to it, as the smiling moon-beams 
illumine the sky. 


18. This germ shoots forth in a couple of leaves, which grow out of 
themselves upon it; one of them is the knowledge of Sdstras, and the other is 
the society of the good and wise. (i.e., Divine knowledge is to be gained from 
the study of scriptures, and attendance to the lectures of learned men). 


19. Let your fixedness support the stem and height of this tree, and make 


your patience its covering bark; and cause your unconcernedness with the 
world, supply it with the moisture of indifference. 


20. The tree of godliness being nourished with the moisture of 
unworldliness, and watered by the rain water of Sdstras, attains its full height 
in course of a short time. 


21. Being thickened by the pith of divine knowledge, and marrow of good 
society, and the moisture of indifference, this tree attains a fixity, which is not 
to be shaken by the apes of passions and affections. 


22. And then this tree shoots forth in luxuriant branches of wisdom, which 
stretches far and wide with their fresh verdure and virescent leaves, distilling 
their juicy sweets all around. 


23. These are the branches of frankness and truth, of constancy and 
firmness, of equanimity and unchangeableness, of calmness and amicableness, 
and of kindness, self-respect and renown. 


24. These branches are again adorned with the leaves of peace and 
tranquility, and studded with flowers of good repute and fame; wherewith this 
tree of godliness becomes the pdrijdta (or the arbour of paradise or Parnassus) 
to the hermits of the forests. 


25. In this manner, the tree of divine knowledge, being fraught with its 
branches, leaves and flowers; brings for the best and richest fruits of 
knowledge, day by day (during the life time of its possessor). 


26. It blossoms in clusters of the flowers of fame, and is covered with 
leaves of bright qualities all over; it is profluent with the sweets of 
dispassionateness; and its filaments are full of the dust of intelligence. 


27. It cools all sides like clouds in the rainy weather, and always the heat of 
worldly anxieties, as the moon-beams assuage the warmth of sun-shine. 


28. It spreads the awning shade of harmony, as the clouds cast a cooling 
shadow below; it stretches a quiet composure over the mind, (chitta-vritti 
nirodha), as an extensive cloud overspreads a still calm in the air. 


29. It builds a sound and sure basis for itself, as the rocks stand on their 
solid bases; it lays the foundation of future rewards on high, and causes all 
blessings to attend upon it. 


30. As the arbour of discrimination, grows higher and higher day by day; so 
it stretches a continuity of cooling shade, over the forest of the hearts of men. 


31. It diffuses a coldness, that pacifies the heat below; and makes the plant 


of the understanding to shoot forth (develop), as a tender creeper juts out of 
the snows. 


32. The deerlike mind being tired with its wanderings, about the deserts of 
this world; takes its rest and refuge under this cool shade; as a weary traveller, 
worried out from his very birth, in his journey among men, comes to take his 
rest at last. 


33. This deer of the mind, that is galled in its mouth by browsing the thorny 
brambles of the forest for food, is again hunted by its enemies of the passions, 
which lay waiting like huntsmen, to kill the soul, as these slay the body of the 
stag for its skin. 


34. The deerlike mind, being ever impelled by its vain desires, wanders all 
about the desert land of this world, and pursues after the poisonous water of 
mirage of its egoism. 


35. It sees the extended and verdant valley at distance, and is battered and 
shattered in its body with running after its verdure; and being harassed in 
search of the food and forage for its offspring, it falls headlong into the pit for 
its destruction. 


36. Being robbed of his fortune, and put to bodily troubles, and led by thirst 
of gain to the ever-running stream of desires, the man is at last swallowed up 
and carried away by the current waves. 


37. The man flies afar for fear of being overtaken by a disease, as the stag 
does for fear of a huntsman, but he is not afraid of the hunter of fate, that falls 
upon him unawares at every place. 


38. The timid mind is afraid of the shafts of adverse fortune, flying from 
every known quarter; and of being pelt by stones flung from the hands of its 
enemies on every side. 


39. The mind is ever hurled up and down, with the ups and downs of 
fortune; and is continually crushed under the millstone of his rising and 
setting passions (of anger and hatred, etc.). 


40. One who follows after thirst, without putting reliance on the laws 
inculcated by the great, falls headlong into the delusion of the world; as one 
suffers a scratch is well as wound over his body, by penetrating within the 
beautiful thorny creepers. 


41. Having entered in the organic body of man, the mind is eager to fly 
away from it; but there is the ungovernable elephant of earthy desire, that 
stuns it with its loud shrieks (on its way). 


42. There is again the huge snake of worldly affairs, which benumbs it with 
its poisonous breath; and so do the fairies on the face of the earth, serve to 
enslave the mind in love to them. 


43. There is also the wild fire of anger, which boils like a smart bile with its 
burning flame in the human breast; and inflames the mind with endless pain, 
by its repeated recurrence in the bosom. 


44. The desires clinging to the mind, are as gnats and fleas, biting and 
stinging it constantly; and its carnal enjoyments, appetites and revelries, are as 
shakals shrieking loudly about it. 


45. It is led by virtue of its actions, to wander all about without any rest or 
profit to its self, and driven from place to place by the tiger-like poverty, 
staring grimly at its face, again it is blinded amidst the mist of its affections to 
children and others, and lost at last in the hidden pitfall of death. 


46. Again, it trembles with the sense of and fear for its honor, which like a 
lion strikes tremor in its heart; while it is struck with terror at the glaring of 
the wolf of death at its face. 


47. It is afraid of pride, as a forester in dread of dragon coming to devour 
him; and it fears the appetites, which with their open mouths and bloody teeth, 
threaten to engulf it in ruin. 


48. It is no less in fear of its female companions in youth, whose amorous 
embraces like gusts of wind threaten to hurl it headlong to repeated hell-pits. 


49. It seldom happens, O prince! that the deerlike mind finds its rests in the 
arbour of godliness; as the living beings do, when they come from darkness to 
day light. (It ought to be, when they come from day light to repose at night). 


50. O ye hearers, let your deerlike minds find that delight in the arbour of 
peace, whose name even is not known to the ignorant, who are deluded by 
their fickle and smiling fortunes, resembling the oscillating smiles of flowers. 


CHAPTER XLV. 
Continuation of the Story of the Deerlike Mind. 


Argument: — Description of the happiness, attending upon the access of 
the mind to the arbour of Godliness. 


Vasishtha continued: — O destroyer of enemies! the deerlike mind having 
found its rest in that sacred bower, remains quite pleased with the same, and 
never thinks of going to any other arbour. 


2. In course of time, the tree of discriminate knowledge, brings forth its 
fruits; which ripen gradually with the sweet substance of spiritual knowledge 
in the inside. 


3. The deerlike mind sitting under the goodly tree of its meditation, beholds 
its outstretching branches hanging downward, with loads of the fruits of merit 
and virtue; (meaning its meritoriousness). 


4. It sees people climbing in this tree, with great persistence and pains; in 
order to taste these sweet fruits in preference to all others; (because merit is 
preferable to reward). 


5. Worldly peoples decline to ascend the foot of the tree of knowledge, but 
those who have mounted high upon it, never think of ever coming down from 
the high position which they have attained. 


6. For he who has ascended on the tree of reason or knowledge, in order to 
taste its delicious fruits, forgets the relish of his habitual food, and forsakes 
the bondage of his former deserts, as a snake casts aside his slough or skin. 


7. The man who has risen to a high station, looks at himself and smiles to 
think, how miserly he has passed so long a period of his past life. 


8. Having then mounted on the branch of fellow feeling, and putting down 
the snake of selfishness under his feet, he seems to reign in himself, as if he 
were the sole monarch over all. 


9. As the digits of the moon decrease and disappear in the dark fortnight, so 


the lotuses of his distress are lost in oblivion; and the iron fetters of his thirst 
after greed are rubbed out day by day (as he advances in his Yoga). 


10. He heeds not what is unattainable, nor cares about what is not obtained; 
his mind is as bright as the clear moon light night, and his heart is quite cold, 
in all its passions and affections. 


11. He sits poring upon the sages of the scriptures, and meditates in silence 
in their profound sense; he observes with extensive view the course of nature, 
from the highest and greatest objects to the mean and minute. 


12. Looking at the aforesaid septuple ground of his past follies, full with 
thick forests of poisonous fruits and flowers; he sits smiling looking upon 
them in derision (for having fled from their infection). 


13. Having fled from the tree of death, and alighted on that of life, his 
aspiring mind like a flitting bird, rises by degrees to its higher branches, and 
there sits delighted as a prince in his elevated station. 


14. Thence he looks down upon the family and friends, and upon the 
wealth and property (he has left behind); as if they were the adjuncts of 
former life, or as visions in his dream. 


15. He views with coldness his passions and feelings, his fears, hopes, his 
errors and honors, as actors, (dramatis personae), acting their several parts in 
the drama of his life. (The world is a stage, life a play, and the passions are 
players in it). 


16. The course of the world is as that of a rapid river, running onward with 
its furious and mischievous current; and laughing with its frothy breakers, 
now swelling highland then sinking at once. 


17. He does not feel any craving for wealth, wife or friends in his breast, 
who lives dead to his feelings as an insensible corpse (or forgets himself to a 
stone). 


18. His sight is fixed only on that single fruit on high, which is the holy and 
conscious soul or intellect; and with his sole object in his view, he mounts 
high on the higher branches of this tree of life. 


19. He bears in his remembrance, the blessings of the preceding step of his 
Yoga meditation, which is one fraught with the ambrosia of contentment; he 
remains as content at the loss of his riches, as he felt himself glad at their gain 
before. 


20. In the callings of his life, as also to the calls of his private and public 
interest; he is as displeased and annoyed, as one who is untimely roused from 


his wholesome sleep. 


21. As a weary traveller fatigued with his long and tiresome journey, longs 
for his rest from cessation of his labour; so a man tired with his repeated 
journey through life by cause of his ignorance, requires his respite in nirvana 
(or extinction of the trouble and transmigration in this troublesome world). 


22. As a flame of fire is kindled by the wind of breath and without the help 
of fuel, so let him kindle the flame of his soul within by the breath of 
respiration; and be united with the Supreme spirit. 


23. Let him check per-force his yearning after anything, which falls of 
itself before his sight; although he is unable to prevent his wistful eye, from 
falling upon it. (Look on all things, but long after nothing). 


24. Having attained this great dignity, which confers the fruits of best 
blessings on man, the devotee arrives to the sixth stage of his devotion, whose 
glory no language can describe. 


25. Whenever he happens to meet with some unexpected good, which 
fortune presents unto him he feels a repugnance to it, as the traveller is loathe 
to trust the mirage in a barren desert. 


26. The silent sage who is full with divine grace within himself, attains to 
such a state of ineffable felicity; as the weary and exhausted traveller finds in 
his sweet sleep, over the bustle of the busy world. 


27. He, — the sage, having arrived at this stage of his devotion, advances 
towards this attainment of the fruit of spiritual bliss, as an aerial siddha spirit 
has on its alighting on the Mount Meru, or a bird of air on its dropping down 
on the top of a tree. 


28. Here he forsakes all his thoughts and desires, and becomes as free as 
the open air and sky; and then he takes and tastes and eats and satiates 
himself, with his feeding freely upon this fruit. 


29. It is the leaving off of every object of desire day by day, and living the 
live long day with perfect composure with one’s self; that is termed the 
attainment of godliness or full perfection in life. 


30. The means of attaining to this state of perfection, is the doing away 
with all distinctions and differentiations, and remaining in perfect union and 
harmony with all and everything; this state of the mind is said by the learned, 
to be the assimilation and approximation to the nature of God, who is ever 
pure and the one and same in all from eternity to eternity. 


31. One disgusted at his desire of the world and its people, and abandoning 


his desire of wife and family; and forsaking his desire of acquiring riches, can 
only find his rest in this blissful state. 


32. The ultimate union of both the intellect and its true knowledge, (i.e., of 
both the subjective and objective) in the Supreme spirit; serves to melt away 
all sense of distinction, as the solar heat melts down the frozen snow. 


33. The nature of one who has known the truth, is not comparable with the 
state of a bent bow, which becomes straight after it is loosened; but to that of 
a curvilinear necklace, which retains its curvature, even after it is let loose on 
the ground. (i.e., The true convert does not slide back, like the back-sliding 
hypocrite). 


34. As a statue is carved in wood or stone, and stands expect to view in 
bas-relief therein; so is the world manifest in the great pillar of the Supreme 
spirit, and is neither an entity nor nullity of itself. 


35. We cannot form any idea of it in the mind, as to how the material 
subsists in the immaterial spirit; nor is it proper to entertain the notion, of 
what is unknowable by our ignorance of the nature of the self-existent One. 


36. Whoso is known to have his utmost indifference to the visibles, is 
capable of knowing the invisible spirit; but the unenlightened soul, is 
incapable to forsake and forget the visibles (in order to see the spirit). 


37. The knowledge of the phenomenal is utter ignorance, but that which is 
never lost to our consciousness is what is meant by samddhdna, and our 
reliance in the same, constitutes what is called samddhi. (This passage has a 
long explanatory note which is here omitted). 


38. When the viewer and view, (or the subjective and objective), are 
viewed in the same light of identity, and so relied upon by the mind; it is then 
called samddhdna or the union of both into one, and it is this belief 
whereupon the Yogi places his rest and reliance. 


39. He who has known truth, finds a distaste in the visibles of his own 
natures, (i.e., is naturally averse to them); and wise men make use of the word 
phenomenalism for ignorance of truth. 


40. Fools only feed upon the objects of sense, from their ignorance of truth, 
but the wise men have a natural distaste for them; for they that have the relish 
of sweet nectar in them, cannot be disposed to taste the sour gruel or the acrid 
ale. 


41. The uncovetous man being content in himself, is quite devoid of the 
triple desire mentioned before; but the wise man who is not inclined to 


meditation, is addicted to the increase of his wealth. 


42. Self-knowledge results from absence of cupidity, and whoso loses his 
self by his venality, hath neither his self-possession, nor any fixed position to 
stand upon (but is led on everywhere by his covetousness to the service of 
others). 


43. The learned man does not prosper in his meditation, though he may 
employ all his knowledge to it; because he is divided in himself by his various 
desires, though he was made as the whole and undivided image of himself; 
(i.e., his maker). 


44. But the soul which is freed from its desires, comes of itself in the 
possession of endless bliss, by being dissolved in the source of it in its 
meditation, as the flying mountains were fixed upon the earth (by having their 
wings chopped off by the thunder of Indra). (So the fickle mind is fixed, by 
lopping off its desires). 


45. As the soul becomes conscious of holy light in itself, it loses the sense 
of its meditation and is wholly lost in that light; as a drop of clarified butter 
offered in sacred oblation, is burnt away in the sacrificial fire. 


46. It is the entire inappetency of sensible objects, which constitutes the 
peace and quietude of the mind; and he who has accustomed himself to this 
habit, is entitled to our regard as a venerable and holy divine. 


47. Verily, the man that has gained his proficiency in the suppression of his 
appetite for worldly objects, becomes as firm and sedate in his holy 
meditation, that he is not to be shaken from it, by the joint power of Indra and 
those of the Gods and demi-gods. (The greedy are as sacrificial beasts, for the 
food of Gods and others). 


48. Resort therefore, to the strong and adamantine refuge of meditation, 
and know that all other meditations beside that of knowledge, is as frail and 
fragile as straws. 


49. The word world is used in reference to ignorant people, and the wise 
are not the subject of its meaning; the difference of the words ignorant and 
wise, consists in the one’s forming the majority of mankind and the other their 
lords; (i.e., Wise men rule over the ignorant mob, who compose the world). 


50. Let wise men resort to and rest at that place, where all meet in union in 
one self-shining unity; whether it be on the ground of the understanding of the 
saintly Siddhas, or those of viveki sages. (This is an admonition to everyone, 
for his reliance in one catholic religion of unity, of any nation or country). 


51. No one has yet been able to ascertain the unity or duality of the real or 
unreal, (i.e., of the spirit and matter) and the way to learn it, is firstly by 
means of the Sdstras, and next by association with wise and holy men. 


52. The third and best means to nirvdna is meditation, which is arrived at 
one after the other; and then it will appear that the immense body of Brahma, 
(i.e., the infinite spirit), takes upon it the name and nature of the living soul. 


53. The world appears in various forms by the concourse of the like and 
unlike principles, and becomes divided into eighteen regions, by the 
omniscience of God that knows the past, and future. 


54. Both the two things, namely knowledge and dislike of the world, are 
attained by attainment of either of them; and the thoughts of our mind, which 
fly with the winds in open air, are burnt away by the fire of knowledge. 


55. The worlds like flying cottons, having fled into the supreme soul, 
nothing is known where they are flown at last; and the gross ignorance of man 
is not removed by knowledge, as the dense snow is not to be melted by the 
fire in a painting. 


56. Though the world is known to be an unfounded fallacy, yet it is hard to 
remove this error from the mind; but on the other hand, it increases like the 
knowledge of ignorant men of it, by their ignorance. 


57. As the knowledge of the ignorant, tends the more to increase their 
ignorance; so the wise man comes to find the meaninglessness of the 
knowledge of ignorant people with regard to the world. 


58. The existence of the three worlds, is known to us only as they are 
represented in our knowledge of them; they are built in vacuity as aerial cities, 
and stretched out before us as empty dreams in our sleep. 


59. The knowledge of the world appears as false, as the conception of 
fanciful desires in the minds of the wise; for neither the entity of the world nor 
that of his self-existence, is perceptible in the understanding of the wise man. 


60. There is only the existence of one supremely bright essence, which 
shines in our minds; which bears resemblance to pieces of wet or dry wood, in 
as much as they are moistened or exsiccated by the presence or absence of the 
divine knowledge. 


61. To the right understanding the whole world with all its living beings, 
appears as one with one’s self; but men of dull understandings, bear no mutual 
sympathy to one another. The knowledge of twain, tends to difference and 
disunion betwixt man and man; but that of oneness unity leads men to fellow- 


feeling and union. 


62. The wise man possessing a greater share of wisdom, becomes as one 
with the Supreme One; and does not take into consideration, the question of 
the entity or nullity of the world. 


63. As the man who has arrived at the fourth stage of Yoga, takes no notice 
of the waking, dreaming and sleeping states of man; so the reasonable man 
takes into no account the vain wishes of his heart, and false fancies of his 
mind. 


64. Hence, the deerlike mind does not choose its annihilation, (or the loss 
of its entity); for the sake of its liberation, (which is an ideal and negative 
felicity), and has no reality in it. 


65. Thus the tree of meditation produces of itself the fruit of knowledge, 
which is ripened by degrees and in course of time to its lusciousness; and then 
the deer like mind drinks its sweet juice of divine knowledge to its satiety, and 
becomes freed from its fetters of earthly desire. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
On Abstract Meditation and Hypnotism. 


Argument: — The state of the mind, after its tasting the fruit of the tree of 
Meditation; and the nausea produced thereby in all worldly objects and 
enjoyments. 


Vasishtha continued: — After the Supreme being, which is the object and 
fruit of meditation, is known as present in the mind, and the bliss of release 
from flesh is felt within, all sensations are lost altogether, and the deerlike 
mind becomes spiritualized into the Supreme essence. 


2. It then loses its deership of browsing the thorns, as the extinguished lamp 
loses its flame; it assumes a spiritual form and shines with exhaustless blaze. 


3. The mind, in order to attain the fruit of its meditation, assumes a 
firmness resembling that of the mountains, after their wings were mutilated by 
the thunder bolts of Indra. 


4. Its mental faculties fly away from it, and there remains only its pure 
consciousness in it; which is irrepressible and indivisible and full with the 
supreme soul in itself. 


5. The mind being roused to its reasonableness (from its former state of 
material dullness); now rises as the sentient soul, and dispensing its clear 
spiritual light, from its identity with the increate and endless One. 


6. It then remains in that state, in perfect freedom and from all wishes and 
attempts; it is assimilated with the everlasting spirit of God, in its form of 
eternal contemplation. 


7. Until the great Brahma may be known, and our rest may be found in that 
Blessed state; so long the mind remains a stranger to meditation, by reason of 
its dwelling on other thoughts. 


8. After the mind has obtained its union with the supreme One, we know 
not whither the mind is fled; and where our wishes and actions, our joys and 


griefs, and all our knowledge fly away. 


9. The Yogi is seen to be solely absorbed in his meditation, and sitting 
steadfast in his contemplation, like a wingless and unmoving mountain. 


10. Loathe to his sensual enjoyments, and blunt to all sensibilities; averse 
to the various sights and objects of senses, the Yogi is pleased only with 
himself. 


11. With his sensations numbed by degrees, and his soul resting in 
tranquility; and his mind dead to the enticements of wealth and sensible 
objects; the Yogi is pleased with himself. 


12. All men of right understanding, are fully aware of the tastelessness of 
the objects of sense; and remain like human figures in painting, without doting 
or looking upon them. 


13. The man that is master of himself, and has mastery over his soul and 
mind; disdains to look upon earthly treasures, for his want of desire for them; 
he is firmly fixed in his abstraction, as if he were compelled to it by force of 
another. 


14. The soul immerged in meditation, becomes as full as a river in the rainy 
season; and there is no power that can restrain the mind, which is fixed in its 
meditation. 


15. When the mind is immerged in deep meditation, by its cool apathy to 
all sensible objects, and feels an utter indifference to all worldly affairs, it is 
then said to be in its samadhi and no other. 


16. It is a settled distaste to the objects of sense, that constitutes the pith 
and marrow of meditativeness; and the maturity of this habit, makes a man as 
compact as adamant. 


17. It is therefore, the distaste to worldly enjoyments, that is the germ of 
meditation, while it is the taste for such pleasures, which binds a man fastly to 
it. 

18. Full knowledge of truth, and the renunciation of every desire at all 


times; lead men to the nirvana meditation, and to the infinite joy of the divine 
state. 


19. If there is inappetency of enjoyments, why think of anything else? and 
if there be no such inappetency, what avails any other thought or meditation? 


20. The well intelligent sage who is freed from his relishing the visibles, is 
situated in his position of unflinching meditation, and in the enjoyment of his 


continuous reveries. 


21. He whom the visibles do not delight, is known as the most enlightened 
man; and he who takes no delight in the enjoyables, is deemed as the full wise 
man. 


22. He who is disposed to repose by nature, can have no inclination to 
enjoyments; it is unnatural to indulge in carnal enjoyments, but the subdued 
nature needs nothing to enjoy. 


23. Let men resort to their reflection, after their hearing of a lecture, 
reciting the scripture, and muttering the mantras and uttering their prayers; 
and when tired with meditation, let them return to their lectures and recitals. 


24. Sitting in meditation in an indefatigable mood, and resting at agreeable 
ease with freedom from fear and care; remaining in rapturous hypnotism, with 
a quiet and composed mind, likens the fair autumnal sky with its unclouded 
and serene aspect. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 
The First Step towards Liberation. 


Argument: — Of the different steps leading to Liberation, and firstly of 
Indifference to the world and lastly of putting reliance in the holy precepts. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear now the manner and the measures which the 
Yogi adopts to himself, in order to obtain his release from his cumbrous 
burthen and troubles of the world. 


2. As the germ of discrimination springs in the mind at first, by reason of 
the disparagement of the world (for the multiplicity of its faults, or from some 
cause or other). 


3. All good people, resort under the wide stretching shade of this (full- 
grown) tree; as the weary and sunburnt traveller halts under the cooling shade 
of trees on their way. 


4. The wise man shuns the ignorant at a distance, as the wayfarer casts 
aside the sacrificial wood; because the worshippers of the gods only observe 
the ceremonious rites of holy ablutions and almsgivings, austerities and 
offering of sacred oblations. 


5. In his fair, just, polite and undissembling behaviour, and in his placid 
and pleasing countenance, he resembles the fair moon with her ambrosial 
beams. 


6. He acts with sound wisdom and prudence, is polite and civil in his 
manners, is prompt in serving and obliging others, is holy in his conduct and 
humorous in his discourse. 


7. He is as clear and cold, soft and pleasing as fresh butter, and his 
company is delightsome to people even at his very first appearance. 


8. The deeds of wise men are as pure and grateful to mankind, as the dews 
of moon-beams, are refreshing and refrigerating of whole nature. 


9. No one sleeps so delighted on a bed of flowers, and in a flower garden 
devoid of fears; as he rests secure in the society of reasonable and pious men. 


10. The society of holy and wise men, like the pure waters of the heavenly 
river, serve to cleanse the sins and purify the minds of the sinful. 


11. The society of the holy recluse and liberated men, is as cooling as a 
refrigeratory or ice house. 


12. The great and high delight, which the holy sage feels in his heart, is not 
to be enjoyed in the company of fairies among the gods, gandharvas and 
human kind. 


13. It is by continued performance of proper acts, that the pious devotee 
attains his knowledge and clearness of understanding; when the significance 
of the Sdstras, is reflected as clearly in the tablet of his mind, as the reflections 
of objects are seen in a reflector. 


14. A good understanding, moistened by instruction of the Sdstras, thrives 
in the mind of a holy man, as a plantain tree grows in the forest. 


15. The mind which is cleared by good judgment, retains the clear 
impression of everything in it, as a mirror reflects the images of objects on its 
surface. 


16. The wise man whose soul is purified by the association with holy men, 
and whose mind is cleansed with the lavation of scriptural instruction, is as a 
sheet of linen cloth flaming with fire. 


17. The holy saint shines with the effulgence of his person, as the sun does 
with his golden beams, diffusing a pure light all around the world. 


18. The wise man follows the conduct of holy sages, and the precepts of the 
Sdstras in such a manner; as to imitate and practice them himself. 


19. Thus the tyro (novice) becomes by degrees, as good as the good and 
great objects of his imitation, and as full of knowledge as the Sdstras 
themselves; and having then put down all the enjoyments of life under him, he 
appears to come out of a prison, by breaking down his chains and fetters. 


20. He who is practiced in reducing his appetites and enjoyments day by 
day, resembles the crescent moon daily increasing in brightness, and 
enlightening his family, as the moon throws her lustre over the stars about her. 


21. The penurious miser (who amass their wealth without enjoying it), is 
always as sulky as the face of eclipsed moon, and never as smiling as the 
countenance of the liberal, which is as bright as the face of the moon when 
freed from eclipse. 


22. The liberal man spurns the world as mere straw, and becomes 


renowned among the great for his munificence; he resembles the kalpa plant 
of paradise, which yields the desired fruit to everybody. 


23. Though one may feel some compunction in his mind, at the willful 
abdication of his possessions; yet the wise man is glad at his having no 
property at all. (It is better to have no property, than to regret at its loss or 
resignation). 


24. Any one may laugh at his prior acts, if he will come to know what he 
was and he is; as a low chandal by being jdtismara, laughs in disgust in 
making comparison of his past birth with that of the present. 


25. Even the Siddhas or holy saints, repair with wonder to see the Yogi for 
their esteem of him; and look upon him as the moon risen on earth, with their 
delighted eyes. 


26. The Yogi who is ever accustomed to despise all enjoyment, and has 
attained his right judgement, does not hold in estimation any of the enjoyables 
in life, though it presents itself to him in the proper manner. 


27. The holy man whose soul is raised and enlightened (in time), feels his 
former enjoyments to become as dull and insipid to him, as a luxuriant tree 
becomes dry and withered in autumn. 


28. He then resorts to the company of holy men, for his greatest and lasting 
good; and becomes as sane and sound, as the sick man becomes hale by his 
abstinence and recourse to physicians. 


29. Being then exulted in his mind, he dives into the deep sense of the 
Sdstras; as a big elephant plunges into a large lake of clear water. 


30. It is the nature of virtuous men, to deliver their neighbours from danger 
and calamity; and to lead them to their well-being and prosperity, as the sun 
leads people to light. 


31. The reasonable man becomes from before, averse to receive anything 
from another, and lives content with what is his own. 


32. He hates to taste the delicacies of others, from his satiety with the 
ambrosial draughts of contentment; and prepares himself for his abandonment 
of what he is already possessed of himself. 


33. He is accustomed to give away his gold and money to beggars, and beg 
his vegetable food from others; and by habitual practice of giving away 
whatever he has, he is even ready to part with the flesh of his body. 


34. Verily, the man of subdued mind and holy soul, gets over the hidden 


traps of ignorance with as much ease, as a running man leaps over a pitfall, 
(goshpada). 


35. The holy man being accustomed to despise the acceptance of wealth 
from others, learns betimes to slight the possession of any wealth for himself 
also. 


36. Thus the aversion to the wealth and possessions of others, leads the 
wise and holy man by degrees to be averse to the retaining of anything for 
himself. 


37. There is no such trouble in this earth, nor any great pain in the torment 
of hell, as there is in the punishment of earning and accumulation of wealth. 


38. Ah! how little are the money-making fools aware, of the cares and 
troubles which they have to undergo in their restless days and nights, in their 
servitude for money. 


39. All wealth is but lengthening woe, and prosperity is the harbinger of 
adversity; all enjoyments and aliments are but ailments, and thus every earthly 
good turns to its reverse. 


40. One cannot have a distaste to sensual enjoyments, as long he thinks on 
the objects of sense; and so long as he has a craving for riches, which are the 
spring of all evils and bane of human life. 


41. He who has got a relish for his highest heavenly bliss, looks upon the 
world as a heap of straw, and riches as the fire that kindles them to a flame. 
Avoid this fire and be cool and quiet. 


42. The meaning of wealth is known to be the source of all evils in the 
world, and as the cause of all wants and disorders and even of diseases and 
death. It is also the cause of oppression and plunder, of incendiarism and the 
like, and their consequent poverty and famine. 


43. In this mortal world of the death and diseases of living beings, there is 
one elixir which confers perpetual health and life to man, and this is his 
contentment only. (Hence called the ambrosia of life, santoshdamritang). 


44. The vernal season is charming, and so are the garden of paradise, the 
moon-beams and fairies, but all combine in contentment only, which is alone 
capable of yielding all the delights. 


45. The contented soul likens a lake in the rains, when it is full as it is deep, 
and as clear and cooling as the nectarious beverage of the gods. 


46. The honest man is strengthened by his contentment and flourishes with 


full glee, as a flower tree is decked with blooming blossoms in the flowering 
season. 


47. As the poor emmet is likely to be crushed under the foot of every 
passer, in its ceaseless search and hoarding of food; so the greedy and needy 
man is liable to be spurned, for his incessant wanderings after paltry gains and 
lucre. 


48. The deformed and disfigured beggar, is as a man plunged in a sea of 
troubles, and buffeting in its waves without finding a support for rest, or any 
prospect of ever reaching to the shore. 


49. Prosperity, like a beauty, is as frail and fickle as the unstable waves of 
the ocean; what wise man is there that can expect to find his reliance in them, 
or have his rest under the shade of the hood of hideous serpent? (This simile is 
borrowed in the Nyaya wherein world is said, kupita phani phand chhdyeva). 


50. He who knowing the pains attending on the gaining, keeping and losing 
of money, still persists to pursue in its search, is no better than a brute, and 
deserves to be shunned by the wise as unsociable. 


51. He who mows down at once the growing grass of his internal and 
external appetites, from the field of his heart, by the means of the scythe of 
insouciance, gets it prepared for reception of the seeds of Divine knowledge. 


52. Ignorant people take the world for a reality, and wise men also conduct 
themselves under this supposition though they are well aware of its unreality; 
and this owing to their neglect of practicing what they are taught to believe. 
(The wise and foolish are in the same footing, by equally unwise conduct in 
life). 


53. The sum of the whole is that, it is the resignation of the world which 
leads men to the society of sages and study of the scriptures; and then by 
reliance in the holy precepts, one abandons his worldliness, and at last his firm 
dislike of the temporal, leads him to seek his spiritual bliss. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 
On the Dignity of Right Discrimination. 


Argument: — The state of holy Resignation. 


Vasishtha continued: — After a man has come to his resignation of the world, 
and to his association with holy men; and after he has well digested the 
precepts of the Sdstras, and abandoned his carnal appetites and enjoyments: 


2. And then having a distaste to worldly objects, and gained the reputation 
of being a man of probity; and being outwardly an inquirer after truth, and 
inwardly full of enlightenment. 


3. He does not long for wealth, but shuns it as one flies from darkness; he 
gives away whatever he has in hand, as a man casts aside the dry and rotten 
leaves from his house. 


4. Everyone is seen to be worn out with toil and care, for the supportance of 
his family and friends throughout his life; and yet like a weary traveller 
labouring under his load, he is rarely found to cast off his burthen, as long he 
has strength to bear it. 


5. A man in full possession of his senses, and the sensible objects all about 
him, is yet quite insensible of them, if he is but possessed of the calm, quiet of 
his mind. 


6. Wherever he remains, whether in his retired solitude or remote from his 
country; or in a forest or sea or distant deserts or gardens; he is perfectly at 
home in every place. 


7. But he is not in love with any place, nor dwells secure in any state 
whether it be the company of friends in a pleasure garden, or in learned 
discussions in the assembly of scholars. 


8. Wherever he goes or stays, he is always calm and self-governed, silent 
and self-communing; and though well informed himself, yet he is ever in 


quest of knowledge by reason of his inquiry after truth. 


9. Thus by his constant practice, the holy sage sits on the low ground or in 
water, and reclines himself in the supreme One in the state of transcendent 
bliss. 


10. This is the state of perfect quietude, both of inner soul as also of the 
outward senses; and the Yogi remains quite insensible of himself, with his 
consciousness of indubitable truth, (of the unity of his soul with the Supreme 
spirit). 


11. This transcendent state, consists in the unconsciousness of sensible 
objects; and the consciousness of a vacuum full with the presence of 
omniscience spirit (or soul). 


12. Firstly, one’s concern with the knowledge of unity, and lastly his 
unconsciousness of himself and everything besides, whether of a void or 
substance, constitutes what is called the state of highest felicity. 


13. The saint who is mindless of everything, and rests in his consciousness; 
has no taste of (or desire for anything), but remains as a block of stone amidst 
the encircling water (without tasting it). 


14. The self-conscious person who has attained to that exclusive state of 
perfection, (nirodha-padam), which shuts out all objective thoughts from it, 
remains silent and slow, and quite unmindful of everything beside itself; and 
he reposes in his own being, (i.e., rests in himself), as a human figure does in 
its picture. 


15. He who has known the One that is to be known, sees in his heart all 
things as nothing; all magnitudes dwindle into minuteness (before his sight of 
the boundless majesty of God), and the whole plenum appears as vacuum to 
him. 


16. The knower of God, has no more the knowledge of himself or others, 
(the ego, tu, and the world besides); and all space and time and existence 
appear as non-existent before him. 


17. The seer who has seen the glory of God, is situated in the region of 
light; and like a lighted lamp, he dispels his inner darkness, together with all 
his outward fears, animosities and affections. 


18. I bow down before that sun like sage, who is set beyond darkness on 
every side, and is raised above all created things; and whose great glory is 
never liable to be darkened. 


19. I cannot describe in words the most eminent state of divine seer, whose 


soul is fraught with divine knowledge, whose mind is quite at rest, and whose 
knowledge of duality is wholly extinct. 


20. Know, O most intelligent Rama, that the Great Lord God is pleased to 
bless him with the bliss of his final extinction in him; in reward of his serving 
him by day and night with sincere devotion. 


21. Rama rejoined: — Tell me, O chief of sages, who is this Lord God, and 
how He is propitiated by our prayers and faith in him; explain this mystery to 
me, for you are acquainted with all truth. 


22. Vasishtha replied: — Know, O highly intelligent Rama, that the Lord 
God is neither at a distance nor unattainable by us; the Lord is the all-knowing 
soul, and the soul is the great God. 


23. In Him are all things, and from him have come all these; He is all, and 
everywhere with all; He is immanent in and self-same with all, he is 
everlasting and I bow down to him. 


24. From him comes out this creation, as well as all its change and 
dissolution; He is the uncaused cause of all, which rise as winds in the hollow 
vault of heaven. 


25. Him do all these creatures, — the moving as well as unmoving, 
worship always (in their hearts), as well as they can; and present them the best 
offerings that they can find. 


26. So men by adoring him in their repeated births, with all their hearts and 
minds and in the best manner that they can; propitiate at last the supreme 
object of their adoration. 


27. The great Lord God and Supreme soul, being thus propitiated by their 
firm faith; sends to them at last his messenger (or angel), with his good will 
for their enlightenment. 


28. Rama asked: — Tell me, great sage, how does the lord God and 
supreme soul, send his messenger to man; and who is this messenger, and in 
what manner he throws the light in the mind. 


29. Vasishtha replied: — The messenger sent by the divine spirit, is known 
by the name of wise discrimination, which shines as coolly in the cell of the 
human heart, as the moonlight does in the clear firmament. 


30. It is this which awakens and instructs, the brutish and cupidinous soul 
to wisdom, and by this means saves the unwise soul, from the turbulent ocean 
of this world. 


31. This enlightening and intellectual spirit, residing in the human heart; is 
denominated as the pranava or adorable, in the Veda and Vedic Sdstras. 


32. This holy spirit is propitiated daily, by men and the serpent tribe, and 
by gods and demi-gods also; by their prayers and oblations, by their 
austerities and alms-givings, as also by their sacrificial rites and recitals of the 
scriptures. 


33. This Lord has the highest heaven for his crown, and the earth and 
infernal regions for his footstools; the stars glisten as hairs on his person; his 
heart is the open space of the sky, and all material bodies, are as the bones of 
his body. 


34. He being the intellectual soul of all, spreads undivided everywhere; He 
is ever wakeful, and sees and moves everything, as it were with his hands and 
feet, and his eyes and ears and the other organs of his body. 


35. The living or sentient soul, being awakened to wisdom, by destroying 
the demon of the sensualistic mind; takes upon it a bright spiritual form and 
becomes a spiritual being. 


36. Now shun the various wishes of your heart, which are ever changeful 
and full of evils; and exert your manliness to exult your soul to the state of 
meeting with divine grace. 


37. The rambling mind resembles a demon, buffeting with the waves of 
furious ocean of the world; it is the enlightened soul only that shines like a 
luminary, over the dark dreary and dismal waste of the earth. 


38. See thy mind is wafted away by the gale of its greediness, to the vast 
billowy ocean of the world; and hurled to the deep cavity of its whirlpools, 
from whose depth no man can rise again. 


39. You have the strong ship of your divine wisdom alone, that can get you 
across the sea of your ignorance; and bear you up above the billows of your 
carnal appetites and passions. 


40. In this manner the lord being propitiated by his worship, sends his holy 
spirit as his messenger, for sanctification of the human soul; and thus leads the 
living being to his best and most blest state, by the gradual steps of holy 
society, religious learning, and the right understanding of their esoteric and 
spiritual sense. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 
Total Stoicism and Insouciance. 


Argument: — The tranquility arrived at by the Holy Sage, and his relation 
with the world. 


Vasishtha continued: — Those that are stanch in their discernment of truth, 
and firm in the abandonment of their desires, are truly men of very great souls, 
and conscious of their greatness in themselves. 


2. The vast extent of magnanimity of noble-minded men, and the 
fathomless depth of their understanding, is even greater than the space 
occupied by the fourteen worlds. (The unbounded mind of the divine Newton, 
comprehended the boundless with all the hosts of heaven in its fathomless 
depth). 


3. Wise men having a firm belief in the erroneous conception of the reality 
of the universe, are quite at rest from all internal and external accidents, which 
overtake the unwary ignorant as sharks and alligators. (The sea of ignorance 
abounding with sharks of casualties). 


4. What reliance is there in our hope or desire for anything in this world, 
which is as tempting and deceitful, as the appearance of two moons in the sky, 
of water in the mirage, and the prospect of a fairy city in the air. (Here the 
falsity applies both to worldly things as well as our desire for them, and 
means the unrealizeableness of unrealities). 


5. Desires are as vain as the empty void, owing to the nullity of the mind in 
which they arise; the sapient therefore, are not led away by their desires, 
which they know, have their origin in the unreal and vacant mind. (The Yogi 
who has arrived at the state of his inappetency in the seventh stage of Yoga, 
never falls back to his desires any more). 


6. The three states of waking, dreaming and sound sleep, are common to all 
living beings at large; but that state which is beyond those triple functions, 
and is all seeing and all knowing, without its being seen or known in the state 


or nature of the Supreme being, (whose omniscience neither wakes, nor 
dreams nor sleeps at any time). 


7. The soul in its enraptured state sees the world as a collection of light, 
issuing from gems of various kinds; and the human soul as a reflexion of that 
light, and not as a solid or earthly (material) substance. 


8. The phenomenal world presenting its various appearances to the eye 
sight, is no more than an empty vacuity; and the varieties of light and 
lightsome bodies which appear in it, are no other than reflexions of the rays of 
the vast mine of brilliant gems, which is hid under it, and shoots forth its glare 
in the open air. 


9. Here there is no other substance in reality, neither the vast cosmos nor 
the boundless vacuity itself; all this is the glare of that greatest of gems, whom 
we call the great Brahma, and whose glory shines all around us. 


10. The created and uncreated all is one Brahma alone, and neither is there 
any variety or destructibility in these or in him. All these are formless beings, 
and appear as substantial ones in imagination only, as the sun beams paint the 
various figures in empty clouds in the air. (Note. Whereas there is no variation 
in God, there is neither the creation nor destruction of anything at all; these 
are but creations of imagination, and evolutions of the infinite mind of the 
eternal God). 


11. Thus, when the imaginary world appears to blend with the ethereal 
void, this solid mass of the material world, will then vanish into nothing. 


12. So the whole proving to be a perfect unsubstantiality, it is quite 
impossible for it to admit any property or predicate whatever (whether 
material or immaterial), which is usually attributed to it; because there is no 
probability of any quality belonging to an absolute nothing, as it is impossible 
for a bird of air to alight upon, or find a resting place in an air-grown tree. 


13. There is no solidity of anything, nor is there a vacuity at all; the mind 
also is itself a nullity but that which remains after all these, is the only being 
in reality, and which is never inexistent at any time. 


14. The soul is one alone and without its variation, and has the 
consciousness of all varieties in itself, and these are inherent in its nature, as 
all the various forms of jewelleries are ingrained in a lump of gold. 


15. The sapient sage who remains in his own essential nature, finds his 
egoism or personality, together with the consciousness of his mind and the 
world besides, all dwindle into himself; it is difficult to describe the mind of 
wise man, which remains identified with the nature of the self-existent being. 


16. The understanding is perplexed and confounded in itself, by 
observation of the sward nature of things on all sides; and requires to be 
slowly and gradually brought to the knowledge of truth, by means of right 
reason and argument. 


17. It is by abstracting the mind, from its dwelling or visible nature, — the 
production of Virdj; and leading it to the contemplation of the spiritual cause 
of these works, (i.e., the sutrdtma), that the true knowledge of the author of 
the present, past and future worlds can be arrived at. 


18. He is known as a wise sage, whose well discerning soul has perceived 
the truth in itself; and that has found his rest in the One unity, has no 
perception of the visible world, and all its endless varieties (which are 
attributed to Virdj). 


19. All the aforesaid sayings which are given here by way of advice, are 
perceived by the intuition of the wise man, as the wise sayings of good 
people, are self-evident of themselves. 


20. The substance of all this is that, there is no bulk or magnitude of beings 
in general, nor its absence either as an entire vacuum; therefore, there is 
neither a gross or airy mind also, but the One that exists after all, is the true 
and ever existent entity. 


21. This entity is Intelligence, which is conversant with all the intelligibles 
in itself; its manifestation in the form of our senses is fraught with all our woe, 
while its disappearance leads to our felicity. 


22. Being developed, it evolves itself in the shape of outward organs, and 
takes upon it the form of the gross body; as the liquid water, consolidates by 
degrees to the bulky forms of islands, and huge mountainous bodies. 


23. This intelligence being engrossed by ignorance, assumes gross form of 
mind to itself; and with form it binds itself fastly with the corporeal body, as a 
man views his aerial dreams in their material substance. (So the intelligent 
mind is transformed to a material substance). 


24. In these states of the conversion of intelligence into sensation, 
perception and other faculties, the Intellect remains the same and 
unchangeable though it is expressed by different words of human invention 
(and which are but synonyms of the same). 


25. The soul remains the same both in its conception of mental thoughts 
and ideas, as well as in its perception of outward objects; and it is not changed 
in either case like the mind, in its vision of the dreams within it, and its sight 
of object, without itself. 


26. The Intellect or understanding, resembling a vacuous substance, is as 
unchangeable in its nature as that of vacuity and eternity; and the objects 
which present their ideas in the soul, are as dreams which appear in the mind, 
and are nothing in reality. 


27. The gross nature of external objects, bear no relation with the pure 
internal intellect; nor can their impurity touch or pollute the purity of the soul; 
therefore, the intellect is not subject to the mutability of external nature. 


28. The understanding never acquires the mutable state, of the objects it 
dwells upon (as the mind does); it remains always in its immutable nature, and 
is never otherwise in any state or condition. 


29. The Yogi having attained to his extreme purity of his understanding, in 
the seventh or the highest degree of his perfection; becomes identified with 
intelligence, and of the meaning of its presence or absence. 


30. The minds of the passing or ordinary people, are impressed with idea of 
their materiality by reason of their understanding themselves as material 
bodies. 


31. They falsely take their fleeting minds, which are as pure as the clear 
firmament for a material object; in the same manner as the players in a drama, 
take upon themselves the false guise of Pisdchas demons. (Misrepresenting 
the fair as foul). 


32. All error is corrected by the habit of an unerring wisdom, as the 
madness of a man is cured by his thinking himself as no mad man. (That is, 
the constant habit of your thinking yourself as so and so, is what will make 
you really appear as such). 


33. The knowledge of one’s erroneousness makes him get out of his error, 
as the error of dreaming is lost, upon one’s coming to the knowledge, that all 
he beheld was but a mere dream. 


34. It is the extenuation of our desires, that lessens our attachment to the 
world (and the vice versa); the desire is a great demon, which must be 
destroyed by the wise man. 


35. As the madness of men, is increased by their habitual ravings; so it is 
by their constant practice of sobriety, that the giddy insanity of man comes to 
be abated. 


36. As the passing human body, is taken in its corporeal sense in thought; 
so it is taken in a spiritual sense also by the learned, by virtue of its 
understanding or intellectual powers or faculties. 


37. The passing or subtle body, having taken the form of the living soul; is 
capable of being converted into the state of Brahma; by the intense culture of 
its understanding. (But it is argued and objected that). 


38. If anything is produced according to its substance, and if anybody 
thinks himself according his own understanding; how is it then possible for a 
material being, to take itself in a spiritual sense. 


39. Logomachy rather increases the doubts, but following one’s advice, the 
error is removed off; as devil is removed off by chaunting the mantras only, 
rather than knowing the meaning of them. 


40. The world being thought as identic with its thought (or conception in 
the mind), it is believed to be an immaterial and bodiless substance; until at 
last its substantivity is lost in the vacuity of the Intellect. (So says the sruti: — 
The world is the bodiless and unsullied spirit). 


41. The mind being quite at rest from all its internal and external thoughts, 
the real spiritual nature of the soul then appears to light; and manifest itself in 
the form of the cool and clear firmament, which must be laid hold upon for 
one’s rest and refuge. 


42. The wise man will perform his sacrifice with knowledge, and plant the 
stakes of his meditation in it; and at the conclusion of his all-conquering 
sacrifice, (Vishajit), offer his relinquishment of the world, (sarva tydga), as his 
oblation to it. (Because whoso wishes to overcome the world, needs first to 
make an offering of it in his holy sacrifice). 


43. The wise man is always the same and equally firm in himself, whether 
he stands under a shower of rain or falling rain or fire stones from above, or 
walks in a diluvian storm; or when he is travelling all over the earth or 
mounting or flying in the air. 


44. No one can attain the station of the apathetic sage, whose mind is 
tranquil by its want of desire, and which has obtained its enclosure within 
itself; unless he is practiced to sit in his steadfast meditation. 


45. The mind can never derive that perfect peace and tranquility, either 
from the study of the Sdstras, or attending on holy lectures and sermons, or by 
the practice of austerities and self-controul; as it does by its distaste of all 
external objects and enjoyments. 


46. The mind, like a bundle of hay, is burnt away by the fire of inappetency 
of all worldly objects; this fire is kindled by the breath of abandonment of all 
things, and fanned by the persuasion, that all prosperity is followed by 
adversity. 


47. The perception of sensible objects, casts a mist of ignorance in and all 
about the mind; it is one’s knowledge alone, which shines as a brilliant gem 
within himself. 


48. It is the Intellect alone which shines amidst this gloom, like a luminary 
in the sky; and looks over all mankind, Nagas and Asuras, and over mountains 
and in their caves. 


49. It is by the infusion of this Intellect, that all things are moving in the 
dull womb of the universe; they are whirling in the whirlpool of the Intellect, 
and are deriving their freshness from the enlivening power of that source. 


50. All living beings whirling in the great whirlpool of the Intellect, (chit 
Vivarte), are as weak little fishes encircled by the net of ignorance; they are 
swimming and skimming in the water of the vast vacuum, and are quite 
forgetful of their spiritual origin. 


51. It is the Divine Intellect, that shows itself in various forms within the 
sphere of itself; as the air presents the variegated forms of thickening clouds, 
in the wide arena of the sky. 


52. All living beings are of the same nature, with their spiritual source, 
when they are devoid of their desires; it is the difference of desire that makes 
their different states, and causes them to fly about like the dry leaves of trees, 
and rustling in the air as hollow reeds. 


53. Therefore, you must not remain as the ignorant, but rise above them by 
raising your mind to wisdom; and this is to be done, by calling the manly 
powers to your aid; and then by overcoming your dullness to suppress the 
whole band of your rising desires, and next by breaking the strong fetters and 
prison-house of this world, to devote your attention to your improvement in 
spiritual knowledge. (These steps are described very diffusely in the gloss for 
the practice of the devotee). 


CHAPTER L. 
Description of the Seven kinds of Living Beings. 


Argument: — The septuple orders of living creatures, according to the 
degrees of the tenacity and laxity of their desires. (As mentioned in the 
preceding Chapter). 


Vasishtha added: — These bodies of living beings, that are seen to fill the ten 
sides of this world; and consisting of the different tribes of men, Nagas, Suras, 
Gandharvas, mountaineers and others. 


2. Of these some are sleeping wakers, (waking sleepers), and others are 
waking in their imaginations only, and hence called imaginative wakers; some 
are only wakeful, while there be others who have been waking all along. 


3. Many are found to be strictly wakeful, and many also as waking sleepers 
both by day and night; there be some animals that are slightly wakeful, and 
these constitute the seven classes of living beings (inhabiting this world). 


4. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, the difference of the seven species of living 
beings for my satisfaction; which appear to me to be as different as the waters 
of the seven seas. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — There have been some men in some former age 
and parts of the world, who are known to have been long sleepers with their 
living bodies. (Such were the seven sleepers of kehef mentioned in Sddi’s 
Gulistan). 


6. The dream that they see, is the dream of the existence of the world; and 
those who dream this dream are living men, and denominated as waking 
sleepers or day dreamers. 


7. Sometimes a sleeping man, sees a dream rising of itself before him, by 
reason of some prior action or desire of the same kind arising in the mind; 
such is the uncalled for appearance of anything or property unto us; and it is 
therefore, that we are denominated as dreaming men. (The story of Lila 
related before, will serve as an elucidation of this kind). 


8. They who come to wake after their prolonged sleep and dream, are 
called as awakened from their sleep and dream, and to have got rid of them, 
(such are the enlightened men that have come out of their ignorance). 


9. I say we are also sleepers and dreamers, among those sleeping men; 
because we do not perceive the omniscient One, who by his omnipresence is 
present everywhere, as the All in all. 


10. Rama rejoined; — Tell me now where are those awakened and 
enlightened men now situated, when those Kalpa ages wherein they lived and 
were born, are now past and gone along with their false imagination. 


11. Vasishtha replied: — Those who have got rid of their erroneous dreams 
in this world, and are awakened from their sleep; resort to some other bodies 
which they meet with, agreeable to the fancies which they form in their 
imaginations. (Everyone having a peculiar fancy of himself for anything, 
assumes that form in his next birth). 


12. Thus they meet with other forms in other ages of the world, according 
to their own peculiar fancies; because there is no end of the concatenation and 
fumes of fancy, in the empty air of the mind. 


13. Now know them that are said to be awakened from their sleep, to be 
those who have got out of this imaginary world; as the inborn insects, come 
out of an old and rotten fig tree. 


14. Hear now of those that are said to be waking in their fancies and 
desires, and they are those who are born in some former age, and in some part 
of the world; and were entirely restless and sleepless in their minds owing to 
some fanciful desire springing in them, and to which they were wholly 
devoted (so are they that live upon hope). 


15. And they also who are lost in their meditation, and are subjected in the 
realm of their greedy minds; who are strongly bound to their desires, by losing 
or the sacrifice of all their former virtues. 


16. So also are they whose desires have been partly awake from before, and 
have gradually engrossed all the other better endeavours of their possessors, 
are likewise said to be wakeful to their desires. 


17. They who after cessation of their former desires, resort to some fresh 
wishes again; are not only greedy people themselves, but think ourselves also 
to be of the same sort. 


18. I have told you already regarding the vigils of their desires, and now 
know them to be dormant over their desires, who bear their lives as they are 


life beings, and dead to their wishes like ourselves. But hear further of them 
that are ever awake. 


19. The first patriarchs that were produced from the self-evolving Brahma, 
are said to have been ever-wakeful, as they had been immerged in profound 
sleep before their production. 


20. But being subjected to repeated births, these ever-wakeful beings, 
became subject to alternate sleep and waking, owing to their subjection to 
reiterated work and repose. 


21. These again became degraded to the state of trees, on account of their 
unworthy deeds; and these are said to be duly waking, because of their want 
of sensibility even in waking state. (The nocturnal sleep of the vegetable 
creation was unknown to the ancients). 


22. Those who are enlightened by the light of the Sdstras, and the company 
of wise men; look upon the world as a dream in their waking state, and are 
therefore, called as waking dreamers by day. 


23. Those enlightened men, who have found their rest in the divine state; 
and are neither wholly awake nor asleep, are said to have arrived at the fourth 
stage of their Yoga. 


24. Thus have I related to you the difference, of the seven kinds of beings, 
as that of the waters of the seven seas from one another. Now be of that kind 
which you think to be the best. 


25. After all, O Rama, give up your error of reckoning the worlds as real 
entities of themselves; and as you have come to your firm belief in one 
absolute unity, get rid of the duality of vacuity and solidity, and be one with 
that primeval body, which is free from monism and dualism. 


CHAPTER LI. 
Admonition to arrive at the Yoga of Ultimate Rest. 


Argument: — The world disappearing at the sight of God, its falsity at the 
sight of the self, and its voidness before true knowledge. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, what is the cause of mere waking for nothing, and 
how does a living being proceed from the formless Brahma, which is 
tantamount to the growth of a tree in empty air. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — O highly intelligent Rama, there is no work to be 
found anywhere which is without its cause, therefore, it is altogether 
impossible for anybody to exist here, that is merely awake for nothing. 


3. Like this, it is equally impossible also for all other kinds of living beings, 
to exist without a cause. 


4. There is nothing that is produced here, nor anything which is destroyed 
also; it is only for the instruction and comprehension of pupils, that such 
words are coined and made use of. 


5. Rama asked: — Who then is it that forms these bodies, together with 
their minds, understandings and senses; and who is it that deludes all beings 
into the snares of passions and affections, and into the net of ignorance. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — There is nobody that forms these bodies at any 
time, nor is there anyone who deludes the living beings in a manner at all. 


7. There is alone the self-shining soul, residing in his conscious self; which 
evolves in various shapes, as the water glides on in the shapes of billows and 
waves. (Here water is expressed by the monosyllabic word ka, — aqua, as it is 
done else where by udac undan and udra — hydra, as also by ap, — ab, 
Persian). 


8. There is nothing as an external phenomenon, it is the intellect which 
shows itself as the phenomenal; it rises from the mind (as perception does 
from the heart), like a large tree growing out of its seed. 


9. It is in this faculty of the understanding, O thou support of Raghu’s race, 
that this universe is situated, just as the images are carved in a stone. 


10. There is but one spiritual soul, which spreads both internally as well as 
externally, throughout the whole extent of time and space; and know this 
world as the effluvia of the divine intellect scattered on all sides. 


11. Know this as the next world, by suppressing your desire for a future 
one; rest calmly in your celestial soul even here, nor let your desires range 
from here to there. 


12. All space and time, all the worlds and their motions with all our actions, 
being included under the province of the intellectual soul; the meanings of all 
these terms are never insignificant and nil. 


13. O Raghava! It is they only who are well acquainted with the meanings 
of words (of the vedas), and those keen observers who have ceased to look 
upon the visibles, that can comprehend the Supreme soul, and not others (who 
have no understanding). 


14. Those who are of light minds, and are buried in the depth of egoism; it 
is impossible for them ever to come to the sight of that light (which is seen 
only by the holy). 


15. The wise look upon the fourteen regions of this world, together with 
multitudes of their inhabitants, as the members of this embodied spirit. 


16. There can be no creation or dissolution without its cause; and the work 
must be conformable with the skill of its maker. 


17. If the work be accompanied with its cause, and the work alone be 
perceptible without its accompanying cause, it must be an unreality, owing to 
our imperception of its constituting cause. 


18. And whereas the product must resemble its producer, as the whiteness 
of the sea water produces the white waves and froths, so the productions of 
the most perfect God, must bear resemblance to his nature in their perfection. 
But the imperfect world and the mind not being so, they cannot be said to 
have proceeded from the all perfect One. 


19. (Therefore, imperfect nature is no creation of the father of perfection). 
Wherefore, all this is the pure spirit of God, and the whole is the great body of 
Brahma; in the same manner, as one clod of earth, is the cause of many a pot; 
and one bar of gold, becomes the cause of many a jewel. 


20. As the waking state appears as a dream in dreaming, (i.e., when one 
dreams), on account of the oblivion of the waking state; so the waking state 


seems as dreaming, even in the waking state of the wise. (So the pot appears 
as the clod in its unformed state, and the clod appears as the pot after it is 
formed. So the spirit appears as the world to the ignorant, while the world 
appears as soul to the wise). 


21. If it is viewed in the light of the mind or a creation of the mind, it 
proves to be as false as water in the mirage (because the phantasies of the 
mind present only false appearances to view). It proves at last to be a waking 
dream by the right understanding of it. 


22. By right knowledge all material objects, together with the bodies of 
wise men, dissolve like the bodies of clouds, in their proper season. 


23. As the clouds disappear in the air, after pouring their waters in the 
rains; so doth the world disappear from the sight of men, who have come to 
the light of truth and knowledge of the soul. 


24. Like the empty clouds of autumn and the water of the mirage, the 
phenomenal world loses its appearance, no sooner it is viewed by the light of 
right reason. 


25. As solid gold is melted down to fluidity by hot fire, so the phenomenals 
all melt away to an aerial nothing, when they are observed by the keen eye of 
philosophy. 


26. All solid substances in the three worlds, become rarefied air when they 
are put to the test of a rational analysis; just as the stalwart spectre of a 
demon, vanishes from the sight of the awakened child into nothing. 


27. Conceptions of endless images, rise and fall of themselves in the mind; 
so the image of the world being but a concept of the mind, there is no reality 
in it, nor is there anything which has any density or massiveness in it; (a mass 
being but the conception of an aggregate of minute particles and no more). 


28. The knowledge and ignorance of the world, consist only in its 
conception and nescience in the mind; when the knowledge of its existence 
disappears from the understanding, where is there the idea of its massiveness 
any more in the mind. (So as in the insensibility of our sound sleep and 
swooning, we have no consciousness of it). 


29. The world loses its bulk and solidity, in our knowledge of the state of 
our waking dream; when its ponderousness turns to rarity, as the gold melts to 
liquidity when it is put upon fire. 


30. The understanding as it is, (i.e., being left uncultivated), becomes dull 
and dense by degrees; as the liquid gold when left to itself, is solidified in a 


short time. 


31. Thus one who in his waking state considers himself to be dreaming, and 
sees the world in its rarified state; comes to extenuate himself with all his 
desires and appetites, as a ponderous cloud is sublimated in autumn. 


32. The wise man seeing all the visible beauties of nature which are set 
before his face, as extremely rare and of the appearance of dreams, takes no 
notice of nor relish in them. 


33. Where is this rest of the soul, and where this turmoil of the spirit for 
wealth; their abiding in the one and same man, is as the meeting of sleep and 
wakefulness together, and the union of error and truth in the same person, and 
at the same time (which is impossible). 


34. He who remains asleep to (or insensible of) the erroneous imaginations 
of his mind, acts freed from his false persuasion of the reality of the world. 


35. Who is it, O high minded Rama, that takes a pleasure in an unreality, or 
satisfies himself with drinking the false water of the mirage appearing before 
him. 


36. The saintly sage, who rests in his knowledge of truth; looks upon the 
world as an infinite vacuum, beset with luminaries, which shines forth like the 
light of lamps set behind the windows. 


37. The waking man who knows everything as void and blank, and as the 
vagary of his vagrant mind, ceases to long for the enjoyment of it. (For 
nobody craves for anything, which he knows to be nothing). 


38. There is nothing desirable in that, which is known to be nothing at all; 
for who runs after the gold, which he has seen in his dream at night? 


39. Everybody desists from desiring that, which he knows to be seen in his 
dream only; and he is released from the bondage, which binds the beholder to 
the object of this sight. (Lit., the knot of the viewer and view is broken). 


40. He is the most accomplished man, who is not addicted to pleasure, and 
is of a composed mind and with pride; and he is a man of understanding, who 
is dispassionate and remains quiet without any care or toil. (Perfect 
composure is the character of the Stoic and Platonic philosophers). 


41. Distaste to pleasure, produces the want of desire; just as the flame of 
fire being gone, there is an end of its light. (The fire gives heat but the flame 
produces the light). 


42. The light of knowledge, shows the sky as a cloudless and lighted 


sphere; but the darkness of error, gives the world an appearance of the hazy 
fairy land. 


43. The wise man neither sees himself, nor the heavens nor anything 
besides; but his ultimate view is at last fixed upon the glory of God (which 
shines all about him). 


44. The holy seer (being seated in the seventh stage of his Yoga), sees 
neither himself nor the sky nor the imaginary worlds about him; he does not 
see the phantasms of his fancy, but sits quite insensible of all. 


45. The earth and other existences, which are dwelt and gazed upon by the 
ignorant, are lost in the sight of the sage, who sees the whole as a void, and is 
insensible of himself. (The earth recedes, and heaven opens to his sight. — 
Pope). 


46. Then there comes on a calm composure and grace in the soul, 
resembling the brightness of the clear firmament; and the Yogi sits detached 
from all, as a nullity in himself. 


47. Unmindful of all, the Yogi sits silent in his state of self-seclusion and 
exclusion from all; he is set beyond the ocean of the world, and the bounds of 
all its duties and action. (The Yogi gets exempt from all social and religious 
obligation). 


48. That great ignorance (or delusion), which is the cause of the mind’s 
apprehension of the earth and sky, and the hills and seas and their contents, is 
utterly dissolved by true knowledge, though these things appear to exist 
before the ignorant eye. 


49. The sapient sage stands unveiled before his light of naked truth, with 
his tranquil mind freed from all sceptical doubts; and being nourished with the 
ambrosia of truth, he is as firm and fixed in himself, as the pithy and sturdy 
oak. 


CHAPTER LILI. 
Description of the Form and Attributes of Brahma. 


Argument: — Refutation of the Theories of Logicians, and Explanation of 
Brahma as Immanent in all nature. 


Rama said: — Tell me, O sage, whence comes our knowledge of the world (as 
a distinct entity from God); and then tell me, how this difference is removed 
and refuted. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The ignorant man takes to his mind all that he sees 
with his eyes, and not at all what he does not see. Thus he sees a tree in its 
outward branches and leaves, but knows not the root, which lies hid from his 
sight. 


3. The wise man sees a thing by the light of the Sdstra, and uses it 
accordingly; but the ignorant fool, takes and grasps anything as he sees it; 
without considering its hidden quality. 


4. Be attentive to the dictates of the Sdstras, and intent upon acting 
according to their purport; and by remaining as a silent sage, attend to my 
sermon, which will be an ornament to your ears. 


5. All this visible phenomenon is erroneous, it hath no real existence, and 
appears as the flash of light in the water and is known by the name of 
ignoramus. 


6. Attend for a moment and for my sake, to the purport of the instruction 
which I am now going to give you; and knowing this as certain truth, rely 
upon it (and you will gain your object hereby). 


7. Whence are all these and what are they, is a doubt (inquiry) which 
naturally rises of itself in the mind; and you will come to know by your own 
cogitation, that all this is nothing and is not in existence. 


8. Whatever appears before you in the form of this world, and all its fixed 
and moveable objects; as also all things of every shape and kind, is altogether 


evanescent and vanishes in time into nothing. 


9. The continual wasting and partition of the particles of things, bespeak 
their unavoidable extinction at last, as the water exuding by drops from a pot, 
make it entirely empty in a short time. 


10. Thus all things being perishable, and all of them being, but parts of 
Brahma, it is agreed (by Logicians), that Brahma is neither endless nor 
imperishable, nor even existent at this time, (since by loss of parts by 
infinitesimal, the whole is lost in toto at last). 


11. This conceit (of a theist) likening the intoxication of wine, cannot over 
power our theistical belief; because our knowledge of bodies, is as that of 
things in a dream, and not at all of their real substantiality. 


12. The phenomenals are of course all perishable, but not the other (the 
spirit), which is neither matter nor destructible, and this is conformable with 
the doctrines of the Sdstras, which mean no other. 


13. Whether what is destroyed come to revive again or not, is utterly 
unknowable to us; all that we can say by our inferences, is that the 
renovations are very like the former ones. 


14. That matter existed in the form of vacuum upon its dissolution, is not 
possible to believe (from the impossibility of plastic nature to be converted to 
a formless void). Again, if there was the vacuum as before, then there could 
not be a total dissolution (if this was left undestroyed). 


15. If the theory of the identity of creation and dissolution be maintained 
(owing to the existence of the world in the spirit of God); then the absence of 
causality and effect, supports our tenet of their being the one and the same 
thing. 


16. Vacuity being conceivable by us, we say everything to be annihilated, 
that is transformed to or hid in the womb of vacuum; if then there is anything 
else which is meant by dissolution, let us know what may it be otherwise. 


17. Whoever believes that, the things which are destroyed, comes to restore 
again, (as the Pratyabhijna vadis do); is either wrong to call them annihilated, 
or must own, that others are produced to supply their place. 


18. Where is there any causality or consequence in a tree, which is but a 
transformation of the seed; notwithstanding the difference of its parts, as the 
trunk and branches, and leaves and fruits. 


19. The seed is not inactive as a pot or picture, but exhibits its actions in the 
production of its flower and fruits in their proper seasons. (So doth the divine 


spirit show its evolution and involution, as the proper times of creation and 
dissolution of the world). 


20. That there is no difference in the substance of things (of different form 
and natures), is a truth maintained by every system of philosophy; and this 
truth is upheld in spirituality also; therefore, there is no dispute about it. 


21. And this substance being considered to be of an eternally inert form, 
and of a plastic nature; it is understood to be of the essence of vacuum, both 
by right inference and evidence of Sdstras. 


22. Why the essential principle is unknown to us, and why we have still 
some notion of it, and how we realize that idea, is what I am now going to 
relate to you step by step. 


23. All these visible spheres, being annihilated at the final dissolution of the 
world; and the great gods also being extinct, together with our minds and 
understandings, and all the activities of nature. 


24. The sky also being undefined and time dwindling into a divisible 
duration; the winds also disappearing and fire blinding into the chaotic 
confusion. 


25. Darkness also disappearing and water vanishing into nothing; and all 
things which are expressed by words quite growing nil and null in the end. 


26. There remains the pure entity of a conscious soul, which is altogether 
unbounded by time and space, and is something without its beginning or end; 
is decrease or waste, and entirely pure and perfect in its nature. 


27. This one is unspeakable and undiscernible, imperceptible and 
inconceivable and without any appellation or attribute whatever; This is an 
utter void itself and yet the principle and receptacle of all beings and the 
source of all entity and non-entity. 


28. It is not the air nor the wind, nor is it the understanding nor any of its 
faculties nor a void or nullity also; it is nothing and yet the source of 
everything, and what can it be but the transcendent vacuum, (vyom-beom 
Hebrew, and the bom-bom of sivaites when Siva is called vyom-Kesa). 


29. It is only a notion in the conception of wise and beside which no one 
can conceive or know anything of it, whatever definition or description of it is 
given by others, is only a repetition of the words of the vedas. 


30. It is neither the time or space, nor the mind nor soul nor any being or 
nothing that it may said to be; it is not in the midst or end of any space or side, 
nor is it that we know or know altogether. (The Lord is unspeakable yet 


faintly seen in these his meanest works. — Milton). 


31. This something, too translucent for common apprehension, and is 
conceivable only by the greatest understandings; and such as have retired 
from the world and attained to the highest stage of their Yoga. 


32. I have left out the popular doctrines, which are avoided by the Srutis; 
and the expressions of the latter are displayed herein, like the playful waves in 
the limpid ocean. 


33. It is said there, that all beings are situated in their common receptacle of 
the great Brahma; as the unprojected figures are exhibited in relief, upon a 
massive stony pillar. 


34. Thus all beings are situated and yet unsituated in Brahma, who is the 
soul of and not the same with all; and who is in and without all existence 
(These contraries are according to the texts of different Srutis, giving the 
discordant ideas of God in the spiritualistic and materialistic points of view). 


35. Whatever be the nature of the universal soul, it is devoid of all 
attributes; and in whatever manner it is viewed, it comes at last to mean the 
self-same unity. (The different paths leading to the one and same goal). 


36. It is all and the soul of all, and being devoid of attributes, it is full of all 
attributes; and in this manner it is viewed by all. 


37. So long, O intelligent Rama, as you do not feel the entire suspension of 
all your objects (in the torpid state of your samddhi); you cannot be said to 
have reached to the fullness of your knowledge, as it is indicated by your 
doubts till then. 


38. The enlightened man who has come to (know) the unapparent great 
glory of God, has the clear sightedness of his mind, and remains quiet with 
viewing the inbeing of his being. 


39. His fallacies of, I, thou, and he, and his error of the world and the three 
times, (namely, the present, past, and future); are lost in his sight of that great 
glory, as many a silver coin is merged in a lump of gold. 


40. But as a gold coin, produces (yields) various kinds of coins (different 
from itself); it is not in that manner that these worlds and their contents, are 
produced as things of a different kind from the nature of God. 


41. The detached soul looks always upon the different bodies, as contained 
within itself; and remains in relation to this dualism of the world, as the gold 
is related to the various kinds of jewels, which are produced from it. 


42. It is inexpressible by the words, implying space and time or any other 
thing; though it is the source and seat of them all; it comprehends everything, 
though it is nothing of itself. 


43. All things are situated in Brahma, as the waves are contained in the sea; 
and they are exhibited by him, like pictures drawn by the painter; he is the 
substratum and substance of all, as the clay of the pots which are made of it. 


44. All things are contained in it, as they are and are not there at the same 
time, and as neither distinct nor indistinct from the same; they are ever of the 
same nature, and equally pure and quiet as their origin. 


45. The three worlds are contained in it, as the uncarved images are 
concealed in a stone or wood; and as they are seen with gladness even there, 
by the future sculptor or carver. 


46. The images come to be seen, when they are carved and appear manifest 
on the stone pillar; otherwise, the worlds remain in that soul, as the 
unperturbed waves lie calmly in the bosom of the sea. 


47. The sight of the worlds appears to the Divine intellect, as divided and 
distinct when they are yet undivided and indistinct before their creation; they 
appear to be shining and moving there; when they are dark and motionless on 
the outside. 


48. It is the combination of atoms, that composes these worlds; and makes 
them shine so bright, when no particle has any light in it. (Dull matter is dark, 
and it is the light of God that makes it shine). 


49. The sky, air, time and all other objects, which are said to be produced 
from the formless God; are likewise formless of themselves; the Lord God is 
the soul of all, devoid of all qualities and change, undecaying and everlasting, 
and termed the most transcendent truth. 


CHAPTER LIT. 
Explanation of Nirvana — Anaesthesia. 


Argument: — Ascertainment of the source of cause of the visible world. 


Rama said: — How there is sensibility in sensible beings, and there is 
durability in time; how vacuum is a perfect void, and how inertness abides in 
dull material substances: — 


2. How does fluctuation reside in air, and what is the state of things 
infuturo, and those that absent at present; how doth motion reside in moving 
things, and how doth plasmic bodies receive their forms. 


3. Whence is the difference of different things, and the infinity of infinite 
natures; how there is visibility in the visibles, (i.e., how the visibles appear to 
view), and how does the creation of created things come to take place: — 


4. Tell me, O most eloquent Brahman, all these things one by one, and 
explain them from the first to last, in such manner, that they may be 
intelligible to the lowest understanding. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — That endless great vacuum, is known as the great 
and solid intellect itself; but this is not to be known any more, than as a 
tranquil and self-existent unity. 


6. The Gods Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva and others, are reduced to their 
origin at the last dissolution of the world; and there remains only that pure 
source whence they have sprung. 


7. There is however, no cause to be assigned in this prime cause of all, who 
is also the seed of matter and form, as well as of delusion, ignorance and 
error. (These being but counterparts of spirit and knowledge, are all mingled 
in Him). 

8. The original cause is quite transparent and tranquil, and having neither 
its beginning nor end, and the subtle ether itself is dense and solid, in 
comparison with the rarity of the other. 


9. It is not proper to call it a nullity, when it is possessed of an intellectual 
body; nor can it with propriety styled as an existent being, when it is 
altogether calm and quiet (and nothing imaginable). 


10. The form of that being is as inconceivable, as the idea of that little 
space of time which lies in midst of our thought of the length of a thousand 
miles, which the mind’s eye sees in a moment. (Its flash is quicker than that of 
a lightning and the flight of imagination). 


11. The Yogi who is insensible of the false and delusive desires and sights 
of objects, that intrude upon internal mind and external vision, sees the 
transient flash of that light in his meditation, as he wakes amidst the gloom of 
midnight. 


12. The man that sits with the quiet calmness of his mind, and without any 
of joy or grief; comes to feel the pulsation of that spirit in himself, as he 
perceives the fluctuation of his mind within him. 


13. That which is the spring of creation, as the sprout is the source of all 
vegetable productions; the very same is the form of the Lord; (That he is the 
vegetative seed or germ of the arbour of the world. Sansdra Briksa 
Brijdnkura). 


14. He is the cause of the world, which is seen to exist in Him; and which is 
a manifestation of himself, in all its varieties of fearful forms and shapes; (All 
which is the act of his illusion). 


15. These therefore, having no actual or real cause, are no real productions 
nor actual existences; because there is no formal world (in its natural form), 
nor a duality co-existent with the spiritual unity. 


16. That which has no cause, can have no possible existence; the eternal 
ideas of God cannot be otherwise than mere ideal shapes. 


17. The vacuum which has no beginning nor end, is yet no cause of the 
world; because Brahma is formless, but the vacuous sky, which presents a 
visible appearance, cannot be the form of the formless and invisible Brahma. 


18. Therefore, he is that, in which the form of the world appears to exist; 
hence the lord himself appears as that which is situated in the vacuity of his 
intellect. 


19. The world being of the nature of the intellectual Brahma, is of the same 
intellectual kind with him; though our error shows it otherwise; (i.e., in a 
material and visible form. All is one with the unborn and ever tranquil One, in 
whom all dualities blend in unity). 


20. This whole world springs from that whole intellect, and subsists in its 
entirety in that entire One; the completeness of that is displayed in the totality 
of this, and the completeness of creation, depends upon the perfection of its 
cause. (Nothing imperfect proceeds from the perfect one). 


21. Knowing that One as ever even and quiet, having neither its rise or fall; 
nor any form of likeness, but ever remaining in its translucent unity as the 
ample sky, and is the everlasting all; and combining the reality and unreality 
together in its unity, makes the nirvdna of sages. 


CHAPTER LIV. 
Establishment of the Undivided Individuality of 
God. 


Argument: — Ascertainment of the unity of God. 


Vasishtha continued: — The world is a clear vacuum, subsisting in the entity 
of the vacuous Brahma; it is as the visible sky in the empty sky, and means 
the manifestation of Brahma. 


2. The words, I, and thou, are expressive of the same Brahma, seated in his 
undivided individuality; so are all things seated as calmly and quietly in him, 
as if they are not seated there, though they are shining in and by the same 
light. 


3. The earth with its hills and protuberant bodies upon it, resembles the 
tumour on the body of Brahma; and the whole world, remains as dumb as a 
block in the person of Brahma. 


4. He views the visibles, as he is no viewer of them; and he is the maker of 
all, without making anything; because they naturally subsist with their several 
natures in the Supreme spirit. 


5. This knowledge of the subsistence of all nature in the essence of God, 
precludes our knowledge of the positive existence of everything besides; and 
our ideas of all entity and vacuity and of action and passion, vanish into 
nothing. (Since the One is all in all). 


6. The one solid essence of the everlasting One, is diffused through all 
everywhere, as the solidity of a stone stretches throughout its parts; and all 
varieties blending into unity, are ever alike to him. 


7. Life and death, truth and untruth, and all good and evil, are equally 
indifferent in that vacuous spirit, as the endless billows continually rising and 
falling in the waters of the deep. 


8. The self-same Brahma becomes divided, into the viewer and the view; 


(i.e., into the subjective and the objective); the one being the intellect or the 
supreme, and the other the living soul; (the former being the viewer of the 
latter). This division is known in the dreaming and waking states of the living 
or animal soul; when the same is both the subject as well the object in either 
state. (i.e., The sleeping soul dreams the living state as its object, and the 
living soul believes the other as object of its dream). 


9. In this manner, the form of the world, being exhibited as a vision in a 
dream, in the sphere of the divine intellect; is manifest therein as the 
counterpart or representation of Brahma himself, from the beginning. (This is 
the doctrine of the eternal ideas, being co-existent with the essence of the 
eternal One). 


10. Therefore, know this world and all things in it, to be exactly of that 
spiritual form, in which they are exhibited in the divine spirit; nor is there any 
variation in their spirituality (to materiality) owing to their appearance in 
various forms, as there is no change in the substance of the moon, owing to 
her several phases. 


11. All these worlds reside and rove amidst the quiet spirit of God, in the 
same manner, as the waters remain and roll in waves in the midst of the calm 
bosom of the ocean. 


12. Whatever is manifest, is manifested as the work, and that which is not 
apparent is the hidden cause of them; and there is no difference in them, in as 
much as they are both situated in that spirit, as their common centre; just as a 
traveller ever going forward, yet never moving from the centre of the earth. 
(The cause and effect both concentrate in the Lord, and there is no particle 
that goes out of that centre). 


13. Hence, the prime cause of creation is as nil, as the horn of a hare, 
(which is a nullity in nature); search for it as much as you can, and you will 
find nothing (save an ectype of the eternal One). 


14. Whatever appears anywhere without its cause, must be a fallacy of 
vision and mind; and who can account for the truth of an error which is untrue 
itself. (Falsehood is no truth). 


15. How and what effect can come to existence without its cause, and what 
is it but an error of the brain, for a childless man to say he sees his son. 


16. Whatever comes to appearance without its cause, is all owing to the 
nature of our imagination of the same; which shows the objects of our desire 
in all their various forms to our view, as our fancy paints the fairy lands in our 
minds. 


17. As a traveller passing from one country to another, finds his body 
(himself) to stand at the mid-point, (from his knowledge of the rotundity of 
the earth); so nothing departs from its nature, but turns about that centre like. 


18. The understanding also shows many false and biggest objects, in its 
airy and minute receptacle; as for instance the many objects of desire, and the 
notion of mountains, which it presents to us in our waking and dreaming 
states. 


19. Rama rejoined: — We know well that the future banian tree, resides 
within the minute receptacle of its seed; why then don’t you say, that the 
creation was hidden in the same manner in the unevolved spirit of God? 


20. Vasishtha replied: — The seed in its material form, contains the 
formless big tree in its undeveloped bosom; which develops afterwards to a 
gigantic size, by aid of the auxiliary causalities (of heat, rain, efc.). (But God 
is formless spirit and cannot contain the material world in it, nor has it the 
need of other helping causes to produce the world). 


21. The whole creation being dissolved in the end, tell me what remains 
there of it in the form of its seed; and what ancillary causes are there to be 
found, which cause the production of the world. (Nothing exists in nothing). 


22. The pure and transparent spirit of God, has nothing of any possible 
shape or figure in it; and if it is impossible for even an atom to find a place 
therein, what possibility is there for a formal seed to exist or subsist in it. 


23. So the reality of a causal (productive) seed, being altogether untrue; 
there is no possibility of the existence of a real (substantial) world, nor can 
you say how, whence, by whom, and when, it came into being. 


24. It is improper to say that the world consisted in a minute particle in the 
divine spirit, and quite absurd to maintain that it remained in an eternal atom 
(according to the atomic theory); for how is it possible that a body as big as a 
mountain could be contained in a minim as small as a mustard seed? It is 
therefore, a false theory of the ignorant. 


25. Had there been a real seed from eternity, it is possible for the world to 
be produced from it, by causes inherent in the same; but how could a real and 
formal seed, be contained in the formless spirit of God; and by what process 
could the material proceed from the immaterial? 


26. It is therefore, that prime and transcendent principle (of the divine 
spirit), which exhibits itself in the form of the world; and there is nothing 
which is ever produced from, nor reduced into it. 


27. The world is situated in its intellectual form, in the vacuity of the 
Intellect; it is the human heart which portrays it, in its material shape. The 
pure soul views it in its pure spiritual light, but the perverted heart perceives it 
in a gross and concrete state. 


28. It appears in the mind as empty air, and fluctuates there with the 
oscillation of the wind; there is nothing of its substantiality in the mind, nor 
even an idea of its creation (or being a created thing), as the word sarga is 
meant to express. 


29. As there is vacuity in the sky, and fluidity in the water of its own 
nature; so is there spirituality alone in the soul, which views the world in a 
spiritual light only. 


30. The world is a reflexion of Brahma, and as such, it is Brahma himself, 
and not a solid and extended thing; it is without its beginning or end and quiet 
in its nature, and never rises nor sets of itself. (e., It is inherent in the 
divinity, and is neither involved in nor evolved from it). 


31. As a wise man going from one country to another, finds his body to be 
ever situated in the midst of this globe; so the universe with all its remotest 
worlds, is situated in the vacuity of the divine spirit. 


32. As fluctuation is innate in the air, and fluidity is inherent in water, and 
vacuity is essential to vacuum; so is this world intrinsic in the divine soul, 
without anything concomitant with it. 


33. The vacuous phantom of the world, is in the vacuum of divine 
consciousness or intellect; and being thus situated in the Supreme soul, it has 
no rising nor setting as that of the sun. Therefore, knowing all these to be 
included in that vacuum, and there is nothing visible beside the same, cease 
from viewing the phantoms of imagination, and be as the very vacuity 
yourself. 


CHAPTER LV. 
The Spiritual sense of the World. 


Argument: — The ignorance of self, shows the world, but the knowledge 
of self, disperses it to nothing. 


Vasishtha continued: — It is the thought and its absence, that produce the 
gross and subtle ideas of the world; which in reality was never created in the 
beginning for want of a creator of it. (i.e., The identity of the world with 
Brahma himself, precludes the supposition of its creation). 


2. The essence of the intellect being of an incorporeal nature, cannot be the 
cause of a corporeal thing. The soul cannot produce an embodied being, as the 
seed brings forth the plants on earth. 


3. It is the nature of man to think of things, by his own nature, and hence 
the intelligent of mankind view the world in an intellectual light, while the 
ignorant take in a gross material sense. The intellect being capable of 
conceiving everything in itself, (whether the concrete or discrete). 


4. The ethereal soul relishes things according to its taste, and the intellect 
entertains the idea of whatever it thinks upon; the ignorant soul begets the 
idea of creation, as a giddy man sees many shapes in his intoxication. 


5. Whenever the shape of a thing, which is neither produced nor existent, 
presents itself to our sight; it is to be known as a picture of the ideal figure, 
which lies quietly in the divine mind. 


6. The vacuous Intellect dwelling in the vacuity of the intellect, as fluidity 
resides in water; shows itself in the form of the world, as the fluid water 
displays itself in the form of waves upon its surface. So the world is the self- 
same Brahma, as the wave is the very water. (But the world is intellectual 
display and not material as the wave). 


7. The worlds shining in the empty air, are as the clear visions of things in a 
dream, or like the false appearances appearing to a dim-sighted man in the 
open sky. 


8. The mirror of the intellect perceives the pageant of the world, in the 
same manner, as the mind sees the sights of things in dream. Hence what is 
termed the world, is but void and vacuity. (A something of nothing). 


9. The dormant Intellect (or the sleeping soul of God), is said to be 
awakened in its first acts of creation; and then follows the inaction of the 
intellect, which is the sleep and night of the soul. (And so it is with all beings, 
the time of their action being their waking, and that of rest their sleep). 


10. As a river continues to run in the same course, in which its current first 
began to flow; so the whole creation moves in the same unvaried course as at 
first, like the continuous current and rippling waves of rivers. 


11. As the waves of river are concomitant with the course of its waters, so 
the source of creation lying in the vacuous seed of the airy Intellect, gives rise 
to its incessant course, along with its ceaseless train of thoughts. 


12. The destruction of a man in his death, is no more than the felicity of his 
repose in sleep; so the resurrection of his soul (in a renovated body) in this 
world, is likewise a renewal of his felicity. (Hence there is neither pain nor 
fear, either in living or dying but both is bliss). 


13. If there is any fear for or pain in sin, it is equally so both in this life as 
well as in the next; therefore, the life and death of the righteous are equally as 
blissful (as they are painful to the unrighteous). 


14. Those who look on and hail their life and death, with equal 
indifference; are men that have an unbroken tranquility of their minds, and are 
known as the cold-hearted (or meek stoical and platonic). 


15. As the conscience becomes clear and bright, after the dross of its 
consciousness (of the subjective and objective), is cleansed and wiped from it; 
so shines the pure soul which they term the liberated and free, (mukta). 


16. It is upon the utter absence of our consciousness, that there ensues a 
total disappearance of our knowledge of the phenomenals also; and then our 
intellect rises without a vestige of the intelligibles in it, as also without its 
intelligence of the existence of the world. (This state of the mind constitutes 
likewise, its liberation or mukti). 


17. He that knows God, becomes unified with the divine nature, which is 
neither thinkable nor of the nature of the thinking principle or intellect, or any 
which is thought of by the intellect; and being so absorbed in meditation, 
remains quite indifferent to all worldly pursuits. 


18. The world is a reflexion of the mirror of the intellect, and as it is 


exhibited in the transparent vacuity of the divine spirit, it is in vain to talk of 
its bondage or liberty. 


19. It is the oscillation of the airy intellect, and an act of its imagination, 
which produces this imaginary world; it is entirely of the nature of the airy 
spirit whence it has its rise, and never of the form of the earth or anything else 
as it appears to be. 


20. There is no space or time, nor any action or substance here, except an 
only entity, which is neither a nothing nor any thing that we know of. 


21. It is only a spiritual substance, appearing as a thick mist to our sight; it 
is neither a void nor a substantiality either; but something purer and more 
pellucid, than the transparent vacuum about us. 


22. It is formless with its apparent form, and an unreality with its seeming 
reality; it is entirely a pure intellectual entity, and appearing as manifest to 
sight, as an aerial castle in a dream. 


23. It is termed the nirvdna-extinction of a man, when his view of this 
outstretched gross and impure world, becomes extinct in its pure spiritual 
form in the vacuity of his mind. The vast and extensive world presenting all 
its endless varieties to view, has no diversity in it in reality; but forms an 
infinite unity, like the vacuous space of the sky, and the fluidity of waters of 
the one universal ocean on the globe. 


CHAPTER LVI. 
Story of the Great Stone, and Vasishtha’s 
Meditation. 


Argument: — Here the story of the stone is given, in elucidation of the 
truth that Intellect is all in all. 


Vasishtha added: — It being proved before, that the Intellect is always and 
everywhere, and in every manner the all in all; it becomes evident, that it 
remains like the vacuous and translucent air in everything in the whole 
universe. 


2. Wherever there is the Intellect, there is also the creation (inseparable 
from it); the Intellect residing alike both in the void as well as in the plenum, 
all things are full of the Intellect, and there is nothing whatsoever in existence 
beside this universal Intellect. 


3. As all created things (whether the moving or unmoving), appear in their 
visionary forms in our dream; so it is the vacuous Intellect alone, which 
appears in the various forms of existence in our waking dreams also. 


4. Attend now, Rama, to my narration of the stone, which be as pleasant to 
taste, as a remedial of ignorance. In this I will relate what I have seen and 
actually done myself. 


5. Being anxious to know the knowable One, I was fully resolved in my 
mind, to leave this world and all its erroneous usages. 


6. I remained a long while in a state of calm and quiet meditation, after 
having forsaken all the eagerness and restlessness of my body and mind, for 
the sake of solitary peace and rest. 


7. 1 then pondered in my mind, of betaking myself to some seat or shrine of 
the Gods; and there sitting in quiet, continue to survey the changing and 
transitory states of worldly things. 


8. I find all things, said I, to be quite insipid to my taste, though they seem 


to be pleasant for a while; I never see anyone in any place, who is ever happy 
or content with his own state. 


9. All things breed but care and sorrow, with the acutest pangs of remorse 
and regret; and all these phenomenals produce but evil, from their appearance 
of good to the beholder of them. (Thus the goodly bright aspects of the sun 
and moon, are attended with sunstroke and lunacy to their observer). 


10. What is all this that comes to our view, who is their viewer and what 
am I that look upon these visibles; (i.e., what is this objective sight, and what 
is this subjective self). All this is the quiet and unborn spirit, which flashes 
forth in the vacuous sky with the light of its own intellect. 


11. With thoughts as these, I sought to retire from here to a proper place, 
where I might confine myself, in myself and which might be inaccessible to 
the gods and demi-gods, and to the Siddhas and other beings. 


12. Where I might remain unseen by any being, and sit quiet in my 
unalterable meditation; by placing my sole reliance in one even and 
transparent soul, and getting rid of all my cares and pains. 


13. Ah! where could I find such a spot, which may be entirely void of all 
creatures; and where I may not be distracted in my mind by interruptions of 
the objects of my five external organs of sense. 


14. I cannot choose the mountains for my seat, where the whistling breeze 
of the forests, the dashing noise of waterfalls, and the concourse of wild 
animals, serve to disquiet the mind, without the capability of their being 
quieted by human power. 


15. The hills are crowded with hosts of elephants, and the dales are filled 
with hordes of savage peoples, the countries are full of heinous men, more 
baneful than the poison of venomous serpents. 


16. The seas are full of men (on board the vessels), and are filled with 
horrible beasts in their depth; and the cities are disturbed with the din of 
business, and the broil of the citizens. 


17. The foot of the mountains and the shores and coasts of seas and rivers, 
are as thickly peopled as the realms of the rulers of men; and even the 
summits of mountains and the caverns of infernal regions, are not devoid of 
animal beings. 


18. The mountains are singing in the whistling of the breezes, and the trees 
are dancing with the motion of their leafy palms; and the blooming flowers 
are smiling gently, in the caves of mountains and forest grounds and low 


lands. 


19. I cannot resort to the banks of rivers, where the mute finny tribe dwell 
like the silent munis in their grottos, and gently shake the water lilies by their 
giddy flirtation; because this place is disturbed also by the loud noise of the 
sounding whirlpools, and the hoarse uproar or roaring whirlwind. 


20. I can find no rest in the barren deserts, where the howling winds are 
raising clouds of all engulfing dust, nor can I resort to the mountain cataracts, 
where the air resounds with the stunning noise of incessant waterfalls. 


21. Then I thought of setting myself in some sequestered corner, of the 
remote region of the sky; where I might remain absorbed in my holy 
meditation without any disturbance. 


22. In this corner, I thought of making a cell in my imagination, and 
keeping myself quite pent up in its close cavity, by an entire relinquishment of 
all my worldly desires. 


23. With these reflexions, I mounted high in the blue vault of the sky; and 
found the ample space in its womb to know no bounds (and was identic with 
Infinity itself). 


24. Here I saw the Siddhas, (perfected spirits), roving in one place, and the 
roaring clouds rolling in another; in one side I beheld the Vidyddhara or 
accomplished spirits, and the excelled Yakshas on another. (Heaven is the 
abode of perfected souls of all people at large). 


25. In one spot I saw an aerial city, and the region of the jarring winds in 
another; I beheld the raining clouds on one side, and raging yoginis or furies 
in another. 


26. There was the city of the Daityas or demons, hanging in the air on one 
side; and the place of the Ghandharvas appearing in another. The planetary 
sphere was rolling about in one way, and the starry frame revolving at a 
distance. 


27. Somewhere the sky was brushed over by flights of birds, and great 
gales were raging in another part; somewhere there appeared portents in the 
sky, and elsewhere there were canopies of clouds formed in the heavens. 


28. One part of heaven was studded with cities, peopled by strange kinds of 
beings; the car of the sun was gliding on one side, and the wheel of the lunar 
disk was sliding in another. 


29. One region of the sky was burning under the torrid sun, and another 
part was cooled by the cooling moon-beams; one part was intolerable to little 


animals and another was inaccessible owing to its intense heat. 


30. One place was full of dancing demons, and another with flocks of flying 
garuda eagles; one region was deluged by diluvian rains, and another was 
infested by tempestuous winds. 


31. Leaving these plenary parts behind, I passed onward far and further; 
when I reached to a region entirely desolate, and devoid of everything, (i.e., 
the increate vacuity). 


32. Here the air was mild, and no being was to be seen even in a dream; 
there was no omen of good, nor anything portentous of evils, nor any sight or 
sign of world. 


33. I figured to myself in this place, a solitary cell with some space in it; 
and it was without any passage for egress, and was as goodly as the unblown 
bed of a lotus. 


34. It was not perforated by worms, but was as handsome as the bright disk 
of the full-moon; and as lovely as the comely features of the lily and lotus, 
jasmine and mandara flowers. 


35. This abode of my imagination, was inaccessible to all other beings but 
to myself; and I sat there alone with only my thoughts and creations of my 
imagination by myself. 


36. I remained quite silent and calm in my mind, in my posture of 
Padmasana (or Yoga meditation); and then rose from my seat at the expiration 
of a hundred years, after my acquirement of spiritual knowledge. 


37. I sat in unwavering meditation, and was absorbed in a fit of hypnotism; 
I remained as quiet as the calm stillness of the air, and as immovable as a 
statue carved in relief upon the face of the sky. 


38. At last I found out in my mind, what it had been long searching after in 
earnest; and at last, the breath of my expectation returned into my nostrils. 
(Parting breath of longing returns with the longed-for object). 


39. The seed of knowledge which I had sown in the field of my mind, came 
to sprout forth of itself from the midst of it, after the lapse of a whole century. 


40. My life or living soul, is now awakened to its intuitive knowledge (of 
truth); as a tree left withered by the dewy season, becomes revivified by the 
moisture of the renovating spring. 


41. The hundred years which I passed in my meditation here, glided away 
as quickly as a single moment before me; because a long period of time 


appears a very short space, to one who is intensively intent upon a single 
object. (Whereas the succession of thoughts be an unchanging duration of the 
same moment to him who is fixed in his mind). 


42. Now my outward senses had their expansion, from their contracted 
state (in my meditative mind); just as the withered arbors expand themselves 
into flowers and foliage, by the enlivening influence of the vernal season. 


43. Then the vital airs filled the organs of my body, and restored my 
consciousness of their sensations; soon after I was seized upon by the demon 
of my egoism, accompanied by its consort of desire; and these began to move 
to and fro, just as the strong winds shake the sturdy oaks. 


CHAPTER LVII. 
On the Knowledge of the Known and Unknown. 


Argument: — Difference of Egoism in wise and in common people, and 
Disappearance of visibles. 


Rama rejoined: — Tell me, O most sapient sage, how it is possible for the 
demon of ego to take hold of you, that are extinct in the deity, and dissipate 
my doubts there. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — It is impossible, O Rama, for any being whether 
knowing or unknown to live here without the sense of his egoism; as it is not 
possible for the contained to subsist without its container. 


3. But there is a difference of this which you must know, that the demoniac 
egoism of the quiet minded man, is capable of control by means of his 
knowledge of and attention to the Srutis. 


4. It is the infantine ignorance which raises up this idol of egoism, though it 
is found to exist nowhere; just as little children make dolls and images of gods 
and men, that have no existence at all. 


5. This ignorance also, (which is the cause of egoism), is nothing positive 
of itself; since it is dispelled by knowledge and reason, as darkness is driven 
away by the light of a lamp. (Ignorance and darkness are but negative terms). 


6. Ignorance is a demon that dances about in the dark, and a fiend that flies 
afar before the light of reason. (Hence the disappearance of ignorance causes 
our egoism to disappear also). 


7. Granting the existence of ignorance, in absence of the advance of 
knowledge and reason; yet it is at best but a fiend of delusion, and is as 
shapeless as the darkest night, (when nothing is to be seen). 


8. Granting the existence of creation, we have no trace of ignorance 
anywhere in it, (since creation is the production of omniscience, there is no 
nescience in any part of) the existence of two moons in the sky. 


9. Creation having no other cause (but God himself), we know not how 
could ignorance find a place in it; just so it is impossible for a tree to grow in 
the air (which God hath made void, barren, and bare). (God hath planted the 
tree of knowledge in the garden of Eden, but no tree of ignorance did He set 
anywhere). 


10. When creation began and was begotten in the beginning, in its pure and 
subtle form in the womb of absolute vacuum (or the mind of God); how is it 
possible for the material bodies of earth and water to proceed (from the 
immaterial spirit) without a material cause? 


11. The Lord is beyond (the conception of) the mind, and (the perception 
of) the six senses, and is yet the source of the mind and senses; but how could 
that formless and incorporeal being, be the cause of material and corporeal 
things? 


12. The germ is the effect (or product), germinating from its causal source, 
— the seed; but how and where can you expect to see the sprout springing 
without the productive seed? 


13. No effect can ever result, without its formal cause or main-spring; say 
who has ever seen or found a tree to spring from and grow in empty air. (Nihil 
ex nihilo fit, et nihil in nihilum reverte posse). 


14. It is imagination alone that paints these prospects in the mind, just as 
the fume of fancy shows you the sight of trees in the empty air; so it is the 
phrensy of the mind, that exhibits these phenomena before your eyes, but 
which in reality have no essentiality in them. 


15. So, the universe as it appeared at its first creation, in the vacuity of the 
divine intellect, was all a congeries of worlds swimming in empty air (in their 
hollow ideal shapes). 


16. (But the universe is not altogether a void and nihility). It is the same as 
it shines itself in the spacious intellect of the supreme soul (or spirit); it is the 
divine nature itself which is termed as creation, and which is an intellectual 
system having proceeded from the intellect, and the self-same divinity. 


17. The vision of the world which is presented in our dream, and which is 
of daily occurrence to us, furnishes us with the best instance of this; when we 
are conscious of the sights of cities, and of the appearance of hills, all before 
our mental eyes in the dreaming state. (So this world is but a dream). 


18. It is the nature of the Intellect as that of a dream, to see the vision of 
creation, as we view the appearance of the uncreated creation before our eyes, 
in the same manner as it appeared at first in the vast void (of divine mind). 


19. There is but one unintelligible intelligence, a purely unborn and 
imperishable being, that appears now before us in the shape of this creation, 
as it existed with its everlasting ideas of infinite worlds, before this creation 
began. 


20. There is no creation here, nor these orbs of earth and others; it is all 
calm and quiet with but One Brahma seated in his immensity. 


21. This Brahma is omnipotent and as He manifests himself in any manner, 
He instantly becomes as such without forsaking his purely transparent form. 


22. As our intellect shows itself, in the form of visionary cities in our 
dream; so doth the divine intellect exhibit itself, in the forms of all these 
worlds, at the commencement of their creation. 


23. It is in the transparent and transcendent vacuum of the Intellect, that the 
vacuous intellect is situated; and the creation is the display of its own nature, 
by an act of its thought in itself. (There is a large note explanatory of this 
passage). 


24. The whole creation consists in the clear vacuity of the intellect, and is 
of the nature of the spirit situated in the spirit of God. (The world exists in its 
spiritual form in the ample space of the divine spirit). 


25. The whole creation being but the diffusion of the self-same spiritual 
essence of God, there is no possibility of the existence of a material world or 
ignorance or egoism, in the creation and pervasive-fulness of the Supreme 
spirit. 

26. Everything have I told you all about the desinence of your egoism, and 
one knowing the unreality of his egoisticism, gets rid of his false belief, as a 
boy is freed from his fear of a ghost. 


27. In this manner, no sooner was I fully convinced of the futility of 
egoism, than I lost the sense of my personality; and though I retained fully the 
consciousness of myself, yet I got freed from my selfishness, as a light 
autumnal cloud by disloading its watery burden. 


28. As our knowledge of the inefficacy of a flaming fire in painting, 
removes the fear of our being burnt by it; so our connection of our fallacies of 
egoism and creation, serves to efface the impressions of the subjective and 
objective from our minds. 


29. Thus, when I was delivered from my egoism, and set to the tranquility 
of my passions; I then found myself seated in an unatmospheric firmament, 
(which was free from cloud and rain); and in an uncreated creation, (i.e., in 


the everlasting vacuity or eternal sunshine of heaven). 


30. I am none of egoism, nor is it anything to me; having got rid of it, I 
have become one with clear intellectual vacuum. 


31. In this respect, all intelligent men are of the same opinion with myself; 
as it is well known to them that our notion of egoism is as false, as the fallacy 
of fire represented in a painting. 


32. Being certain of the unreality of yourself and of others, and of the 
nihility of everything beside; conduct yourself in all your dealings with 
indifference, and remain as mute as a stone. 


33. Let your mind shine with the clearness of the vault of heaven, and be as 
impregnable to the excess of all thoughts and feelings as solid stone. Know 
that there is but One Intellectual essence from beginning to end, and that there 
nothing to be seen except the One-deity, who composes the whole plenum. 


CHAPTER LVIII. 
Proving the Creation as Divine Attribute. 


Argument: — The Eternity and infinity of creation, elucidated in the story 
of the block of stone. 


Rama said: — O venerable Sir, what an extensive, noble, grand, and clear 
prospect have you exposed to my sight; (by showing the infinite of time and 
place to be composed of the essence of the supreme deity). 


2. I find also by my percipience, that the entity of the One and sole Ens, 
fills the whole space at all times and places; and that it is the essence which 
shows itself alike in every manner and form always and everywhere forever 
and ever-more. 


3. I have yet some scruples Sir, rankling in my breast, and hope you will 
please to remove them, by explaining unto me the meaning of your story of 
the stone (you mentioned before). 


4. Vasishtha replied: — Rama, I will relate to you the story of the stone, in 
order to stablish that this whole or the plenum, is existent in all times and in 
all places (with the Divine essence). 


5. I will elucidate to you by means of this story, how thousands of worlds 
are contained within the compact and solid body of a stone (as the thoughts of 
all things, are comprised in the density of the Divine Intellect). 


6. I will also show to you in this story, how the grand material world 
(which is as compact as a stone, is contained in its immaterial or airy ideal 
state, in the vast vacuity of the divine mind). 


7. You will also find from this story, that there is in the midst of all plants 
and their seeds, and in the hearts of all living animals, as also in the bosom of 
the elementary bodies of water and air as of earth and fire, sufficient space 
containing thousands of productions of their own kinds. 


8. Rama rejoined: — If you say, O sage, that all vegetables and living 


beings are full with the productions of their respective kinds, then why is it 
that we do not perceive the numerous productions, which abound in the empty 
air? 


9. Vasishtha replied: — I have already told you Rama, much about this first 
and essential truth; that the whole of this creation which appears to our sight, 
is empty air and subsisting in the inane vacuum only. 


10. In the first place, there is nothing that was ever produced in the 
beginning, nor is there anything which is in existence at present; all this that 
appears as visible to us is no other than Brahma Himself, and subsisting in his 
Brahmic or plenary immensity or fullness. (So the sruti: — The Lord is full in 
the fulness of his creation, efc.). 


11. There is no room for an atom of earth, to find its place in the fulness of 
the divine Intellect, which is filled with its ideal worlds; nor do the material 
worlds exist in Brahma, who is of the form of pure vacuum. 


12. There is no room even for a spark of fire, to have its place in the 
intellectual creation of God which admits of no gap or pore in it; nor do these 
worlds exist in any part of Brahma, who is entirely a pure vacuity. 


13. There is no possibility also for a breath of air, to subsist in the imporous 
fulness of the intellectual creation of God; nor doth any of these (earthly, 
luminous or aerial) worlds, exist in the purely vacuous Intellect of Brahma. 


14. There is not even a jot of the visible vacuity, that finds a place in the 
intensity of the ideal creation in the divine mind; nor is it possible for any of 
these visible worlds, to subsist in the compact vacuum of the deity. 


15. The five great elementary bodies, have no room in the consolidated 
creation of God, which subsists in its vacuous form in the vacuity of the 
Divine Intellect. 


16. There is nothing created anywhere, but it is the vacuum and in the 
vacuity of the great spirit of God. 


17. There is no atom of the great spirit of God, which is not full of 
creations or created things; nor is there any creation or created thing, but is the 
void and in the vacancy of the Divine spirit. 


18. There is no particle of Brahma, distributed in the creation, because the 
Lord is spirit, and always full in Himself. (The Divine soul, admits no 
materiality nor divisibility in its nature). 


19. The creation is the supreme Brahma, and the Lord is the creation itself; 
there is not the slightest tint of dualism in them, as there is no duality of fire 


and its heat. 


20. It is improper to say that this is creation and the other is Brahma, and to 
think them as different from one another; just as it is wrong to consider a ddru 
and ddrya, (a tree and tearable), as two things, from the difference in the 
sounds of the words (of the same meaning). (So Brahma, immensity, and 
srishti, — creation, are synonymous terms differing in sound). 


21. There exists no difference of them, when their duality disappears into 
unity; and when we cannot have any idea of their difference, unless we 
support the gross dualistic theory (which is absurd). 


22. We know all this as one clear and transparent space, which is without 
its beginning and end, and quite indestructible and tranquil in its nature; and 
knowing this, all wise men remain as mute as a piece of solid stone, even 
when they are employed in business. 


23. Look at this whole creation as whether extinct in the Deity, and view 
the visible world as a vast void only; look upon your egoism and tuism as 
mere fallacies, and behold the Gods and demi-gods and the hills and 
everything else as the visionary appearances in our dream, which spread their 
nil of delusion over the minds of men, (even in their waking state). 


CHAPTER LIX. 
Description of the Network of the World. 


Argument: — Vasishtha’s hearing a faint sound after his hybernation and 
his coming to the sight of endless worlds afterwards. 


Rama rejoined: — Relate to me, O sage, of your acts of a whole century, after 
you had risen from your trance, in the cell of your aerial abode. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — After I had awakened from my trance, I heard a 
soft and sweet sound, which was slow but distinctly audible, and was clearly 
intelligible both in sound and sense. 


3. It was as soft and sweet, as if it proceeded from female voice; and 
musical to the ear; and as it was neither loud nor harsh owing to its 
effeminacy, I kept to watch whence the words were heard. 


4. It was as sweet as the humming of the bees, and as pleasing as the tune 
of wired instruments; it was neither the chime of crying nor the rumble of 
reading, but as the buzzing of black bees, known to men as the visa-koshi 
strain in vocal music. 


5. Hearing this strain for a long time, and seeking in vain whence it came, I 
thought within myself: — “It is a wonder that I hear the sound, without 
knowing its author, and from which of the ten sides of heaven it proceeds.” 


6. This part of the heavens, said I, is the path of the Siddhas, (or spirits of 
sanctified saints), and on the other side I see an endless vacuity; I passed over 
millions of miles that way, and then I sat there awhile and pondered in my 
mind. 


7. How could such feminine voice, proceed from such a remote and solitary 
quarter; where I see no vocalist with all my diligent search. 


8. I see the infinite space of the clear and inane sky lying before me, where 
I find no visible being appearing to my sight notwithstanding all my diligent 
search. 


9. As I was thinking in this manner, and looking repeatedly on all sides, 
without seeing the maker of the sonant sound; I thought on a plan in the 
following manner. 


10. That I must transform myself to air, and be one with the inane vacuum; 
and then make some sound in the empty air, which is the receptacle of sound. 
(The air is said to be the vehicle and medium of sound, which is called the 
property of air). 


11. I thought on leaving my body in its posture of meditation, as I was 
sitting before; and with the vacuous body of my intellect, mix with the inane 
vacuum, as a drop of water mixes with water. 


12. Thinking so, I was about to forsake my material frame, by sitting in my 
posture of Padmdsana, and betaking myself to my samddhi or intense 
meditation, and shut my eyes closely against all external sights. 


13. Having then given up my sensations of all external objects of sense, I 
became as void as my intellectual vacuum, preserving only the feeling of my 
consciousness in myself. 


14. By degrees I lost my consciousness also, I became a thinking principle 
only; and then I remained in my intellectual sphere as a mirror of the world, 
(i.e., to reflect the reflexions of all worldly things in their abstracted light). 


15. Then with that vacuous nature of mine, I became one with the universal 
vacuum; and melted away as a drop of water with the common water, and 
mixed as an odour in the universal receptacle of empty air. 


16. Being assimilated to the great vacuum, which is omnipresent and 
pervades over the infinite space; I became like the endless void, the reservoir 
and support of all, although I was formless and supportless myself. 


17. In my formless (of endless space), I began to look into myriads of 
worlds and mundane eggs, that lay countless in my infinite and unconscious 
bosom. 


18. These worlds were apart from, and unseen by and unknown to one 
another; and appeared with all their motions and manners, as mere spaces to 
each other. (i.e., they are at such great distance that they could not be seen all 
at once). 


19. As visions in a dream appearing thickly to a dreaming man, and as 
nothing to the sleeping person; so the empty space abounds with worlds to 
their observers, and as quite vacant to the unobservant spiritualist. 


20. Here many things are born, to grow and decay and die away at last; and 


what is present is reckoned with the past, and what was in the womb of 
futurity, comes to existence in numbers. 


21. Many magic scenes and many aerial castles and buildings, together 
with many a kingdom and palace, are built in this empty air, by the 
imaginations of men. 


22. Here there were to be seen many edifices with several apartments 
counting from unit to the digit, (and these are the various systems of 
philosophy, with one and many more number, of their respective categories). 


23. There were some structures, constructed with ten or sixteen apartments; 
and others which had dozens and three dozens of doors, attached to them. 
(The predicaments of the Nydya and Jaina systems of philosophy. But 
Buddhism or Jain Atheism is called Nirdvarana, having no category but 
vacuity). 


24. The whole ethereal space is full of the five primary elements, which 
compose elementary bodies of single or double and triple natures. 


25. Some of these bodies are composed of quadruple, quintuple and 
hextuple elements, and others of seven different elementary principles called 
seven-fold great elements, — Sapta-mahd-bhutas. (They are the five subtle 
elements of earth, water, fire, air and vacuum, and the two principles of time 
and space, all which subsist in vacuity). 


26. So there are many super-natural natures, which are beyond the power of 
your conception, (as the Gods, demons and other ethereal beings), and so 
there are spaces of everlasting darkness, without the light of the sun and 
moon. 


27. Some parts of the void were devoid of creation, and others were 
occupied by Brahma the creator, — their master, some parts were under the 
dominion of the patriarchs or lords of creatures, and under influence of 
various customs. 


28. Some parts were under the control of the vedas, and others were 
ungoverned by regulations of Sdstras; some parts were full of insects and 
worms, and others were peopled by gods and other living beings. 


29. In some parts the burning fires of daily oblations were seen to rise, and 
at others the people were observant of the traditional usages of their respective 
tribes only, (without knowing their reasons). 


30. Some parts were filled with water, and others were the regions of 
storms; some bodies were fixed in the remote sky, and others were roving and 


revolving in it continually. 


31. The growing trees were blossoming in some parts, and others were 
fructifying and ripening at others. There were the grazing animals moving 
pronely in some place, and others were teeming with living beings. 


32. The Lord alone is the whole creation, and He only is the totality of 
mankind; He is the whole multitude of demons, and He too is the whole shoal 
of worms everywhere. 


33. He is not afar from anything, but is present in every atom that is 
contained in his bosom. All things are growing and grown up in the cell of 
vacuity, like the coatings of the plantain tree. 


34. Many things are growing unseen and unknown to each other, and never 
thought of together, such are the dreams of soldiers which are unseen by 
others. 


35. There are endless varieties of creations, in the unbounded womb of 
vacuum, all of different natures and manners; and there are no two things of 
the same character and feature. 


36. All men are of different Sdstras, faiths and persuasions from one 
another, and these are of endless varieties; they are as different in their habits 
and customs, as they are separated from each other in their habitations and 
localities. 


37. So there are worlds above worlds, and the spheres of the spirits over 
one another; so there are a great many big elemental bodies, like the hills and 
mountains that come to our sight. 


38. It will be impossible for understandings like yours, to comprehend the 
incoherent (unusual) things, which are spoken by men like ourselves; (i.e., 
inspired sages, who talk of wonders beyond the common comprehension). 


39. We must derive the atoms of spiritual light, which proceeds from the 
sphere of vacuum; as we feel the particles of mental light which issues from 
the orb of sun of our intellect. (Here the author speaks of the lights of the sun, 
intellect and spirit). 


40. Some are born to remain just as they are, and become of no use to any 
one at all; and others become somewhat like themselves as the leaves of forest 
trees. 


41. Some are equal to others, and many that are unlike to them; for 
sometime as alike to one another, and at others they differ in their shapes and 
nature. (It is difficult to make out the meaning of these passages, not given in 


the gloss). 


42. Hence there are various results of the great tree of spirituality, among 
which some are of the same kinds and others, of different sorts. 


43. Some of these are of short duration, and others endure for longer 
periods; there are some of temporary existence, and others endure forever. 


44. Some have no determinate time (for want of the sun and moon), to 
regulate its course; and others are spontaneous in their growth and 
continuance. 


45. The different regions of the sky, which lie in the concavity of boundless 
vacuum, are in existence from unknown periods of time, and in a state beyond 
the reach of our knowledge. 


46. These regions of the sky, this sun and these seas and mountains, which 
are seen to rise by hundreds to our sights, are the wonderful display of our 
Intellect in the sky, like the chain of dreams in our sleep. 


47. It is from our erroneous notions, and the false idea of a creative cause, 
that we take the unreal earth and all other appearances as they are really 
existent ones. 


48. Like the appearance of water in the mirage, and the sight of two moons 
in the sky; do these unreal phenomena present themselves to our view, 
although they are altogether false. 


49. It is the imaginative power of the Intellect, which create these images as 
clouds in the empty air; they are raised high by the wind of our desire, and roll 
about with our exertions and pursuits. 


50. We see the gods, demi-gods and men, flying about like flies and gnats 
about a fig tree; and its luscious fruits are seen to hang about it, and shake 
with the winds of heaven. 


51. It is only from the naturally creative imagination of the Intellect, 
likening the sportive disposition of boys, that the toys of fairy shapes are 
shown in the empty air. 


52. The false impressions of, I, thou, he and this, are as firmly affixed in the 
mind, as the clay dolls of boys are hardened in the sunlight and heat. 


53. It is the playful and ever active destiny, that works all these changes in 
nature; as the genial vernal season, fructifies the forest with its moisture. 


54. Those that are called the great causes of creation, are no causes of it; 
nor are those that are said to be created, created all, but all is a perfect void. 


They have sprung of themselves in the vacuity of the Intellect. 


55. They all exist in their intellectual form, though they appear to be 
manifest as otherwise; the perceptibles are all imperceptible, and the existent 
is altogether inexistent. 


56. The fourteen worlds, and the eleven kinds of created beings; are all the 
same in the inner intellect, as they appear to the outward sight. 


57. The heaven and earth, and the infernal regions, and the whole host of 
our friends and foes, are all nullities in their true sense though they seem to be 
very busy in appearance. 


58. All things are as inelastic fluid, as the fluidity of the sea waters; they are 
as fragile as the waves of the sea in their inside, though they appear as solid 
substances on the outside. 


59. They are the reflexions of the supreme soul, as the day light is that of 
the sun; they all proceed from and melt away into the vacuous air as the gusts 
of winds. 


60. The egoistic understanding, is the tree bearing the foliage of our 
thoughts. 


61. The rituals and their rewards, which are prescribed in the vedas and 
puranas, are as the fanciful dreams occurring in light sleep; but they are buried 
into oblivion by them and are led up in the sound sleep like the dead. 


62. The Intellect like a Gandharva architect, is in the act of building many 
fairy cities in the forest of intellectuality, and lighted with the light of its 
reason, blazing as the bright sun-beams. 


63. In this manner, O Rama, I beheld in my meditative revelry, many 
worlds to be created and scattered without any cause, as a blind man sees 
many false sights in the open air. 


CHAPTER LX. 
The Network of Worlds (Continued). 


Argument: — Vasishtha sees the siren songstresses in his Reveries and 
then turns to his meditation of the world. 


Vasishtha continued: — Then I went on forward to find out the spot of the 
ethereal sounds, and continued journeying onward in the vacuous region of 
my excogitation, without any interruption from any side. 


2. I heard far beyond me the sound that came to my ears, resembling the 
jingling thrill of the Indian lute; it became more distinct as I appeared nearer 
to it, till I heard the metrical cadence of Arya measure in it. 


3. As I glanced in my meditation at the site of the sound, I beheld a damsel 
on one side as fair as liquid gold, and brightening that part of the sky (by the 
blaze of her beauteous body). 


4. She had necklaces pendant on her loose garments, and her eyelashes 
were tinged with lac-dye, and with loosened traces and fluttering locks of her 
hair, she appeared as the goddess of prosperity (sitting in the air). 


5. Her limbs were as calm and handsome, as they were made of pure gold; 
and sitting on the way side with the near-blown bloom of her youth, she was 
as odorous as the goddess Flora, and handsome in every part of her body. 


6. Her face was like the full moon, and was smiling as a cluster of flowers; 
her countenance was flushed with her youth, and her eyelids betokened her 
good fortune. 


7. She was seated under the vault of heaven, with the brightness of her 
beauty blooming as the beams of the full moon; and decorated with ornaments 
of pearls, she walked gracefully towards me. 


8. She recited with her sweet voice, the verses in the Arya metre by my 
side; and smiled as she recited them in a high tone of her voice, saying: — 


9. I salute thee, O sage, she said, whose mind is freed from the evil 


propensities of those, that are deluded to fall into the currents of this world; 
and to whom you are a support, as a tree standing on its border. 


10. Hearing this I looked upon that sonant charming face, and seeing the 
maiden with whom I had nothing to do, I disregarded her and went on 
forward. 


11. I was then struck with wonder, on viewing the magic display of the 
mundane system, and was inclined to wander through the air, by slighting the 
company of the damsel. 


12. With this intention in my mind, I left the ethereal dame in the air; and 
assumed an aerial form in order to traverse the ethereal regions, and scan the 
phantasmagoria of the world. 


13. As I went on viewing the wondrous worlds, scattered about in the 
empty sky; I found them no better than empty dreams, or the fictions in works 
of imagination. 


14. I neither saw nor ever heard of anything at any place, about those 
creations and creatures, that existed in those former kalpas and great kalpa 
ages of the world, (nor the world destroying deluges of yore). 


15. I did not see the furious pushkara and dvarta clouds (of the great 
deluge), nor the portentous and raging whirlwinds of old; I heard no thunder 
claps, that split the mighty mountains, and broke the worlds asunder. 


16. The conflagration of diluvian fire, which cracked the edifices of Cuvera, 
and the burning rays of a dozen of solar orbs were to be seen no more. 


17. The lofty abodes of the gods, which were hurled headlong on the 
ground, and the crackling noise of the falling mountains, were no more to be 
seen or heard. 


18. The flame of the diluvian fire, which raged with tremendous roar all 
about, and boiled and burnt away the waters of the ethereal oceans, were now 
no more. 


19. There was no more that hideous rushing of waters, which over flooded 
the abodes of the gods, demi-gods and men; nor that swelling of the seven 
oceans, which filled the whole world, up to the face of the solar orb. 


20. The peoples all lay dead and insensible of the universal deluge, like 
men laid up in dead sleep, and sung the battle affray in their sleep. 


21. I beheld thousands of Brahmas, Rudras and Vishnus, disappearing in 
the different Kalpa or diluvian ages of the world. 


22. I then dived in my excogitation, into those dark and dreary depths of 
time, when there were no Kalpa nor Yuga ages, nor years and days and nights, 
nor the sun and moon, nor the creation and destruction of the world. 


23. All these I beheld in my intellect, which is all in all, to which all things 
belong, and which is in every place; it is the intellect which engrosses 
everything in itself, and shows itself in all forms. 


24. Whatever, O Rama, you say to be anything, know that thing to be the 
intellect only; and this thing being rarer than the subtle air, know it next to 
nothing. 


25. Therefore, it is this empty air, which exhibits everything in it under the 
name of the world; and as the sound proceeding from the empty air, melts 
again into the air, so all things are aerial and the transcendent air only. 


26. All these phenomena and their sight are simply erroneous, and 
appertain to the vacuous intellect alone; and are exhibited as foliage of the 
aerial tree (which I know is false and nothing). 


27. The intellect and vacuum are identic and of the same nature with 
themselves, and this I came to understand from the entire absence of all my 
desires. 


28. These worlds that are linked together in the chain of the universe, and 
lie within the limits of the ten sides of it, are but One Brahma only; and the 
infinite vacuity, with all its parts of space and time, and all forms of things 
and actions, are the substance and essence of Brahma only. 


29. In this manner, I saw in manifold worlds that were manifested before 
me, many a great muni like myself; all sons of the great Brahma, and named 
as Vasishthas, and men of great holiness and piety. 


30. I saw many revolutions of the Tretd age, with as many Ramas in them; 
I marked the rotation of many Satya and Dwdpara periods, (the golden and 
brazen ages) of the world, which I counted by hundreds and thousands. 


31. From my common sense of concrete particulars, I saw this changing 
state of created things; but by the powers of my reflexion and generalization, I 
found them all to be but one Brahma, extended as the infinite vacuity from all 
eternity. 


32. It is not to be supposed, that the world subsists in Brahma or He in this 
(as either the container or contained of the whole); but Brahma is the 
uncreated and endless all himself, and whatever bears a name or is thought of 
in our understanding. 


33. He is like a block of silent stone, that bears no name or epithet; but is of 
the form of pure light, which is termed the world also. 


34. This light shines within the sphere of the infinite intellect, which is 
beyond the limit of our finite intelligence; it manifests itself in the form of the 
world, which is as formless as the other, and is as unknown to us, as anything 
in our dreamless sleep. 


35. Brahma is no other than himself, and all else is only his reflexion; His 
light is the light of the world, and shows us all things like the solar light. 


36. It is by that light, that these thousands of worlds appear to view; and 
that we have the notion of heat in the lunar disk, and of cold in the solar orb(?) 


37. We see some creatures that see in the dark, and do not see in the 
daylight; such are the owls and bats, (asses?), and so there are men of the 
same kind. 


38. There are many here, that are lost by their goodness, while there are 
others, who thrive and ascend to heaven by their wickedness; some that come 
to life by drinking of poison, and many that die by the taste of nectar. 


39. Whatever a thing appears to be by itself, or whatsoever is thought of it 
in the understanding of another, the same comes to occur and is presented to 
the lot of every one, be it good or evil. 


40. The world is a hanging garden in the air, with all its orbs fixed as trees 
with their firm roots in it and yet rolling and revolving about, like the shaking 
leaves and tossing fruits of this arbour. 


41. The sand like mustard seeds being crushed under stony oil mills, yield 
the fluid substance of oil; and the tender flower of lotus, grows out of the 
clefts of rocks. (So things of one nature produce another of a different kind). 


42. The moving images that are carved out of stone or wood, are seen to be 
set in the company of goddesses; and to converse with them. (The gloss gives 
no explanation of this unintelligible passage). 


43. The clouds of heaven are seen to shroud many things as their vests, and 
many trees are found to produce fruits of different kinds every year. 


44. All terrestrial animals are seen to move upon the earth, in different and 
changing forms with different kinds of the members of their bodies and heads. 


45. The lower worlds (regions) are filled with human beings, that are 
without the pale of the vedas and Sdstras; and live without any faith, religion, 
and lead their lives in the state of beasts. 


46. Some places are peopled by heartless peoples, who are without the 
feelings of love and desire; and others who are not born of women, but appear 
to be strewn as stones on the ground. 


47. There are some places, which are full of serpents that feed upon air 
only; and others where gems and stones are taken in an indifferent light; some 
again where the indigent are without avarice and pride. 


48. There were some beings, who look on their individual souls, and not on 
those of others; and others who regard the universal soul, that resides alike in 
all. (i.e., In all the four kinds of living creatures). 


49. As the hairs and nails and other members of a person, are parts of his 
same body, though they grow in different parts of it; so do all beings appertain 
to the One universal soul, which is to be looked upon in all. 


50. The one infinite and boundless vacuum, seems as many skies about the 
different worlds which it encompasseth; and it is by the exertion of Divine 
energy, that these empty spaces are filled with worlds. 


51. There are some who are entirely ignorant of the meaning of the word 
liberation, (which is freedom from the knowledge of everything beside 
Brahma); and move about as wooden machines without any sense in them. 


52. Some creatures have no knowledge of astronomical calculation, and are 
ignorant of the course of time; while there are others quite deaf and dumb, and 
conduct themselves by signs and motions of their bodies. 


53. Some are devoid of the sense of sight of their eyes, and the light of the 
sun and moon, are all in vain to them. 


54. Some have no life in them, and others have no sense of smelling the 
sweet odours; some are quite mute and cannot utter any sound, while others 
are deprived of the sense of their hearing. 


55. There are some who are entirely dumb, and without the power of 
speech; and some again that having no power of touch or feeling, are as 
insensible blocks or stones. 


56. Some have their sense (of conception) only, without possessing the 
organs of sense; and others that manage themselves as foul Pisdchas or 
goblins, and are therefore, inadmissible in human society. 


57. There are some made of one material only, (as solid earth), and others 
have no solidity in them, (as air, efc.); some are composed of the watery 
substance, and others are full of fiery matter in them. 


58. Some are full of air, and some there are of all forms, (i.e., capable to do 
anything). All these are of vacuous forms, and are shown in the vacuity of the 
understanding. (This is an effect of a Yoga called prakdmya siddhi or the 
power of seeing everything in the mind or imagination). 


59. So the surface of the earth, and air and water, teem with living beings, 
and the frogs live in the cell of stones, and the insects dwell in the womb of 
the earth. 


60. There are living beings living in vast bodies of water, as in lands, 
forests and mountains; and so there are living creatures skimming in the other 
elements and air, as the finny tribes move about and swim in the air. 


61. There are living things also, peopling the element of fire, and moving in 
fiery places, where there is no water to be had; and there they are flying and 
flitting about as sparks and particles of fire. 


62. The regions of air are also filled with other kinds of living beings; and 
these have airy bodies like the bilious flatulency which runs all over the body. 


63. Even the region of vacuum is full of animal life; and these have 
vacuous bodies, moving in their particular forms. 


64. Whatever animals are shut up in the infernal caves, or skip aloft in the 
upper skies; and those that remain, and rove about all sides of the air; these 
and all those which inhabit and move about the many worlds in the womb of 
the great vacuum, were seen by me in the vacuity of my Intellect. 


CHAPTER LXI. 
On the Identity of the World with Infinite vacuity. 


Argument: — Want of Divine knowledge, produces the knowledge of the 
reality of the unreal world; but the knowledge of God, proves the nothingness 
of the World at all times. 


Vasishtha continued: — It is from the face of the firmament of Divine 
Intellect, that the atmosphere of our understandings, catch the reflexion of this 
universe; just as the waters of the deep, receive the images of the clouds in the 
upper sky. It is this Intellect which gives us life, and guides our minds. 


2. These living souls and minds of ours, are of the form of the clear sky; 
and these countless worlds, are productions of empty vacuity. 


3. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, that after all kinds of beings were entirely 
liberated, from the bonds of their bodies and their souls also, at the universal 
annihilation of things; what is it that comes to be created again, and whence it 
gets it undone also. 


4. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me tell you, how at the great destruction or 
deluge, all things together with the earth, water, air, fire and the sky, and the 
spheres of heaven vanish away, and are liberated from their respective forms; 
and how this universe comes to appear again to our imagination. 


5. There remains alone the undefinable spirit of God after this, which is 
styled the great Brahma and Supreme Intellect by the sages; and this world 
remains in the heart of that being, from which it altogether inseparable and 
indifferent. 


6. He is the Lord, and all this is contained in the nature of this heart, which 
passeth under the name of the world, it is by his pleasure that he exhibits to us 
the notion that we have of the world, which is not his real form. 


7. Considering this well, we find nothing either as created or destroyed by 
him; but as we know the supreme cause of all to be imperishable by his 
nature, so do we know his heart to be indestructible also; and the great Kalpa 


ages are only parts of Himself, (as the divisions of time are only parts of 
eternity). 


8. It is only our circumscribed knowledge, that shows us the differences 
and dualities of things; but these upon examination are not to be found and 
vanish into nothing. 


9. Therefore, there is nothing of anything, that is ever destroyed to nothing, 
nor is there anything which is ever produced from Brahma; who is unborn and 
invisible, and rests always in his tranquility. 


10. He remains as the pure essence of intellect, in atoms of a thousand part 
of the particles of simple vacuity. 


11. This world is verily the body of that great Intellect, how then can this 
mundane body, (corpus mundi), come to be destroyed, without destruction of 
the other also (which is indestructible of its nature)? 


12. As the intellect awakes in our hearts, even in our sleep and dream; so 
the world is present in our minds at all times, and presents unto us its airy or 
ideal form ever since its first creation. 


13. The creation is a component part of the vacuous intellect and its rising 
and setting being but the airy and ideal operations of the intellect, there is no 
part of it that is ever created or destroyed of it at any time. 


14. This spiritual substance of the intellect, is never susceptible of being 
burnt or broken or torn at any time; it is not soiled or dried or weakened at all 
nor is it knowable or capable to be seen by them that are ignorant of it. 


15. It becomes, whatever it has in its heart; and as it never perishes, so the 
notion of the world and all things which inhere in its heart, (mind), is neither 
begotten nor destroyed in any wise. 


16. It subsides and revives only, by cause of its forgetfulness and 
remembrance only at different times, and rising and setting of the notion, 
gives rise to the ideas of the creation and destruction of the world. 


17. Whatever notion you have of the world, you become the same yourself; 
think it perishable, and you perish also with it; but know it as imperishable, 
and you become unperishing also. 


18. Know then the creation and great destruction of the world, to be but 
recurrences of its notion and oblivion, and the two phases of the intellect only. 


19. How can the production or destruction of anything, take place in the 
vacuity of the airy intellect; and how can any condition or change be 


attributed to the formless intellect at all? 


20. The great Kalpa ages and all periods of time, and parts of creation, are 
mere attributes of the intellect and the intellect but a predicate of Brahma, 
they all merge into the great Brahma alone. 


21. The intellect is a formless and purely transparent substance, and the 
phenomenals are subject to its will alone; and it is according to the will or 
wish that one has in his heart (or mind), that he sees the object appear before 
him, like the fairy lands of imagination. 


22. As the body of a tree is composed of its several parts, of the roots, 
trunk, branches, leaves, flowers, fruits and other things. 


23. So the solid substance of the divine spirit, which is more translucent 
than the clear firmament, and which nothing can be predicated in reality, has 
the creation and great destructions, efc., as the several conditions of its own 
essence. 


24. So the various states of pleasure and pain, of happiness and misery, of 
birth, life and death, and of form and want of form, are but the different states 
of the same spirit. 


25. And as the whole body of this spirit, is imperishable and unchangeable 
in its nature, so are all the states and conditions of its being also. 


26. There is no difference in the nature and essence of the whole and its 
part, except that the one is more palpable to sight by its greater bulk than the 
other. 


27. As our consciousness, is the root of existence of a tree; so is our 
consciousness the root of our belief in the existence of God. 


28. This consciousness shows us the varieties of things, as something in 
one place and another elsewhere; it shows us the creation as a great trunk, and 
all the worlds as so many trees. 


29. It shows some where the great continents, as the branches of these trees 
and their contents of hills, efc., as their twigs and leaves; some where it shows 
the sunshine as its flowers, and darkness as the black bark of these trees. 


30. Some where it shows the concavity of the sky as the hollow of the tree, 
and elsewhere the dissolution of creation as a vast desolation; it shows in one 
place the synod of gods as cluster of flowers, and other beings in another as 
bushes and brambles and cuticles of trees. 


31. So are all these situated in the formless and vacuous consciousness, 


which is the great Brahma itself, and no other than the same nature with 
Brahma (in its clearness and transparency). 


32. There was a past world, here is the present one, and in another a would- 
be creation in futuro; are all but notions of our minds, and known to us by our 
consciousness of them, which is as unchangeable in its nature as Brahma 
himself. 


33. Thus the supreme and self-conscious soul of Brahma, being as 
transparent as clear firmament, there is no colour or cloud (or the changeful 
shadows of creation and destruction), which are attributed to it (by way of 
simile), with the shades of light and darkness in the orb of the moon. 


34. How can there be the taint of anything in the transcendent, and 
transparent firmament, and can the imputation of the first, midst and last, and 
of far and near attach to infinity and eternity. 


35. Want of a comprehensive and abstract knowledge, is the cause of 
attributing such and other qualities to the divine nature; and it is removed by 
right knowledge of the most perfect One. (These two are distinguished by the 
terms, the knowledge of the pardgatmd and pralaydtma?). 


36. Ignorance known as such, by cognoscence of truth, is removed by 
itself; as a lamp is extinguished by the air which kindles the light. (i.e., The 
knowledge of ignorance drives away ignorance). 


37. As it is certain that the knowledge of one’s ignorance, is the cause of its 
removal; so the knowledge of the unlimited Brahma, makes him to be known 
as all in all. 


38. Thus Rama, have I expounded to you the meaning of liberation, consult 
it attentively with your conscience, and you will undoubtedly attain to it (in a 
short time). 


39. This network of worlds, is uncreated and without its beginning; yet it is 
apparent to sight by means of the spirit of Brahma, manifest in that form. 
Whoso contemplates with the eye of his reason, the eight qualities of the lord, 
becomes full with the divine spirit, although he is as mean as a straw in his 
living soul. 


CHAPTER LXII. 
The unity of the Intellect with the Intellectual 
World. 


Argument: — Establishment of the theory of vacuum, as Composing the 
Intellect and all existence contained in its vacuity. 


Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, whether you were sitting in one place, or 
wandering about in the skies, when you said all these with your vacuous and 
intellectual body. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — I was then fraught with the infinite soul, which fills 
and encompasses the whole space of vacuum; and being in this state of 
ubiquity, say how could I have my transition from or fixed. 


3. I was neither seated in any one place, nor was I moving about anywhere; 
I therefore was present everywhere, in the empty air with my airy spirit, and 
beheld everything in my self or soul. (This is said of the omnipresent soul). 


4. As I see with my eyes, all the members of my body, as composing one 
body of mine from my head to foot, so I saw the whole universe in myself 
with my intellectual eyes. 


5. Though my purely vacuous and intellectual soul, is formless and without 
any part or member as my body; yet the worlds formed its parts (by their 
being contained in it), and neither by the soul’s diffusion in them, nor by their 
being of the same nature and essence in their substance. 


6. As an instance of this is your false vision of the world in your dream, of 
which you retain a real conception, though it is no other than an airy nothing 
or empty vacuity. 

7. As a tree perceives in itself the growth of the leaves, fruits and flowers 


from its body; so I beheld all these rising in myself. 


8. I saw all these in me, as the profound sea views the various marine 
animals in its bosom, as also the endless waves and whirlpools, and foam and 
froth, continually floating over its breast. 


9. In short as all embodied beings, are conscious of the constituent 
members of their own bodies; I had the consciousness of all existence in my 
all-knowing soul. 


10. Rama, I still retain the concepts of whatever I saw on land and water, 
and in the hills and dales, as they are embodied with my body; and I yet 
behold the whole creation, as if it were imprest in my mind. 


11. I see the worlds exposed before me, to be lying within and without 
myself, as they lay in the inside and outside of the house; and my soul is full 
with all these worlds, which are unified with my understanding. 


12. As the water knows (retains) its fluidity, and the frost possesses its 
coldness; and as the air has its ventilation, so the enlightened mind knows and 
scans the whole world within itself. 


13. Whoever has a reasoning soul in him, and has attained a clear 
understanding; is possessed of the same soul as mine, which I know to be of 
the same kind. 


14. After the understanding is perfected, by absence of knowledge of the 
subject and object, there is nothing that appears otherwise unto him, than the 
self-same intelligent soul, which abides alike in all. 


15. And as a man seated on a high hill, sees with his clear-sightedness, all 
objects to the distance of many furlongs; so from my elevation of Yoga 
meditation, saw with my clairvoyance, all things situated far and near and 
within and without me. 


16. As the earth perceives the minerals, metals and all things lying in its 
bowels; so I saw everything as identical with and no other than myself. 
(Andnyat, — non alter). 


17. Rama rejoined: — Be this as it may, but tell me, O Brahman, what 
became of that bright eyed, (/it., aureate-eyed) dame, that had been reciting 
the drya verses. 


18. Vasishtha replied: — That aerial damsel of aeriform body, that recited 
in the drya metre; advanced courteously towards me, and sat herself beside 
me in the air. 


19. But she being as aeriform as myself, could not be seen by me in her 
form of the spirit. (Do not the spirits see each other?). 


20. I was of the aeriform spirit, and she also had an airlike body; and 
worlds appeared as empty air, in my airy meditation in aerial seat (of the sky 
where I was seated). 


21. Rama rejoined: — The body is the seat of the organs of sense and 
action of breathing, how then could the bodiless spirit utter the sounds of the 
articulate words which composed the verse? 


22. How is it possible for a bodiless spirit, either to see a sight or think of 
anything (without the eye & mind). Explain to me these inexplicable truths, of 
the facts you have related. 


23. Vasishtha replied: — The seeing of sights, the thinking of thoughts, and 
the uttering of sounds; are all productions of empty air, as they occur in our 
airy dreams. (i.e., they are all caused by air). (The air being the receptacle of 
the light of things, the vehicle of sound, and framer of fancy). 


24. The sight of a thing and the thought of anything, depend on the aerial 
intellect, as they do in our aerial dream; and these are impressed in the 
hollowness of the intellect, both in the waking as well as dreaming states. 


25. Not only is that sight, but whatever is the object of any of our senses, 
and the whole world itself, is the clear and open sky (and the idea of their 
substantiality, is altogether erroneous). 


26. The transcendent first principle, is of the form of the unknowable 
intellect; which exhibits itself in the constitution of the universe, which is 
verily its very nature. (Hence called the mundane God or the god of nature; or 
as the poet says: — Whose body nature is, and God the soul). 


27. What proof have you of the existence of the body and its senses? Matter 
is mere illusion, and as it is with other body, so it is with ours also. (The sruti 
says: — see the formless one under all forms, etc.). 


28. This is as that One, and that is as this. (i.e., The world appears to be as 
the intellect shows it, efc.). But the unreal (matter) is taken for the real (spirit); 
and the real is understood as an unreality. 


29. As the uses that are made of the earth, its paths and houses in a dream, 
prove to be false and made in empty air upon waking; so the applications 
made of the words my, thy, his, efc., made in our waking, are all buried in 
oblivion in the state of our sound sleep, (when we have lost the consciousness 
of our personality). 


30. All our struggles, efforts and actions in life time, are as false and void 
as empty air; and resemble the bustle, commotion and fighting of men in 
dream, which vanish into nothing in their waking. 


31. If you ask whence comes this phenomenon of dreaming, and whence 
proceed all its different shapes and varieties? To this nothing further can be 


said regarding its origin, than that it is the reproduction or remembrance of the 
impressions (preserved in the mind). 


32. In answer to the question, why and how does a dream appear to us it 
may only be said that, there is no other cause of its appearance to you, than 
that of the appearance of this world unto you. (i.e., as you see this before you, 
so you see the other also). 


33. We have the dreaming man, presented to us in the person of Virdj from 
the very beginning of creation; and this being is situated in open air with its 
aeriform body, in the shape of the dreamer and dream mixed up together. 


34. The word dream that I have used and adduced to you, as an instance to 
explain the nature of the phenomenal world; is to be understood as it is neither 
a reality nor an unreality either, but the only Brahma himself. 


35. Now Rama, that lovely lady who became my loving companion, was 
accosted by me in the form in which I beheld her in my consciousness. 


36. I conversed with her ideal figure, and in my clairvoyant state, just as 
men seen in a dream, talked with one another (or as spirits commune and 
communicate with themselves). 


37. Our conference together, was of that spiritual kind, as it was held 
between men in a dream; so was our conversation as airy, as our persons and 
spirits; and so Rama, must you know the whole worldly affair, is but an airy 
and fairy play. 


38. So the world is a dream, and the dream a phantasm of air; they are the 
same void with but different names; the phantom of the waking daytime, 
being called the world, and of sleeping nighttime a dream. 


39. This scene of the world, is the dream of the soul; or it is the empty air 
or nothing; it is the clear understanding of God or his own essence that is so 
displayed. 


40. The nightly dream needs a dreamer, and a living person also in order to 
see the same, such as I, thou, he, or anybody else; but not so the day dream of 
the world, which is displayed in the vacuity of the clear intellect itself. 


41. As the viewer of the world is the clear vacuum of the intellect, so its 
view also is as clear as its viewer; the world being of the manner of a dream, it 
is as subtle as the rare atmosphere. 


42. When the empty dream of the world appears of itself, in the vacuous 
and formless intellect within the hollow of the mind (or heart) and has no 
substantiality in it; how then is it said to be a material substance, when it is 


perceived in the same manner by the immaterial intellect? 


43. When the visionary world, appearing in a dream of corporeal beings as 
ourselves, proves to be but empty void and vacuity; how do you take it for a 
material substance, when it is contained in its immaterial form, in the 
incorporeal spirit and intellect of God, and why not call it an empty air, when 
it resides in the manner of a dream in the Divine Intellect? 


44. The Lord sees this uncreated world, appearing before him as in a 
dream. 


45. The Lord Brahma, (in the form of the Hiranya-Garbha), has framed this 
creation in air, with the soft clay of his vacuous intellect; and all these bodies 
with numerous cavities in them, appear as created and uncreated in the same 
time. 


46. There is no causality, nor the created worlds nor their occupants; know 
there is nothing and nothing at all, and knowing this likewise and as mute as 
stone; and go on doing your duties to the last, and care not whether your body 
may last long or be lost to you. 


CHAPTER LXIII. 
Unity of the Universe with the Universal soul. 


Argument: — The multifarious worlds of ignorant people, are viewed as 
one with the Supreme Spirit by the Wise. 


Rama rejoined: — O sage, how could you hold your conference with the 
incorporeal maid, and how could she utter the letters of the alphabet, without 
her organs of speech? 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The incorporeal or vacuous bodies, have of course 
no power or capability of pronouncing the articulate letters of the alphabet; 
just as dead bodies incapable of speech. 


3. And should there even be an articulate sound, yet there can be no 
intelligible sense in it; and must be unintelligible to others; just as a dream 
though perceived by the dreamer, is unknown to the sleepers in the same bed 
and side by side. 


4. Therefore, there is nothing real in a dream; it is really an unreality and 
the ideal imagery of the Intellect in empty air, and concomitant with sleep of 
its own nature. (i.e., Sleep and dream are twins by their nature). 


5. The clear sky of the intellect, is darkened by its imageries (ideas), like 
the disk of the moon by its blackness, and as the body (face) of the sky by its 
clouds; but these are as false as the song of a stone, and the sound of a dead 
body. 


6. The dreams and images (ideas), which appear in the sphere of the 
intellect, are no other than appearances of itself; as the visible sky is nothing 
else, than the invisible vacuum itself. 


7. Like the appearance of dreams in a sleep, doth this world appear before 
us in our waking state; so the invisible vacuum appears as the visible (sky to 
our eye). So the form of the dame was a shape of the intellect. (i.e., that is a 
creature of imagination only. — Gloss). 


8. It is the very clever intellect in us, which exhibits all these varieties of 
exquisite shapes in itself; and shows this world to be as real and permanent as 
itself (though in truth, they are as unreal and fleeting dreams). 


9. Rama rejoined: — Sir, if these be but dreams, how is it they appear to us 
in our waking state; and if they are unreal, why is it that they seem as solid 
realities unto us? 


10. Vasishtha replied: — Hear how the visionary dreams, appear as 
substantial worlds; though they are no other than dreams, and never real, and 
in no way solid or substantial. 


11. The seeds of our notions are playing at random as dust, in the spacious 
sky of the intellect; some of them are of the same kind and others dissimilar to 
one another, and productive of like and unlike results. 


12. Some of these are contained one under the other, like the cuticles of 
plantain trees; and there are many others that have no connection with 
another, and are quite insensible and unknown to others. 


13. They do not see each other, nor know anything of one another; but as 
inert seeds they moulder and moisten in the same heap. (It means the ideas 
that haunt us in our sleep and waking). 


14. These notions being as void and blank as vacuum, are not as shadows 
in the visible sky; nor are they known to one another, and though they are of 
sensible shapes, yet they are as ignorant of themselves, as it were under the 
influence of sleep. 


15. Those that sleep in their ignorance, find the world appearing to them in 
the shape of a dream, by the daytime and act according as they think 
themselves to be. So the Asura demi-gods being situated in their dreaming (or 
visionary world), think themselves to be fighting with and worsted by the 
Gods. 


16. They could not be liberated owing to their ignorance nor were they 
reduced to the insensibility of stones; but remained dull and inactive in the 
visionary world of their dream. 


17. Men laid up in the sleep of their ignorance, and seeing the dream of the 
world before them; act according to their custom, and observe how one man is 
killed by another; (i.e., the mutual enmity of mankind). 


18. There are other intelligent spirits, which being fast bound to their 
desires, are never awakened nor liberated from their ignorance; but continue 
to dwell on the visionary world, which they see in their day dream. 


19. The Rdkshasas also, that lie asleep in the visionary world of their 
dream, are placed in the same state as they were used to be by the gods. (i.e., 
the unemancipated souls of all beings, dream of their former state). 


20. Say then, O Rama, what became of those Rdkshasas, who were thus 
slain by Gods; they could neither obtain their liberation owing to their 
ignorance, nor could they be transformed to stones with their intelligent souls. 


21. Thus this earth with its seas and mountains and peoples, that are seen to 
be situated in it; are thought to be as substantial as we think of ourselves by 
our prior notions of them. (This is the doctrine of Plato’s reminiscence, that 
the sight of the present existence, is but a representation of our remembrance 
of the past). 


22. Our imagination of the existence of the world, is as that of other beings 
regarding it; and they think of our existence in this world in the same light, as 
we think of theirs. 


23. To them our waking state appears as a dream, and they think us to be 
dreaming men, as we also think them to be; and as those worlds are viewed as 
visionary by us, so is this of ours but one of them also. 


24. As other people have the notion of their existence from their 
reminiscence alone, so have we of ourselves and theirs also, from the 
ubiquious nature or omnipresence of the intellectual soul. 


25. As those dreaming men think of their reality, so do others think of 
themselves likewise; and so art thou as real as any one of them. 


26. As thou beholdest the cities and citizens to be situated in thy dream, so 
do they continue to remain there in the same manner to this day; because God 
is omnipresent everywhere and at all times. 


27. It is by your waking from the sleep of ignorance, and coming to the 
light of reason; that these objects of your dream will be shorn of their 
substantiality, and appear in their spiritual light as manifestation of God 
himself. 


28. He is all and in all, and everywhere at all times; so as He is nothing and 
nowhere, nor is He the sky nor is ever anything that destroyed. (Or produced). 


29. He abides in the endless sky, and is eternal without beginning and end; 
He abides in the endless worlds, and in the infinity of souls and minds. 


30. He lives throughout the air and in every part of it, and in all orbs and 
systems of worlds; He resides in the bosom of everybody, in every island and 
mountain and hill. 


31. He extends all over the extent of districts, cities and villages; He dwells 
in every house, and in every living body. He extends over years and ages and 
all parts of time. 


32. In him live all living beings, and those that are dead and gone, and have 
not obtained their liberation; and all the detached worlds are attached to him 
to no end and forever. 


33. Each world has its people, and all peoples have their minds. Again, 
each mind has a world in it, and every world has its people also. 


34. Thus the visibles having neither beginning nor end, are all but 
erroneous conceptions of the mind; they are no other than Brahma to the 
knower of God, who sees no reality in aught besides. 


35. There is but one only intellect, which pervades this earth below and the 
heaven above; which extends over the land and water, and lies in woods and 
stones, and fills the whole and endless universe. Thus, wherever there is 
anything, in any part of this boundless world; they all inspire the idea of the 
divinity in the divine, while they are looked upon as sensible objects by the 
ungodly. 


CHAPTER LXIV. 
Sport of the Heavenly Nymphs. 


Argument: — Full account of the nymph, since her birth to her 
Beatification. 


Vasishtha continued: — The graceful nymph with lotus like eyes, and her side 
long glances darting as a string of mdlati flowers, was then gently looked 
upon by me, and accosted with tenderness. 


2. Who art thou sweet nymph, I said, that art as fair as the farina of the 
lotus floret, and comest to my company; say, whose and what thou art, where 
is thy abode and wither thou goest, and what thou desirest of me. 


3. The nymph replied: — It is meet, O muni, that you greet me thus; that 
repair to you with a grieving heart, and will lay my case confidently before 
you for your kind advice to me. 


4. There is in a corner of the cell of the great vault of vacuity, that this 
worldly dwelling of yours is situated. 


5. This dwelling house of the world has three apartments in it, namely the 
earth, heaven, and the infernal regions; wherein the great architect (Brahma) 
hath placed a dame by name of fancy, as a mistress of this dwelling. 


6. Here is the sombre surface of the earth, appearing as the store-house of 
the world; and beset with numerous islands surrounded by oceans and seas. 
(The earth is said to be the mother and supporter of all worlds). 


7. The earth stretches on all sides, with many islands in the midst of its seas 
and with many a mine of gold underneath, and extending to ten thousand 
yojanas in its length. 


8. It is bright and visible itself, and is as fair as the vault of heaven; it 
supplies us with all the objects of our desire, and vies with the starry heaven 
by the lustre of its gems. 


9. It is the pleasure and promenading ground of gods, siddha spirits and 


Apsara nymphs; it abounds with all objects of desire, and fraught with all 
things of our enjoyment. 


10. It has at its two ends the two polar mountains, called the lokaloka 
ranges, (for having one side of them always brightened by the sunlight, and 
the other ever darkened by the sunly night). The two polar circles resembling 
the two belts at both extremities of the earth. 


11. One side of the polar mountains, is ever covered by darkness, like the 
minds of ignorant people; and the other side shines with eternal light, like the 
enlightened souls of the wise. 


12. One side of these is as delightsome, as society with the good and wise; 
while the opposite side is as dark and dolesome, as company with the ignorant 
and vile. 


13. On one side all things were as clear as the minds of intelligent men, and 
on the other, there was as impervious a gloom as it hangs over the minds of 
unlettered Brahmanas. 


14. On one part there was neither the sunshine nor the moon light to be 
had; and as one side presented the habitable world before it, so the other 
showed the vast void and waste beyond the limits of nature. 


15. One side of these teemed with the cities of gods, and the other with 
those of demons; and as the one side lifted its lofty summits on high, so the 
other bent below towards the infernal regions. 


16. Somewhere the vultures were hovering over the craters and at others 
the lands appeared charming to sight; while the mountain peaks appeared to 
touch the celestial city of Brahma on high. (The city of Brahma loka, is 
situated in the highest heaven). 


17. Somewhere there appears a dismal and dreary desert forest, with loud 
blasts of death hovering over them; and at others there are flower gardens and 
groves, with the nymphs of heaven, sitting and singing in them. 


18. In one part of it there is the deep infernal cave, containing the horrible 
Kumbhanda demons in it; and in another are the beautiful nandana gardens 
with the hermitages of holy saints in them. 


19. On one part there overhang the eternal clouds, roaring loudly like 
furious elephants, while raining clouds are showering on the other. There are 
deep and dark caverns on one part, and thick forest arbours on another. 


20. The labouring woodmen are felling the trees of wood-lands, inhabited 
by evil spirits on one side or the hardy woodmen are driving away the devils 


on one side, by felling the woods of their haunts in the wood-lands; while the 
other is full of inhabited tracts, and men more polished in their manners, than 
the celestials of heaven. 


21. Some places are laid desolate by their inhabitants, by the driving and 
whirling winds; and others secure from every harm, are flourishing in their 
productions (of animals and vegetables). 


22. Somewhere are great and desolate deserts, dreary wastes dreadful with 
their howling winds; and in some places there are purling lakes of lotuses with 
rows of sounding cranes gracing their borders. 


23. In some places, is heard the gurgling of waters, and the growlings of 
clouds in others; and in others are the gay and merry Apsaras, turned giddy 
with their swinging. 


24. On one side the landscape is beset by horrible demons, and is shunned 
by all other beings; and on the other, the happy spirits of Siddhas, 
Vidyadharas and others, are seen to be sitting and singing by the side of 
cooling streams. 


25. Somewhere the pouring clouds, caused the ever-flowing rivers to 
encroach upon the lands; and there were the light and flimsy clouds also, 
flying as sheets of cloths, and driven by gusts of winds here and there. 


26. There are the lotus bushes on one side, with swarms of humming bees, 
fluttering about their leafy faces; and there are seen the rubicund teeth of 
celestial damsels, blushing with the tincture of betel leaves on the other. 


27. In one place is seen the pleasant concourse of people, pursuing their 
several callings under the shining sun; and in another the assemblage of 
hideous demons, dancing in their demoniac revelry in the darkness of night. 


28. Somewhere the land is laid waste of its people, by havocs and portents 
befalling on them; and elsewhere the country is smiling with its rising cities, 
under blessing of a good government. 


29. Sometimes a dreary waste distracts, and at others a beautiful population 
attracts the sight; sometimes deep and dark caverns occur to view, and at 
others the dreadful abyss appears to sight. 


30. Some spot is full of fruitful trees and luxuriant verdure, and another a 
dreary desert devoid of waters and living beings; some where you see bodies 
of big elephants, and at others groups of great and greedy lions. 


31. Some places are devoid of animals, and others peopled by ferocious 
Rdkshasas; some places are filled with the thorny Karanja thickets, and others 


are full of lofty palma forests. 


32. Somewhere are lakes as large and clear as the expanse of heaven, and at 
others there are vast barren deserts as void as the empty air. Somewhere there 
are tracts of continually driving sands, and there are goodly groves of trees at 
others, flourishing in all the seasons of the year. 


33. This mountain has many a peak on its top, as high as ordinary hills and 
mounts elsewhere; and the Kalpa clouds are perpetually settled upon them, 
blazing with the radiance of gems by the hues of heaven. 


34. There are forests growing on the milk white and sunny stones of this 
mountain, and serving as abodes of foresters; and always resorted to by the 
breed of lions and monkeys. 


35. There is a peak on the north of this mountain, with a grotto towards the 
east of it; and this cavern affords me a sequestered habitation, in its hard and 
stony bosom. 


36. There I am confined, O sage, in that stony prison-house; and there 
methinks I have passed a series of yuga ages (of which there is no reckoning). 


37. Not I alone, but my husband also is confined in the same cave with 
myself; and we are doomed to remain imprisoned therein, like bees closed up 
at night fall, within the cup of a closing lotus-flower. 


38. Thus have I with my husband, continued to abide in the stony dungeon, 
for the very long period of very many years. 


39. It is owing to our own fault, that we do not obtain our release even at 
the present time; but continue to remain there in the state of prisoners as ever 
and forever. 


40. But Sir, it is not only ourselves that are confined in this stony prison- 
house; but all our family, friends and dependents, are enthralled in the same 
stronghold and to no end. 


41. The ancient personage, (purusha), of my twice-born husband, is there 
confined in his dungeon (of the body); and though he has remained there for 
many an age, yet he has never removed from his single seat. 


42. He is employed in his studentship and studies, (Brahmacharya), since 
his boyhood, attends to the hearing and reciting of the vedas; and is steadfast 
in his observances without swerving or deviation. 


43. But I am not so, O sage, but doomed to perpetual distress; because I am 
unable, O sage, to pass a moment without his company. 


44. Hear now, O sage, how I became his wife, and how there grew an 
unfeigned affection between us. 


45. When that husband of mine had been still a boy, and acquired a little 
knowledge by remaining in his own house. 


46. He thought in himself, saying, “Ah, I am a srotriya, or vedic Brahmana, 
and can it be possible for me to have a suitable partner for myself.” 


47. He then produced me out of himself, in this beauteous figure of mine; 
in the manner that the lightsome moon causes the moonlight to issue out of his 
body. (In Sanskrit the moon is masculine, and the moonlight feminine; 
whence they are called nishdpati and jyotsna). (So in Arabic, gmar, the moon 
is masculine, and shams, the sun, is feminine). 


48. Being thus produced from the mind (of my husband), I remained as a 
mental consort of his; and grew up in time as the blossoms in spring, and as 
beautiful as the mandara plant in bloom. 


49. My body became as bright, as the face of the sky by its nature; and all 
my features glittered like the stars in heaven. My countenance was as fair as 
the face of the full moon, and became attractive of all heart towards it. 


50. My breasts were swollen as the buds of flower, and as luscious as a 
juicy fruit; and my arms and the palms of my hands, resembled two tender 
creepers with their rubicund leaflets. 


51. I became the delight and captor of the hearts of living beings, and the 
side long glances of my all-stretched antelope eyes, infatuated all minds with 
the maddening passion of love. 


52. I was prone to the blandishments and dalliance of love, and prompt in 
quips and cranks and wreathed smiles, and glancings; I was fond of singing 
and music, and was insatiate in my joviality. 


53. I was addicted to the enjoyment of all felicity, both in prosperity and 
adversity, both of which are alike friendly to me. I was never tempted by the 
delusive temptations of the one, nor ever frightened by the threatening 
persecution of the other. 


54. I do not sustain the household of my Brahmanical lord alone, but I 
support, O Sir, the mansions of the inhabitants of all the three worlds; because 
by my being a mental being, I have my access to all places far and near. 


55. I am the legal wife of the Brahmanas, and fit for the propagation and 
supportance of his offspring; as also for bearing the burden of this house of 
the triple. (Does it mean that this is capable of comprehending all what is 


contained in the three worlds?). 


56. Iam now grown a young woman, with my swollen up big breasts; and 
am as giddy paced with my youthful gaiety, as a cluster of flowers flouncing 
in the air. 


57. My husband from his natural disposition of procrastination and 
studiousness, is employed in his austerities; and being in expectation of 
getting his liberation, is deferring to engage in his marriage with me to this 
day. 


58. But I being advanced in my youth, and fond of youthful dalliance, 
(have given him my mind); and do now burn in the flame of my passion for 
him, like the lotus flower in a fiery furnace. 


59. Though I am always cooling myself, with the cooling breeze of brooks 
and lotus lakes; yet I burn incessantly in all my body, as the sacrificial embers 
are reduced to ashes in the sacred fire place. 


60. I see the garden grounds covered, (smiling), with the flowers falling in 
showers from the shady trees; but I burn as the land under the burning sands, 
of the unshaded and burning desert. 


61. The soft gurgling of waters, and the gentle breeze of lakes, full with 
blooming lotuses and lilies; and the sweet sounds of cranes and water fowls, 
are all rough and harsh to me. 


62. Though decked with flowery wreaths and garlands, and swinging upon 
my cradle of flowers; yet methinks I am lying down upon a bed of thorns. 


63. Sleeping on beds, formed of the soft leaves of lotuses and plantain- 
leaves; I find them dried under the heat of my body, and powdered to ashes by 
the pressure of my person. 


64. Whatever fair, lovely, charming and sweet and pleasant things, I come 
to see and feel, I am filled with sorrow at their sight, and my eyes are suffused 
in tears. 


65. My eyes steam with tears, from the heat of my inward bosom; and they 
trickle upon and fall down my eyelids, like dew drops on lotus leaves. 


66. Swinging with my playmates, on the pendant boughs of plantain trees, 
in our pleasure gardens; I think of the burning grief in my heart, and burst out 
in tears, by covering my face with my hands (for fear of being detected in my 
love). 


67. I look at our bowers of cooling plantain leaves, and strewn over with 


snows all over the ground; but fearing them as bushes of thorny brambles, I 
fly from them far away. 


68. I see the blooming lotus of the lake, and the fond crane fondling with its 
stalk like arm, and then begin to contemn my youthful bloom. 


69. I weep at seeing whatever is handsome, and keep quiet at what is 
moderate; I delight in whatsoever beseems to be ugly, and I am happy in my 
utter insensibility of everything. 


70. I have seen the fair flowers of spring, and the hoary-frost of winter; and 
thought them all to be but heaps of the ashes of lovelorn dames, burnt down 
by the flame of love, and scattered by the relentless winds on all sides. 


71. Ihave made me beds of the blue leaves of lotuses and other plants, and 
covered me with chaplets of snow-white flowers; but found them to turn pale 
and dry by their contact with my body. So pity me, that my youthful days 
have all gone in vain. 


CHAPTER LXV. 
Life and Conduct of the Ethereal Nymph. 


Argument: — How nymph has come to approach before Vasishtha, her 
statement of facts of her life. 


After the lapse of a long time, I found my passions subsiding, and I grew as 
callous to my susceptibilites, as the tender greens become juiceless and dry 
after the autumn is over. 


2. Seeing my husband grown old, and shorn of all his susceptivity and 
vivaciousness; and sitting quietly in his steadfast devotion with an unwavering 
mind, I thought my life to be useless to me. 


3. And methought that early widowhood, and even premature death, or 
rather a lingering disease or lasting misery, are preferable to a female’s living 
without a loving husband. 


4. It is the boon of life, and the greatest good fortune of a woman, to have a 
young and loving husband, who is of good and pleasant humour, and pliant in 
his manners. 


5. A woman is given for lost, who has not a sweet and lovely spouse; as the 
understanding is lost which is not fraught with learning. In vain is prosperity 
when she favours the wicked, and in vain is a woman that is lost to shame. 
(Because modesty is the best quality of women). 


6. She is the best of women, who is obedient to her husband; and that is the 
best fortune, which falls in the hands of the virtuous and good. That 
understanding is praised which is clear and capacious; and that goodness is 
good, which has a fellow feeling and equal regard for all mankind. 


7. Neither disease nor calamity, nor dangers nor difficulties, can disturb the 
minds, or afflict the hearts of a loving pair, (bound together by mutual 
affection). 


8. The prospect of the blossoming garden of Eden, and the flowery paths of 


paradise, appear as desert lands to women, that have no husbands, or such as 
wicked and unmannerly in their behaviour. 


9. A woman may forsake all her worldly possessions, as of little value to 
her; but she can never forsake her husband, even for any fault on his part. 


10. You see, O chief of sages, all these miseries to which I am subjected 
these very many years of my puberty. 


11. But all this fondness of mine, is gradually turning to indifference; and I 
am pining and fading away as fast, as the frost beaten lotus flower, is 
shrunken and shrivelled for want of its sap and juice. 


12. Being now indifferent to the pleasure of my enjoyment of all things, I 
come to seek the felicity of my nirvdna-extinction; and stand in need of your 
advice for my salvation. 


13. Otherwise, it is better for them to die away than live in this world, who 
are unsuccessful in desires and ever restless and perplexed in their minds; and 
such as are buffeting and borne by the waves of deadly troubles. 


14. He my husband being desirous of obtaining his nirvdna liberation, is 
now intent both by day and night upon the subduing of his mind by the light 
of his reason, as a prince is roused to conquer his foe in company with his 
princess. 


15. Now Sir, please to dispel both his as well as mine ignorance, by your 
reasonable advice, which may revive our remembrance of the soul (which 
may destroy our faith in the body). 


16. Because my lord sitting solely upon the meditation of the soul, without 
the company or any thought about me; has created in me an indifference and 
distaste to all worldly things in toto. 


17. I am now set free from the influence of worldly desires, and have girt 
myself fast with the amulet of aeronautic expedition, for journeying through 
the regions of air. (This amulet is called the khechari mudra). 


18. I have acquired the power of locomotion amidst the air, by means of 
this amulet of mine; and it is by virtue of this power, that I am enabled to 
associate with the siddha spirits, and to converse with you. 


19. Having girt myself with this charm, I have acquired such potency, that 
though remaining in my dwelling house on earth, which is the basis and centre 
of all the worlds, I can see all its past and future events (by means of my 
intuition and Yoga meditation). 


20. Having then beheld within my mind, all and everything relating to this 
world; I have come out to survey the outward world, and seen as far as the 
gigantic polar mountain (which has perpetual light and darkness on either side 
of it). 


21. Before this, O sage, neither I nor my husband, had ever any desire of 
seeing anything beyond our own habitation. (i.e., Or the internal world 
contained within the world). 


22. My husband being solely employed in meditating on the meanings 
(doctrines) of the vedas; has no desire whatever, to know anything relating the 
past or unpassed, (i.e., the present and future) time. 


23. It is for this reason (of unacquaintance with the world), that my lord has 
not been able to succeed to any station in life; and it is today only, that both of 
us are desirous to be blest with the best state of humanity (the knowledge of 
the Deity). 


24. We therefore beseech you, O venerable Sir, to grant our request, as it is 
never in the nature of noble persons to refuse the prayer of their suppliants. 


25. I who have been wandering in the ethereal regions, among hosts of the 
perfected spirits of Siddhas; do not find anyone except yourself, O honourable 
Sir, who may put fire to the thick gloom of ignorance as a conflagration. 


26. And as it is the nature of good people to do good to others, even 
without the knowledge of any cause of pity in their suppliants; so should you, 
O venerable Sir, do to your suppliant one without refusing her suit. 


CHAPTER LXVI. 
Description of the Inside of the Stony mansion 
of the World. 


Argument: — The nymph’s Relation of the manner of her habitation in the 
womb of the solid stone. 


Vasishtha said: — I then, seated as I was, in my imaginary seat in the sky, 
asked the lady who was also sitting like myself in the visionary air, saying: — 


2. Tell me, O gentle lady, how could an embodied being as yourself, abide 
in the inside of a block of stone; how could you move about within that 
imporous substance, and what was the cause of your abode therein. 


3. The Nymph replied: — Wonder not, O sage, at this kind of our 
habitation, which is as habitable to us, and inhabited by other creatures, as the 
open and spacious world which you inhabit. 


4. There are the snakes and reptiles, living in and moving about the bowels 
of the earth; and there are huge rocks deeply rooted in the subterranean cell; 
the waters are running within the bosom of the ground, with as much freedom 
as the winds are flying all about the open air. 


5. The oceans are flowing with the fulness of their waters, and the finny 
tribe moving slowly beneath and above their surface; and there are infinite 
numbers of living creatures, that are incessantly born and dying away in them. 


6. It is in the cavity of the mundane stone, that the waters are gliding 
below, as the winds are flying above; here the celestials are moving and 
roving in the air, and the earth and the planetary bodies, revolving with their 
unmoving mountains and other immovables. 


7. There are also the gods, demi-gods and human beings, moving in their 
respective circles, within the womb of this stone; and it is from the beginning 
of creation, that the waters of rivers are running as those of the oceans. 


8. Again, it is from the beginning of creation, that the sun has been darting 


his beams from above; and strewing them like lotuses on the lake like land, 
while the dark clouds of heaven are hovering over them like a swarm of black 
bees, fluttering upon those blooming blossoms. 


9. The moon spreads her light like sandal paste on all sides, and effaces 
thereby the darkness, which overspreads the bosom of night, and covers the 
face of the evening star. 


10. The sunlight is the lamp of his light in heavenly mansion, and scatters 
its rays on all the ten sides of the skies, by means of their conductor of air. (It 
is believed that the circumambient air is the medium, through which the 
pencils of solar light pass in all directions). 


11. The wheel of the starry frame, is continually revolving in the air by the 
will of God, like a threshing mill turning about its central axle by means of a 
string. 


12. This rotatory circle of celestial bodies, about its axis of the pole, kills 
all things under its two valves of heaven and earth, as the wheel of fate grinds 
them to dust. (So says Kabir the saint of Julpa caste: — “Everyone is ground 
to dust, under the two disks of earth and sky, as under the jaws of death’). 


13. The surface of the earth is full of hills and mountains, and the bosom of 
the sea is filled by rocks and islands; the upper sky contains the celestial 
abodes, and the demons occupy the lower regions below the ground. 


14. The orbit of this earth, resembles the ear-ring of the goddess of the 
three worlds; and the verdant orb of this planet, is as the pendant gem of the 
ringlet, continually with the fluctuations of its people. 


15. Here all creatures are impelled by their desires to their mental and 
bodily activities, as if moved to and fro by the flying winds, and are thus led 
to repeated births and deaths (from which they have no respite). 


16. The silent sage sits in his sedate meditation, as the sky is unmoved with 
its capacity of containing all things within itself; but the earth is shaken and 
wasted by the dashing waves, and the fire is put down by its blazing flame, 
and everything is moved about as monkey by the wind of its desires. 


17. All the living beings abounding in the earth and water, and those flying 
in the air, as well as such as live in the hills and on trees; together with the 
gods and giants, are alike doomed to death and regeneration, as the ephemeral 
insects, worms and flies. 


18. Time, — the greatest slaughterer, destroys the gods, giants, 
Ghandharvas and all, with its many arms of ages and Yugas, and of years, 


months, days and nights, as a herdsman kills his cattle, which he has reared up 
himself. (Time feeds upon what it has fed himself). 


19. All these rise and fall in the eventful ocean of time, and having leapt 
and jumped and danced awhile, sink in the abyss of the fathomless whirl of 
death, from which none can rise again. 


20. All sorts of beings living in the fourteen spheres of the world, are 
carried away as dust and ashes by the gust of death, to the hollow womb of 
air, where they disappear as empty clouds in the autumnal sky. 


21. The high heaven which is ever clad in the clean and clear attire of the 
atmosphere, and wears the frame work of the stars as a cap or crown on its 
head, holds the two lights of the sun and moon in its either hand, and shows us 
the works of gods in the skies. (Heaven is the book of God, before thee set, 
etc. — Milton). 


22. It remains unmoved forever, and never changes its sides composed of 
the four quarters of heaven, notwithstanding vicissitudes of the sky, the 
rushing of the winds, the tremor of the earth, the roaring of the clouds and the 
intense heat of the sun; (All which it bears as patiently as the fixed trees and 
stones on earth). 


23. And all things continue in their destined course, whether they that are 
conscious or those which are unconscious of these changes in nature; such are 
the appearance of meteors and portents in the sky, the roaring of clouds, the 
eclipses of the planets, and the trembling of the earth below. 


24. The sub-marine fire sucks up the over flowing waters, of the seven great 
basins or oceans on earth; in the same manner as the all-destroying time, 
devours the creatures in all the different worlds. 


25. All things are continually going on in their course, in the manner of the 
continued motion of the (saddgati) of the current air: — Namely, all earth 
born worms moving on and returning into the bowels of the earth; the birds of 
the air are moving in and flying on all sides of the sky; the fishes are 
swimming and skimming all about the waters, the beasts returning to their 
caverns in earth and the hills, and such is the case with the inhabitants of all 
the continents and islands lying in the womb of this world. 


CHAPTER LXVII. 
Praise of Continued Practice or the Force of Habit. 


Argument: — The sage’s visit to the stony-mansion and the nymph’s 
relations of the force of habit. 


The Nymph continued: — If you, O sage, have any doubt in any part of my 
narration; then please to walk with me and see that mansion, and you will 
observe there many more wonders than what I have related. 


2. Vasishtha said: — Upon this, I said, “well,” and went on travelling with 
her in our aerial journey; as the fragrance of flowers flies with the winds, to 
aerial nothing in which they are both lost forever. 


3. As I passed far and afar, in the regions of air; I met with multitudes of 
ethereal beings, and came to the sight of their celestial abodes. 


4. Passing over the regions traversed by the celestials, in the upper and 
higher sphere of heaven; I arrived at blank and blanched sky, beyond the 
height and above the summit of the polar mountain. 


5. I then passed amidst this etiolated vault and came out at last of it, as the 
fair moon appears under the white canopy of heaven; and beheld above me 
the bright belt of zodiac, containing the seven-fold golden spheres of the 
seven planets. Note. The Hindu astronomy does not reckon the earth as one of 
the moving planets. 


6. As I was looking at that belt of the zodiac, I found it as a crystaline 
marble, and burning with fire. I could not discern any of the worlds that it 
encompassed, (they being all put to shade by the zodiacal light). 


7. I then asked my lovely companion, to tell me where were the created 
worlds, together with the gods and planetary bodies and stars, and the seven 
spheres of heaven. 


8. Where were the oceans and the sky, with all its different sides (of the 
compass); where were the high and heavy bodies of clouds, the starry heaven, 


and the ascension and descension of the rolling planets. 


9. Where are now, said I, the rows of the lofty mountain peaks, and the 
marks of the seas upon the earth; where are the circles and clusters of the 
islands, and where are the sunny shores and dry and parched grounds of 
deserts. 


10. There is no reckoning of time here, nor any account of actions of men; 
nor is there any delusive appearance of a created world or anything whatever, 
in this endless and empty vacuum. 


11. There is no name of the different races of beings, as the Gods, demi- 
gods, Vidyadharas, Ghandharvas and other races of mankind; there is no 
mention of a sage or prince, or of aught that is good or evil, or of a heaven or 
hell, or day and night and their divisions into watches, hours, etc. 


12. There is no calculation of the divisions of time (in this extramundane 
space), nor any knowing of merit or demerit (in this uninhabited place); it is 
free from the hostility of the gods and demi-gods and the feelings of love and 
enmity (between man and man). 


13. Whilst I had been prating in this manner in my amazement, that 
excellent lady who was my cicerone in this maze, spake to me and said, with 
her eyeballs rolling as a couple of fluttering black bees. 


14. The Nymph said: — I neither see anything here, in its former state; but 
find everything presenting a picturesque form in this crystal stone, as it does 
in its image appearing in a mirror. 


15. I see the figures of all things in this, by reason of my preconceived 
ideas eternally engraven herein, while the want of your preconceptions of 
them, is the cause of your over sight or blindness of the same. 


16. Moreover, it is your habitual conversation, regarding the unity or 
duality of the sole entity; and forgetfulness of our pure spiritual and 
intellectual bodies, that you were blind to the sight of the reality, and I had a 
dim glimpse of it. 


17. I have by my long habit of thinking, learnt to look upon this world in 
the light of an ethereal plant (which is nothing); I never view it as you do to 
be a reality, but as a dim reflection of the ideal reality. 


18. The world that appeared before so conspicuous to my sight, I find it 
now appearing as indistinct to me as a shadow of the same cast upon a glass. 


19. It is owing to our prejudice in favour of the false doctrine of old, 
regarding the personality of the body; that we have missed the ease of our 


reliance in the spiritual body, and thus fallen in the deep darkness of delusion. 


20. Whatever we are habituated to think in our internal minds, the same 
grows forth and takes a deep root in the heart, under the moistening influence 
of the intellectual soul; and mind becomes of the nature, as the force of early 
habit forms the youth. 


21. There is nothing which is likely to be effected, either by the precepts of 
the best Sdstras, or the dictates of right reason, unless they are made effectual 
by constant application and practice of them. (Theoretical knowledge is 
useless without practice). 


22. Your erroneous speech regarding the nihility of the world in this empty 
space, proceeded only from your constant habit of thinking the reality of the 
false world, which was about to mislead me also. Be now wise that you have 
overcome your previous prejudice, and known the present truth. 


23. Know, O sage, that it is your habitual thinking of a thing as such, that 
makes it appear so to you; just as a mechanic master’s art is by his constant 
practice of the same under the direction of its professor. 


24. The erroneous conceptions of this thing and that, and of the existence of 
the material world, and the reality of one’s egoism and personality; are all 
obviated by culture of spiritual knowledge, and by force of the constant habit 
of viewing all things in their spiritual light. 


25. Iam but a weak and young disciple to thee, and yet see the stony world 
too well, which thou with thy all knowingness dost not perceive; and this is 
because of my habit of thinking it otherwise than thou art practiced to do. 


26. See the effect of practice, which makes a learned man of a dunce (by 
his habitude to study); and reduces a stone to dust (by continued pounding). 
Look at the force of the inert arrow, to hit at the distant mark (by impulsion of 
the practiced archer). 


27. In this manner the gloom of our ignorance, and the malady of false 
knowledge, are both of them dispelled by right reasoning and deep thinking, 
both of which are the effect of habit. 


28. It is habit that produces a zest, in the tests of particular articles of food, 
as some have a relish for what is sour and pungent, while there are others that 
luxuriate in what is sweet and savoury. (Tastes differ). 


29. A stranger becomes friendly, by his continuance in one’s company; and 
so is a friend alienated, by his living in an alien and distant land. 


30. Our spiritual body, which is perfectly pure, aerial and full of 


intelligence, is converted to and mistaken for the gross material body as soul, 
by our constantly thinking of our corporeality. 


31. The impression of your being a material body, will fly away as a bird 
flies off in the air, no sooner you come to know yourself to be a spiritual and 
intellectual soul. But it is the habit of thinking yourself as such, that makes 
you really so. 


32. All our meritorious acts are destroyed, by a slight act of demerit; and 
our prosperity flies away at the approach of adversity; but there is nothing 
which can remove our habit from us. (Habit being our second nature). 


33. All difficult matters are facilitated by practice, and enemies are 
conciliated into friendship, and even poison is made as delectable as honey by 
virtue of habit. 


34. He is reckoned as too mean and vile a person, who does not accustom 
himself to practice, whatever is good and proper for him; he never acquires 
his object, but becomes as useless as a barren woman in the family. 


35. Whatever is desirable and good for one, is to be gained with assiduity 
all along one’s life time, just as one’s life, which is his greatest good in the 
world, is to be preserved with care, until the approach of death. 


36. Whoso neglects to practice any act or art, which is conducive to his 
welfare, is prone to his ruin and to the torments of hell. 


37. They who are inclined to the meditation of the spiritual soul, cross over 
easily over the billowy rivulet of this world, although they may be attached to 
it in their outward and bodily practices. (The knowledge of the immortal soul, 
is the healing balm of the turmoils of mortal life). 


38. Practice is the light, that leads one in the path of his desired object; just 
as the light of the lamp shows the place, where the lost pot or cloth lies in the 
room. (So application to the esoteric, enlightens the mysterious truths of 
nature). 


39. The arbour of assuetude fructifies in its time, as the kalpa tree yields all 
the fruits of our desire; and as the hoarded capital of the rich, is attended with 
great profit and interest. 


40. Habitual inquiry into spiritual truth, serves as the sunlight to enlighten 
the nature of the soul (unto us); or it lies hid in our very body as any part of it 
in the darkness of the sunless night. (The inward soul is invisible to exoteric 
view). 


41. All animal beings are in need of certain provisions, for the supportance 


of their lives; and all these they have to obtain by their continued search, and 
never without it. Therefore, the force of habit prevails in all places as the 
powerful sunshine. 


42. All the fourteen kinds of living beings, have to live by the habit of their 
respective activities; and it is impossible for anyone to get its desired object, 
without its unfeigned activity. 


43. It is the repetition of same action, which takes the name of habit, and 
which is called one’s personal effort or exertion; and it is not possible for 
anybody to do anything without any effort. 


44. Constant habit of action, joined with bodily and mental energy, is the 
only means of accomplishing anything and not otherwise. 


45. There is nothing which is impossible to the power of habit, which is as 
powerful as the strong sun-beams which give growth to everything on earth. It 
is habitual energy only that gives prosperity and undauntedness to the brave, 
on earth and water and mountains, and in forests and deserts. 


CHAPTER LXVIII. 
The Fallacy of the Existence of the World. 


Argument: — Exposition of the Erroneous conception of the Material 
World. 
The Nymph continued: — Now as it is the habit of long practice, combined 


with the understanding and cogitation of a subject, that makes one proficient 
in it; so these being applied to the meditation of the spiritual and pure soul, 
will cause the material world to vanish in the stone (we have been talking of). 


2. Vasishtha said: — After the celestial nymph had spoken in this manner, I 
retired to the cavern of a rock, where I sat in my posture of Padmdsana (or 
legs folded upon one another); and became engaged in my samddhi-devotion 
(or abstract and abstruse meditation). 


3. Having given up all thoughts of corporeal bodies, and continued to think 
only of the intellectual soul, according to the holy dictate of the nymph as said 
before. 


4. I then had the sight of an intellectual void in me, which present a clear 
and fair prospect before me, resembling the clearness of the vacuous vault of 
heaven in autumnal season. 


5. It was at last by my intense application, to the meditation of the true One 
(or the God in spirit), that my erroneous view of the phenomenals, entirely 
subsided within me (or disappeared from my mind). 


6. The intellectual sphere of my mind, was filled by a transcendent light; 
which knew no rising or setting, but was always shining with an uniform 
radiance. 


7. As I was looking into and through the light, that shone in me, I could 
find neither the sky nor that great stone, which I sought to find. 


8. I then found the clear and thick blaze of my spiritual light, to ravish my 
outward sight; as it had enrapt my inward vision. 


9. As a man sees in his dream a huge stone in his house, so I beheld the 
vast vacuum as a crystaline globe, situate in the clear atmosphere of the 
intellect. (The stone is the mundane egg or sphere of the universe). 


10. A dreaming man, may think himself as another person; but after he is 
awakened from his sleep, he comes to know himself. (So we dream ourselves 
as this and that, but upon waking to reason, we find ourselves as none of 
these, but the pure spirit). 


11. Those who dream themselves headless beings in their sleep, and remain 
so in this world; they can be of no good or use to themselves, though they 
have a little knowledge afterwards. 


12. The man that is drowned in utter ignorance, comes to his right 
understanding in course of time; and comes to know at the end, that there is 
no real entity, except the essence of God. 


13. This when I beheld the solid and transparent light, which appeared as 
crystal stone lying in the vacuity of Brahma; I could observe no material thing 
as the earth and water, or aught whatever in connection with it. 


14. The pure and spiritual form, in which all things were presented at their 
first creation; they bear the same forms still, in our ideas of them. 


15. All these bodies of created beings, are but forms of Brahma; being 
considered in their primordial and spiritual and natural natures; and it is the 
mind which gives them the imaginary shapes of materiality, in its fabricated 
dominion of the visible world. 


16. It is the spiritual form, which is the true essence of all things; and all 
that is visible to us or perceptible to the senses, is mere fabrication of the 
originally inventive mind. 


17. The prime creation was in the abstract, or an abstract idea of it, and 
imperceptible to the senses (because the original prototype of the world, was 
co-eternal with the divine mind, and existent with it from before the formation 
of the perceptive senses of beings; but it was perceptible to the mind in the 
form of the noumenal, which was converted to the concrete and phenomenal 
by the ignorant). 


18. The Yogi like the knowing minds, sees all things in the abstract and in a 
general view; but the ignorant that are deprived of the power of abstraction 
and generalization, fall into the errors of concrete particulars and deceptive 
sensibles. 


19. All sensation is but a temporary perception, and presents a wrong 


impression in the mind; know all sensible perceptions to be false and 
deluding, but their concepts in the mind of Yogi are the true realities. (Falsity 
of perception and reality of noumena according to Berkeley). 


20. O, the wonder of taking the sensibles for the invisible verities! when it 
is ascertained that the concepts, which are beyond the senses, are the true 
realities that come under our cognizance. 


21. It is the subtle form (or idea) of a thing, that appears at first before the 
mind; which is afterwards represented in various false shapes before us; and 
this is true of all material things in the world. (As the general and abstract idea 
of heat, which is at first imprinted in the mind, is manifested unto us at last in 
the concrete and particular forms of the sun and fire and all other hot bodies). 
(This passage supports the doctrine of the eternity of general ideas innate in 
us, against Locke’s denial of inborn ideas). 


22. Whatever there has not been before, has never been in being 
afterwards; as the variety of the jewelry of gold, is naught but gold itself; so 
the pristine subtle ideas, cannot have any gross material form. (All which is 
but shadow and fallacy). 


23. O, the great ignorance of men! that takes the error for truth, and 
considers the falsehood as true; and there is no way for the living soul to 
discern the true and false, except by right reasoning. 


24. The material body cannot be maintained by correct reason, but the 
immaterial essence of it is indestructible, both in this world as also in the next. 


25. The error of materiality in the incorporeal or spiritual body, which is 
presided over by the intellect, — chit; is as the fallacy of a vast sea, in the 
shining sands of a sandy desert. 


26. The consciousness of materiality, which one has in his spiritual and 
intellectual form; is as his supposition of a human body in the peak of a 
mountain, when it is viewed by his naked eye sight. 


27. The erroneous supposition of materiality, in the spiritual entity of our 
being; is as the error of our taking the shells on the sea shore for silver, the 
sun shines on sands for water, and another moon in the mist. 


28. O the wondrous efficacy or error! that represents the unreal as real and 
the vice-versa; and O the great power of delusion! which springs from the 
unreasonableness of living beings. 


29. The Yogi finds the spiritual force and mental activity, to be the two 
immaterial causes of all action and motion, that actuate everything in both the 


physical and intellectual worlds. 


30. Therefore, the Yogi relies in his internal perception only, by rejecting 
those of his external senses; while the common sort are seen to run giddy, 
with drinking the vapours of the mirage of senses. 


31. That which is commonly called pleasure or pain, is but a fleeting 
feeling in the mind of men, and is of a short duration; it is that unfeigned and 
lasting peace of mind, which has neither its rise or fall, that is called true 
happiness, (and is felt by Yogis only). 


32. Infer the hyper-sensible from the sensibles, and see the true source of 
thy sensations manifest in thy presence. (Know the Lord as the pattern of thy 
perceptions). 


33. Reject the sight of this triple world (composed of the upper, lower and 
midway spheres), which thy perception presents to thy imagination; because 
there can be nothing more foolish than taking a delusion for truth. 


34. All these bodies and beings bear only, their immaterial forms of mere 
ideas; and it is the goblin of delusion alone, that causes us to suppose their 
materiality. 


35. Whatever is not produced or thought of in the mind, cannot present its 
figure to our sight also; and that which is no reality of itself, cannot be the 
cause of any else. (Nothing comes from a nullity). 


36. When the sensibles are null and unreal, what other thing is there that 
may be real; and how can anything be said as real, whose reality is by the 
unreal and delusive senses. 


37. The sensibles being proved as unreal, there can be no reality in their 
perceptions and thoughts also; it is impossible for a spider to maintain its web 
before a storm, which blows away an elephant. 


38. So likewise, the ocular evidence being proved as false, there is no proof 
of there being any object of vision anywhere. There is but One invariable 
entity in all nature, whose solidity depends upon the consolidation of the 
divine intellect, as of the sea salt on the solidified sea water. 


39. As a dreamer dreams of a high hill in his house, and in its ideal form, 
which is unknown to and unseen to others sleeping with him in the same 
house; so we thought two of that stone we have been talking of erewhile, and 
which is no other than the intellect. 


40. It is this intellectual soul, which exhibits a great many ideal phenomena 
within itself, and all of which are as unsubstantial as empty air; such as: — 


this is a hill, and this is the sky; this is the world, and these are myself and 
thyself. 


41. Men of enlightened souls only, can perceive these phenomena of the 
intellect in themselves and not the unenlightened soul; just as the hearer of a 
lecture understands its purport, and not one who dozes upon the reading of a 
sermon. 


42. All these erroneous sights of the world, appear to be true to the 
unenlightened person; just as the unmoving trees and mountains, seem to be 
dancing to inebriated man. 


43. The Yogi beholds one irrepressible form of God (Siva) in all places, and 
manifest before him in the form of his intellect; but the ignorant are beguiled 
by their false guides, to place their reliance in the objects of senses, 
notwithstanding their frail nature. 


CHAPTER LXIX 
Entrance into the Cosmical Stone of Mundane Egg. 


Argument: — Creative energy of God is the cause of reminiscence, and 
reminiscence is the cause of reproduction. 


Vasishtha added: — The world is without any figure or substance, though it 
presents the appearance of such; it is seen in the light of the pure and 
imperishable essence of God, by the keen sight of transcendental philosophy. 


2. It is that quintessence which exhibits in itself the rare show of the 
cosmorama, and the figures of hills and rivers are seen in it as pictures in a 
panoroma, or as spectres appearing in the empty air. 


3. The nymph then entered that cosmical block by the resistless efforts, and 
I also penetrated in it after her, with my curiosity (to know the contents 
thereof). 


4. After that indefatiguable lady had made her way into the cosmos of 
Brahma, she took her seat before a Brahmana, and shone supremely bright in 
his presence. 


5. She introduced me to him and said: — This is my husband and supporter 
and with whom I have made my betrothal a long time in my mind. 


6. He is now an old man, and I too have attained my old age; and as he has 
differed his marriage with me till now, I have become utterly indifferent about 
it at present. 


7. He also has grown averse to his marriage at present, and is desirous of 
attaining to that supreme state, of which there is no view nor viewer, and 
which is yet no airy vacuity also. 


8. The world is now approaching to its dissolution, and he has been sitting 
in his meditation, in as silent a mood as a stone and as immovable as a rock 
(in his Yoga hypnotism). 


9. Therefore, do thou please, O lord of saints, to awaken both himself and 


me also, and enlighten and confirm us in the way of supreme felicity, until the 
end of this creation and the re-creation of a new one. 


10. Having said so to me, she waked her husband and spoke to him saying; 
Here my lord, is the chief of saints, that has come today to our abode. 


11. This sage is the progeny of Brahma in another apartment of this 
worldly dome, and deserves to be honoured with the honors worthy of a guest, 
according to the proper rite of hospitality. 


12. Arise and receive the great sage with offering of his honorarium, and 
the water (for washing his feet); because great persons are deserving of the 
greatest regards and respects, that one can offer unto them. 


13. Being thus addressed by her, the holy devotee awoke from his 
hypnotism, and his consciousness rose in himself, as a whirlpool rises above 
the sea. 


14. The courteous sage opened his eyes slowly, as flowers open their petals 
in the vernal season after the autumn is over. 


15. His returning senses slowly displayed the power of his limbs, as the 
returning moisture of plants in spring, puts their new sprouts and branches to 
shoot forth anew. 


16. Immediately there assembled about him the gods, and demi-gods, 
Siddhas and Ghandharvas also from all sides; just as the assemblage of swans 
and cranes, flock to the limpid lake, blooming with the full-blown lotuses in it. 


17. He looked upon all that were standing before him, together with myself 
and the fair lady (that had brought me thither); and then in the sweet tone of 
the parnava hymn, he addressed me as the second Brahma himself. 


18. The Brahmana said: — I welcome thee, O sage, to this place, that dost 
view the world as in a globe placed in the palm of thy hand; and resemblest 
the great ocean in the vast extents of thy knowledge. (Lit.,: — the ambrosial 
waters of knowledge). 


19. You have come a great way, to this far distant place; and as you must 
have been tired with your long journey, please to sit yourself in this seat. 


20. As he said these words, I saluted him saying, I hail thee my lord; and 
then sat on the jewelled seat, he pointed out to me. 


21. And then he was lauded by the assembled gods, and holy spirits 
standing before him, and received their puja presents and adorations, 
according to the rules and rites of courtesy. 


22. Then as the praises and prayers of the assembled host, was all at an end 
in a moment; the venerable brahmana was accosted and bespoken unto me in 
the following manner. 


23. How is it, O venerable Sir, that this nymph has recourse to me, and tells 
me to enlighten you both with true knowledge, when you are acquainted 
whatever is past, and all that is to take place in future. 


24. You Sir, are lord of all, and fully acquainted with all knowledge; what 
is it then that this silly woman wants to learn from me, and this is what I want 
to learn from you. 


25. Why was she produced by you to become your spouse, and was never 
taken to spousal by your indifference towards her. 


26. The Brahmana replied: — Hear me saint to tell you, how it came to be 
so with us; because it is right and fit to acquaint everything in full to the wise 
and good. 


27. There is an unborn and imperishable entity from all eternity, and I am 
but a spark of that ever sparkling and effulgent intellect. 


28. I am of the form of empty air or vacuum, and situated forever in the 
supreme spirit; and am called the self-born in all the worlds, that were to be 
created afterwards. 


29. But in reality I am never born, nor do I ever see or do anything in 
reality; but remain as the vacuous intellect in the intellectual vacuity of the 
self-same entity. 


30. These our addresses to one another in the first and second persons, (Jit., 
as I, thou, mine, thine, efc.), are no other than as the sounds of the waves of 
the same sea dashing against each other. 


31.1, who was of this nature (of a clear wave in the sea of eternity), became 
disturbed in time by feeling some desire rising in me, and seeing that maid 
amidst the blaze of my intellect. 


32. I thought her as myself, though she appears as another person to you 
and others; and though she is manifest before you, yet lies as hidden in me as 
my very self. 


33. And I find myself as that imperishable entity, which abides in me as I 
abide in the supreme soul; I find my soul to be imperishable in its nature, and 
to be delighted in itself as if it were the lord of all. 


34. Though I was thus absorbed in meditation, yet the reminiscence of my 


former state, (as the creative energy of God or Brahma); produced in me the 
desire of reproduction, and yonder is the incarnate divinity presiding over my 
will. 


35. She is the presiding divinity over my will, that is standing here manifest 
before you; she is neither my wife nor have I betrothed her as such. 


36. It is from the desire of her heart, that she deems herself the spouse of 
Brahma; and it is for that reason that she has undergone troubles, before she 
got rid of her desires. 


CHAPTER LXxX. 
The Words of the Creator of Worlds in the 
Mundane Stone. 


Argument: — Relation of the desire of the Divine of Divinity as the cause 
of her sorrow. 


The Brahmana related: — Now as the world is approaching to its end, and I 
am going to take my rest in the formless void of the intellect (after dissolution 
of the material world); it is for this reason that this divinity of worldly desires, 
is drowned in deep sorrow. 


2. And as I am about to forsake her forever, it is for this very reason, O 
sage, that she is so very sorry and sick at her heart. 


3. Being myself of an aerial form, when I become one with the supreme 
spirit (after my leaving the mental sphere); then there takes place the great 
dissolution of the world with the end of all my desire. 


4. Hence, she with deep sorrow pursues my way, for who is there so 
senseless, that does not follow after the giver of her being. 


5. Now the time is come for the termination of the Kaliyuga, and of the 
rotation of the four ages; and the dissolution of all living beings, Manus, 
Indras, and the Gods, is near at hand. 


6. Today is the end of the Kalpa and great Kalpa age, and this day puts an 
end to my energy and will, and makes me mix with the eternal and infinite 
vacuity. 


7. It is now that this personification of my desire, is about to breathe her 
last; just as the lake of lotuses being dried, the breath of lotus flowers also is 
lost in the air. 


8. The quiet soul like the calm ocean, is always at a state of rest; unless it is 
agitated by its fickle desires, as the sea is troubled by its fluctuating waves. 


9. The embodied being (which is confined in the prison-house of the human 
body), has naturally a desire to know the soul, and to be freed from its 
dungeon. 


10. Thus this lady being fraught with spiritual knowledge, and long 
practiced in Yoga meditation; has seen the world you inhabit, and the four 
different states of its inhabitants. (The gloss explains the four states to mean 
the four different pursuits of men expressed by Dharma, Artha, Kdma, 
Moksha). 


11. She traversing through the regions of air, has come to the sight of the 
aforesaid ethereal stone above the polar mountain, which is our celestial 
abode and the pattern of your world. 


12. Both that world of yours and this abode of ours, rest on a great 
mountain, which bears upon it many other worlds (invisible to the naked eye). 


13. We also do not see them with our discriminating eye sight, of 
discerning them separately from one another; but we behold them all 
commingled in one, in our abstract view of Yoga meditation, (i.e., The sight of 
particulars is lost in their abstract meditation). 


14. There are numberless worlds of creations, in earth, water and air and in 
everything under the sky, as if they are compressed or carved in the body of a 
huge block of stone. 


15. What you call the world is a mere fallacy, and resembles your vision of 
a fairy city in dream; it is a false name applied to an object, existing nowhere 
beyond the intellect (and in the imagination of the mind). 


16. They who have come to know the world, as no other than an airy vision 
of the mind, are verily called as wise men, and not liable to fall into error. 


17. There others who by their application to and practice of Yoga 
contemplation, come to attain their desired object, as this lady has succeeded 
to gain your company (for her edification). 


18. Thus doth the illusory power of the intellect, display these material 
worlds before us; and thus doth the everlasting Divine omnipotence manifest 
itself (in all these various forms). 


19. There is no action nor any creation, that is ever produced from anything 
or ever reduced to nothing; but all things and actions are the spontaneous 
growth of the intellect only; together with our ideas of space and time. 


20. Know the ideas of time and space, of substance and action, as well as of 
the minds and its faculties, are the lasting figures and marks on the stone of 


the intellect, and are ever salient in it, without their setting or being shaded at 
any time. 


21. This intellect is the very stone (we have been talking of), and is either at 
rest or rolling on as roller or wheel; the worlds appertain to it as its 
appurtenances, and accompany it as motion doth the wind. 


22. The soul being replete with its full knowledge of all things, is 
considered as the solid world itself; and though it is infinite in time and space, 
yet it is thought as limited, owing to its appearance in the form of the bounded 
and embodied mind. 


23. The unbounded intellect appears as bounded, by its limited knowledge; 
and although it is formless, yet it appears in the form of the mind, representing 
the worlds in it. 


24. As the mind views itself in the form of aerial city in its dream, so doth 
it find itself in the form of this stone, with the worlds marked upon it in the 
daytime. (The world like the dream, is a transformation or representation of 
the mind itself). 


25. There is no rolling of the orbs in this world, nor the running of streams 
herein, there is no object subsisting in reality anywhere; but they are all mere 
representations of the mind in empty air. 


26. As there are no kalpa and great kalpa ages in eternity, nor the 
substantiality of anything in the vacuity of our consciousness; and as there is 
no difference of the waves and bubbles from the waters of the sea. (So there is 
no difference of the empty thoughts from the vacuous mind; whence they take 
their rise). 


27. The worlds appearing to be in esse, or existent in the mind and before 
the eyes; are in reality utterly inexistent in the intellect, which spreads alike as 
the all-pervading and empty vacuum everywhere. And as all empty space in 
every place is alike and same with the infinite vacuity; so the forms of things 
appearing to the limited understanding, are all lost in the unlimited intellect. 


28. Now Vasishtha, go to your place in your own world; and have your 
peace and bliss in your own seat of samddhi-devotion. Consign your aerial 
worlds to empty air, while I myself to the supreme Brahma do repair. 


CHAPTER LXXI. 
Description of Final Dissolution. 


Argument: — Conduct of Kali age, and Termination of Brahma’s Creation 
at the End. 


Vasishtha added: — So saying, Brahma, — the personified Brahman, sat in 
his posture of devotion, — padmdsana, and resumed his intense meditation of 
the samadhi meditation; and so did his celestial companions also. 


2. He fixed his mind on the pause santa, which is placed at the end of half 
syllable m, — the final letter of the holy mantra of omkara; and sat sedate 
with his steady attention (on the Divine), as an unmoved picture in painting. 


3. His concupiscent consort, — vdsand or desire, followed his example 
also; and sat reclined at the end of all her endless wishes, as an empty and 
formless vacuity. (The devotee must become a nullity, for his union with the 
unity). 


4. When I saw them growing thin for want of their desires, I also reduced 
myself by means of my meditation, until I found myself as one with all 
pervading Intellect; in the form of endless vacuity (and perceived everything 
that was going on everywhere). 


5. I saw that as the desires of Brahma were drying up in himself, so I found 
all nature to be fading away, with the contraction of the earth and ocean, 
together with the diminution of their hills and islands. 


6. I saw the trees and plants and all sorts of vegetables, were fading away 
with the decay of their growth; and all creation seemed to come to its end in a 
short time. 


7. It seemed that the stupendous body of Virdj, which contained the whole 
universe, was sick in every part; and the great earth which was borne in his 
body, was now falling insensibly into decline and decay. 


8. She is now stricken with years, and grown dull and dry without her 


genial moisture, and is wasting away as a withered tree in the cold season. 
(Jit., — in the cold month of Christmas, when the icy breath of winter withers 
every green). 


9. As the insensibility of our hearts, stupifies the members of our bodies; so 
did the anesthesia of One produce the obtuseness of all things in the world. 
(The creative power failing, all creation dwindles away). 


10. The world was threatened by many a portent and ill omen on all sides, 
and men were hastening to hell-fire; and burning in the flame of their sins. 
(The end of Kali or sinful age, is the precursor to its final doom of the dooms- 


day). 


11. The earth was a scene of oppression and famine, troubles, calamities 
and poverty, waited on mankind everywhere; and as women trespassed the 
bounds of decorum, so did men transgress the bounds of order and conduct. 


12. The sun was obscured by mist and frost, resembling gusts of ashes and 
dust; and the people were greatly and equally afflicted by the excess of heat 
and cold, the two opposites which they knew not how to prevent. (i.e., All 
beings were tormented by the inclemencies of weather). 


13. The Pamaras or Pariahs, were tormented by burning fires on one side, 
and floods and draughts of rain water on the other; while waging wars were 
devastating whole provinces altogether. 


14. Tremendous portents were accompanied, with the falling mountains 
and cities all around; and loud uproars of the people rose around, for the 
destruction of their children and many good and great men under them. (i.e., 
under the falling rocks and edifices). 


15. The land burst into deep ditches, where there was no water course 
before; and the peoples and rulers of men, indulged themselves in 
promiscuous marriages. 


16. All men living as way-farers or peddlers, and all paths full of tailor 
shops; all women dealing in their hairs and head-dressess, and all rulers 
imposing head taxes on their people. 


17. All men living by hard labour, and the reyets living upon litigation 
only; women living in impiety and impurity, and the rulers of men addicted to 
drinking. 


18. The earth was full of unrighteousness, and its people were misled by 
heretical doctrines and vicious Sdstras; all wicked men were wealthy and 
fortunate, and good people all in distress and misery. 


19. The vile non-aryans, were the rulers of earth, and the respectables and 
learned men had fallen into disrepute and disregard; and the people all were 
guided by their evil passions of anger, avarice and animosity, envy, malice 
and the like. 


20. All men were apostates from their religion, and inclined to the faith of 
others; the Brahmanas were furious in their dehortation, and the vile borderers 
were persecutors of others. (i.e., they robbed themselves). 


21. Robbers infested the cities and villages, and robbed the temples of gods 
and the houses of good people; and there were parasites, pampered with the 
dainties of others, but short lived and sickly with their gluttony. 


22. All men indulging themselves in their idleness and luxury, and 
neglecting their rituals and duties; and all the quarters of the globe, presented 
a scene of dangers and difficulties, woe and grief. 


23. Cities and villages were reduced to ashes, and the districts were laid 
waste on all sides; the sky appeared to be weeping with its vaporous clouds, 
and the air disturbed by its whirling tornadoes. 


24. The land resounded with the loud crying and wailing of widows and 
unfortunate women, and they who remained at last, compelled to live by 


beggary. 
25. The country was dry and anhydrous, and lying bare and barren in all 


parts; the seasons were unproductive of season-fruits and flowers; so every 
part of this earthly body of Brahma, was out of order and painful to him. 


26. There was a great dearth on earth, upon her approaching dissolution, 
and the body of Brahma grew senseless, owing to the loss of the watery 
element, in all its canals of rivers and seas. 


27. The spirit of Brahma being disturbed, there occurred a disorder in the 
course of nature; and it brought on a transgression of good manners, as when 
the waters of rivers and seas overflowed their boundaries. 


28. Then the furious and sounding surges begin to break down their 
bounds, and run mad upon the ground; and the floods overflow the land, and 
lay waste the woodlands. 


29. There were whirlpools, whirling with hoarse noise, and turning about 
on every side, with tremendous violence; and huge surges rose as high, as to 
wash the face of the heavy clouds in the sky. 


30. The mountain caverns, were resounding to the loud roars of huge 
clouds on high, and heavy showers of rain fell in torrents from the sky, and 


overflooded the mountain tops afar and nigh. 


31. Gigantic whales, were rolling along with the whirling waves of the 
ocean; and the bosom of the deep appeared as a deep forest, with the huge 
bodies of the whales floating upon the upheaving waves. 


32. The mountain caves were strewn over with the bodies of marine 
animals, which were killed there by rapacious lions and tigers; and the sky 
glittered with marine gems, which were borne on high by the rising waters. 


33. The dashing of the rising waves of the sea, against the falling showers 
of the sky; and the dashing of the uplifted whales with elephantine clouds on 
high, raised a loud uproar in the air. 


34. The elephants floating on the diluvian waters, washed the faces of the 
luminaries, with the waters spouted out of their nozzles; and their justling 
against one another, hurled the hills aground. (Or they clashed on one another, 
as two hills dashed over against the other). 


35. The sounding surges of the sea, dashed against the rocks on the shore, 
emitted a noise like the loud roar of elephants, contending in the caverns of 
mountains. 


36. The nether sea invaded the upper sky, and its turbulent waves drove the 
celestials from their abode; as an earthly potentate attacks another, and his 
triumphant host, dispossesses the inhabitants with loud outcry. 


37. The overflowing waters covered the woods, both in the earth and air; 
and the overspreading waves filled the skies like the winged mountains of 
yore. 


38. High sounding winds were breaking the breakers of the sea, and driving 
them ashore as fragments of mountains; while their splashing waters, dashed 
against the rocks on the shore, and washed the fossil shells on the coast. 


39. Whirling whirlpools, were hurling the huge whales into them; and 
engulfing the falling rocks in their fathomless depth. 


40. Big water elephants or whales were carried with the torrents, and 
drowned in the depths of the caverns on the mountain tops; and these they 
attempted to break, with their hideous teeth or tusks. 


41. The tortoise and crocodile hang suspended on the trees, and extended 
their full length and breadth thereon; and the vehicles of Yama and Indra, 
(i.e., the buffalo and elephant), stood aghast with their erect ears. 


42. They listened to the fragments of rocks, falling with hideous noise on 


the sea-shore; and beheld fishes with their broken fins, tossed up and down by 
the falling stones. 


43. The forests shook no more in their dancing mood, and the waters on 
earth were all still and cold; but the marine waters were flaming with the sub- 
marine fire, emitting a dismal glare. 


44. The sea elephants or whales being afraid of the extinction of marine 
fire, by the primeval waters (which were the seat of Narayana); fell upon the 
waters on the mountain tops, and contended with the earthly and mountainous 
elephants. 


45. The rocks carried away by the rapid current, appeared as dancing on the 
tops of the waves; and there was a loud concussion of the swimming and 
drowned rocks, (maindkas), as they dashed against the mountains on land. 


46. Large mountains and woods, were now resorted to by men and wild 
animals; and the driving droves of wild elephant, were roaring as loud, as the 
high-sounding trumpets at a distance. 


47. The infernal regions were disturbed by the torrents of water, as by the 
infernal demons; and the elephants of the eight quarters, raised loud cries with 
their uplifted trunks and nozzles. 


48. The nether world emitted a growling noise, from their mouths of 
infernal caverns; and the earth which is fastened to its polar axis, turned as a 
wheel upon its axle. 


49. The over-flowing waters of the ocean, broke their bounds with as much 
ease, as they tear asunder the marine plants; and the breathless skies 
resounded to the roaring of the clouds all around. 


50. The sky was split into pieces, and fell down in fragments; and the 
regents of the skies fled afar with loud cries. And comets and meteors were 
hurled from heaven, in the forms of whirlpools. 


51. There were fires and firebrands, seen to be burning on all sides of the 
skies, earth and heaven; and flaming and flashing as liquid gold and luminous 
gems, and as snakes with colour of vermilion. 


52. My flaming and flying portents, with their burning crests and tails, were 
seen to be flashing all about, and flung by the hands of Brahma, both in the 
heaven above and earth below. 


53. All the great elementary bodies, were disturbed and put out of order; 
and the sun and moon and the regents of air and fire, with the gods of heaven 
and hell (name by Pavana and Agni, and Indra and Yama), were all in great 


confusion. 


54. The gods seated even in the abode of Brahma, were afraid of their 
impending fall; when they heard the gigantic trees of the forests falling 
headlong, with the tremendous crash of pata-pata noise. 


55. The mountains standing on the surface of the earth, were shaking and 
tottering on all sides; and a great earthquake shook the mountains of Kailasa 
and Meru, to their very bottom and caverns and forests. 


56. The ominous tornadoes at the end of the Kalpa period, overthrew the 
mountains and cities and forests, and overwhelmed the earth and all in a 
general ruin and confusion. 


CHAPTER LXXII. 
Description of Nirvana or Final Extinction. 


Argument: — Brahma’s suppression of his Respiration; his settling on the 
wings of air and his form of Virdj. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now the self-born Brahma, having compressed his 
breath in his form of Virdj (or the heart); the aerial or atmospheric air, which 
is borne on the wings of wind, lost its existence. 


2. The atmospheric air, which is the very breath of Brahma being thus 
compressed in his breast; what other air could there remain, to uphold the 
starry frame and the system of the universe. 


3. The atmospheric air, being compressed with the vital breath of Brahma; 
the perturbed creation (as described before), was about to come to its ultimate 
quietus. 


4. The firmament being no more upheld by its support of the air, gave way 
to the fiery bodies of meteors, to fall down on earth, as starry flowers from the 
arbour of heaven. 


5. The orbs of heaven, being unsupported by the intermediate air, were now 
falling on the ground; like the unfailing and impending fruits of our deserts, or 
the flying fates falling from above. 


6. The gross desire or the crude will of Brahma, being now at its end at the 
approach of dissolution; there was an utter stop, of the actions and motions of 
the Siddhas, as that of the flame of fire before its extinction. 


7. The world-destroying winds were winding in the air, like the thin and 
flying scraps of cotton; and then the Siddhas fell down mute from heaven, 
after the loss of their strength and power of speech. 


8. The great fabrics of human wishes, fell down with the cities of the Gods; 
and the peaks of mountain were hurled headlong, by shocks of tremendous 
earthquakes. 


9. Rama rejoined: — Now Sir, if the world is but a representation of the 
ideal in the mind of the great God Brahma or Virdj; then what is the difference 
of earth, heaven and hell to him (who encompasses the whole in his body or 
mind). 


10. How can these worlds be said, to be the members of his body; or can it 
be thought, that the God resides in them with his stupendous form. 


11. I well know that Brahma is the willful spirit of God, and has no form of 
himself; and so, do I take this world for a formless representation of the will 
or idea in the Divine Mind. Please Sir, explain this clearly unto me. 


12. Vasishtha replied: — In the beginning this world was not in existence, 
nor inexistence either; because there was the eternal Intellect, which 
engrossed all infinity in itself, and the whole vacuity of space with its essence. 


13. This vacuity of it (the subjective chit), is known as the objective chetya 
or thought; and the intellect without forsaking its form, becomes chetana or 
the power of intellection (or the mind) itself. 


14. Know this intellection as the jiva or living soul, which being condensed 
(with feelings, etc.) becomes the gross mind; but none of these essences or 
forms of existence, have any form whatever. 


15. The vacuity of the intellect, remains as the pure vacuum in itself 
forever; and all this which appears as otherwise, is no other and nothing 
without the self-same soul. 


16. The very soul assumes to it its egoism (or personality), and thinking 
itself as the mind, becomes sullied with its endless desires, in its vacuous 
form. (The pure soul is changed to the impure spirit or volitive mind). 


17. Then this intellectual principle, thinks itself as the air, by its own 
volition; and by this false supposition of itself, it becomes of an aerial form in 
the open air. 


18. Then it thinks of its future gross form, and immediately finds itself 
transformed to an aerial body, by its volition or sankalpa. (The will being 
master to the thought). 


19. Though the soul, spirit and mind, are vacuous in their natures; yet they 
can assume aerial forms to themselves by their will, as the mind sees its 
imaginary cities; and so doth the Lord take upon Him any form it pleases. 


20. And as the knowledge of our minds, is purely of an aerial nature, so the 
intelligence of the all-intelligent Lord is likewise of an intellectual kind; and 
he takes and forsakes any form as he supposes and pleases for himself. 


21. As we advance to the knowledge of recondite truth, so we come to lose 
the perception of size and extension; and to know this extended world as a 
mere nullity, though it appears as a positive entity. 


22. By knowledge of the real truth, we get rid of our desires, as it is by our 
knowledge of the unity and the absence of our egoism or personality, that we 
obtain our liberation. (i.e., The knowledge of our nothingness). 


23. Such is He, — the supreme One, and is Brahma the entity of the world. 
And know Virdj, O Rama, to be the body of Brahma, and the form of the 
visible world. (Brahma, Brahma and Virdj, are the triple hypostasis of the One 
and same God). 


24. The desires or will, is of the form of empty vacuum, and the erroneous 
conceptions which rise in it; the same give birth to the world, which is thence 
called the mundane egg. 


25. Know all this is non esse, and the forms you see, are but formation of 
your fancy; in reality there is nothing in esse; and tuism and egoism are no 
entities at any time. 


26. How can the gross world be ever attached to the simple Intellect, which 
is of the nature of a void; how can a cause or secondary causality, be ever 
produced in or come out from a mere void? 


27. Therefore, all this production is false, and all that is seen a mere falsity; 
all this is a mere void and nothing, which erroneously taken for something. 


28. It is the Intellect only which exhibits itself, in the forms of the world 
and its productions, in the same manner as the air begets its pulsations (in the 
form of winds), in the very calm air itself. 


29. The world is either as something or as nothing at all, and devoid of 
unity and duality; know the whole to lie in the empty vacuity of the Intellect, 
and is as void and transparent as the same. 


30. I am extinct to all these endless particulars and distinctions, and 
whether you take them as real or unreal, and be with or without your egoism, 
it is nothing to me. 


31. Be without any desire and quiet in your mind, remain silent and without 
fickleness in your conduct; do whatever you have to do, or avoid to do it 
without anxiety. 


32. The eternal One, that is ever existent in our notion of Him, is manifest 
also in the phenomenal, which is no other than Himself. But our imperfect 
notion of God, has many things in it which are unknown to us and beyond our 


comprehension; and such are the phenomenals also, that are so palpable unto 
us. (We have the innate idea of God, but no knowledge of his inner or outer 
nature and attributes, which are displayed in all existence). 


CHAPTER LXXIII. 
Description of the Person of Virdj — The 
God of Nature. 


Argument: — If there is no truth or untruth in the creation, how can both be 
true or false at once. 


Rama said: — Sir, you have said at length regarding our bondage and 
liberation, and our knowledge of the world as neither a reality nor an unreality 
also; and that it neither rises nor sets, but is always existent as at first and ever 
before. 


2. [have well understood Sir, all your lectures on the subjects, and yet wish 
to know more of these, for my full satisfaction with the ambrosial drops of 
your speech. 


3. Tell me Sir, how there is no truth nor any untruth, either an erroneous 
view of the creation as a reality, or its view as a mere vacuum. 


4. In such a case, I well understand what is the real truth; yet I want you to 
tell more of this, for my comprehension of the subject of creation. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — All this world that is visible to us, with all its 
moving and unmoving creatures; and all things with all their varieties, 
occasioned by difference of country and climate. 


6. All these are subject to destruction, at the great dissolution of the world; 
together with Brahma, Indra, Upendra, Mahendra and the Rudras at the end. 


7. Then there remains something alone, which is unborn and increate and 
without its beginning; and which is ever calm and quiet in its nature. To this 
no words can reach, and of which nothing can be known. 


8. As the mountain is larger and more extended than a mustard seed, so is 
the sky much more than that; but the entity of vacuity is the greatest of all. 


9. Again, as the dusts of the earth, are smaller than the great mountain; so 


the stupendous universe, is a minute particle in comparison with the infinite 
entity of the vacuity of God. 


10. After the long lapse of unmeasured time, in the unlimited space of 
eternity, (i.e., at the end of a Kalpa age); and after the dissolution of all 
existence in the transcendent vacuum of the Divine Mind, (Jit., thinking soul); 


11. At this time, the great vacuous intellect, which is unlimited by space 
and time, and is quite tranquil by being devoid of all its desire and will; looks 
in itself by its reminiscence, the atomic world in aeriform state (as the soul 
ruminates over the past in its dream). 


12. The intellect reconnoitres over this unreality within itself, as it were in 
its dream; and then it thinks on the sense of the word Brahma or enlargement, 
and beholds the dilation of these minutiae in their intellectual forms; (i.e., the 
developed ideas). 


13. It is the nature of the intellect to know the minute ideas, which are 
contained in its sensory; and because it continues to look upon them, it is 
called their looker. (i.e., The subjective principle of the objective thoughts). 


14. (In order to clear how the intellect can be both the subjective and 
objective at once, it is said that: —) As a man sees himself as dead in his 
dream, and the dead man sees his own death; so doth the intellect see the 
minute ideas in itself. (Hence it is not impossible for the contraries to subsist 
together). 


15. Hence it is the nature of the intellect, to see its unity as a duality within 
itself; and to remain of its own nature, as both the subjective and objective by 
itself. 


16. The intellect is of the nature of vacuum, and therefore, formless in 
itself; and yet it beholds the minute ideas to rise as visibles before it, and 
thereby the subjective viewer becomes the duality of the objective view also. 


17. It then finds its minute self, springing out distinctly in its own 
conception; just as a seed is found to sprout forth in its germ. (This is the first 
step of the conception of personality of the universal spirit). 


18. It has then the distinct view of space and time, and of substance and its 
attributes and actions before its sight; but as these are yet in their state of 
internal conceptions, they have as yet received no names for themselves. 


19. Wherever the particle of the intellect shines (or that which is 
perceptible to it); is called the place (or object), and whenever it is perceived 
the same is termed as time, and the act of perception is styled the action. 


20. Whatever is perceived (by the intellect), the same is said as the object; 
and the sight or seeing thereof by it, is the cause of its perception, just as the 
light of a luminary, is the cause of ocular vision. 


21. Thus, endless products of the intellect appear before it, as distinct from 
one another by their time, place, and action; and all these appearing as true, 
like the various colours of the skies in the sky. 


22. The light of the intellect shines through different parts of the body, as 
the eye is the organ whereby it sees; and so the other organs of sense for its 
perception of other objects. (All these are called axas answering the sight of 
the eyes). 


23. The intellectual particle, shining at first within itself, bears no distinct 
name except that of tanmdtra or its inward perception; which is as 
insignificant a term as empty air. 


24. But the shadow of the atomic intellect falling upon the empty air, 
becomes the solid body; which shoots forth into the five organs of sense, 
owing to its inquest into their five objects of form and the rest. 


25. The intellectual principle, being then in need of retaining its sensations 
in the sensorium, becomes the mind and understanding (which is called the 
sixth or internal organ of sense). 


26. Then the mind being actuated by its vanity, takes upon it the 
denomination of egoism, and is inclined to make imaginary divisions of space 
and time. 


27. Thus the minute intellect comes to make distinctions of time, by giving 
them the different denomination of the present, past and future. 


28. Again, with regard to space, it denominates one place as upper and 
another as lower; and goes on giving different appellations of sides (or the 
points of compass), to one invariable space in nature. 


29. It then comes to understand the meanings of words, and invent the 
terms signifying time and space, action and substance. 


30. Thus the intellect bearing a vacuous form in the primordial vacuum, 
became the spiritual or lingadéha of its own accord, until it was diffused all 
over the world (which is thence called the mundane God). 


31. Having long remained in that state as it thought, it took upon it the 
compleately concrete material form through which it was transfused. 


32. Though formed originally of air in the original air, and was perfectly 


pure in its nature; yet being incorporated in the false corporeal form, it forgot 
its real nature; as the solar heat in conjunction with sand, is mistaken for 
water. 


33. It then takes upon itself and of its own will, a form reaching to the 
skies; to which it applied to the sense of the word head to some part, and that 
of the word feet to another. (The highest heaven is the head and the earth the 
foot-stools of God). 


34. It applied to itself the sense of the words breast, sides and to other parts, 
by adopting their figurative sense and rejecting the literal ones. (Virdj is the 
human figure for the macrocosm of the universe). 


35. By thinking constantly on the forms of things, as this is a cow and that 
is a horse, etc., as also of their being bounded by space and time; it became 
conversant with the objects of different senses. 


36. The same intellectual particle, saw likewise the different parts of its 
body; which it termed its hands, feet, efc., as its outward members; and the 
heart, etc., as the inner members of the body. 


37. In this manner is formed the body of Brahma, as also those of Vishnu 
and the Rudras and other Gods; and so also the forms of men and worms are 
produced from their conception of the same. 


38. But in fact there is nothing, that is really made or formed; for all things 
are now, as they have been ever before. All this is the original vacuum, and 
primeval intelligence; and all forms are the false formations of fancy. 


39. Virdj is the seed producing the plants of the three worlds, which are 
productive of many more, as one root produces many bulbs under it. Belief in 
the creation, puts a bolt to the door of salvation; and the appearance of the 
world, is as that of a light and fleeting cloud without any rain. 


40. This Virdj is the first male, rising unseen of his own will. He is the 
cause of all actions and acts. 


41. He has no material body, no bone or flesh, nor is he capable of being 
grasped under the fist of anybody. 


42. He is as quiet and silent, as the roaring sea and cloud, and the loud roar 
of lions and elephants, and the din of battle, is unheard by the sleeping man. 


43. He remains neither as a reality, nor entirely as an unreality; but like the 
notion of a waking man, of a warrior seen to be fighting in his dream. (i.e., As 
the faint idea of an object seen in dream). 


44. Although his huge body stretches to millions of miles, yet it is 
contained in an atom with all the worlds that lie hid in every pore of his body. 
(Meaning, — the cosmos contained in a grain of the brain). 


45. Though thousands of worlds and millions of mountains compose the 
great body of the unborn Virdj, yet they are not enough to fill it altogether, as 
a large quantity of grain, is not sufficient to fill a winnowing basket. 


46. Though myriads of worlds are stretched in his body, yet they are but an 
atom in comparison with its infinity; and the Virdj is represented to contain all 
in his body, yet it occupies no space or place, but resembles a baseless 
mountain in a dream. 


47. He is called the self-born and Virdj also, and though he is said to be the 
body and soul of the world, yet he is quite a void himself. 


48. He is also named as Rudra and Sanatana, and Indra and Upendro also; 
he is likewise the wind, the cloud and the mountain in his person. 


49. The minute particle of the Intellect, like a small spark of fire, inflates 
and spreads itself at first; and then by thinking its greatness, it takes the form 
of chitta or the thinking mind, which with its self-consciousness becomes the 
vast universe. 


50. Then being conscious of its afflation, it becomes the wind in motion; 
and this is the aeriform body of Virdj. 


51. Then it becomes the vital breath, from the consciousness of its 
inspiration and expiration in the open air. 


52. It then imagines of an igneous particle in its mind, as children fancy a 
ghost where there is none; and this assumes the forms of luminous bodies (of 
the sun, moon, and stars) in the sky. 


53. The vital breath of respiration, are carried by turns through the 
respiratory organs into the heart; whence it is borne on the wings of air to 
sustain the world, which is the very heart of Virdj. 


54. This Virdj is the first rudiment of all individual bodies in the world, and 
in their various capacities forever. 


55. It is from this universal soul, that all individual bodies have their rise, 
and according to their sundry desires; and as these differ from one another in 
their outward shapes, so they are different also in their inward natures and 
inclinations. 


56. As the seed of Virdj sprang forth at first, in the nature and constitution 


of every individual being; it continues to do so in the same manner in the 
heart of every living, agreeably to the will of the same causal principle. 


57. The sun, moon and the winds, are as the bile, phlegm in the body of 
Brahma; and the planets and stars, are as the circulating breath and drops of 
the spittle of phlegm of that deity. 


58. The mountains are his bones, and the clouds his flesh; but we can never 
see his head and feet, nor his body and skin. 


59. Know, O Rama, this world to be the body of Virdj, and an imaginary 
form by his imagination only. Hence the earth and heaven and all the 
contents, are but the shadow of his Intellectual vacuity. 


CHAPTER LXXIV. 
Description of the Cosmical body of Virdj 
(Continued). 


Argument: — Description of the several parts and Members of the body of 
Virdj. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear now more about the body of Virdj, which he 
assumed to himself of his own will in that Kalpa epoch, together with the 
variety of its order and division, and its various customs and usages. 


2. It is the transcendent vacuous sphere of the intellect, which makes the 
very body of Virdj; it has no beginning, middle or end, and is as light as an 
aerial or imaginary form. 


3. Brahma who is without desire, beheld the imaginary mundane-egg 
appearing about him, in its aerial form (of a chimera). 


4. Then Brahma divided this imaginary world of his in twain. It was of a 
luminous form, from which he came out as a luminary, like a bird matured in 
its egg. (This is hence called Brahmanda or egg of Brahma). 


5. He beheld one half (or the upper hemisphere) of this egg, rising high in 
the upper sky; and saw the other half to constitute the lower world, and both 
of which he considered as parts of himself. 


6. The upper part of Brahma’s egg, is termed as the head of Virdj; the lower 
part is styled his footstool, and the midway region is called his waist. 


7. The midmost part of the two far separated portions, is of immense 
extent, and appearing as a blue and hollow vault all around us. 


8. The heaven is the upper roof of this hollow, likening to the palate of the 
open mouth, and the stars which are studded in it, resemble the spots of blood 
in it. The breath of the mouth is as vital air, which supports all mortals and the 
immortal Gods. 


9. The ghosts, demons and ogres, are as worms in his body; and the cavities 
of spheres of the different worlds, are as the veins and arteries in his body. 


10. The nether worlds below us, are the footstools of Virdj; and the cavities 
under his knees, are as the pits of infernal regions. 


11. The great basin of water in the midst of the earth, and surrounding the 
islands in the midst of them; is as the navel and its pit in the centre of the body 
of Virdj. 

12. The rivers with the purling waters in them, resemble the arteries of 
Virdj with the purple blood running in them; and the Jam-bu-dvipa is as his 
lotiform heart, with the mount Meru as its pericarp. 


13. The sides of his body, are as the sides of the sky; and the hills and rocks 
on earth, resemble the spleen and liver in the body of Virdj; and the collection 
of cooling clouds in the sky, is like the thickening mass of fat in his body. 


14. The sun and the moon are the two eyes of Virdj, and the high heaven is 
his head and mouth; the moon is his marrow, and the mountains are the filth 
of his person. 


15. The fire is the burning heat, and bile in his bowels; and the air is the 
breath of his nostrils (and so the other elements are humours of his body). 


16. The forests of kalpa trees and other woods, and the serpentine races of 
the infernal regions, are the hairs and tufts of hairs on his head and body. (All 
these are parts of the one undivided whole of Virdj’s body). 


17. The upper region of the solar world, forms the capt head of Virdj’s 
body; and the zodiacal light in the concavity beyond the mundane system, is 
the crest on top of Virdj’s head. 


18. He is the universal Mind itself, has no individual mind of his own; and 
he being the sole enjoyer of all things, there is nothing in particular that forms 
the object of his enjoyment. 


19. He is the sum of all the senses, therefore, there is no sense beside 
himself; and the soul of Virdj being fully sensible of everything, it is a mere 
fiction to attribute to him the property of any organ of sense. (It is a mere 
figure of speech to say God hears and sees, when the omniscient soul knows 
all without the aid of the organs of seeing and hearing). 


20. There is no difference of the property of an organ (as the hearing of the 
ear); and its possessor, — the mind, in the person of Virdj, who perceives by 
his mind all organic sensations, without the medium of their organs. 


21. There is no difference in doings of Virdj and those of the world; it is his 
will or thought alone which acts with many (or active) force (on the passive 
world), both in their transitive as well as in their causal forms. 


22. All actions and events of the world, being said to be same with his, our 
lives and deaths in this world, are all conformable to his will. (This passage is 
explained in four different ways in the gloss). 


23. It is by his living that the world lives, and so it dies away with his 
death; and just as it is the case, with the air and its motion, so it is with the 
world and Virdj to act or subside together. (But Virdj being the god of nature 
in general, he acts by general and not by partial laws, and is therefore, neither 
affected by particular events nor ever directs any particular accident at any 
place or time). (Both of which are the one and the same thing). 


24. The world and Virdj are both of the same essence, as that of air and its 
motion in the wind; that which is the world, the same is Virdj; and what Virdj 
is, the very same is the world also. (The same thing personified as another). 


25. The world is both Brahma as well as Virdj, and both of which are its 
synonyms according to its successive stages; and are but forms of the will of 
the pure and vacuous intellect of God. (The will was at the beginning, Aham 
bahu syam; i.e., | will become many). 


26. Rama asked: — Be it so that Virdj is the personified will of God, and of 
the form of vacuum; but how is it that he is considered as Brahma himself in 
his inner person? 


27. Vasishtha replied: — As you consider yourself as Rama, and so 
situated in your person also; so Brahma, — the great father of all, is the 
willful soul only in his person. 


28. The souls of holy men also, are full with Brahma in themselves; and 
their material bodies, are as mere images of them. 


29. And as your living soul is capable, of fixing its residence in your body; 
so the self-willed soul of Brahma, is by far more able to reside in his body of 
the Brahmanda- Universe. 


30. If it is possible for the plant, to reside in its seed, and for animal life to 
dwell in the body; it must likewise be much more possible for the spirit of 
Brahma, to dwell in a body of its own imagination. 


31. Whether the Lord be in his consolidated form of the world, or in his 
subtle form of the mind, He is the same in his essence, though the one lies 
inside and the other outside of us, in his inward and outward appearance. 


32. The holy hermit who is delighted in himself, and continues as mute as a 
log of wood and as quiet as a block of stone; remains with his knowledge of I 
and thou, (i.e., of the subjective and objective as well as of the general and 
particular) fixed in the universal soul of Virdj. 


33. The holy and God knowing man, is passionless under all persecution, as 
an idol which they make with ligatures of straw and string; he remains as calm 
as the sea, after its howling waves are hushed; and though he may be engaged 
in a great many affairs in the world, yet he remains as calm and quiet in his 
mind, as a stone is unperturbed in its heart. 


CHAPTER LXXV. 
Description of the Final Conflagration of the 
World. 


Argument: — Destruction of the world by the great fire, produced by a 
dozen of suns at the behest of Brahma. 


Vasishtha continued: — Then sitting in my meditation of Brahma, I cast my 
eyes around, I came to the sight of the region before me. 


2. It being then midday, I beheld a secondary sun behind me, appearing as a 
conflagration over a mountain (or a burning mountain), at the furthest border 
of that side. 


3. I saw the sun in the sky as a ball of fire, and another in the water burning 
as the sub-marine fire; I beheld a burning sun in the south east corner, and 
another in the southern quarter. 


4. Thus I saw four fiery suns on the four sides of heaven, and as many in 
the four corners of the sky also. 


5. I was astonished to find so many suns all at once in all the sides of 
heaven; and their flame-fire which seemed to burn down their presiding 
divinities, — the Agni, Vayu, Yama, Indra, etc. (The twelve suns of Hindu 
Astronomy, are the so many solar mansions in the twelve signs of the zodiac, 
which encircle all the sides of the compass, together with the personified 
climates under the same). 


6. As I was looking astonished at these unnatural appearances, in the 
heavens above; there appeared on a sudden a terrestrial sun before me, 
bursting out of the sub-marine regions below. 


7. Eleven of these suns were as reflexions of the one sun, seen in a 
prismatic mirror; and they rose out of the three suns of Brahma, Vishnu and 
Siva, in the vacuity of the different sides of heaven. (The gloss explains the 
eleven suns, as the eleven Rudra forms of Siva, — the god of destruction 


amidst the Hindu Trinity). 


8. The same form of Rudra with its three eyes, shone forth in the forms of 
the twelve burning suns of heaven. (As Siva with the eleven Rudras, makes 
the number twelve, so doth the sun with the other eleven signs of the zodiac, 
make the same number). 


9. In this manner the sun burnt down the world, as the flame of fire burns 
away dry wood of the forest; and the world was dried up of its moisture, as in 
the parching days of summer season. 


10. The solar fire burnt away the woods, without any literal fire or flame; 
and the whole earth was as dry as dust by this fireless incendiarism. 


11. My body became heated and my blood boiled as by the heat of a wild 
fire; and I left that place of torrid heat, and ascended to the remoter and higher 
regions of air. 


12. I beheld the heavenly bodies hurling as tops, flung from the string held 
by a mighty hand; and I saw from my aerial seat, the rising of the blazing suns 
in heaven. 


13. I beheld the twelve suns burning in the ten sides of it, and I saw also the 
extensive spheres of the stars, whirling with incredible velocity. 


14. The waters of the seven oceans were boiling, with a gurgling noise; and 
burning meteors were falling over the cities in farthest worlds. 


15. The flame flashed upon distant mountains, making them flare with 
vermeil hue, and splitting noise; and continued lightnings flashed upon the 
great edifices on every side, and put the canopy of heaven in a flame. 


16. The falling buildings emitted a cracking and crackling noise all around, 
and the earth was covered with columns of dark smoke, as by the thickening 
clouds and mists. 


17. The fumes rising as crystal columns, appeared as turrets and spires 
upon the towers on earth; and the loud noise of wailing beasts and men, raised 
a gurgling, (gharghara), clangor all over the ground. 


18. The falling of cities upon men and beasts, made a hideous noise and 
huge heaps of omnium gatherum on earth; and the falling stars from heaven, 
strewed the earth with fragments of gems and jewels. 


19. All human habitations were in flames, with the bodies of men and 
beasts, burning in their respective homes and houses; and the noiseless skirts 
of villages and towns, were filled with the stink of dead and burning bodies. 


20. The aquatic animals were stewed, under the tepid waters of the seas; 
and the cry of people within the city, was hushed by the howling of the 
ambient flames on all sides. 


21. The elephants of the four quarters of heaven, fell down and rolled upon 
the burning ground, and uplifted the hills with their tusks (to shelter 
themselves from the falling fires); while the caverns of the mountains, were 
emitting gusts of smoke, from the subterranean fire. 


22. The burning hamlets and habitations, were crushed and smashed under 
the falling stones and hills; while the mountain elephants yelled aloud, with 
their deadly groans and agonies. 


23. Heated by sun-heat, all living beings rushed to and splashed the hot 
waters of seas, and the mountainous vidyddharas fell down into the hollow 
bosom of mountains, bursting by their volcanic heat. 


24. Some being tired with crying, and others resorting to their Yoga 
meditation, remained quiet in some places; and the serpent races were left to 
roll on the burning cinders, both below as well as upon the earth. 


25. The voracious marine beasts as sharks and whales; being baked in the 
drying channels, were driven to the whirlpools of the deep; and the poor fishes 
attempting to evade the smart fire, flew into the airs by thousands and 
thousands. 


26. The burning flames, then clad as it were, in crimson apparel, rose high 
in the air; and there leaping as it were in dancing, caught the garments of the 
Apsaras in heaven. 


27. The desolating Kalpa fire, being then wreathed with its flashing flames, 
began to dance about all around; with the loud sound of bursting bamboos and 
cracking trees, as it were with the beating of drums and timbrels. 


28. The sportive fire danced about like a playful actor, in the ruinous stage 
of the world. 


29. The fire ravaged through all lands and islands, and desolated all forests 
and forts; it filled all caves and caverns and the hollow vault of sky, till at last 
it over reached the tops of the ten sides of heaven. 


30. It blazed in caverns and over cities and in all sides of dales, and the 
lands; it blazed over hills and mountain tops, and the sites of the Siddhas and 
on the seas and oceans. 


31. The flames flashing from the eyes of Siva, and the Rudras, boiled the 
waters of the lakes and rivers; and burned the bodies of devas and demons, 


and those of men and serpent races; and there arose a hoarse whispering 
sound from everywhere. 


32. With column of flaming fire over their head, they began to play by 
throwing ashes upon one another; like the playful demon’s flirtation with dust 
and water. 


33. Flames flashed forth from subterranean cells and caves on earth, and all 
things situated amidst them, were reddened by their light. 


34. All the sides of heaven lost their azure hue, under the vermilion colour 
of the clouds which hung over them; and all things and the rubicund sky, lost 
their respective hues, and assumed the rosy tint of the red lotus, (sthala 
padma, — growing on land). 


35. The world appeared to be covered under a crimson canopy, by the 
burning flames which overspread it all around, and resembled the evening sky 
under the parting glories of the setting sun. 


36. Overspread with the flaming fires, the sky appeared as an overhanging 
garden of blooming Asoka flowers, or as a bed of the red kinsuka blossoms 
hanging aloft in the sky. 


37. The earth appeared to be strewn over with red lotuses and the seas 
seemed to be sprinkled with red dye; in this manner the fire blazed in many 
forms, with its tails and crests of smoke. 


38. The fire of conflagration, raged with its youthful vigour in the forest, 
where it glared in variegated colours, as a burning scenery is shown in a 
painting. 


39. The vicissitudes of sunrise and sunset, (i.e., the succession of day and 
night), now disappeared from the vindhyan mountain, owing to the continual 
burning of the woods upon its summit. 


40. The flying fumes had the appearance of the blue sahya mountain in the 
south (Deccan), from their emitting the flashes of fire in the midst, like the 
lustre of the gems in that mountain. 


41. The blue vault of the sky seemed as a cerulean lake, decorated with 
lotus like fire brands all over it, and the flames of fire flashed over the tops of 
the cloudy mountains in air, (like the brisk dancing of actresses in a play). 


42. Flames of fire with their smoky tails, resembling the train of a comet, 
danced about on the stage of the world, in the manner of dancing actresses, 
with the loosened and flouncing hair. 


43. The burning fire burst the parched ground, and flung its sparkling 
particles all around, like the fried rice flying all about the frying pan in various 
colours. 


44. Then the burning rocks and woods exhibited a golden hue on the breast 
of the earth, with their bursting and splitting noise (as if the earth was beating 
her breast at her impending destruction). 


45. All lands were crushed together with the cry of their inhabitants, and all 
the seas dashed against one another, with foaming froths in their mouths. 


46. The waves shone in their faces, with the reflexion of the shining sun 
upon them; they clashed against each other, as if they were clapping their 
hands; and dashed with such force against the land, that they beat and broke 
down the rocks on the sea shore. 


47. The raging sea with his billowy arms, grasped the earth and stone, as 
foolish men do in their anger; and devoured them in his hollow cell with a 
gurgling noise, as fools swallow their false hopes with vain bawling. 


48. The all destroying fire with a hoarse sound, melted down the rivers with 
their banks, and the regents of the sphere fell before the geysers. 


49. The ten sides of the compass, were out of order and confounded 
together; and all the mountains were reduced to the form of liquid gold (fire), 
with their woods and abodes and caves and caverns. 


50. By degrees the prodigious mountain Meru, was dissolved to snow by 
the heat of fire; and soon after the great mount of Himalaya, was melted down 
as lac-dye by the same fire. 


51. All things were cold and pinched in themselves, as good people are 
thawed by the awe of the wicked; except the Malaya mountain, which yielded 
its fragrance even in that state (of its tribulation). 


52. The noble-minded man never forsakes his nobleness, though he is 
exposed to troubles; because the great never afflict another, though they are 
deprived of their own joy and happiness. 


53. Burn the sandal wood, yet it will diffuse its fragrance to all living 
beings; because the intrinsic nature of a thing, is never lost or changed into 
another state. 


54. Gold is never consumed nor disfigured, though it is burnt in the fire of a 
conflagration; thus there are two things, namely, aura and vacuum, that cannot 
be consumed by the all destroying fire. 


55. Those bodies are above all praise, which do not perish at the perdition 
of all others; such as the vacuum is indestructible on account of its 
omnipresence, and gold is not subject to any loss owing to its purity. 


56. The property of goodness, (sattwa), alone is true happiness, and neither 
rajas nor ostentation or passion. Then the fiery clouds moved aloft as a 
moving forest, ashed showers of vivid flame. 


57. Mountainous clouds of fire, accompanied with flame and fume, poured 
liquid fire around; and burnt away all bodies, already dried up by heat and for 
want of water. 


58. The dried leaves of trees ascending high in the air, were burnt away by 
the flame instead of the rain of heavy clouds. (Now the clouds were heavy 
with fire, and not with rain water). 


59. The ambient and gorgeous flame passed by the Kailaésa mountain 
without touching it, knowing it to be the seat of the dread God Siva; in the 
manner of wise men, flying from the mud and mire of sin (knowing it to be 
attended with their perdition). 


60. Then the God Rudra, growing furious at the final destruction of the 
world, darted the direful flame of his igneous eyes, and burnt down the sturdy 
arbours and robust rocks to ashes, with their stunning cracklings. 


61. The hills at the foot of mountains, being crowned with flames of fire, 
moved forward as it were, to fight against the fire, with their stones and clubs 
of the clumps of trees. 


62. The sky became as a bed of full-blown lotuses, and creation became a 
mere name as that of Agastya, that departed and disappeared for ever from 
sight. 


63. The suffering idiot, on remembering into his mind the Kalpdnta, took 
the world to be at an end; as the fire consumes all objects like the unreality of 
the world. 


64. The falling thunderbolts pierced all bodies, and the glittering flames 
inflamed all the trees and plants; the winds too blew with fiery heat, and 
scorched the bodies of even the gods, and singed all things on every side. 


65. Here the wild fire was raging loose among the arbours in the forest, and 
there were clouds of hot ashes flying in the air; and smoky mists emitting red 
hot embers and fiery sparks. Again, darknesses were rising upward with 
faggots of fire falling from amidst them, and gusts of wind blew with speed 
and force, to befriend the destructive fire. (The air enkindled and spread the 


wild fire all about). 


CHAPTER LXXVI. 
The Stridor of Pushkaravarta Clouds. 


Argument: — Description of the Devouring fire below, and the Deluging 
clouds above. 


Vasishtha added: — Now blew the destroying winds, shaking the mountains 
by their force, and filling the seas with tremendous waves, and rending the 
skies with cyclonic storms. 


2. The bounded seas broke their bounds, and ran to the boundless oceans by 
impulse of the wind, as poor people run to the rich, by compulsion of their 
driving poverty. 


3. The earth being fried by the fire, went under the overflowing waters; and 
joined with the infernal regions, lying below the waters of the deep. 


4. The heaven disappeared into nothing, and the whole creation vanished 
into the air. The worlds were reduced to vacuum, and the solar light dwindled 
to that of a star in the starry sphere. 


5. There appeared from some cavity of the sky some hideous clouds, called 
Pushkara Avartaka and others in the forms of dreadful demons, and roaring 
with tremendous noise. 


6. The noise was as loud as the bursting of the mundane-egg, and the 
hurling down of a large edifice; and as the dashing of the waves against one 
another, in a furiously raging sea. 


7. The loud peal resounding through the air and water, and reechoing 
amidst the city towers, was deafening and stunning to the ear; and the 
swelling at the tops of mountains, filled the world with uproar. 


8. The sound swelling as it were, in the conch-shell of the mundane-egg, 
was returned with triple clangor, from the vaults of heaven and sky and the 
infernal world. 


9. The supports of all the distant sides, were tottering at their base; and the 


waters of all the seas were mixed up together, as if to quench the thirst of the 
all-devouring doomsday. 


10. The doomsday advanced as the God Indra, mounted on the back of his 
elephantine clouds; which roared aloud amidst the waters, contained in the 
ethereal ocean from the beginning. 


11. The great doomsday was attended with a hubbub, as loud as that of the 
churning of the ocean before; or as that emitted by the revolving world or a 
hydrostatic engine of immense force. 


12. Hearing this roaring of the clouds, amidst the surrounding fires, I 
became quite astonished at the stridor, and cast my eyes on all sides to see the 
clouds. 


13. I saw no vestige of a cloud in any part of the heavens, except that of 
hearing their roar and finding flashes of firebrands flaming in the sky, with 
showers of thunderbolts falling from above. (i.e., It was a thunder storm 
preceding the rain). 


14. The flaming fire spread over millions of miles, on all the sides of earth 
and heaven; and burnt away everything in them, to a horrid devastation. 


15. After a little while I descried a spot at a great distance in the sky; and 
felt a cool air blowing to my body from it. 


16. At this time I observed the kalpa clouds, appearing and gathering at a 
great distance in the sky, where there was no relic of the living fire perceptible 
to the naked eye. 


17. Then there breathed the kalpa airs, from the watery corner or western 
side of the sky; which burnt at last in blasts, capable of blowing and bearing 
away the great mountains of Meru, Malaya and Himalaya. 


18. These winds blew away the mountainous flames, and put to flight the 
burning cinders as birds to a distance; they bore down the spreading sparks, 
and drove away the fire from all sides. 


19. The clouds of fire disappeared from the air, as evening clouds; then 
clouds of ashes rose to the sky, and the atmosphere was cleared of every 
particle of fire. 


20. The air was blowing with fire, and passing everywhere as the fire of 
incendiarism; and melted down the golden citadels on the flying mountain of 
Meru. 


21. The mountains on earth being put on fire, their flames spread all about 


as the rays of the twelve suns. 


22. The waters of oceans were boiling with rage, and the trees and leaves of 
the forest were burning with blaze. 


23. The cities and celestials sitting on their happy seats, in the highest 
heaven of Brahma, fell down below with all their inhabitants of women and 
young and old people, being burnt by the flames. 


24. The Kalpdnta or chaotic fire was mixed with the water, in the lake of 
Brahma. 


25. The strong winds uprooted the deep-rooted mountains and rocks, and 
plunged them headlong into the fiery mire of the infernal regions. 


26. The chaotic clouds advanced as a troop of sable camels, moving slowly 
in the azure sky with a grumbling noise. 


27. They appeared from a corner of the sky, like a huge mountain flashing 
with lightnings of gorgeous flame; and fraught with the waters of the seven 
oceans. 


28. These clouds were capable of rending the great vault of the world, 
(heaven), with their loud uproar; and splitting all the sides of heaven, standing 
upon their solid snow white and impregnable walls. 


29. The doomsday was as the raging ocean, and the planets were the rolling 
islands in the whirlpools of their orbits; the flitting lightnings likened its 
shifting aquatic animals, and the roaring of the clouds was as the howling of 
its waters. 


30. The moon being devoured by Rahu, and burnt away by the fiery comet, 
rose to heaven again and assumed the colder form of the cloud, to pour down 
more moisture than her nightly beams and dews. 


31. Lightning like golden sphere in the shape of frigidity of the sort of 
Himalaya, held all stupefied waters, woods and hills. 


32. After the clouds had split the vault of heaven, by their harsh crackling 
and thunders; they dropped down the solid snows at first, which were then 
melted down in the form of liquid rain. 


33. There was a jarring of dissonant sounds, that grated upon the ear, and 
proceeded from the bursting of woods by wild fire, and the stridor of thunder- 
claps in the rebellowing air; and the cracking and crackling and dashing and 
crashing of everything in the shattering world. 


34. There was a sharp and shrill noise, arising from the warring winds 


blowing in a hundred ways, and the drift of bleak cold showers of driving 
snows, covering the face of heaven. 


35. The vault of heaven which is supported by the blue and sapphire-like 
pillars of the azure skies on all sides, shattered the earth and its props of the 
mountains, with big and heavy showers of diluvian rain. 


36. The earth was bursting and splitting sound, by the blazing furnaces of 
fire on all sides; and the hearts of all living beings, were rent by the loud 
rattling of thunderbolts from heaven. 


37. The rain that reigned long over the realm of the fiery earth, was now 
going upward in the form of smoke, which the burning earth heaved from her 
bosom, as her sighs towards heaven. 


38. Now the vault of heaven, appeared to be overspread with a network, 
studded with red lotuses of the flying fires on high; while the dark showers 
had the appearance of swarms of black bees, and the rain drops likened their 
fluttering wings. 


39. All the sides of heaven resounded to the mingled clatter of hailstone 
and fire brands, falling down simultaneously from the comingled clouds of 
dire and dreadful appearance; and the scene all around was as diresome to 
behold, as the mingled warfare of two dreadful forces, with dire arms and 
commingled bloodshed. 


CHAPTER LXXVII. 
Description of the World Overflooded by the Rains. 


Argument: — The world presenting the scene of one universal sheet of 
water caused by the deluging clouds. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear now of the chaotic state of the world, which 
was brought on by conflict of the earth, air, water, and fire with one another; 
and how the three worlds were covered under the great diluvian waters. 


2. The dark clouds flying in the air as pitchy ashes, overspread the world as 
a great ocean, with whirlpools of rolling smoke. 


3. The dark blaze of the fire glimmered amidst the combustibles, and 
converted all of them to heaps of ashes, which flew and spread over all the 
world. 


4. The swelling sound of the hissing showers rose as high, as they were 
blowing aloud the whistle of their victory. 


5. There was the assemblage of all the five kinds of clouds and all of them 
pouring their waters in profusion upon the ground; these were the ashy clouds, 
the grey clouds, the kalpa clouds, and the misty and the showering clouds. 


6. The howling breezes, tottered the foundations of the world; the high 
wind rose high to heaven, and filled all space; and bore the flames to burn 
down the regencies of the gods on every side. 


7. The winds dived deep into the depths of water, and bore and dispersed 
their frigidity to all sides of the airs, which numbed the senses, and deafened 
the ears of all (by their coldness). 


8. A loud hubbub filled the world, raised by the incessant fall of rain in 
columns from the vault of heaven; and by the roaring and growling of the 
kalpa fire. 


9. The whole earth was filled with water as one ocean, by waterfalls from 
the clouds of heaven, resembling the torrents of Ganges and the currents of all 


rivers. 


10. The canopy of the kalpa or diluvian clouds, pierced by the shining sun- 
beams above them, appeared as the leafy tuft at the top of the nigrescent 
tamala tree, with clusters of lurid flowers, peeping through the sable leaves. 


11. The all destroying tornado bore away the broken fragments, of trees 
and rocks, and the top of towers and castles aloft in the air; dashed them 
against the sky-capt mountains, and broke them asunder to pieces. 


12. The swift stars and planets, clashing with the rapid comets and meteors, 
struck sparks of fire and flame by their mutual concussion, which burned 
about as igneous whirlpools in the air. 


13. The raging and rapid winds, raised the waves of seas, as high as 
mountains; which striking against the rocks on the sea-shore, broke and hurled 
them down with tremendous noise. 


14. The deep dusty and showering clouds, joined with the wet kalpa clouds, 
cast into shade the bright light of the sun; and darkened the air under their 
sable shadows. 


15. The seas over flowed their beds and banks, and bore down the broken 
fragments of the rocks under their bowels; and they became dreadful and 
dangerous by the falling and rolling down of the stones with their current. 


16. The huge surges of the sea, bearing the fragments of the rocks in their 
bosom, were raised aloft by the cloud rending winds; and they dashed against 
and broke down the shores with deep and tremendous noise. 


17. The diluvian cloud then broke asunder the vault of heaven, and split the 
bosom of the sky with its loud rattling; and then clapped together its oak-like 
hands, to see the universal ocean which it had made. 


18. The earth, heaven and infernal regions, were rent to pieces, and tossed 
and loosed in the all-devouring waters; and the whole nature was reduced to 
its original vacuity, as if the world was an unpeopled and vast desert. 


19. Now the dead and half-dead, the burnt and half-burnt bodies, of gods 
and demi-gods, of Ghandharvas and men beheld one another in the general 
ruin, and fled and fell upon each other with their lifted arms and weapons, 
with the velocity of the winds. (It is a dogma of spiritualism, that tribal and 
personal animosities, efc., continue to the death bed and in after life, if there is 
no reconciliation made in the present state). 


20. The diluvian winds, were flying as the funeral ashes from the piles; or 
as the arjuna humour of choler, drives a person up and down in the air like a 


column of ashes. 


21. The heaps of stones that were collected in the air, fell forcibly on the 
ground, and broke down whatever they struck upon; just as the falling 
hailstones from heaven, clatter out of season, and shatter everything wherever 
they fall. 


22. The rustling breezes howling in the caverns of mountains, resounded 
with a rumbling noise from the fall of the mansions of the regents of every 
side. 


23. The winds growled with harsh sounds, resembling the jarring noise of 
demons; and these blowing amidst the woods, appeared to be passing through 
the windows. 


24. The cities and towns burning with the demoniac fire, and the mountains 
and abodes of the gods, flaming with solar gleams, and their sparks in the air, 
flying like swarms of gnats. 


25. The sea was roaring with its whirling rain waters on the surface, and 
boiling with the sub-marine fire below; and destroying alike both the big 
mountains below, as also the abodes of the gods above. 


26. The conflict of the waters and rocks, demolished the cities of the rulers 
of earth on all sides; and hurled down the abodes of the deities and demons, 
and of the Siddhas and Ghandharvas also. 


27. The stones and all solid substances were pounded to powder, and the 
fire-brands were reduced to ashes; when the flying winds blew them as dust 
all about. 


28. The hurling down of the abodes of gods and demons, and the dashing 
together of their walls emitted a noise as that of the crashing of clouds, or 
gingling of metallic things in mutual contact. 


29. The sky was filled with peoples and edifices, falling from the seven 
regions of heaven; and the gods themselves were whirling in air, as anything 
fallen in a whirlpool in the sea. 


30. All things whether burnt or unburnt, were swimming up and down in 
the ethereal ocean, as the winds toss about the dry leaves of trees in the air. 


31. The air was filled with the jarring and gingling sounds, rising from the 
fallen edifices of various metals and minerals in all worlds. 


32. Then the smoky and ashy clouds all flew upward, while the heavy 
watery clouds lowered upon the earth; again, the swelling billows were rising 


high upon the water, and the hills and all other substances were sinking 
below. 


33. The whirlpools were wheeling against one another, with gurgling noise, 
and the old ocean was rolling on with gigantic mountains, floating upon it like 
groups of leaves and shrubs. 


34. The good deities were wailing aloud, and the weary animals were 
moving on slowly; the comets and other portents were flying in the air, and 
the aspect of the universe, was dreadful and diresome to behold. 


35. The sky was full of dead and half-dead bodies, borne by the breezes 
into its bosom; and it presented a grey and dingy appearance, as that of the dry 
and discoloured foliage of trees (in the fading autumn). 


36. The world was full of water, falling in profuse showers from the 
mountain peaks; and hundreds of streams flowed down by the sides of 
mountains, and were borne all about by the breeze. 


37. The fire now ceased to rage with its hundred flames, and the swelling 
sea now run over its boundary hills; and over flowed its banks. 


38. Mass of gramineous plant mixed with mud and mire, appeared as large 
island; and intellect in the far distant vacuity, appeared as lighting over a 
forest. 


39. The rains closing extinguished the fire, but the rising fume and smoke 
filled the air and hid the heaven, so that the existence of the prior world and 
the former creation was altogether forgotten from remembrance. 


40. Then there rose the loud cry of the extinction of creation, and there 
remained only the One being, who is exempt from creation and destruction. 
(i.e., who is increate and imperishable). 


41. Now the winds abated also, that had been incessantly struggling to 
upset the world; and continually filling the universe with their particles, as 
with an unceasing supply of grains. 


42. The bodies of comets clashing against one another, were reduced to 
sparks of fire resembling the dust of gold; and these extinguishing at last to 
ashes, filled the vault of heaven with powdered dust. 


43. The orb of the earth being shattered to pieces, with all its contents of 
islands, efc., was rolling in large masses together with the fragments of the 
infernal worlds. 


44. Now the seven regions of heaven and those of the infernal worlds, 


being mixed up in one mass with the shattered mass of the earth and its 
mountains, filled up the universal space with the chaotic waters and diluvian 
winds. 


45. Then the universal ocean, was swollen with the waters of all its 
tributary seas and rivers; and there was a loud uproar of the rolling waters, 
resembling the clamour of the enraged madman. 


46. The rain fell at first in the form of fountains and cascades, and then it 
assumed the shape of falling columns or water spouts; at last it took the figure 
of a palm tree, and then it poured down its showers in torrents. 


47. Then it ran as the current of a river, and flooded and overflowed on all 
sides; and the raining clouds made the surface of the earth one extended sheet 
of water. 


48. The flame-fire was seen to subside at last, just as some very great 
danger in human life, is averted by observance of the precautions given in the 
Sdstras, and advice of the wise. 


49. At last the vast vault of the mundane world, became as desolate of all 
its contents and submerged in water; as a goodly bel fruit loses its substance 
by being tossed about in playful mood from the hands of boys. 


CHAPTER LXXVIII. 
Description of the Universal Ocean. 


Argument: — Rain waters running as rivers, and these meeting together 
and making an universal ocean. 


Vasishtha continued: — The rain storm and falling hails and snows, shattered 
the surface of the earth to parts and parcels; and the violence of the waters 
was increasing, like the oppression of kings in Kali or last days of the world. 


2. The rain water falling upon the stream of the ethereal Ganges, make it 
run in a thousand streamlets, flowing with huge torrents, higher than the 
mountains of Meru and Mandara. 


3. Here the waves rose to the path of the sun, and there the waters sank 
down and lay dull in the mountain caves; and then the dull element made the 
universal ocean, as when a fool is made the soveran lord of earth. 


4. The great mountains were hurled down as straws, in the deep and broad 
whirlpools of water; and the tops of the huge surges, reached to the far distant 
sphere of the sun. 


5. The great mountains of Meru and Mandara of Vindhya, Sahya and 
Kailasa, dived and moved in as fishes and sea monsters; the melted earth set 
as its soil, and large snakes floated thereon like stalks of plant with their lotus 
like hoods. 


6. The half-burnt woods and floating plants, were as its moss and bushes, 
and the wet ashes of the burnt world, were as the dirty mud underneath the 
waters. 


7. The twelve suns shone forth, as so many full-blown lotuses, in the large 
lake of the sky; and the huge and heavy cloud of Puskara, with its dark 
showers of rain, seemed as the blue lotus bed, filled with the sable leaves. 


8. The raging clouds roared aloud from the sides of mountains, like the 
foaming waves of the ocean; and the sun and moon rolled like two pieces of 


sapphires over cities and towns (being darkened by the clouds). 


9. The gods and giants and people at large, were blown up and borne into 
the air; till at last they flew up from their lightness and fell into the disc of the 
sun. (i.e., From their want of gravity on earth, they were attracted to the sun, 
— the centre of gravity of the solar system). 


10. The clouds rained in torrents with loud clattering noise, and their 
currents carried down the floating rocks, as if they were mere bubbles of 
water, into the distant sea. 


11. The deluging clouds were rolling in the air, after pouring their water in 
floods on earth; as if they were in search after other clouds, with their open 
mouths and eyes, (as if to see whether there remained any raining cloud still). 


12. The rushing tornado filled the air with uproar, and with one gust of 
wind, blasted the boundary mountain from its bottom into the air. (So were 
the mountainous clouds, flung by the hands of Titans to the skies). 


13. The furious winds collected the waters of the deep to the height of 
mountains; which ran with a great gurgling noise all about, in order to deluge 
the earth under them. 


14. The world was torn to pieces by the clashing of bodies, driven together 
by the tempestuous winds; which scattered and drove millions of beings pell- 
mell, and over against one another. 


15. The hills floated on the waves as straws, and dashing against the disc of 
the sun, broke it into pieces as by the pelting of stones. 


16. The great void of the universe, spread as it were, the great net of waters 
in its ample space, and caught in them the great hills, resembling the big eels 
caught in fishing nets. 


17. The big animal bodies that were rising or plunging in the deep, either as 
living or dead described the eddies made by whirlpools and whales on the 
surface of the waters. (i.e., the one sinking downwards, and the other rising 
upward). 


18. Those that have been yet alive, were floating about the tops of the 
sinking mountains, which resembled the floating froths of the sea; while the 
gods were fluttering as gnats and flies over them. 


19. The spacious firmament on high, filled with innumerable rain drops, 
shining as bubbles of water in the air; appeared as the thousand eyes of Indra, 
looking on the rains below. 


20. Indra the god of heaven, with his body of the autumnal sky, and his 
eyes of the bubbling rain-drops; was looking on the floating clouds in the 
midway skies, flowing as the currents of rivers on high. 


21. The Pushkara and Avartaka clouds with their world overflowing floods; 
met and joined together in mutual embrace, as two winged mountains flying 
in air, and clashing against one another. 


22. These clouds being at last satisfied with their devouring the world, 
under their all-swallowing waters; were now roaring loudly and flying lightly 
in the air, as if they were dancing with their uplifted hilly arms. 


23. The clouds were pouring forth their floods of water above, and the 
mountain tops were flaming in the midway sky; and the huge snakes that had 
supported the earth, were now diving deep into the mud of the infernal regions 
(owing to the destruction of the earth). 


24. The incessant showers filled the three regions, like the triple stream of 
Ganges running in three directions; they drowned the highest mountains, 
whose tops floated as froths in the universal ocean. 


25. The floating mountains struck against the sphere of heaven, and broke it 
into fragments; when the fairies of heaven, floated as pretty lotuses on the 
surface of waters. 


26. The universe was reduced to an universal ocean, which roared with a 
tremendous noise; and the three worlds being split to pieces, were borne away 
into the waters of the endless deep. 


27. There remained no one to save another, nor any one that was not swept 
away by the flood; for who is there that can save us, when the all-devouring 
time grasps us in his clutches. 


28. There remained neither the sky nor the horizon, there was no upside nor 
downward in the infinite space; there was no creation nor a creature 
anywhere, but all were submerged under one infinite sheet of water. 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 
Maintenance of Inappetency or Want of Desire. 


Argument: — Nirvdna-Extinction Compared with Waking from the Dream 
of Existence. 


Vasishtha resumed: — Seeing the end of all I still retained my seat in infinite 
vacuity; and my eyes were detained by the sight of a glorious light, shining as 
the morning rays of the rising luminary of the day. 


2. While I was looking at that light, I beheld the great Brahma sitting as a 
statue carved in stone, intent upon his meditation of supreme One, and beset 
by his transcendent glory all about him. 


3. I saw there a multitude of gods, sages and holy personages, with 
Vrihaspati and Sukra, — the preceptors of gods and demi-gods, together with 
the regent deities of wealth and death. 


4. There were likewise, the regent divinities of water, fire and the other 
deities also; so were there companies of Rishis and Siddhas and Sddhyas, 
Ghandharvas and others. 


5. All these were as figures in painting, and all sitting in their meditative 
mood; they all sat in their lotiform posture, and appeared as lifeless and 
immovable bodies. 


6. Then the twelve ddityas or suns (of the twelve signs), met at the same 
centre (with the same object in their view); and they sat in the same lotiform 
posture (of devotion, as the other deities). 


7. Then awhile after, I beheld the lotus born Brahma; as if I came to see the 
object of my dream before me after my waking. 


8. I then lost the sight of the deities, assembled in the Brahma-loka or in the 
world of Brahma, as when great minded men, lose the sight of the most 
prominent objects of their desire from their minds. Nor did I perceive the 
aerial city of my dream before me, upon my waking (from the trance of my 


illusion). 


9. Then the whole creation, which is but the ectype of the mind of Brahma; 
appeared as void as an empty desert to me; and as the earth turning to a barren 
waste upon the ruin of its cities. 


10. The gods and sages, the angels and all other beings, were nowhere to be 
seen any more; but were all blended in and with the same void everywhere. 


11. I then, seated in my ethereal seat, came to know by my percipience, that 
all of them have become extinct. (/it., obtained their nirvdna extinction, like 
Brahma in Brahma himself). 


12. It is with the extinction of their desires, that they have become extinct 
also; as the sleeping dreamers come to themselves after they are awakened 
from their illusive vision. (Coming to one’s self Swasiaruipa one’s own nature 
or essence, means in vedanta, the holy and pure nature of the human soul, as 
an emanation or image of the divine). 


13. The body is an aerial nothing, appearing as a substantial something, 
from our desire (or imagination of it only), and disappearing with the 
privation of our fancy for it, like a dream vanishing from the sight of a waking 
man. 


14. The aerial body appears as real as any other image in our dream; and 
there remains nothing of it, upon our coming to their knowledge of its unreal 
nature, and the vanity of our desires. 


15. We have no consciousness also, of either our spiritual or corporeal 
bodies, when we are fixed in our samddhi or intense meditation in the state of 
our waking (from sleep). 


16. The notion of a thing seen in our dream, is given here as an instance (to 
prove the unreality of our idea of the body); because it is well known to boys 
and everybody, and adduced to us both in the Srutis and smritis tradition (that 
the objects of sight, are as false as those of dreams). 


17. Whoever denies the falsity of the notions he has in his dream, and goes 
on to support the reality of these as well as other visible sights; must be a 
great impostor; and such a one deserves to be shunned, for who can wake the 
waking sleeper. 


18. What is the cause of the corporeal body? Not the dream; since the 
bodies seen in a dream, are invisible (to the naked eye); and this being true it 
follows, that there is no solid body in the next world (as it is expected by 
means of sacrifices and pious acts). 


19. Should there be other bodies after the loss of the present ones (by 
death); then there would be no need of repeated creation (of corporeal bodies 
by Brahma); if the pristine bodies were to continue forever. 


20. Anything having a form and figure and its parts and members, is of 
course perishable in its nature; and the position (of Jaimini), that there was 
another kind of world before, is likewise untenable (since there could be 
nothing at any time, without its definite form and parts). 


21. If you say, (in the manner of the chdrvdkas), that the world was never 
destroyed; and that the understanding is produced of itself in the body, in the 
same manner as the spirit is generated in the fermented liquor. 


22. This position of yours is inconsistent with the doctrines, of the puranas 
and histories as well as those of the vedas, smritis and other Sdstras, which 
invariably maintain destructibility of material things. 


23. Should you, O intelligent Rama, deny with the chdrvdkas the 
indefeasibility of these Sdstras; say what faith can be relied on those heretical 
teachings, which are as false as the offspring of a barren woman. 


24. These heretical doctrines are not favoured by the wise, owing to their 
pernicious tendencies; there are many discrepancies in them, as you shall have 
it, from the few that I am going to point out to you. 


25. If you say the human spirit to liken the spirit of liquors, (which is 
generated in and destroyed with the liquor); then tell me what makes the 
destroyed or departed spirit of a deceased person, who is dead in a foreign 
country, revisit his friends at home in the shape and form of a fiend, (pisdcha). 


26. To this it is answered, that the apparition which thus appears to view is 
a false appearance only; granting it as such, why not own our appearances to 
be equally false also? 


27. It being so, how can you believe the bodies, that the departed souls of 
men are said in the Sdstras, to assume in the next world, to be true also? (Any 
more than their being mere apparitions only). 


28. There is no truth in the proof of a ghost, (pisdcha), as there is in that of 
the spirit in liquor; hence if the supposition of the former is untrue, what faith 
is there in future body in the next world? 


29. If the existence of spirits be granted, from the common belief of 
mankind in them; then why should not the doctrine of a future state of the 
dead, be received as true upon the testimony of the Sdstras? 


30. If the prepossession of a person’s being possessed on a sudden by an 


evil spirit, be any ground of his reliance in it, why then should he not rest his 
belief in his future state, wherein he is confirmed by the dogmas of the 
Sdstras? 


31. Whatever a man thinks or knows in himself, he supposes the same as 
true at all times; and whether his persuasion be right or wrong, he knows it 
correct to the best of his belief. 


32. A man knowing well, that the dead are to live again in another world, 
relies himself fully upon that hope; and does not care to know, whether he 
shall have a real body there or not. 


33. Therefore, it is the nature of men, to be prepossessed with the idea of 
their future existence; and next their growing desire for having certain forms 
of bodies for themselves, leads them to the error of seeing several shapes 
before them. 


34. It is then the abstaining from this desire, that removes the maladies of 
our errors of the looker, looking and the look. (i.e., of the subjective and the 
objective); while the retaining of this desire leads us, to the viewing of this 
apparition of the world ever before us. 


35. So it was the feeling of desire at first, which led the supreme spirit of 
Brahma to the creation of the world; but its abandonment causes our nirvdna- 
release, while its retention leads us to the error of the world. 


36. This desire sprang at first in the Divine mind of Brahma, and not in the 
immutable spirit of Brahma; and I feel this desire rising now in me, for seeing 
the true and supreme Brahma in all and everywhere. 


37. All this knowledge that you derive here from, is said to form what is 
called the nirvdna-extinction by the wise; and that which is not learnt herein, 
is said to constitute the bondage of the world. 


38. This is the true knowledge to see God everywhere, it is self-evident in 
our inmost soul, and does not shine without it; (for all without is error and 
ignorance, — avidyd). 


39. The self-consciousness of our liberation, — muktdsmi, is what really 
makes us so; but the knowledge that we are bound to this earth, — 
baddhdsmi, is the source of all our woe, which require great pains to be 
removed. 


40. The awakening of our consciousness of the world, is the cause of our 
being enslaved to it; and its hybernation in the trance of samddhi, is our 
highest felicity. By being awake to the concerns of the world, you only find 


the unreal appearing as real to you (for everything here, is but deception and 
delusion). 


41. Lying dormant in holy trance, without the torpidity of insensibility, is 
termed our moksha or spiritual liberation; while our wakefulness to the outer 
world, is said to be the state of our bondage to it. 


42. Now let your nirvdna be devoid of all desire, and from trouble, care and 
fear; let it be a clear and continuous revery without any gap or cessation, 
without the scruples of unity and duality; and be of the form of spacious 
firmament, ever calm and clear and undisturbed in itself. 


CHAPTER LXXX. 
The World proved to be a Delusion. 


Argument: — Description of ultimate Dissolution according to Rational 
and Materialistic Philosophy. 


Vasishtha continued: — Afterwards, the celestials that were present in the 
heaven of Brahma, vanished away and became invisible, as a lamp with its 
weakened, (i.e., burnt out), wick or thread. 


2. Now the twelve suns, having disappeared in the body of Brahma; their 
burning beams burnt away the heaven of Brahma, as they had burnt down the 
earth and other bodies. 


3. Having consumed the seat and abode of Brahma, they fell into the 
meditation of the supreme Brahma, and became extinct in him like Brahma, as 
when a lamp is extinguished for the want of its oil. 


4. Then the waters of the universal ocean, invaded the celestial city of 
Brahma, and over flooded its surface, as the shade of night fills the face of the 
earth darkness. 


5. Now the whole world was filled by water, from the highest seat of 
Brahma, to the lowest pit of hell; and became as full with that liquid, as a 
grape is swollen with its juice, when it is perfectly ripe. (ie., cold and 
darkness filled the place, where there was no heat or light). 


6. The waving waters rising as mountain tops, plied with the flying birds of 
air; and washed the seats and feet of the gods hovering over them. They 
touched the Kalpa or diluvian clouds, which deluged over them. 


7. In the meantime, I beheld from my aerial seat, something of a dreadful 
appearance in the midst of the skies, which horrified me altogether. 


8. It was of the form of deep and dark chaos, and embraced the whole space 
of the sky in its grasp and appeared as the accumulation of the gloom of night, 
from the beginning to the end of creation. 


9. This dark form radiated the bright beams of millions of morning suns, 
and was as resplendent as three suns together; and as the flashing of many 
steady lightnings at once. 


10. Its eyes were dazzling and its countenance flashed with the blaze of a 
burning furnace, it had five faces and three eyes; its hands were ten in number, 
and each of them held a trident of immense size. 


11. It appeared manifest before me, with its outstretched body in the air; 
and stood transfixed in the sky, as a huge black cloud extending all over the 
atmosphere. 


12. It remained in the visible horizon, below and out of the universal ocean 
of waters; and yet the position and features of the hands and feet and other 
members of its body, were but indistinctly marked in the sky. 


13. The breath of its nostrils, agitated the waters of the universal ocean; as 
the arms of Govinda or Hari churned of yore, the milky ocean (after the great 
deluge). 


14. Then there arose from the diluvian waters, a male being called 
afterwards the first male, (Adipurusha). He was the personification of the 
collective ego, and the causeless cause of all. 


15. He rose out of the ocean, as a huge mountainous rock; and then flew 
into the air with his big flapping wings, extending over and enclosing the 
whole space of infinite vacuity. 


16. I knew him from a distance, and by the indications of his triple eyes and 
trident, to be the Lord Rudra himself; and then bowed down to him, as the 
great God of all. 


17. Rama asked: — Why Sir, was the Lord Rudra of that form, why was he 
of such gigantic form and of so dark a complexion? Why had He ten arms and 
hands, and why had He the five faces and mouths upon his body? 


18. Why had he his three eyes, and so fierce a form; was he absolute in 
himself or delegated by any other? What was his errand and his act; and was it 
a mere shadow or having a shadow (helpmate) of its substance. (i.e., mdya or 
Illusion)? 


19. Vasishtha replied: — This being is named Rudra or fierce, for his being 
the aggregate of Egoism. He is full of his self-pride, and the form in which I 
beheld him, was that of a clear vacuity. 


20. This lord was of the form of vacuum, and of the hue and resplendence 
of vacuity; and it is on account of his being the essence of the vacuous 


intellect, that he is represented as the cerulean sky. 


21. Being the soul of all beings, and being present in all places, he is 
represented in his gigantic form; as his five faces, serve as representations of 
his five internal organs of sense. 


22. The external organs of sense, (together with their objects and faculties), 
and the five members of his body, are represented by his ten arms on both 
sides of his body. 


23. This Lord of creation together with all living bodies and mankind, are 
resorbed in the supreme One at the final dissolution of the world; and when he 
is let out to pass from the unity, he then appears in this form. 


24. He is but a part of the eternal soul, and has no visible body or form of 
his own; but is thought of in the said form by the erroneous conception of 
men. 


25. Having proceeded from the vacuum of the Intellect, the lord Rudra is 
posited in the material vacuum or firmament; and has his residence also in the 
bodies of living beings in the form of air (or vital breath). 


26. The aeriform Rudra comes to be exhausted in course of time, and then 
by forsaking the animated bodies, he returns to resort to the reservoir of 
eternal rest and peace. 


27. The three qualities, the three times, the three intellectual faculties of the 
mind, understanding and egoism; the three vedas, and the three letters of the 
sacred syllable of om, are the three eyes of Rudra. 


28. The trident of Rudra is the symbol of his sceptre, and it is held in his 
hand, to imply his having the dominion of the three worlds under his hold. 


29. He is represented as having a living body and soul, to indicate his being 
the personality and personification of the egoism of all living beings, and that 
there is no living body apart from himself. 


30. It is his nature and business, to provide to all living creatures, according 
to their wants and desert; and is therefore, manifested in the form of Siva, 
which is the divine Intellect in the form of air. 


31. This Lord having at last destroyed and devoured the whole creation, 
rests himself in perfect peace, and becomes of the form of pure air and of the 
blue firmament. 


32. After affecting the destruction of the world, he drinks down and 
drenches up the universal ocean; and then being quite satiate, he rests himself 


in perfect peace and inaction. 


33. Afterwards as I beheld him drawing the waters of the ocean into his 
nostrils, by the force of his breath. 


34. I saw a flame of fire flashing out from his mouth, and thought it to be 
the flash of the latent fire of the water, which was drawn in him, by the breath 
of his nostrils. 


35. Rudra the personified Ego, remains in the form of latent heat in the sub- 
marine fire; and continues to suck up the waters of the ocean, until the end of 
a Kalpa epoch. 


36. The waters then enter into the infernal regions, as snakes enter in the 
holes beneath the ground; and the diluvian winds entered into his mouth, in 
the form of the five vital airs; just as the winds of heaven have their recess in 
hollow sky. 


37. The lord Rudra then goes on to swallow and suck up the marine waters, 
as the bright sunlight swallows the gloom of the dark fortnight. 


38. There appears at last a calm and quiet vacuity as the azure sky, and 
resembling the wide ocean filled with flying dust and smoke; and devoid of 
any being or created thing, and stretching from the Empyrean of God to the 
lowest abyss or infernum. 


39. I described amidst it four different spheres of empty void, bearing no 
vestige of anything moving or stirring in them. Listen to me, O son of Raghu, 
and you will hear what they were. 


40. One of these lay in the midst of the air, and was sustained in it without 
any prop or support like the particles of fragrance floating in the air. This was 
Rudra of the form of the azure sky. 


41. The second was lying afar, and appeared as the concavity of the sky 
over this earth; it was a part of the mundane system and below the seven 
spheres of the infernal regions. 


42. The third was a region above the mundane sphere, and was invisible to 
the naked eye, owing to its great distance beyond the azure sky. 


43. Then there was the surface of the earth, with its lower hemisphere of 
the watery regions; it was traversed by the great mountain which was the seat 
of gods, — the Himalayas; and beset by islands, and sea-girt sands and shores. 


44. There is another sphere, lying at the furthest distance from the other 
circles of the world; and comprises the infinite space of vacuum, which 


extends unlimited like the unbounded and transparent spirit of God. 


45. This was the remotest sphere of heavens, that could be observed by me; 
and there was nothing else observable on any side, beside and beyond the 
limits of these four spheres or circles. 


46. Rama interrogated, saying: — I ask you to tell me, O venerable Sir; 
whether there is any sphere or space, beyond what is contained in the mind of 
Brahm; then tell me what and how many of them are there, what are their 
boundaries, and how are they situated, and to what end and purpose. 


47. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, that there are ten other spheres 
beyond this world (and each of them ten times greater that the preceding one). 
Of these the first is the sphere of water, lying beyond the two parts (or 
continents) of the earth. It is ten times greater than the land which it covers, as 
the shadow of evening overspreads the sky. 


48. Beyond that is the sphere of heat, which is ten times greater in its extent 
than that of water; and afar from this is the region of the winds, whose circle 
is ten times larger than that of solar heat and light. 


49. Next to these is the sphere of air, which is ten times as wide as the 
circuits of the winds; It is the highest sphere of transparent air, and is said to 
comprise the infinite vacuity of the divine spirit. 


50. Afar and aloft from these, there are some other spheres also, whose 
circles extend to the distance of ten times above one another in the vast 
infinity of space. 


51. Rama said: — Tell me, O chief of sages, who is it that upholds the 
water of the deep below, and supports the air of the firmament above the 
world; and in what manner they are held aloof. 


52. Vasishtha replied: — All earthly things are upheld by the earth, as the 
waters support the leaves of lotuses upon it; and every part depends upon the 
whole, as a babe depends upon its mother (or as the young of an ape, clings to 
the breast of its dam, and never falls off from it). 


53. Hence everything runs to, and is attracted by whatever is larger than it, 
and situated nearer to it than others; just as the thirsty man runs to, and is 
attracted by the adjacent water. (Here we find the discovery of the theory of 
attraction, some thousands of years before it was discovered by Newton, and 
known to moderns). 


54. So all metallic and other bodies, depend upon the close union of their 
parts, which being joined together, are as inseparable from one another, as the 


limbs and members of a person are attached to the main body. 


55. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how do the parts of the world subsist 
together; in what manner they are joined with one another, and how are they 
disjoined from one another, and destroyed at last. 


56. Vasishtha replied: — Whether the world is supported by someone or 
not, and whether it remains fixed (by attraction) or falls off (by its gravity); it 
is in reality an unsubstantial form, like that of a city in a dream. 


57. What is it falls away or remains fixed on some support, it is viewed in 
the same manner, as our consciousness represents it unto us. 


58. The world is contained in and represented by the intellect, in the same 
manner, as the wind is contained in and let out of air; and as the sky presents 
the blueness of the firmament, and other airy appearances. 


59. These habitable worlds forming the universe, are but imaginary cities 
and creations of the Intellect; they are but airy representations of the airy 
mind, as the formless sky is represented in empty vacuity, and appearing in 
various forms unto us. 


60. As it is the nature of our Intellect, to give many things to our 
consciousness, so it is its nature also, to make us unconscious of their 
disappearance by day and night. 


61. An innumerable train of thoughts, are incessantly employing our minds 
when we are sitting and at rest; and so they are flying off and returning to us 
by day and night. 


62. All things appear to approach to their dissolution, to one who knows 
their destructibility and their ultimate extinction at the end of a Kalpa period 
or millennium; and they seem as ever growing to one, who is conversant with 
their growth only in the vacuity of the mind. 


63. All our thoughts appear in the vacuum of our minds, as the vaporous 
chains of pearls are seen in the autumn sky; they are both as erroneous and 
fleeting as the other, and yet they press so very thick and quick on our sight 
and minds, that there is no reckoning of them. 


CHAPTER LXXxXI. 
Description of the Last Night of Death or 
General Doom. 


Argument: — Rudra dancing as Bhairava on the last day, in company with 
his shadow the last night. 


Vasishtha related: — I beheld afterwards, O Rama! the same Rudra standing 
in the same firmament, and dancing with a hideous form in the same part of 
the sky. 


2. This body then became as big as to fill the whole atmosphere, and as 
deep and dark black as to cover the ten sides of the sky, under the shadow of 
its sable appearance. 


3. Its three eye-balls flashed with the flaming lights of the sun, moon and 
fire; and the body which was as black as the fumes of a dark flame, was as 
mute as the ten sides of the naked sky. 


4. The eyes were blazing with the flame of the sub-marine fire, and the 
arms were as ponderous as the huge surges of the sea; and the blue body, 
seemed as the consolidated form of waters rising from the blue universal 
ocean. 


5. As I was looking upon this enormous body, I saw a form like that of its 
shadow rising from it; and jumping about in the manner of dancing. 


6. I was thinking in my mind, as to how could this appear in this dark and 
dreary night; when the heavens were hid under darkness, and there was no 
luminary shining in the sky (to cause the shadow). 


7. As I was reflecting in this manner, I beheld on the foreground of that 
ethereal stage, the stalwart phantom of a dark dingy female with three eyes, 
prancing and dancing and glancing all about. 


8. She was of a large and lean stature, and of a dark black complexion; with 
her flaming eye-balls burning as fire, and girt with wild flowers all over her 


body. 


9. She was as inky black as pasted pitch, and as dark as the darkest night or 
Erebus; and with her body of darkness visible, she appeared as the image of 
primeval night. 


10. With her horrid and wide-open jaws, she seemed to view the spacious 
vacuum of air; and with her long legs and outstretched arms, she appeared to 
measure the depth and breadth of open space on all sides. 


11. Her frame was as faint as it was reduced by long enduring fast, and it 
stooped lower and lower as if pressed down by hunger; it was wavering to and 
fro, as a body of sable clouds is driven backward and forward by the driving 
winds. 


12. Her stature was so lean and long, that it could not stand by itself; and 
was supported like a skeleton, by the ligaments of the ribs, and ligatures of 
arteries, which uphold it fast from falling. 


13. In a word, her stature was so tall and towering, that it was by my 
diurnal journey in the upper and lower skies, that I came to see the top of her 
head, and the base of her feet. 


14. After this, I beheld her body as a bush of tangling thickets and thistles, 
by the complicate ligatures of the tendons and arteries, which fastened all its 
members together. 


15. She was wrapped in vests of various hues, and her head was decked by 
the luminaries belike her head-dress of lotus flowers. She was beset by the 
pure light of heaven, and her robe flashed as fire, enflamed by the breath of 
winds. 


16. The lobes of her long ears, were adorned with rings of snakes, and 
pendents of human skulls; her knee-bones were as prominent as two dried 
gourd shells, and her two dark dugs hung down loosely upon her breast. 


17. The braid of hair on the top of her head, was adorned with feathers of 
male and young peacocks; and defied the crowned head of the lord of Gods, 
(i.e., Indra), and the circlet of his discus, (Khattdnga). 


18. Her moon like teeth, cast their lustre like moon beams; and it glistened 
amidst the dark ocean of chaotic night, as the moon beams play upon the 
surface, and rising waves of the dark blue deep. 


19. Her long stature rose as a large tree in the sky, and her two knee-pans 
resembled two dry gourds growing upon it; and these clattered like the 
rustling of a tree by the breeze, as she turned about in the air. 


20. And as she danced about in the air, with her sombre arms lifted on high; 
they resembled the rising of the waves of dark ocean of eternity. (The words 
Kdla and Kali, — implying both the black goddess and dark eternity). 


21. Now she lifts one arm and then many more, and at last she displays her 
countless hands; to play her part in the playhouse of the universe. 


22. Now she shows but one face and then another, and afterwards many 
more, ad infinitum; in order to represent her various and infinite parts, in the 
vast theatre of the world. 


23. Now she dances on one foot, and instantly on both her feet; she stands 
on a hundred legs in one moment, and on her numberless feet at another. 


24. I understood this person to be the figure of chaotic, and the same which 
the wise have ascertained as the goddess known under the designation of Kali 
or eternal night. Or I presently recognized her as the figure of kdla-rdtri or 
dark night; which the wise have ascertained to be the image of dark eternity, 
as designated as the goddess Kali, — Hecate or chaotic night. (But Kdlias in 
Greek, means Sundari or fair and beautiful also). 


25. The sockets of her triple eyes flashed with a flame, like that of the 
furnace of a fire engine; and her forest was as glaring and flaring, as the 
burning Indra-nila mountain. 


26. Her cheek-bones were as frightful as two high hills, projecting over her 
hideous open mouth; appearing as a mountain cavern, and capable of 
ingulfing the whole world in it. (Hence Kali, the type of time, is said to be the 
devourer of all things, and restorer of them in the unconscious womb). 


27. Her shoulder-blades were as high as two mountain peaks, piercing the 
starry frame; where they were decorated by the clusters of stars, as with 
strings of pearls. 


28. She danced with her outstretched arms, resembling the waving 
branches of trees; and displayed the brightness of her nails, like that of 
blooming blossoms upon them; or as so many full moons shining under the 
azure sky. 


29. As she turned and tossed her sable hands on every side, she seemed as a 
dark cloud moving about in the sky; and the lustre of her nails, appeared to 
shed the splendour of stars all around. 


30. The face of the sky resembled a forest ground, occupied by the black 
arbours of her two sable arms; and her outstretched fingers resembling the 
twigs of the trees, were covered over by the blossoms of their pearly nails, 


which waved as flowers in azure sky. 


31. With her legs taller than the tallest tala and tamdla trees, she stalked 
over the burning earth, and put to shame the largest trees that grew upon it 
(and kept burning without being able to move). 


32. The long and flowing hairs on her head, reached to and spread over the 
skies; and seemed about to form black vestures for the dark elephantine 
clouds, moving about in the empty air. 


33. She breathed from her nostrils a rapid gale of wind, which bore the 
mountains aloft in the air; and blew great gales in the sky; resounding with 
loud repeals from all sides of its boundless spheres. 


34. The breath of her nostrils and mouth, blew in unison all about the circle 
of the universe; and kept the great sphere in its constant rotation, as it were in 
its enharmonic progression. 


35. I then came to perceive, as I looked on her with attention, that her 
stature was enlarging with her dancing, till at last I found it to fill the whole 
space of the air and sky. 


36. And as long I continued to behold her in her dancing state, I saw the 
great mountains pendant all about her body, as if they were a string of jewels 
around her person. 


37. The dark diluvian clouds formed a sable garb about her body, and the 
phenomena of the three worlds appeared as the various decorations, that 
adorned her person. 


38. The Himalaya and Sumeru mountains, were as her two silver and 
golden ear-rings, and the rolling worlds, resembled the ringing trinkets and 
belts about her waist. 


39. The ranges of boundary mountains, were as chains and wreaths of 
flower upon her person; and the cities and towns and villages and islands, 
were as the leaves of trees scattered about her. 


40. All the cities and towns of the earth, appeared as adornments on her 
person; and all the three worlds and their seasons and divisions of time, were 
as ornaments and garments upon her body. 


41. She had the streams of holy rivers of Ganga and Yamuna, hanging 
down as strings of pearls from the ears of her other heads. So the virtues and 
vices (recorded in the Srutis), formed decorations of her ears also. 


42. The four vedas were her four breasts, which exuded with the sweet milk 


(of religion) in the manner of her sweat; and the doctrines of other Sdstras, 
flowed as milk from their nipples. 


43. The armour and arms, and the various weapons as the sword and the 
shield, the spear and the mallet, which she bore on her body; decorated her 
person as with wreaths of flowers. 


44. The Gods and all the fourteen kinds of animal beings, were all situated 
as lines of hair on her person, in her form of animated nature itself. 


45. The cities and villages and hills, which were situated in her person; all 
joined in their merry dance with herself, in the expectation of their 
resurrection, in the same forms again. 


46. The unstable moving creation also, which rested in her, appeared to me 
as if they were situated in the next world, and dancing with joy in the hope of 
their revivification. (The living that are dead and buried in the chaotic Kali, 
are to be revivified to life again). 


47. The chaotic Kdli, having devoured and assimilated the world in herself; 
dances with joy like the peacock, after gorging a snake in its belly, and at the 
appearance of a dark cloud. 


48. The world continues to remain and exhibit its real form, in her wide 
extended figure; as the shadow of a thing is seen in a mirror, and the situations 
of countries are shown in a map. 


49. I saw her sometimes to stand still, with the whole world and all its 
forests and mountains; to be moving and dancing in her person; and all forms 
to be repeatedly reduced in and produced from her. 


50. I beheld the harmonious oscillation of the whole, in the mirror of that 
person; and I saw the repeated rising and setting of the world in that circle, 
without its utter extinction. 


51. I marked the revolution of the stars, and the rising of mountains within 
its circumference, and I observed the throngs of gods and demi-gods, to 
assemble and disperse on her in time, as flights of gnats and flies, are driven to 
and fro by the winds in open air. 


52. All these heavenly bodies and these islands in the ocean, are moving 
around her, like the flying wheels of a broken war-car; and they whirl up and 
down about her, like the rocks and woods in a whirlpool. 


53. She is clad in the robes of the blue clouds, which are furled and folded 
by the breezes of air; and the cracking of wood and bones under feet, answer 
the sound of her foot-steps and anklets below. 


54. The world is filled with the noise of the concussion and separation of its 
objects, and the tumult of worldly people; appearing as passing shadows in a 
mirror, or as the entrance and exits of actors in a play on the stage. 


55. The high-headed Meru and the long armed (ranged) boundary 
mountains, seem to be dancing about her in their representations in the 
moving clouds; and the forest trees seen in the clouds, seem to perform their 
circuitous dance all around. 


56. The high-swelling seas were heaving their waves to heaven, bearing 
with them the uprooted woods of the coasts on high, and again hurling them 
down, and sinking them in the waters below. 


57. The cities were seen to be rolling with a tremendous noise in the waters 
below, and no relics of houses and towers and the habitations of human kind, 
were found to be left beneath. 


58. As the chaotic night (kdla-rdtri) was thus roving at random, the sun and 
moon with their light and shade, found shelter in the tops of her nails, where 
they sparkled as threads of gold. (i.e., The flash of her nails, afforded the only 
light amidst the universe of gloom). 


59. She was clad in the blue mantle of the clouds, and adorned with 
necklaces of frost and icicles; and the worlds hung about her, like the trickling 
dewdrops of her perspiration. 


60. The blue sky formed her covering veil about her head, the infernal 
region her footstool, the earth her bowels, and the several sides (or points of 
the compass) were so many arms on her. 


61. The seas and their islands, formed the cavities and pimples in her 
person; the hills and rocks made her rib bones, and the winds of heaven were 
her vital airs. 


62. As she continues in her dancing, the huge mountains and rocks swing 
and reel about her gigantic body, as her attendant satellites. 


63. The mountain trees turning around her, appear to weave chaplets and 
dance about, in congratulation of her commencing a new cycle or Kalpa. 


64. The gods and demi-gods, the hairless serpents and worms, and all hairy 
bodies; are all but component parts of her body; and being unable to remain 
quiescent while she is in motion, are all turning round with her. 


65. She weaves the three-fold cord of the sacred thread, — trivrit, 
consisting of acts, sacrifices and knowledge, which she proclaims aloud in the 
thundering voice of the triple vedas. 


66. Before her, (i.e., in the infinite space), there is no heaven or earth; (Ze., 
up or down); but the one becomes the other, by its constant rotation like the 
wheel of a vehicle. 


67. Her wide-open nostrils constantly breathe out hoarse currents of her 
breath, which give rise to the winds of air, and their loud sufflations and 
whistlings. 


68. Her hundred-fold arms revolving in all the four directions, give the sky 
the appearance of a forest; filled with the tall heads of trees and their 
branches, shaken by a furious tornado in the air. 


69. At last my steady eye-sight grew tired, with viewing the varieties of 
productions from her body; and their motions and movements, resembling the 
manners of an army in warfare. 


70. Mountains were seen to be rolling as by an engine, and the cities of the 
celestials falling downward; and all these appearances were observed to take 
place in the mirror of her person. 


71. The Meru mountains were torn and borne away as branches of trees, 
and the Malayas were tossed about as flying leaves; the Himalayas fell down 
as dewdrops, and all earthly things are scattered as straws. 


72. The hills and rocks fled away, and the Vindhyas flew as aerials in the 
air; the woods rolled in the whirlpools, and the stars floated in the sea of 
heaven, as swans and geese in the lakes below. 


73. Islands floated as straws in the ocean of her body, and the seas were 
worn as circlet on it; the abodes of the gods were like lotus-flowers, blooming 
in the large lake of her person. 


74. As we see the images of cities in our dream, and in the darkness of 
night, as clearly we behold them in the fair sky light; so I beheld all things in 
her dark body, as vividly as they shone in broad sunlight. 


75. All things though immovable, as the mountains and seas and arbours; 
appear to be moving in and dancing about in her person. 


76. So the wandering worlds are dancing about in the great circle of her 
spacious body, as if they were mere straws in the vast ocean of creation. Thus, 
the sea rolls on the mountain and the high hills pierces the hollow of the 
heaven above. This heaven also with its sun and moon, are turning below the 
earth; and the earth with all its islands and mountains, cities, forests and 
flowery gardens; is dancing in heaven round about the sun. (Describing the 
harmonious dance of the planetary spheres in empty air). 


77. The mountains are wandering (with the earth), amidst the surrounding 
sky; and the sea passes beyond the horizon (with the rotation of the earth); and 
so the cities and all human habitations, traverse through other skies; and so 
also the rivers and lakes pass through other regions, as objects reflecting 
themselves in different mirrors, and as swiftly as the leaf of a tree torn by a 
tempest, is hurled on and borne afar to distant parts. 


78. Fishes skim in the desert air (or ethereal desert), as they swim in the 
watery plain; and cities are situated in empty air, as firmly as they are fixed on 
solid earth. The waters are raised to heaven by the clouds, which are again 
driven back by the winds, to pour their waters on mountain tops. 


79. The groups of stars are wandering about, like lustres of a thousand 
lamps lighted in the sky; they seem to shed gems with their rays as they roll, 
or scatter flowers from all sides on the heads of gods and aerial beings. 


80. Creations and destructions accompany her, as fleeting days and nights, 
or as jewels of brilliant and black gems on her person. They are as the two 
fortnights resembling her white and black wings on either side. 


81. The sun and moon are the two bright gems on her person, and the 
clusters of stars form her necklaces of lesser gems; the clear firmament is her 
white apparel, and the flashes of lightnings form the brocaded fringes of her 
garment. 


82. As she dances in her giddy dance of destruction, she huddles the worlds 
under her feet as her anklets, raising thereby a jingling sound as that of her 
trinkets. 


83. In her warfare with the jarring elements, rolling on like waves of the 
ocean, and darkening the daylight as by the waving swords of warriors, she 
listens to the tumult of all the worlds and their peoples. 


84. The gods Brahma, Vishnu and Siva, together with the regents of sun 
and moon and fire, and all other gods and demi-gods, that shine in their 
respective offices; are all made to fly before like a flight of gnats, and with the 
velocity of lightning. 


85. Her body is a congeries of conflicting elements and contrary principles, 
and creation and destruction, existence and non-existence, happiness and 
misery, life and death, and all injunctions and prohibitions. (i.e., the 
mandatory and prohibitory laws, do all abide conjointly and yet separately in 
her person). 


86. The various states of production and existence, and continuance of 
action and motion, and their cessation which appear to take place in her body, 


as in those of all corporeal beings, together with the revolution of the earth 
and all other worlds in empty air; are all but false delusions of our minds, as 
there is nothing in reality except a boundless vacuity. 


87. Life and death, peace and trouble, joy and sorrow, war and truce, anger 
and fear, envy and enmity, faith and distrust and all other opposite feelings; 
are concomitants with this worldly life, and they dwell together in the same 
person, as the various gems stored in a chest. 


88. The intellectual sphere of her body, teems with notions of multifarious 
worlds; which appear as phantoms in the open air, or as fallacies of vision to 
the dim-sighted man. 


89. Whether the world is quiescent in the intellect, or a passing 
phenomenon of outward vision; it appears both as stable as well as moving, 
like the reflexion of objects in a standing or shaking mirror. 


90. All worldly objects are as fluctuating, as the changing shows in a magic 
play; they forsake their forms and assume others as quickly, as the fickle 
desires of whimsical boys are ever shifting from one object to another. 


91. It is the combination of causal powers, which cause the production of 
bodies; and it is their separation which effects their dissolution; as it is the 
accumulation of grains, which makes a granary, and their abstraction which 
tends to its disappearance. 


92. The Goddess now appears in one form, and then in another; she 
becomes now as small as the thumb finger, and in a moment fills the sky (with 
the bigness of her body). 


93. That goddess is all in all, she is changed through everything in world, 
and is the cosmos itself and the power of the intellect also; she fills the whole 
concavity of the sky with her form of pure vacuity. 


94. She is the intellect, which embraces all, whatever is contained in the 
three worlds and in all the three times (of the past, present, and future). It is 
she that expands the worlds which are contained in her, as a painter draws out 
the figures which are pictured in the receptacle of his mind. 


95. She is the all comprehensive and plastic nature or form of all things; 
and being one with the intellectual spirit, she is equally as calm and quiet as 
the other. Being thus uniform in her nature, she is varied to endless forms in 
the twinkling of her eye. 


96. All these visibles appear in her, as marks of lotuses and carved figures 
are seen in a hollow stone (or in the perforated sdligram stones of gunduk). 


Her body is the hollow sphere of heaven, and her mind is full of all forms, 
appearing as waves in the depth of sea, or as the sights of things in the bosom 
of a crystal stone (as reflected in it by the Divine Intellect). 


97. The very furious goddess Bhairavi, — the consort of the dread god 
Bhairava, — the lord of destruction, was thus dancing about with her fierce 
forms filling the whole firmament. 


98. On one side the earth was burning with the fire, issuing from the eye on 
the fore-head of all destroying Rudra; and on the other was his consort 
Rudrani, dancing like a forest blown away by a hurricane. 


99. She was armed more over with many other weapons, (beside those that 
are mentioned before); such as a spade, a mortar and pestle, a mallet, a mace, 
etc.; which adorned her body as a garland of flowers. 


100. In this manner, she danced and scattered the flowers of her garlands on 
all sides; in her acts of destructions and recreation (as preliminaries on one 
another). 


101. She hailed the god Bhairava, — the regent of the skies, who joined her 
in dancing with his form as big and high as hers. 


102. May the god Bhairava, with his associate Goddess of Kdlardtri or 
chaotic night, preserve you all in their act of heroic dance, with the beating of 
high sounding drums, and the blowing of their buffalo horn, as they drink 
their bowls of blood and are adorned with wreaths of flowers, hanging down 
from their heads to the breasts. 


CHAPTER LXXXII. 
Description of the Person of the God Siva. 


Argument: — Description of the perfection and personality of Siva as an 
undivided whole. 


Rama rejoined: — Who is this goddess, Sir, that is dancing thus in her act of 
destruction, and why is it that she bears on her body the pots and fruits as her 
wreaths of flowers? 


2. Say, whether the worlds are wholly destroyed at the end, or they become 
extinct in the goddess Kali, and reside in her person, and when doth her dance 
come to an end. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Neither is he a male, nor is she a female; nor was 
there a dancing of the one, or a duality of the two (in their spirit); such being 
the case (of their unity), and such the nature of their action (of destruction); 
neither of them any form, or figure of their own (except that they are 
personified as such). 


4. That which is without its beginning or end, is the divine Intellect alone; 
which in the manner of infinite vacuity, is the cause of all causes. (In the 
beginning all was void, which caused all things). 


5. It is the increate and endless light, that exists from eternity, and extends 
over all space. This calm and quiet state of the ethereal space is known as Siva 
or tranquil, and its change to confusion at the end, is denominated Bhairava or 
the dreadful. (i.e., the Lord acting his dreadful part in the theatre of the 
universe). 


6. It is impossible for the pure and formless intellect, to remain alone and 
aloof from its association with plastic nature; as it is not likely to find any 
gold to exist without some form or other. (So the sruti: — The creation and 
absorption of the world, require a formal agent and recipient also). 


7. Say ye who know, how the intellect may subsist without its intelligence, 
and where a pepper may be had without its pungency? (There is nothing 


without its necessary property, nor the formal world without a formal cause). 


8. Consider how can there be any gold, without its form of a bracelet or any 
other; and how doth a substance exist without its substantial property or 
nature? 


9. Say what is the extract of the sugar-cane, unless it is possessed of its 
sweetness; you cannot call it the juice of sugar-cane, unless you find the 
saccharine flavour in the same. 


10. When the intellect is devoid of its intellection, you cannot call it as the 
intellect anymore; nor is the vacuous form of the intellect, ever liable to any 
change or annihilation. (A void is devoid of all accidents). 


11. Vacuity admits of no variety, besides its retaining the identity of its 
inanity; and in order to assume a diversity, the void must remain a void as 
ever. (Or else it becomes a solid, which is no more itself). 


12. Therefore, the unchanged and unagitated essence, which is essential to 
it, must be without beginning and unlimited, and full of all potency in itself, 
(since vacuum is the medium both of creation as well as of annihilation also). 


13. And therefore, the creation of the three worlds and their destruction, the 
earth, firmament and the sides of the compass; together with all the acts of 
creation and destruction, are the indiscriminate phenomena of vacuum. 


14. All births, deaths, delusions and ignorance, being and not being, 
together with knowledge and dullness, restraint and liberty, and all events 
whether good or evil. 


15. Knowledge and its want, the body and its loss, temporariness and 
diuturnity; together with mobility and inertia, and egoism and tuism and 
illism. 


16. All good and evil, goodness and badness, ignorance and intelligence; 
together with durations of time and space, substance and action, and all our 
thoughts, fancies and imagination. 


17. The sight of the forms of things and the thoughts of the mind, the action 
of the body, understanding and senses; with those of the elements of earth and 
water, fire, air, and vacuum extending all about us. 


18. These and all others, proceed from the pure intellectual vacuity of the 
Divine spirit; which resides in its vacuous form in everything and is always 
without decay and decrease. 


19. All things subsist in pure vacuum, and are as pure as the void itself; 


there is nothing beside this empty air, though they appear as real as doth a 
mountain in our hollow dream. 


20. The intellectual spirit, which I have said to be transcendent void; is the 
same which we call as jiva, — the sempiternal and Rudra, — the august. 


21. He is adored as Hari or Vishnu by some, and as Brahma the great 
progenitor of men by others; he is called the sun and moon, and as Indra, 
Varuna, Yama, the Virdja and the God of fire also. 


22. He is the marut or wind, the cloud and sea, the sky, and everything that 
there is or is not; all whatever manifests itself in the empty sphere of the 
Intellect. 


23. In this manner all things appearing under different names, and taken to 
be true by the ignorant eye; vanish into nothing in their spiritual light, which 
shows them in their pure intellectual natures. 


24. In the understanding of the ignorant, the world appears as apart from 
the spirit; but to the intellectual soul, the vacuity of the intellect is known to 
be situated in the Divine spirit; therefore, there is no distinction of unity and 
duality to the knowing mind (in which all multiplicities blend into unity). 


25. So long is the living soul tossed about as a wave in the ocean of the 
world, and running the course of its repeated births and deaths in it; until it 
comes to know the nature of the supreme spirit, when it becomes as immortal 
and perfect as the eternal soul and self-same with it. 


26. By this knowledge of the universal soul, the human soul attains its 
perfect tranquility; as to find itself no more, as the fluctuating wave in the 
ocean of the world, but views itself and everything beside, to be as calm and 
quiet, as the eternal and infinite spirit of God. 


CHAPTER LXXXIII. 
Sight of the Mundane God. 


Argument: — Siva is the Representation of the Pure Intellect; but Bhairava 
& Kali are not so. Explanation of the causes of such representations and 
Personifications. 


Vasishtha added: — I have already related to you, that Siva is the 
representation of the vacuous intellect; but not so is Rudra, whom I have 
described as dancing all about. 


2. The form that is attributed to him (or to the goddess kali); is not their real 
figure; but a representation of the grosser aspect of intellectual vacuity (which 
is of a dark complexion). 


3. I saw with my intellectual and clear vision, (clairvoyance), that sphere of 
the intellect in its clear, bright and clear light (as that of Siva’s body); but it 
did not appear so to others, who beheld it in their ignorance, to be as dark as 
the black complexion of the associate goddess. (There is shadow under the 
lamp). 


4. I saw at the end of the Kalpa cycle, the two spectres of delusion, 
appearing before me; the one was the furious Rudra, and the other, — the 
ferocious Bhairava; and knew them both to be but delusion, and creatures of 
my mistaken fancy. 


5. The great chasm which is seen to exist in the vacuous sphere of the 
Intellect, the same is supposed to be conceived under the idea of a vast void, 
represented as the dreadful Bhairava. 


6. We can have no conception of anything, without knowing the relation, 
the significant term and its signification; it is for that reason that I related this 
to you, as I found it to be. 


7. Whatever idea is conveyed to the mind by the significant term, know 
Rama, the very same to be presently presented before the outward sight by the 
power of delusion and as a magical appearance. 


8. In reality there is no destruction, nor the destructive power of Bhairava 
or Bhairavi (in the masculine or feminine gender); all these are but erroneous 
conceptions fleeting in the empty space of the intellect. (It is the bias of the 
mind, which presents these hobgoblins to sight). 


9. These appearances are as those of the cities seen in our dream, or as a 
warfare shewn in our fancy; they are as the utopian realms of one’s 
imagination, or as the fits of our feelings on some pathetic and heart stirring 
description. 


10. As the fairy castle is seen in the field of fancy, and strings of pearls 
hanging in the empty air; and as mists and vapours darken the clear 
atmosphere, so are there the troops of fallacies flying all about the firmament 
of the intellect. 


11. But the clear sky of the pure intellect, shines of itself in itself; and when 
it shines in that state, it shows the world in itself. 


12. The soul exhibits itself in its intellectual sphere, in the same manner as 
a figure is seen in picture; and the soul manifests also in the raging fire of final 
destruction. (The same soul is equally manifest in the subjective, as well as in 
the objective, i.e., both in itself as in all other things whatsoever). 


13. I have thus far related to you, regarding the formlessness of the forms 
of Siva and his consort Sivani; hear me now to tell you concerning their 
dance, which was literally no dancing. 


14. Sensation cannot exist anywhere (in any person), without the action of 
the power, (Jit., element) of intellection; as it is not possible for anything to be 
a nothing or appear otherwise than what it is. (Gloss. — There can be no 
sensation without action of the power of intellection, as there can be no pearl- 
shell without the appearance of silver in it). 


15. Therefore, the powers of sensations and perception, are naturally united 
with all thing, as Rudra and his consort, who are blended together as gold and 
silver appearing as one and the same metal. 


16. Whatever is sensation and wherever it exists, the same must be a 
sensible object, and have action or motion for its natural property. 


17. Whatever is the action of the Intellect, whose consolidated form is 
called by the name Siva, the same is the cause of our motions also; and as 
these are actuated by our will and desires, they are called the dance or 
vacillations (of the intellectual power). 


18. Therefore, the furious form of Rudra, which is assumed by the god Siva 


at the end of a Kalpa; which is said to dance about at that time, is to be known 
as vibration of the divine intellect. 


19. Rama rejoined: — This world being nothing in reality, in the sight of 
the right observer; and anything that there remains of it in any sense whatever, 
the same is also destroyed at the end of the Kalpa. 


20. How then does it happen at the end of the Kalpa, when everything is 
lost in the formless void of vacuity, that this consolidated form of intellect, 
known as Siva, remains and thinks in itself. 


21. Vasishtha replied: — O Rama! if you entertain such doubt, then hear 
me tell you, how you can get over the great ocean of your doubts, respecting 
the unity and duality of the deity: — that all things being extinct at the end, 
there remains the thinking and subjective intellect alone, without anything 
objective to think upon. 


22. The subjective soul then thinks of nothing, but remains quite tranquil in 
itself; as the unmoving and mute stone, and resting in the solid vacuity of its 
omniscience. 


23. If it reflects at all on anything, it is only on itself; because it is the 
nature of the intellect to dwell calmly in itself. 


24. As the intellect appears itself, like the inward city it sees within itself in 
a dream; so there is nothing in real existence anywhere, except the knowledge 
thereof, which is inherent in the intellect. (So it is with the divine intellect, 
whose omniscience comprehends the knowledge of everything in itself). 


25. The divine soul knowing everything in itself, and in its vacuous 
intellect, sees the manifestation of the universe at the time of creation, by 
simple development of itself. 


26. The intellect develops itself of its own nature, within its vacuous cell at 
first; and then in a moment envelopes this erroneous universe in itself, and at 
his will at the time of its destruction. 


27. The intellect expands itself, in itself in its natural state of vacuum; and 
devolves itself likewise into its conceptions of, I, and thou, and all others, 
(which are but false ideas and creatures of its imagination). 


28. Therefore, there exists no duality nor unity, nor an empty vacuity 
either; there is neither an intelligence or its want or the both together; so is 
there neither my meism nor thy tuism either. 


29. There is nothing that ever thinks of anything, nor aught whatever which 
is thought of or object thereof of its own nature; therefore, there is nothing 


that thinks or reflects, but all is quite rest and silence. 


30. It is the unalterable steadiness of the mind, which is the ultimate 
samddhi or perfection of all Sdstras; therefore, the living Yogi aught to 
remain, as the mute and immovable stone in his meditation. 


31. Now Rama, remain to discharge your ordinary duties, as they are 
incumbent on you by the rules of your race; but continue to be quiet and 
steady in your spiritual part, by renouncing all worldly pride and vanity; and 
enjoy a peaceful composure in your mind and soul, as that of the serene and 
calm and clear concavity of the sky. 


CHAPTER LXXXIV. 
Relation of Siva and Sakti or of the Holy Spirit 
and its Power. 


Argument: — The definition of the term Sakti and her elucidation. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, why the goddess Kali is said to be dancing about, 
and why is she armed with axe and other weapons, and arrayed with her 
wreaths of flowers. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — It is the vacuum of the intellect, which is called 
both as Siva and Bhairava; and it is this intellectual power or force, which is 
identic with itself, that is called Kali and its consorting mind. 


3. As the wind is one with its vacillation, and the fire is identic with its 
heat; so is the intellect identical with its oscillation. (The mind is ever fleeting 
and active as dull matter is inert and inactive). 


4. As the wind is invisible even in its act of vacillations, and the heat is 
unseen even in its act of burning; so the intellect is imperceptible 
notwithstanding its acting, and is therefore called Siva, — the calm and quiet. 


5. It is because of the wondrous power of his vibration, that he is known to 
us, and without which we could have no knowledge of his existence; know 
therefore, this Siva to be the all-powerful Brahma, who is otherwise a 
quiescent being, and unknowable even by the learned and wise. 


6. His oscillation is the power of his will, which has spread-out this visible 
appearance; as it is the will of an embodied and living man, that builds a city 
according to his thought, (or just as it depends on the option of a living 
person, to erect a city according to the model in his thought or mind). 


7. It is the will of Siva or Jove that creates all this world from its formless 
state, and it is this creative power which is the Intelligence of God, and the 
intellection of living being. 


8. This power takes also the form of nature in her formation of the creation, 


and is called the creation itself, on account of her assuming on herself the 
representation of the phenomenal world. 


9. She is represented with a crest of sub-marine fire on her head, and to be 
dry and withered in her body; she is said to be a fury on account of her 
furiousness, and called the lotiform from the blue-lotus-like complexion of 
her person. 


10. She is called by the names jayd and siddha, (victory and fortune), 
owing to her being accompanied by victory and prosperity at all times. 


11. She is also designated as Apardjitd or invincible, viryd the mighty, and 
Durgd, — the inaccessible, and is likewise renowned as umd, for her being 
composed of the powers of the three letters of the mystic syllable Om. (In the 
birth of umd, the subject of the first canto of Kumara Sambhaba, Kalidasa 
says, — “Tapasa nibrita je umeti ndmn4a prakirtita,’ she was termed umd for 
prevention of austerities. The glossarists have all explained the passage in the 
sense of the mythic personification of umd, and nobody has ever known its 
mystic interpretation of sacred syllable Om itself, whose utterance precludes 
the necessity of all formal devotions: i.e., to say, umd, is, om, the divine 
mantra itself). 


12. She is called the gayatri (hymn) from its being chanted by everybody, 
and Savitri also from her being the progenitrix of all beings; she is named 
Saraswati likewise, for her giving us an insight into whatever appears before 
our sight. 


13. She bears the appelation of Gauri from her gaura or fair complexion, 
and of Bhavani from her being the source of all beings, as also from her 
association with the body of Bhava, — or Siva. She is also termed the letter, 
(a) to signify her being the vital breath of all waking and sleeping bodies. 


14. Uma means moreover the digit of the moon, which enlightens the 
worlds from the forehead of Siva; and the bodies of the God and Goddess are 
both painted as black and blue, from their representing the two hemispheres of 
heaven. 


15. The sky appears as dark and bright from the two complexions of these 
divinities, who are situated in the vacuous forms in the bosom of the great 
vacuum itself. 


16. Though they are formless as empty airs, yet they are conceived as the 
first-born of the void; and are figuratively attributed with more or less hands 
and feet, and holding as many weapons in them. 


17. Now, know the reason of attributing the Goddess with many weapons 


and instruments, to be no more, than of representing her, as the patron of all 
arts and their employments. 


18. She was self-same with the supreme soul, as its power of self- 
meditation from all eternity; and assumed the shapes of the acts of sacred 
ablutions, religions, sacrifices, and holy gifts, as her primal forms in vedas. 
(i.e., The intellectual power (chit-sakti) evolves itself to meditation and action, 
— dhydna and Karma). 


19. She is of the form of the azure sky, comely in appearance and is the 
beauty of the visibles; she is the motion of all objects, and the varieties of 
their movements are the various modes of the dancing of the goddess. (the 
divine power or force, — sakti, is always personified as his female agent, as it 
is evident in the words potentia, energia, exergasia, qudrat, taquat, etc.). 


20. She is the agent of Brahma in his laws of the birth, decay, and deaths of 
beings; and all cities and countries, mountains and islands, hang on her 
agency as a string of gems about her neck. 


21. She holds together all parts of the world, as by her power of attraction; 
and infuses her force as momentum in them all, as it were into the different 
limbs and members of her body, she bears the various appellations of Kali, 
Kalika, etc., according to her several functions denoted by those terms (in the 
glossary). 


22. She as the one great body of the cosmos, links together all its parts like 
her limbs unto her heart; and moves them all about her; though this formless 
body of force, has never been seen or known by anybody. (We always see the 
moving bodies about us, but never the moving force which moves them all 
about). 


23. Know this ever oscillant power to be never different or unconnected, 
from the quiescent spirit of Siva the changeless god; nor think the fluctuating 
winds to be ever apart from the calm vacuum, in which they abide and vibrate 
forever. 


24. The world is a display of the glory of God, as the moonlight is a 
manifestation of the brightness of that luminary; which is otherwise dark and 
obscure; so the lord God is ever tranquil and quiet and without any change or 
decay without his works. 


25. There is not the least shadow, of fluctuation in the supreme soul; it is 
the action of this agency, that appears to be moving us. (Gloss. — The 
inactive spirit of God is the true reality, and the passing phenomena are all but 
vanity). 


26. That is said to be the tranquil spirit of Siva, — the god, which reverts 
itself from action, and reposes in its understanding; and apart from the active 
energy which possesses the intellect as its goddess. (Hence the state of the 
soul in perfect rest and repose is called Siva, — salvus or felicity). 


27. The intellect reposing in its natural state of the understanding, is styled 
Siva, — salvus or felix; but the active energy of the intellectual power, is what 
passes under the name of the great goddess of action. 


28. That bodiless power, assumes the imaginary forms of these worlds, 
with all the peoples that are visible in them in the day light. 


29. It is this power which supports the earth, with all its seas and islands, 
and its forests, deserts and mountains, it maintains the vedas with its angas, 
upangas, the sdstras, sciences and the psalms. (The vedas are four in number, 
its angas or branches called the six vedangas, namely, the siksha, kalpa, 
nirukta, vyakarana, chhanda and jyotisha. The upangas or subsidiary branches 
are the four arts, viz., dyurveda or medicine, dhanurveda, — archery, 
gandharva, — music, etc. The vidyas are the sciences and philosophy, and the 
gitds are sdmagiti or the psalm of sdmaveda). 


30. It ordains the injunctions and prohibitions (of law), and gives the rules 
of auspicious and inauspicious acts and rites; it directs the sacrifices and 
sacrificial fires, and the modes of offering cakes and oblations. 


31. This goddess is adorned with the sacrificial implements, as the mortar 
and pestle, the post and ladle, efc.; and is arrayed with the weapons of warfare 
also, as the spear, arrows and the lance. 


32. She is arrayed with the mace and many missile weapons also; and 
accompanied by horse and elephants and valiant gods with her. In short, she 
fills the fourteen worlds, and occupies the earth with all its seas and islands. 


33. Rama said: — I will ask you Sir, to tell me now, whether the thoughts 
of creation in the divine mind, subsisted (in their ideal forms) in the Divine 
soul; or they were incorporated in the forms of Rudra and which are false and 
fictitious. 


34. Vasishtha replied: — Rama, she is verily the power of the Intellect 
(Divine mind), as you have rightly said; and all these that there are being 
thought of by her, they are all true as her thoughts (and not in their visible 
appearances). 


35. The thoughts that are subjective and imprinted in the inner intellect 
(from preconceived desire or reminiscence), are never untrue; just as the 
reflection of our face cast in a mirror from without, cannot be a false shadow. 


36. But those thoughts are false, which enter into the mind from without, as 
the whole body. (lit, city of our desires and false imaginations); and the 
fallacies of these are removed upon our right reflection and by means of our 
sound judgment. 


37. But in my opinion, the firm belief and persuasion of the human soul in 
anything whatever, is reckoned as true by everyone; such as the picture of a 
thing in a mirror, and the representations of things seen in a dream or the 
forms of things seen in a picture or in dream, and the creatures of our 
imagination are all taken for true and real by every one for the time, and for 
their serviceableness to him. 


38. But you may object and say that, things that are absent and at a distance 
from you, are no way serviceable to you, and yet they cannot be said to be 
inexistent or unreal; because they come to use when they are present before 
us. 


39. As the productions of a distant country, become of use when they are 
presented before us; so the objects of our dreams and thoughts, are equally 
true and useful when they are present in view; so also every idea of a definite 
shape and signification, is a certain reality (as that of the goddess Kalf). 


40. As an object or its action passing under the sight of anyone, is believed 
to be true by its observer; so whatever thought passes in his mind, is thought 
to be true by him. But nothing that is seen or thought of by another, is ever 
known to or taken into belief by anyone else, or accounted as true to him. 


41. It is therefore in the power of the Divine Intellect, that the embryo of 
the creation is contained forever; and the whole universe is ever existent in the 
divine soul, it is wholly unknown to others. 


42. All that is past, present, and ever to be in future, together with all the 
desires and thoughts of others; are forever really existent in the divine spirit, 
else it would not be the universal soul. (The meaning of the universal soul is 
the contained of all and not that it is contained in them). 


43. There are the adepts only in Yoga practice, who acquire the power of 
prying into the hearts and minds of others; just as others come to see different 
countries, by passing over the barriers of hills and dales. (As the divine soul is 
the knower of the hearts of others, so is the pure soul of the holy divine also). 


44. As the dream of a man fallen into fast sleep, is not disturbed by the 
shaking of his bedstead or sleeping couch; so the fixed thought of anybody, 
are never lost by his removing from place to place (or by his departure from 
this life to the next, or by his transmigration from one into another). 


45. So the movements of the dancing body of Kali, (the creative energy of 
God), cause no fluctuation in the world which is contained within it; just as 
the shaking of a mirror, makes no alternation in the reflection which is cast 
upon it. 


46. The great bustle and commotion of the world though seeming as real to 
all appearance, yet it being but a mere delusion in sober reality, it were as well 
whether it moveth all or not all (as it were the same whether we are hurried or 
kept sedate in a dream). 


47. When is the dreaming scene or the city seen in our dream, said to be a 
true one, and when is it pronounced as a false one; and when is it said to be 
existent and when dilapidated? (supply how for when to give it some sense). 


48. Know the phenomenal world that is exposed before you, to be but mere 
illusion; and it is your sheer fallacy, to view the unreal visibles as sure 
realities. 


49. Know your conception of the reality of the three worlds to be equally 
false, as the aerial castle of your imagination or the air drawn city of your 
fond desire; it is as the vision in your dream, or any conception of your error. 


50. That this is I, the subjective, and the other is the objective world, is the 
interminable error that binds fast the mind for ever; it is a gross mistake as 
that of the ignorant, who believe the endless sky to be bounded, and take it for 
black or blue; but the learned are released from this blunder (and rest in the 
only existent One). 


CHAPTER LXXXvV. 
Relation of Nature and Soul, or the Prime 
Male and Female Powers. 


Argument: — The dancing goddess embraces the steady god, and is joined 
with him in one body. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus the goddess was dancing with her outstretched 
arms, which with their movements appeared to make a shaking forest of tall 
pines in the empty sky. (The Briarean arms of Kali). 


2. This power of the intellect, which is ignorant of herself and ever prone to 
action, continued thus to dance about with her decorations of various tools 
and instruments. (The mental power acts by means of the mechanical powers). 


3. She was arrayed with all kinds of weapons in all her thousand arms, such 
as the bow and arrows, the spear and lance, the mallet and club, and the sword 
and all sort of missiles. She was conversant with all things whether in being or 
not being, and was busy at every moment of passing time. (i.e., Ever active in 
body and mind). 


4. She contained the world in the vibration of her mind, as airy cities and 
castles consist in the power of imagination; it is she herself that is the world, 
as the imagination itself is the imaginary city, — the utopia. 


5. She is the volition of Siva, as fluctuation is innate in the air; and as the 
air is still without its vibration, so Siva is quite quiet without his will or 
volition, (represented as his female energy in the form of Kali). 


6. The formless volition becomes the formal creation in the same manner, 
as the formless sky produces the wind which vibrates into sound; so doth the 
will of Siva bring forth the world out of itself. 


7. When this volitive energy of Kali, dances and sports in the void of the 
Divine mind; then the world comes out of a sudden, as if it were by union of 
the active will with the great void of the supreme Mind. 


8. Being touched by the dark volitive power (or volentia), the supreme soul 
of Siva is dissolved into water; just as the sub-marine fire is extinguished by 
its contact with the water of the sea. (Water the first form of God: — “and the 
spirit of God moved upon the surface of water.”) 


9. No sooner did this power come in contact with Siva, — the prime cause 
of all, the same power of volentia, inclined and turned to assume the shape of 
nature, and to be converted to some physical form. 


10. Then forsaking her boundless and elemental form, she took upon 
herself the gross and limited forms of land and hills; and then became of the 
form of beautiful arbours and trees. (i.e., Of the forms of minerals and 
vegetables). 


11. (After taking various other forms), she became as the formless void, 
and became one with the infinite vacuity of Siva; just as a river with all its 
impetuous velocity, enters into the immensity of the sea. 


12. She then became as one with Siva, by giving up her title of sivaship; 
and this Siva, — the female form became the same with Siva, — the prime 
male, who is of the form of formless void and perfect tranquility (called 
samana, — quietus, which means both death and the quiet, which follows the 
other. Samana, like somnum, is both extinction of life, and cessation of care 
and labour). 


13. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how that sovran Goddess Siva, could 
obtain her quiet by her coming in contact with the supreme God Siva, (and 
forget her former activity altogether). 


14. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, the Goddess Siva to be the will of 
the God Siva; she is styled as nature, and famed as the great Illusion of the 
word. 


15. And this great God is said the lord of nature, and the prime male also; 
he is of the form of air and is represented in the form of Siva, which is as calm 
and quiet as the autumnal sky. 


16. The great Goddess is the energy of the Intellect and its will also, and is 
ever active as force put in motion; she abides in the world in the manner of its 
nature, and roves all about in the manner of the great delusion (of holding out 
external nature as the true reality, instead of her lord the spirit). 


17. She ranges throughout the world, as long as she is ignorant of her lord 
Siva; who is ever satisfied with himself, without decay or disease, and has no 
beginning or end, nor a second to himself. 


18. But no sooner is this Goddess conscious of herself, as one and same 
with the god of self-consciousness; than she is joined with her lord Siva, and 
becomes one with him. (Force has its rest in inertia). 


19. Nature coming in contact with the spirit, forsakes her character of gross 
nature; and becomes one with the sole unity, as a river is incorporated in the 
ocean. 


20. The river falling into the sea, is no more the river but the sea; and its 
water joining with sea water, becomes the same briny water. 


21. So the mind that is inclined to Siva, is united with him and finds its rest 
therein; as the iron becomes sharpened by returning to its quarry (as the knife 
or razor is sharpened on the white stone). 


22. As the shadow of a man entering into a forest, is lost amidst the shade 
of the wilderness; so the shades of nature (or natural propensities), are all 
absorbed in the umbrage of the Divine spirit. (It also means as the nature of a 
woman, is changed to that of her man). 


23. But the mind that remembers its own nature, and forgets that of the 
eternal spirit; has to return again to this world, and never attains its spiritual 
felicity. 


24. An honest man dwells with thieves, so long as he knows them not as 
such; but no sooner he comes to know them as so, then he sure to shun their 
company and fly from the spot. 


25. So the mind dwells with unreal dualities, as long as it is ignorant to the 
transcendent reality; but as it becomes acquainted with the true unity, he is 
sure to be united with it (by forsaking his dualistic creed). 


26. When the ignorant mind, comes to know the supreme felicity, which 
attends on the state of its self-extinction or nirvana; it is ready to resort to it, 
as the inland stream runs to join the boundless sea. 


27. So long doth the mind roam bewildered, in its repeated births in the 
tumultuous world; as it does not find its ultimate bliss in the Supreme; unto 
whom it may fly like a bee to its honeycomb. 


28. Who is there that would forget his spiritual knowledge, having once 
known its bliss; and who is there that forsakes the sweet, having had once 
tasted its flavour. Say Rama, who would not run to relish the delicious 
draughts, which pacifies all our woes and pains, and prevents our repeated 
births and deaths, and puts an end to all our delusions in this darksome world. 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 
The Convertibility of the World to the 
Supreme Spirit. 


Argument: — The huge body of Rudra, that absorbs the world in it, is at 
last dissolved in empty air and vacuity. 


Vasishtha added: — Hear now Rama, how this whole world resides in the 
infinite void; and how the airy Rudra which rises from it, is freed from his 
deluded body, and finds his final rest in it. 


2. As I stood looking on upon that block of stone, I beheld the aerial Rudra 
and the two upper and nether worlds, marked over it (as in a map), and 
remaining quite at rest. 


3. Then in a moment, that airy Rudra beheld the two partitions of the earth 
and sky within the hollow of vacuum, with his eye balls blazing as the orb of 
the sun. 


4. Then in the twinkling of an eye, and with the breath of his nostrils, he 
drew the two partitions unto him, and threw them in the horrid abyss of his 
mouth. 


5. Having then devoured both the divisions of the world, as if they were a 
morsel of bread or paste food to him; he remained alone as air, and one with 
the universal air or void about him. 


6. He then appeared as a piece of cloud, and then as a small stick, and 
afterwards as little as digit. (A stick is the measure of cubit, and a digit is that 
of a span). 


7. | beheld him afterwards to become transparent as a piece of glass, which 
at last became as minute as to melt into the air, and vanish altogether from my 
microscopic sight. 


8. Being reduced to an atom, it disappeared at once from view; and like the 
autumnal cloud became invisible altogether. 


9. In this manner did the two valves of heaven, (the earth and sky), wholly 
disappear from my sight; the wonders of which I had erelong been viewing 
with so much concern and delight. 


10. The cosmos being thus devoured as grass by the voracious deer; the 
firmament was quite cleared of everything, it became as pellucid, calm and 
quiet as the serene vacuum of Brahma himself. 


11. I saw there but one vast expanse of intellectual sky, without any 
beginning, midst or end of it; and bearing its resemblance to the dreary waste 
of ultimate dissolution, and a vast desert and desolation. 


12. I saw also the images of things drawn upon that stone, as if they were 
the reflexion of the things in a mirror; and then remembering the heavenly 
nymph and seeing all these scenes, I was lost in amazement. 


13. I was amazed as a clown upon his coming to a royal city, to see that 
stone again clearer far than ever before. 


14. This I found to be the body of goddess Ka4li, in which all the worlds 
seemed to be inscribed as in a slab of stone; I saw these with my intellectual 
eyes, far better than they appear to the supernatural sight of deities. 


15. I beheld therein everything that there ever existed in any place, and 
though it seemed to be situated at a distance from me, yet I recognized it as 
the very stone (which was represented as the Divine Intellect). 


16. This stone alone is conspicuous to view, and there was nothing of the 
worlds it contained so perspicuous in it. The stone remained forever in the 
same unvaried state, with all the worlds lying concealed in it. 


17. It was taintless and clean, and as fair and clear as the evening cloud; I 
was struck with wonder at the sight, and then fell to my meditation again. 


18. I looked to the other side of the stone with my contemplative eye, and 
found the bustle of the world lying dormant at that place. 


19. I beheld fully the great variety of things, as described before; and then I 
turned my sight to look into another side of it. 


20. I saw it abounding with the very many creations and created worlds, 
accompanied with their tumults and commotions as I observed before; and 
whatever place I thought of and sought for, I found them all in the same stone. 


21. I saw the fair creation, as if it were an ectype cast upon a reflector; and 
felt a great pleasure to explore into the mountainous source of this stone. 


22. I searched in every part of the earth, and traversed through woods and 


forests; until I passed through every part of the world, as it was exhibited 
therein. 


23. I saw them in my understanding, and not with my visual organs (which 
are both delusive and incapable of reaching so far); and beheld somewhere the 
first born Brahma, — the lord of creatures. 


24. I then beheld his arrangement of the starry frame, and the spheres of the 
sun and moon; as also the rotations of days and nights, and of the seasons and 
years; and I saw likewise, the surface of the earth, with its population here and 
there. 


25. I saw some where the level land, and the great basins of the four oceans 
elsewhere; I saw some places quite unpeopled and unproductive, and others 
teeming with Sura and Asura races. 


26. Somewhere I saw the assemblage of righteous men, with their manners 
and conduct as those of the pure golden age; and elsewhere I beheld the 
company of unrighteous people, following the practices and usages of the 
corrupt iron age. 


27.1 saw the forts and cities of the demons in certain places, with fierce and 
continuous warfares going on all along among them. 


28. I saw vast mountainous tracts, without a pit or pool in them anywhere; 
and I beheld elsewhere the unfinished creation of the lotus-born Brahma. 


29. I saw some lands where men were free from death and decay; and 
others with moonless nights and bare headed Sivas in them. (The moon being 
the coronet of Siva’s head, it must be bare for want of the moon on it). 


30. I saw the milky ocean unchurned, and filled with the dead bodies of 
gods; and the marine horse and elephant, the Kdmadhenu cow, the physician 
Dhanvantari and the goddess Laxmi; together with the sub-marine poison and 
ambrosia, all lying hidden and buried therein. 


31. I saw in one place the body of gods, assembled to baffle the attempts of 
the giants and the devices of their leader Sukra; and the great god Indra in 
another, entering into the womb of Deity, — the mother of demons, and 
destroying the unborn brood therein. 


32. It was on account of the unfading virtue (or unalterable course) of 
nature, that the world was brilliant as ever before; unless that somethings were 
placed out of their former order. 


33. The everlasting vedas ever retain their same force and sense, and never 
did they feel the shock of change, by the revolution of ages or even at the 


kalpdnta dissolution of the world. 


34. Sometimes the demons have despoiled, some parts of the heavenly 
abodes of gods; and sometimes the paradise of Eden, (udydna), resounded 
with the songs of Gandharvas and Kinnaras. (Hence some part of the 
Himalayas, is said to have been the site of the garden of paradise). 


35. Sometimes an amity was formed between the gods and giants, and I 
saw in this manner, the past, present, and future commotions of the world. 


36. I then beheld in the person of the great soul of worlds, (i.e., in the face 
of nature which is the body of God); the meeting of the Pushkara and Avarta 
clouds together. 


37. There was an assemblage of all created things, in peaceful union with 
one another in one place; and there was a joint concussion, of the gods, and 
demi-gods and sovereigns of men, in the one and same person. 


38. There was the union of the sunlight and deep darkness in the same 
place, without their destroying one another; and there were the dark clouds, 
and their flashing lightnings also in the very place. 


39. There were the demons Madhu and Kaitabha, residing together in the 
same navel-string of Brahma; and there were the infant Brahma and the lotus 
bud in the same navel of Vishnu. 


40. In the ocean of the universal deluge, where Madhava (the divine spirit), 
floated on the leaf of the bata tree, (ficus religiosus); there reigned the chaotic 
night along with him, and spread its darkness over the face of the deep. 


41. There was then but one vast void, wherein all things remained unknown 
and undefined, as if they lay buried and asleep, in the unconscious womb of a 
stony grave. 


42. Nothing could be known or inferred of anything in existence, but 
everything seemed to be submerged in deep sleep everywhere; and the sky 
was filled by darkness, resembling the wingless crows and unwinged 
mountains of old. 


43. On one side the loud peals of thunder, were breaking down the 
mountains, and melting them by the fire of the flashing lightnings; and in 
another, the overflowing waters were sweeping away the earth into the deep. 


44. In certain places there were the warfares of the giants, as those of 
Tripura, Vritra, Andha, and Vali, and in others there were terrible 
earthquakes, owing to the trepidation of the furious elephant in the regions 
below. (This elephant is said so be one of the supports of the earth). 


45. On one hand the earth was tottering on the thousand hoods on the 
infernal serpent Vasuki, which trembled with fear at the kalpdnta deluge of 
the world; and on the other the young Rama killing the Rdakshas, with their 
leader Ravana, (an event which was yet to occur). 


46. On one side was Rama, foiled by his adversary Ravana; and I saw these 
wonders, now standing upon my legs on earth, and then lifting my head above 
the mountain tops. 


47. I saw kala-nemi invading the sky one side, where he stationed the 
demons, by ousting the gods from their heavenly seats. 


48. In one place I found the Asuras foiled by the gods, who preserved the 
people from their terror; and in another the victorious son of Pandu, — 
Arjuna, protecting the world from the oppression of Kauravas, with the aid of 
lord Vishnu. I saw also the slaughter of millions of men in the Bharatic war. 


49. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how I had been before in another age, 
and who had been these Pandavas and Kauravas too, that existed before me. 
(Wheeler in his India dates the Pandavas prior to Rama). 


50. Vasishtha replied: — Rama! all things are destined to revolve and 
return, over and over again as they had been before. (In the same manner as 
the impressions in the mind, recur repeatedly to it everywhere; and the present 
state of the world, is no more than a reminiscence of the past ones). 


51. As a basket is filled repeatedly with grains of the same kind, or mixed 
sometimes, with some other sorts in it; so the very same thoughts and ideas, 
with their self-same or other associations, recur repeatedly in our minds. 


52. Our ideas occur to us in the shape of their objects, as often as the waters 
of the sea run in their course, in the form of waves beating upon the banks; 
and thus our thoughts of ourselves, yourselves and others, frequently revert to 
our minds. 


53. There never comes any thought of anything, whereof we had no 
previous idea in the mind; and though some of them seem to appear in a 
different shape, it is simply owing to our misapprehension of them, as the 
same sea water seems to show the various shapes of its waves. 


54. Again, there is a delusion, that presents us many appearances which 
never come to existence; and it is this which shows us an infinite train of 
things, coming in and passing and disappearing like magic shows (or mdyd) in 
this illusive world. 


55. The same things and others also of different kinds, appear and reappear 


unto us in this way, (either by our reminiscence of them, or by illusion of our 
minds). 


56. Know all creatures, as drops of water in the ocean of the world; and are 
composed of the period of their existence, their respective occupations, 
understanding and knowledge; and accompanied by their friends and 
properties and other surroundings. 


57. All beings are born, with every one of these properties at their very 
birth; but some possess them in equal or more or less shares, in comparison 
with others. (That some are and must be greater (or less) than the rest. — 
Pope). 


58. But all beings differ in these respects, according to the different bodies 
in which they are born; and though some are equal to others, in many of these 
respects, yet they come to vary in them in course of time. 


59. Being at last harassed in their different pursuits, all beings attain either 
to higher or lower states in their destined times; and then being shackled to the 
prison houses of their bodies, they have to pass through endless varieties of 
births in various forms. Thus the drops of living beings, have to roll about in 
the whirlpool of the vast ocean of worldly life, for an indefinite period of time, 
which nobody can gainsay or count. 


CHAPTER LXXXVII. 
The Infinity of the World Shown in the 
Material Body. 


Argument: — In the preceding chapter the world was shewn to consist in 
thought or a grain of the brain; in this it is demonstrated to be contained in the 
body or an atom of dust. 


Vasishtha continued: — Afterwards, as I directed my attention to my own 
body for a while; I saw the undecaying and infinite spirit of God. (dit., — the 
vacuous Intellect, surrounding every part of my material frame). 


2. Pondering deeply, I saw the world was seated within my heart, and 
shooting forth therein; as the grains put out their sprouts in a granary, by help 
of the rain water dropping into it. 


3. I beheld the formal world, with all its sentient as well as insensitive 
beings, rising out of the formless heart, resembling the shapeless embryo of 
the seed, (i.e., the plastic nature from the amorphous spirit), by moisture of the 
ground. 


4. As the beauty of the visibles appears to view, on one’s coming to sense 
after his sleep; so it is the intellect only which gives sensation to one, who is 
waking or just risen from his sleep; (and so it was the intellectual wakefulness 
of Vasishtha and other inspired men, which made them sensible of outward 
objects, even in the trance of their meditation). (Samddhi). 


5. So there is conception of creation in the self-same soul, ere its formation 
or bringing into action; and the forms of creations are contained in the 
vacuum of the heart, and in no other separate vacuity whatever. 


6. Rama rejoined: — Sir, your assertion of the vacuum of the heart, made 
me take it in the sense of infinite space of vacuity, which contains the whole 
creation; but please to explain to me more clearly, what you mean by your 
intellectual vacuum, which you say, is the source of the world. (i.e., whether 
the heart or mind or infinite space, is the cause and container of the cosmos). 


7. Vasishtha replied: — Hear Rama, how I thought myself once in my 
meditation, as the self-born Swayambhu or the god who is born of himself, in 
whom subsisted the whole, and there was nothing born but by and from him; 
and how I believed the unreal as real in my revelry, or as an air-built-castle in 
my dreaming. 


8. As I had been looking before, at that sight of the great Kalpa-dissolution, 
with my aeriform spiritual body; I found and felt the other part of my person, 
(i.e., my material frame), was likewise infused with the same sensibility and 
consciousness. (The body being the counterpart or réchauffé of the mind). 


9. As I looked at it for a while, with my spiritual part; I found it as purely 
aerial, and imbued with a slight consciousness of itself. (So says the Sruti: — 
In the beginning the spirit became or produced the air with its oscillation). 


10. The vacuous Intellect found this elastic substance, to be of such a subtle 
and rarefied nature, as when you see the external objects in your dream, or 
remember the objects of your dream upon your waking. 


11. This ethereal air, having its primary powers of chit and samvid, — 
intellect and conscience, becomes the intellection and consciousness also; 
then from its power of reflecting (on its existence in space and time), it takes 
the name of reflection, (chittam). Next from its knowledge of itself as air, it 
becomes the airy egoism, and then it takes the name of buddhi or 
understanding, for its knowledge of itself as plastic nature, and forgetfulness 
of its former spirituality. At last, it becomes the mind, from its minding many 
things that it wills or nils. 


12. Then from its powers of perception and sensation it becomes the five 
senses, to which are added their five-fold organs; upon the perversion of the 
nice mental perceptions to grossness. 


13. As a man roused from his sound sleep, is subject to flimsy dreams; so 
the pure soul losing its purity upon its entrance in the gross body, is subjected 
to the miseries that are concomitant with it. 


14. Then the infinite world; appearing at once and at the same time (before 
the view of the mind and outer sight, both in state of dream and on waking); it 
is said to be an act of spontaneity by some, and that of consecution by others. 
(Some texts say: God willed,) and it was; (so aikshata, fiatet fit, kunfa kand, 
etc.); while others represent the world to be not the work of a day, but of 
many consecutive days. (Such as so atapshata, — God laboured and rested 
from his labour). 


15. I conceived the whole (space and time), in the minutiae of my mind; 


and being myself as empty air, thought the material world, to be contained in 
me in the form of intelligence. 


16. As it is the nature of vacuum, to give rise to the current air; so it is 
natural to the mind, to assign a form and figure to all its ideas, by the power of 
its imagination, (whence it is called the creative mind, or inventive 
imagination, that gives a shape to airy nothing). 


17. Whatever imaginary form, our imagination gives to a thing at first, 
there is no power in the mind to remove it any more from it. 


18. Hence I believed myself as a minute atom, although I knew my soul to 
be beyond all bounds; and because I had the power of thinking, I thought 
myself as the thinking mind, and no more. (So, one knowing himself as the 
body, at once knows him to be a corporeal being only; as the lion thinking 
himself as a sheep, bleated and grazed as one of them. So, we forget our 
higher nature). 


19. Then with my subtle body of pure intelligence, I thought myself as a 
spark of fire; and by thinking so for a long time, I became at length of the 
form of a gross body. (The angels are to be of a bright and fiery body, (muri 
and atashi), and the human body to be of a gross and earthy substance, (khaki 
and martya)). 


20. I then felt a desire of seeing all what existed about me, and had the 
power of sight immediately supplied to my gross body. (Just as a child 
coming out as blind, deaf and dumb from the embryo, has the powers of 
seeing and hearing and crying, immediately furnished to it afterwards) (so 
says Adam in Milton, — “As I came to life, I looked at this light and beautiful 
frame’). 


21. In this manner I felt other desires, and had their corresponding senses 
and organs given to me; and I will tell you now, O race of Raghu, their names 
and functions and objects, as they are known amongst you. 


22. The two holes of my face through which I began to see, are termed the 
two eyes with their function of sight; and having for their objects the visible 
phenomena of nature. 


23. When I see that I call time, and as I see that is called its manner; the 
place where I see an object is simple vacuity, and the duration of the sight is 
governed by destiny. 


24. The place where I am situated, is said to be my location; and when I 
think or affirm anything, that I say the present time; and as long I feel the 
twinkling of my intellect, so long do I know myself as the intellectual cause of 


my action. 


25. When I see anything, I have its perception in me; and I have my 
conviction also, that what I behold with my two eyes, are not empty vacuity, 
but of a substantial nature. 


26. The organs wherewith I saw and felt the world in me, are these two 
eyes, — the keys to the visible world; then I felt the desire of hearing, what 
was going about me, and it was my own soul, which prompted this desire in 
me. (Sensible perceptions are the natural appetites of the soul, and finding 
their way through the external organs of sense). 


27.1 then heard a swelling sound, as that of a sonorous conch; and reaching 
to me through the air, where it is naturally born and through which it passes. 


28. The organs by which I heard the sound, are these two ears of mine; it is 
born by the air to ear, and then enters the earholes with a continuous hissing. 


29. I then felt in me the desire of feeling, and the organ whereby I came to 
it, is called the touch or skin. 


30. Next I came to know the medium, whereby I had the sensation of touch 
in my body; and found it was the air which conveyed that sense to me. (i.e., 
from the object to the skin). 


31. As I remained sensible of the property of feeling or touch in me, I felt 
the desire of taste within myself, and had there upon the organ of tasting given 
to me. 


32. Then my vacuous self, contracted the property of smelling, by the air of 
its breath, I had thereby the sense of smelling given to me, through the organs 
of my nostrils. Being thus furnished with all the organs of sense, I found 
myself to be imperfect still, (because none of them could lead me to the 
knowledge of the truth). 


33. Being thus confined in the net of my senses, I found my sensual 
appetite increasing fast in me (and the possession of sensuous perceptions, 
(vidah), tending to no conscientious verity, samvidah). 


34. The bodily sensations of sound, form, taste, touch and smell, are all 
formless and untrue, and though appear to be actual and true; yet they are 
really false and untrue. 


35. As I remained ensnared in the net of my senses, and considered myself 
a sensible being; I felt my egoism in me, as that with which I am now 
addressing to you. 


36. The sense of egoism growing strong and compact, takes the name of the 
understanding; and this being considered and mature, comes to be designated 
as the mind. 


37. Being possessed of my eternal senses, I pass for a sentient being; and 
having my spiritual body and soul, I pass as an intellectual being in a vacuous 
form. 


38. I am more rare and vacuous than the air itself, and am as the empty 
void itself; I am devoid of all shapes and figures, and am irrepressible in my 
nature. 


39. As I remained at that spot, with this conviction of myself; I found 
myself endowed with a body, and it was as I took me to be. 


40. With this belief (of my being an embodied being), I began to utter 
sounds; and these sounds were as void, as those of man, dreaming himself as 
flying in the air in his sleep. 


41. This was the sound of a new born babe, uttering the sacred syllable om 
at first; and thence it has become the custom to pronounce this word, in the 
beginning of sacred hymn. 


42. Then I uttered some words as those of a sleeping person, and these 
words are called the vyahrites, which are now used in the Gayatri hymn. 


43. Methought I now became as Brahma, the author and lord of creation; 
and then with my mental part or mind, I thought of the creation in my 
imagination. 


44. Finding myself so as containing the mundane system within me, I 
thought I was not a created being at all; because I saw the worlds in my own 
body, and naught besides without it. 


45. Thus the world being produced, within this mind of mine; I turned to 
look minutely into it, and found there was nothing in reality, except an empty 
void. 


46. So it is with all these worlds that you see, which are mere void, and no 
other than your imagination of them; and there is no reality whatever, in the 
existence of this earth and all other things that you see. 


47. The worlds appear as the waters of the mirage, before the sight and to 
the knowledge of our consciousness; there is nothing outside the mind, and 
the mind sees everything, in the pure vacuity of the divine mind. 


48. There is no water in the sandy desert, and yet the mind thinks it sees it 


there; so the deluded sight of our understanding, sees the baseless objects of 
delusion, in the burning and barren waste of infinite void. 


49. Thus there is no world in reality in the divine spirit, and yet the erring 
mind of man, sees it erroneously to be situated therein; it is all owing to the 
delusion of human understanding, which naturally leads us to groundless 
errors and fallacies. (Errors in the mind breed errors in thoughts). 


50. The unreal appears, as the real extended world to the mind; in the same 
manner as the imaginary utopia appears before it, and as a city is seen in the 
dream of a sleeping man. 


51. As one knows nothing of the dream of another sleeping by his side, 
without being able to penetrate into his mind; while the Yogi sees it clearly, by 
his power of prying into the hearts of others. 


52. So doth one know this world, who can penetrate into the mundane 
stone; where it represented as the reflexion of something in a mirror, which in 
reality is nothing at all. 


53. And although the world appears, as an elemental substance to the naked 
eye; yet when it is observed in its true light, it disappears like the Otaria of the 
polar region, which is hidden under everlasting darkness. 


54. He who views the creation with his spiritual body, and with his eyes of 
discernment, finds it full of the immaculate spirit of God, which comprehends 
and pervades throughout the whole. 


55. The percipient or judicious eye, sees the extinction or absence of the 
world everywhere; because they have the presence of the Divine Spirit alone 
before their view, and naught that is not the spirit and therefore, nothing. 


56. Whatever is perceived by the clear-sighted (Yogi), by his conclusive 
reasoning; that transcendent truth is hard to be seen by the triple-eyed Siva, or 
even by the god Indra with his thousand eyes. 


57. But as I looked into the vacuity of the sky, replete with its myriads of 
luminous bodies; so I beheld the earth full with the variety of its productions; 
and then I began to reflect in myself, that I was the lord of all below (and even 
as Brahma himself). 


58. Then thinking myself as the master of the earth, I became amalgamated 
with the earth as if it were one with myself; and having forsaken my vacuous 
intellectual body, I thought myself as the sovereign of the whole. 


59. Believing myself as the support and container of this earth, I penetrated 
deep into its bowels; and thought all its hidden mines were parts of myself, so 


I took whatever it contained both below and above it to be self-same with me. 


60. Being thus warped in the form of the earth, I became changed to all its 
forests and woods, which grew as hairs on its body. My bowels were full of 
jewels and gems, and my back was decorated by many a city and town. 


61. I was full of villages and valleys, of hills and dales, and of infernal 
regions and caverns; I thought I was the great mountain chain, and connected 
the seas and their islands on either side. 


62. The grassy verdure was the hairy cover of my body, and the scattered 
hills as pimples on it; and the great mountain tops, were as the crests of my 
coronet, or as the hundred heads of the infernal snake, (Vasuki). 


63. This earth which was freely enjoined by all living beings, came to be 
parcelled by men and at last oppressed by belligerent kings, and worsted by 
their lines of fighting elephants. 


64. The great mountains of Imaus, Vindhya and Sumeru, had all their tops 
decorated with the falling streams of Ganges and others, sparkling as their 
pearly necklaces. 


65. The caves and forests, the seas and their shores, furnished it with 
beautiful scenes; and the desert and marsh lands, supplied it with clean linen 
garments. 


66. The ancient waters of the deluge, have receded to their basins, and left 
the pure inland reservoirs, decorated by flowery banks, and perfumed by the 
odorous dust of falling flowers. 


67. The earth is ploughed daily by bullocks, and sown in the dewy and cold 
season; it is heated by the solar heat, and moistened by rain water. 


68. The wide level land or plain, is its broad breast; the lotus-lakes its eyes, 
the white and black clouds are its turbans, and the canopy of heaven is its 
dwelling. 


69. The great hollow under the polar mountain, forms its wide-open mouth; 
and the breathing of animated nature, makes the breath of its life. 


70. It is surrounded all about, and filled in its inside, by beings of various 
kinds; it is peopled by the devas, demons and men on the outside, and 
inhabited by worms and insects in its inner parts. 


71. It is infested in the organic poles and cells of its body, by snakes, 
Asuras and reptiles; and peopled in all its oceans and seas, with aquatic 
animals of various kinds. 


72. It is filled in all its various parts with animal, vegetable and mineral 
substances of infinite varieties; and it is plenteous with provisions for the 
sustenance of all sorts of beings. 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 
Further Description of the Earth. 


Argument: — Relation of other wonders, which Vasishtha in his earthly 
body. 
Vasishtha related: — Hear ye men, what I conceived afterwards in my 


consciousness, as I had been looking in my form of the earth, and considered 
the rivers running in my body. 


2. I beheld in one place a number of women, lamenting loudly on the death 
of somebody; and saw also the great rejoicing of certain females, on the 
occasion of their festive mirth. 


3. I saw a direful dearth and famine in one place, with the rapine and 
plunder of the people; and I beheld the profusion of plenty in another, and the 
joy and friendliness of its people. 


4. In one place I saw a great fire, burning down everything before me; and 
in another a great flood deluging over the land, and drowning its cities and 
towns, in one common ruin. 


5. I beheld a busy body of soldiers somewhere, plundering a city and 
carrying away their booty; and I observed the fierce raxas and goblins, bent on 
afflicting and oppressing the people. 


6. I saw the beds of waters brimful with water, and running out to water 
and fertilize the land all around; I saw also masses of clouds issuing from 
mountain caverns, and tossed and borne by the winds afar and aloft in the sky 
(to pour their rains in other quarters). 


7. I saw the out pourings of rain-water, the uprising of verdure, and the land 
smiling with plenty; and I felt within myself a delight, which made the hairs 
on my body stand upright; (as if they were the rising shoots of plants growing 
out of my body). 


8. I saw also many places, having hills, forests and habitations of men; and 


also deep and dreadful dens, with wild beasts, bees in them. Here there were 
no foot prints of human beings, who avoid those places, for fear of falling in 
those diresome caves. 


9. Some places I saw, where warfares were waged between hostile hosts, 
and some others also, where the armies were sitting at ease, and gladsome 
conversation with one another. 


10. I saw some places full of forests, and others of barren deserts with 
tornadoes howling in them; and I saw marshy grounds, with repeated 
cultivations and crops in them. 


11. I saw clear and purling lakes, frequented by cranes and herons, and 
smiling with blooming lotuses in them; and I saw likewise, barren deserts 
with heaps and piles of grey dust, collected together by the blowing breezes. 


12. I saw some places where the rivers were running, and rolling and 
gurgling in their sport; and at others, the grounds were moistened and sown, 
and shooting forth in germs and sprouts. 


13. I saw also in many places, little insects and worms moving slowly in 
the ground; and appeared to me to be crying out, O sage, save us from this 
miserable state. 


14. I saw the big banian tree, rooting its surrounding branches in the 
ground; and I saw many parasite plants growing on and about these rooted 
branches. 


15. Huge trees were growing in some places, upon rocks and mountain 
tops; and these embracing one another with their branching arms, were 
shaking like the billows of the sea. 


16. I saw the raging sun darting his drying rays, and drawing the moisture 
of the shady trees; and leaving them to stand with their dried trunks, and their 
withered and leafless branches. 


17. I saw the big elephants dwelling on the summits of mountains, piercing 
the sturdy oaks with the strokes of their tusks, which like the bolts of Indra, 
broke down and felled and hurted them with hideous noise below. 


18. There grew in some places, many a tender sprout, of plants, shooting 
forth with joy as the green blades of grass; or as the erect hairs of horripilation 
rising on the bodies of saints, enrapt in their reveries and sitting with their 
closed eyelids. 


19. I saw the resorts of flies and leeches and gnats in the dirt, and of bees 
and black bees on the petals of lotus flowers; and I saw big elephants 


destroying the lotus bushes, as the plough-share overturns the furrows of 
earth. 


20. I saw the excess of cold, when all living beings were shrivelled and 
withered in their bodies; when the waters were congealed to stone, and the 
keen and cold blasts chilled the blood of men. 


21. I have seen swarms of weak insects, to be crushed to death under the 
feet of men; and many diving and swimming and skimming in the waters 
below, and others to be born and growing therein. 


22. I have seen how the water enters in the seeds, and moistens them in the 
rainy season; and these put forth their hairy shoots on the outside, which grow 
to plants in the open air. 


23. I smile with the smiling lotuses, when they are slightly shaken in their 
beds by the gentle winds of heaven; and I parade with the gliding of rivers, to 
the ocean of eternity for final extinction. (i.e., As the river bearing all things is 
lost in the ocean; so doth the human body become extinct in the Deity, with 
the world that it contains within itself). 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 
The Phenomenal as the Reproduction of 
Reminiscence. 


Argument: — The situation of the World in the womb of the Vacuous 
Intellect; and its outward appearance as the Imagination of the Mind. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, whether in your curiosity to observe the mutations 
of earthly things and affairs, you beheld them in their earthly shapes with your 
corporeal body; or saw them in their ideal forms, in the imagination of your 
mind. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — It was in my mind, that I thought myself to have 
become the great earth; and all what I saw as visible, being but simple 
conceptions of the mind, could not possibly have a material form. 


3. It is impossible for the surface of the earth to exist, without its 
conception in the mind; whatever thou knowest either as real or unreal, know 
them all as the work of your mind. 


4. I am the pure vacuous Intellect, and it is that which is the essence of my 
soul; it is the expansion of this intellectual soul, which is called its will also. 
(This will is the eternal predicate of the Divine Spirit). 


5. It is this which becomes the mind and the creative power Brahma, and 
takes the form of the world and this earth also; and this vacuous mind being 
composed of its desires, assumes to itself whatever form it likes to take. 


6. It was thus that my mind stretched itself at that time, and put forth its 
desires in all those forms as it liked: and from its habitual capacity of 
containing everything, it evolved itself in the shape of the wide-stretched 
earth. 


7. Hence the sphere of the earth, is no other than the evolution of the self- 
same mind; it is but an unintelligent counterpart of the intelligent intellect. 


8. Being thus a void in itself, it continues to remain forever as such in the 


infinite void; but by being considered as a solid substance by the ignorant, 
they have altogether forgotten its intellectual nature. 


9. The knowledge that this globe of earth is stable, solid and extended, is as 
false as the general impression of blueness in the clear and vacuous 
firmament, and this is the effect of a deep-rooted bias in the minds of men. 


10. It is clear from this argument, that there is no such thing as the stable 
earth; it is of the same ideal form as it was conceived in the mind, at the first 
creation of the world. (The primary idea of creation is of its subtle and not 
gross form. “And the earth was without form and void’). 


11. As the city is situated in a dream, and the intellect resides in vacuity; so 
the Divine Intellect dwelt in the form of the creation in the very vacuum. 


12. Know the three worlds in their intellectual light, likening the aerial 
palace of puerile fancy and hobby; and know this earth and all visible 
appearances, to be the creatures of imagination. 


13. The world is the ectype city or reproduction of the intellectual Spirit of 
God, and not a different kind of production of the Divine Will; it is in fact no 
real or positive existence at all, although it may appear as solid and substantial 
to the ignorant. 


14. The unreal visible world is known only to the ignorant, who are 
unacquainted with its real intellectual nature, and it is he only that is 
acquainted with its true nature, who knows well what I have been preaching to 
you ere long. 


15. All this is the intellection of the Divine Intellect, and manifestation of 
the supreme self in itself; the visible world which appears as something other 
than the supreme soul, is inherent in the very soul. (All this being self-same 
with the Divine spirit, it is exempt from the imputation of its duality or unity 
with it). 


16. As a gemming stone exhibits of itself, the various hues of white, yellow 
and others, without their being infused therein; so the Divine Intellect shows 
this creation in all its various aspects within its vacuous sphere. 


17. Whereas the spirit neither does anything, nor changes its nature (on 
account of its immutability); therefore, this earth is neither a mental nor 
material production of it (but a phantasmagoria only). 


18. The vacuous Intellect appears as the surface of the earth, but it is of 
itself without any depth or breadth, and transparent in its surface (wherefore it 
is not the fathomable or opaque body of the earth). 


19. It is of its own nature, that it shows itself as anything wherever it is 
situated; and though it is as clear as the open air, yet it appears as the earth, by 
its universal inherence into and pervasion over all things. 


20. This terraqueous orb, appearing as something other than the Great 
Intellect; appears in the very form as it pictured in the mind, like the shapes of 
things appearing in our dream (agreeably to their forms preserved in our 
memory). 


21. The world subsists in the vacuous spirit, and the Divine Spirit being 
vacuous also, there is no difference in them, it is the ignorant soul which 
makes the difference, but it vanishes at once before the intelligent soul. 


22. All material beings, that have been or are to be in the three past, present 
and future times; are mere errors of vision, like the false appearances in our 
dreams, and the air-built cities of imagination. 


23. The beings that are existent at present, and such as are to come into 
existence in future; and the earth itself, are of the same nature of an universal 
fallacy, in lieu of the Divine spirit pervading the whole. 


24. I myself and all others that are included in this world, have the visible 
perceptions of all things as they are preserved in our reminiscence. 


25. Know Rama, the Divine Intellect only, as the supreme soul and 
undecaying essence of all existence; and this it is that sustains the whole in its 
person, without forsaking its spirituality. Knowing therefore, the whole world 
as contained in thyself, which is not different from the supreme soul, thou 
shalt be exempt and liberated from all. 


CHAPTER XC. 
Description of the Watery creation. 


Argument: — Description of the Waters and Islands on the surface of the 
Earth, and Watery things in all nature. 


Rama Said: — Tell me Sir, what other things, (/it., — worlds), you saw on the 
surface of the earth. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — With my waking soul, I thought as it were in my 
sleep that I was assimilated to land, and saw many groups of lands scattered 
over this earth. I saw them in my mysterious vision, and then reflected them in 
my mind. 


3. As I beheld those groups of lands, lying everywhere before my 
intellectual vision; the outer world receded from my sight, all dualities were 
quite lost and hushed in my tranquil soul. 


4. I saw those groups as so many spots, lying in the expanded spirit of 
Brahma; which was a perfect void, quite calm, and inert to all agitations. 


5. I saw everywhere large tracts, as great and solid as the earth itself; but 
found them in reality to be nothing more, than the empty dreams appearing in 
the vacant mind. 


6. Here there was no diversity nor uniformity neither, nor was there any 
entity or nihility either; there was no sense of my egoism also, but all blinded 
in an indefinite void. 


7. And though I conceived myself to be something in existence; yet I 
perceived it had no personality of its own, and its entity depended on that of 
one sole Brahma, who is increate and ever undecaying (or never decays). 


8. Thus these sights being as appearances of dream, in the empty space of 
the intellect; it is not known how and in what form they were situated in the 
divine mind, before they were exhibited in creation. 


9. Now as I saw those tracts of land in the form of so many worlds, so I 


beheld large basins of water also (surrounding them on all sides). 


10. Then my active spirit, became as the inert element of water in many a 
great (or reservoirs of water); and these are called as seas and oceans, in 
which lay and played with a gurgling noise. 


11. These waters are incessantly gliding on, bearing upon them loads of 
grass and straw, and bushes of plants and shrubs and trunks of trees; which 
float upon them, as the bugs and leeches crawl and creep on your body. 


12. These are borne by the circling waters, like small insects and worms 
into the crevices of waves; and thence hurled into the womb of the whirlpools, 
whose depth is beyond all comparison. 


13. The currents of the waters were gliding, with the leaves and fruits of 
trees in their mouths; while the floating creepers and branches, described the 
encircling necklaces about them. 


14. Again, the drinkable water being taken by the mouth, goes into the 
hearts of living beings; and produces different effects on the humours of 
animal bodies, according to their properties at different seasons. 


15. Again, it is this water which descends in the form of dews, sleeps on 
leafy beds in the shape of icicles, and shines under the (moon-beams on all 
sides), all the time and without interruption. 


16. It runs with irresistible course to many a lake and brook as its home, it 
flows in the currents of rivers, unless it is stopped by some bridge or 
embankment. 


17. The waters of the sea, like ignorant men on earth, ran up and down in 
search of the proper course; but failing to find the same, they tumbled and 
turned about in eddies and whirlpools (of doubts). 


18. I saw the water on the mountain-top, which thought it rested on high, 
yet it fell owing to its restlessness in the form of a water-fall in the cataract, 
where it was dashed to a thousand splashes. (So I found myself to be hurled 
down by my sins, from my high position in heaven, to a thousand devious 
paths on earth). 


19. I saw the water rising from the earth in the form of vapour on high, and 
then mixing with the blue ocean of the azure sky, or appearing as blue 
sapphires among the twinkling stars of heaven. 


20. I saw the waters ascending and riding on the back of the clouds, and 
there joining with the lightnings as their hidden consorts, shining as the 
cerulean god Vishnu, mounted on the back of the hoary serpent, — Vasuki. 


21. I found this water both in the atomic and elementary creations, as well 
as in all gross bodies on earth, and I found it lying unperceived in the very 
grain of all things, as the omnipresent Brahma inheres in all substances. 


22. This element resides in the tongue; which perceives the flavour of 
things from their particles, and conveys the sense to the mind. Hence, I ween 
the feeling of taste relates to the soul and its perception, and not to the 
sensibility of the body. (The Divine Spirit is said to be flavour, — rasovaitat, 
and it is the human soul only that perceives it). 


23. I did not taste this spiritual savour, by means of the body or any of its 
organs; it is felt in the inner soul only, and not by the perceptions of the mind, 
which are misleading and therefore, false and unreal. 


24. There is this flavour scattered on all sides, in the sapidity of the 
season’s fruits and flowers; I have tasted them all and left the flowers to be 
sucked by the bees and butterflies. 


25. Again, the sentient soul abides in the form of this liquid, in the bodies 
and limbs of all the fourteen kinds of living bodies, (in some of which it 
appears in the form of red-hot blood). 


26. It assumes the form of the showers of rain, and mounts on the back of 
the driving winds; and then it fills the whole atmosphere, with a sweet 
aromatic fragrance. (This sweet scent is called in Bengali, Q7C4T1, which is a 
corruption of @1Y swddu or sweet). 


27. Rama! remaining in that state of my sublimated abstraction, I perceived 
the particulars of the world in each individual and particular particle. 


28. Remaining unknown to and unseen by anybody, I perceived the 
properties of all things, as I marked those of water, with this my sensible 
body, appearing as gross matter. 


29. Thus I saw thousands of worlds, and the repeated rising and fallings, 
like the leaves of plantain trees, (or rather the barks of those trees, which grow 
upon and envelop one another). 


30. Thus did this material world, appear to me in its immaterial form; as a 
creation of the Intellect, and presenting a pure and vacuous aspect. 


31. The phenomenal is nothing, and it is its mental perception only that we 
have all of this world; and this also vanishes into nothing, when we know this 
all to be a mere void. 


CHAPTER XCI. 
Description of Igneous, Luminous and Brilliant 
Objects in Nature. 


Argument: — Vasishtha’s Identity of his soul with light, and his 
observation of it in all lightsome substances. 


Vasishtha related: — I then believed myself as identical with light, and beheld 
its various aspects in the luminous bodies of the sun and moon, in the planets 
and stars, and in fire and all shining objects. 


2. This light has by its own excellence, and it becomes the light of the 
universe; it is as brilliant as the mighty monarch, before whose all surveying 
sight, the thievish darkness of night flies at a distance. 


3. This light, like a good prince, takes upon it the likeness of lamps, and 
reigns in the hearts of families and houses in a thousand shapes (of 
chandeliers, efc.), to drive off the thievish night, and restore the properties of 
all before their sight. 


4. Being glad to lighten all peoples, (worlds), it enkindles the orbs of the 
sun, moon and stars; who with their rays and beams, dispel afar the shade of 
night from the face of the skies. 


5. It impoverishes the darkness, that bereaves all beings from their view of 
the beauties of nature, and dispenses the useful light, which brings all to the 
sight of the visibles. 


6. It employs the axe at the root of the nigrescent arbour of night, and adds 
a purity and price to all things; it is this that gives value to all metals minerals, 
and makes them so dear to mankind. 


7. It shows to view all sorts of colours, as white, red, black and others. It is 
light that is the cause of colours as the parent is the cause of the progeny. 


8. This light is in great favour, with every one upon this earth; wherefore it 
is protected with great fondness in all houses, as they foster their children in 


them, by means of earthen walls, (in order to preserve them from inclement 
winds). 


9. I beheld a slight light, even in the darkness of the infernal region. (i.e., 
the dismal hell fire); and I saw it partly in the particles of dust, which compose 
all bodies on the surface of the earth. 


10. I saw light, which is the first and best of the works of God, to be 
eternally present in the abodes of the celestial; and observed it as the lamp of 
the mansion of this world, which was the great deep of waters and darkness 
before. (“And darkness reigned over the face of the deep”). 


11. Light is the mirror of the celestial nymphs of all the quarters of heaven. 
(i.e., it shows and points out the face of the heavens to us); it scatters like the 
winds the dust of frost from before the face of night, it is the essence of the 
luminous bodies of the sun, moon and fire, and the cause of the red and bright 
hue of the face of heaven. 


12. It discloses the cornfields to day-light, and ripens their corn, by 
dispelling darkness from the face of the earth. It washes also the glassy bowl 
of heaven, and glitters in the dewy waters upon its face. 


13. It is by reason of its giving existence to, and bringing to view all things 
in the world, it is said to be the younger brother, of the transcendent light of 
divine Intellect. (The gross light is the reflexion of holy light). 


14. It is the light of the sun, which is the reviver of the lotus bed of the 
actions of mortals; and which is the life of living beings on earth; it is the 
source of our sight of the forms of all things, as the intellect is that of all our 
thoughts and perceptions. 


15. Light decorates the face of the sky, with numberless gems of shining 
stars; and it is the solar light that makes the divisions of days, months, years 
and seasons in the course of time, and makes them appear as the passing 
waves in the ocean of eternity. 


16. This immense universe bears the appearance of the boundless ocean, 
wherein the sun and moon are revolving as the rolling waves, over the scum 
of this muddy earth. 


17. Light is the brilliancy of gold, and the colour of all metals; it is the 
glitter of glass and gems, the flash of lightnings, and the vigour of men in 
general. 


18. It is moon shine in the nocturnal orb, and the glittering of glancing eye- 
lids; it is the brightness of a smiling countenance, and the sweetness of tender 


and affectionate looks. 


19. It gives significancy to the gestures, of the face, arms, eyes and 
frownings of the eye-brows; and it adds a blush to maiden faces, from the 
sense of their invincibleness. (Laughter spring from pride). 


20. The heat of this light, makes the mighty to spurn the world as a straw, 
and break the head of the enemy with a slap; and strike the heart of the lion 
with awe. 


21. It is this heat which makes the hardy and bold combatants, engage in 
mutual fighting with drawn and jangling swords; and clad in armours clanking 
on their bodies. 


22. It gives the gods their antagonism against the demons, and makes the 
demoniac races also antagonistic to the gods; it gives vigour to all beings, and 
causes the growth of the vegetable kingdom. 


23. All these appeared to me as the mirage in a desert, and I beheld them as 
phantasms in my mind; and this scene of the world was situated in the womb 
of vacuum, and I beheld these sceneries, O bright eyed Rama, all these 
sceneries seem to resemble the appearances of a phantasmagoria to me. 


24. I then beheld the glorious sun above, stretching his golden rays to all 
the ten sides of the universe, and himself flying as the phoenix in the sky; and 
I saw also this speck of the earth, resembling a villa beset by the walls of its 
mountains. 


25. The sun turned about and lent his beams to the moon, and to the sub- 
marine fire beneath the dark blue ocean; and stood himself as the great lamp 
of the world on the stand of the meridian, to give the light of the day. 


26. I saw the moon rising as the face of the sky, with a lake of cooling and 
sweet nectar in it; the moonlight appearing as the soft and sweet smile of the 
sable goddess of night, and as the glow of the nightly stars. 


27. The moon is the comparison of all beautiful objects in the world, and is 
the most beloved object at night, of females, and of the blue lotus, and 
companion of the vesper or evening star. 


28. I beheld the twinkling stars likening to the clusters of flowers in the 
arbour of the skies, and delighting the eyes and faces (of their spectator); and 
they appeared to me as flocks of butterflies, flying in the fair field of the 
firmament. 


29. I saw many shining gems washed away by the waters, and tossed about 
by the waving arms of the ocean; and I saw many jewels also in the hands of 


jewellers, and balanced by them in their scales. 


30. I looked into the sub-marine fire lying latent in the sea, and the eddies 
whirling the silvery shrimps in the whirlpools, I saw the golden rays of the 
sun, shining as filaments of flowers upon the waters, and I saw also the 
lightnings flashing in the midst of clouds. (There is a play upon the words 
abdhi and abda which mean the sea, the eddy, the marine fire, the cloud, efc.). 


31. I witnessed the auspicious sacrificial fire, blazing with ineffable light; 
and marked its burning flame, splitting and cracking the sacred wood, with a 
crackling and clattering noise. 


32. I saw the lustre of gold and other metals and minerals, and I found also 
how they are reduced to ashes by the act of calcination, like learned men 
overpowered by the clownish ignorant. 


33. I observed the brightness of pearls, which gave them a place on the 
breasts of women in the form of necklaces; as also on the necks and chests of 
men and giants, and of Gandharvas and chiefs of men. 


34. I beheld the firefly, with which the beauties adorn their foreheads with 
bright spots; but which are trod upon on the way by ignorant passers as 
worthless; hence the value of things depends on their situation and not real 
worth. 


35. I saw the flickering lightning in the unmoving cloud, and the fickle 
shrimps skimming upon the waters of the calm ocean; I heard also the hoarse 
noise of whirlpools in the quiet and unsounding main, and marked how 
restlessness consorted with restive and sedate. 


36. Sometimes I saw the soft petals of flowers, were used as lamps to light 
the bridal beds in the inner apartments. 


37. Being then exhausted as the extinguished lamp, I became as dark as 
collyrium; and slept silently in my own cell, like a tortoise with its contracted 
limbs. 


38. Being tired with my travel throughout the universe, at the kalpdnta end 
of the world; I remained fixed amidst the dark clouds of heaven, as the 
elephant of Rudra abides there in company with (his lightning). 


39. At the end when the worlds were dissolved, and the waters were 
absorbed by the sub-marine fires; I kept myself dancing in the ethereal space, 
which devoid of its waters. 


40. Sometimes I was borne on high by the burning fire, with its teeth of the 
sparks and its flaming arms, and its flying fumes resembling the dishevelled 


hairs on its head. 


41. The conflagration burnt down the straw-built houses before it, and fed 
upon the animal bodies on its way; and consumed the eight kinds of wood, 
that are ordained in sacrificial rites. 


42. I saw the sparks of fire, emitted by the strokes of hammer, from the red- 
hot iron of blacksmiths, were rising and flying about like golden brickbats, to 
hit the hammerer. 


43. In another place I saw the whole universe, lying invisible for ages in the 
womb of stony mundane egg. 


44. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how you felt yourself in that state of 
confinement in the stone; and whether it was a state of pleasure or pain, to you 
and the rest of beings. 


45. Vasishtha replied: — As when a man falls into sleep with the dullness 
of his senses, and has yet his airy intellect fully awake in him; so was that 
outward insensibility filled with intellectual sensibility. (So a man assimilating 
himself to Brahma, is full of his internal light and felicity). 


46. The great Brahma awakens the soul, when the body lies as insensible as 
the dull earth; so the sleeping man remaining in his torpid state, has his 
internal soul full with the divine spirit (which fills it with true intellectual 
delight sachchiddnanda). 


47. Because the earthly or corporeal body of man, is verily a falsity and has 
no reality in it; it appears as visual phantom to the sight of the spectator, but in 
reality it is one with unchanged spirit of God. 


48. Knowing this certain truth, whoso views these all as an undivided 
whole; sees the quintessence as one essence, and the subjective and the 
objective as the same. (Lit.: — He does not fall into the blunder of the viewer 
and the view). 


49. I then having assimilated myself to the pure spirit of Brahma, viewed 
all things in and as Brahma, because there is none beside Brahma, that is or 
can be or do anything from naught. 


50. When I viewed all these visibles as manifestation of the self-same 
Brahma, then I left myself also situated in the state of divinity of Brahma 
himself. 


51. When on the other hand, I reflected myself as combined with the 
pentuple material elements; I found myself reduced to my dull nature, and 
was incapable of my intellectual operation of excogitation, and the conception 


of my higher nature. 


52. I thought myself as asleep, notwithstanding my power of intellection 
(which lay dormant in me); and being thus overtaken by the conception of my 
sleepy insensibility, how could I cogitate of anything otherwise; which is of a 
transcendental nature. 


53. He whose soul is awakened by knowledge, loses the sense of his 
corporeal body, and raises himself to his dtivahika or spiritual form, by means 
of his purer understanding. 


54. A man having his sentient and spiritual body, either in the form of a 
minute particle or larger size as one may wish, remains perfectly liberated 
from the fetters of his body and his bondage in this world. 


55. With his intelligent and spiritual body, a man is enabled to enter into 
the impenetrable heart of a hard stone, or to rise to heaven above or descend 
to the regions below. 


56. Hence, O Rama, I having then that intelligent and subtle body of mine, 
did all that I told you, with my essence of infinite understanding. 


57. In my entrance into the hard stone, and my passages up and down the 
high heaven and the nether world, I experienced no difficulty from any side. 


58. With my subtle and intelligent body, I passed everywhere, and felt 
everything, as I used to do with material body. 


59. One going of his own accord in one direction, and wishing to go in 
another, immediately finds himself even then and there, by means of his 
spiritual body. 


60. Know this spiritual and subtle body, to be no other than your 
understanding only; and now you can well perceive yourself to be of that 
imperishable form, by means of your intelligence also. 


61. Thinking one’s self as the vacuous Intellect, abiding in the sun and all 
visible objects; the spiritualist comes to know the existence of his self only, 
and all else that is beside himself as nothing. 


62. But how is it possible to view the visible world as inexistent, to which it 
is answered that it appears as real as the unreal dream to the sleeping person, 
but vanishes into nothing upon his waking (scholium). Reliance in the 
inexistent world, is as the belief of the ignorant man in falsehoods; and this 
reliance is confirmed by habit, although it is not relied upon by others that 
know the truth. 


63. But this reliance is as vain as the vanity of our desires, and the falsity of 
our aerial castle building; all which are as false as the marks of waves, left on 
the sea sands; or as the marking of anything with a charcoal, which is neither 
lasting nor perceptible to anybody. 


64. We see the woodlands, blooming with full-blown flowers and 
blossoms; but these sights are as deluding, as the sparks of fire, presenting the 
appearance of a flower garden in fireworks. 


65. These pyrotechnical works, which are prepared with so much labour; 
burst on a sudden at the slight touch of fire, and then they are blown away as 
soon, as the prosperity of sharpers (which is transient). 


66. Rama, I beheld the flourish of the world, to be as false and fleeting, as 
the appearance of light in the particles of dust; all these appearing as so many 
things of themselves, are in fact no other than the appearances of hills and 
cities, in the vacuity of the mind in our dreams at sleep. 


CHAPTER XCII. 
Description of the Current Air, as the 
Universal Spirit. 


Argument: — Vasishtha’s assuming the form of Air, and his finding its 
pervasion all over the world as its vital spirit. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now in my curiosity to know the world, I thought 
myself as transformed to the form of the current air; and by degrees extended 
my essence, all over the infinite extent of the universe. 


2. I became a breeze with a desire, to view the beauty of the lovely plants 
all about me; and to smell the sweetness of the fragrant blossoms of kunda, 
jessamine as lotuses. 


3. I bore about the coolness of the falling rains and snows and dew drops, 
with a view to restore freshness to the languid limbs of the tired and weary 
labourer. 


4. My spirit in the form of the current winds, bore about the essences of 
medicinal plants and the fragrance of flowers; and carried away the loads of 
grass, herbs, creepers and the leaves of plants all around. 


5. My spirit travelled as the gentle zephyr, in the auspicious hours of morn 
and eve; to awaken and lull to sleep the lovely maids; again it takes the 
tremendous shape of a tornado in tempest, to break down and bear away the 
rocks. 


6. In paradise it is florid, with the reddish dust of manddra flowers; in the 
mountains it is hoary with hoar frost and snows; and in hell it burns in the 
infernal fires. 


7. In the sea it has a curvilinear motion, with the curling waves and 
revolving whirlpools; and in heaven it bears aloft and moves the clouds, both 
to cover and uncover the mirror of moon hid under them. 


8. In heaven it has the name of the prabdha air, to hold aloft the starry 


frame; and guide the course of the starry legions and the cars of their 
commanding generals, — the post of Gods. 


9. It is accounted as the younger brother of thought, owing to its great 
velocity; it is formless but moveth over all forms; and though intangible, yet 
its touch is as delightsome, as the cooling paste of sandal wood. 


10. It is hoary old with the hoar frost, it bears on its head; it is youthful with 
wafting the fragrance of vernal flowers, and it is young when it is quiet and 
still. 


11. Here it roves at large, loaded with the fragrance of the garden of Eden; 
and there it moves freely bearing the perfumes of the grove of the Gandharva 
Chitra-ratha, to tired persons and worn out lovers. 


12. Though fatigued with its toil, of raising and moving the incessant 
waves, of the cooling and purifying stream of Ganges; yet it is ever alert to 
lull the toil of others, being quite forgetful of its own weariness. 


13. It gently touches its brides of vernal plants, bending down under the 
load of their full-blown flowers; which are ever shaking their leafy hands, and 
flitting eyes of fluttering bees, to resist its touch. 


14. The fleeting air buried its weariness in its soft bed of clouds; after 
drinking dew drops exuding from the disc of the moon; and being fanned by 
the cooling breath of lotuses (growing in lakes of heaven). 


15. Like the swiftest steed of Indra, he bears the farina of all flowers to him 
in heaven; and becomes a compeer with Indra’s elephant, who is giddy with 
the fragrance of his ichor. 


16. Then blew the winds, with the soft breath of the shepherd’s horns; and 
drove away the clouds like cattle, and blasted the showering rain drops; that 
served to set down the dust of the earth. 


17. It is perfumed with the fragrance of flowers flying in the air, and is the 
uterine brother of all sounds which proceed from the womb of vacuum, 
(which is the common source of wind and sound). It runs in the blood and 
humours, within the veins and arteries of bodies; and is the mover of the limbs 
of persons. 


18. It dwells within the hearts of human bodies as their life, and is the soul 
and sole cause of all their vital functions. It is ever on its wing, and being 
ubiquitous throughout the world, it is acquainted with the secrets of all the 
works of Brahma. 


19. It is the plunderer of the rich treasure of odours, and the supporter of 


ethereal cities; it is the destroyer of heat and darkness as the moon, and this air 
is the milky ocean, that produces the fair and cooling moon. 


20. It forms the islands (by undulation of waves and collection of sands); 
and is the preserver of the machine of animal bodies, by means of its 
conducting the vital airs. 


21. It is ever present before us, and yet invisible in itself, like an imaginary 
palace; or as oil in the pods of palm trees, or fetters on the legs of infuriate 
elephants. 


22. It blows away in a moment, all the mountains at the end of the world; it 
marks the waves with their curls, and collects the sands of rivers (to large 
beaches and coasts). 


23. It is false in appearance, as water in a cloud of smoke, or a whirlpool in 
it; it is as invisible as the streams above the firmament, and the lotuses 
growing in the lakes of the blue ethereal sky. 


24. It is covered with bits of rotten grass, in its form of the gusts of wind; it 
opens the lotus blossoms by its gentle breeze, and showers down the rains in 
its form of sounding blasts. 


25. Its body is as a wind instrument at home, and as an elephant in the 
forest of the sky; it is a friend to the dust of the earth, and a wooer of flowers 
in woods and gardens. 


26. It is ever busy in its several acts, of congealing and drying, of 
upholding and moving, and of cooling the body and carrying the perfumes; 
and is incessantly employed in these six-fold functions to the end of the 
world. 


27. It is as fleet as light, and adroit in extracting juices as the absorbent 
heat; and is ever employed in the acts of contraction and distension of the 
limbs of bodies, at the will of everybody. 


28. It passes unobstructed through the avenues, of every part of the city of 
the body; and by its circulation in the heart, and distribution of the bile and 
chyle through blood vessels, it preserves the functions of life. 


29. It is expert in repairing the losses, of the great citadel of the living 
body; by removing its excrements and replacing its gastric juices, (i.e., the six 
humours of the body), and the formation of its blood and fat, and the flesh, 
bones, and skin. 


30. I looked through every particle of the body, by means of the circulating 
air; as I viewed every part of the universe by means of the circumambient air; 


and it is by means of my vital airs, that I conduct this body of mine. 


31. The winds bear innumerable particles on their back, as if they were so 
many worlds in the air, while in fact there is nothing borne by them, when 
there is naught but an utter negative vacuity everywhere. 


32. I viewed all bodies including those of the gods, as those of Hari and 
Brahma, and the Gandharvas and Vidyadharas; and I saw the bright sun and 
moon, of fire and Indra and others. 


33. I saw the seas and oceans, the islands and mountains, stretching as far 
as the visible horizon; I beheld also the other worlds, and the natures and 
actions of their inhabitants. 


34. I saw the heaven and earth and the infernal regions also, and marked 
their peoples and their lives and deaths likewise. 


35. So I beheld various kinds of beings, composed of the five elements; and 
traversed in the form of air, throughout all parts of the universe, as a bee 
enters the foliage of a lotus flower. 


36. In my aerial form, I passed through the bodies of all corporeal beings, 
which are composed of earth, water, air and fire; I sucked the juice of all 
animal bodies, and drank the moisture of trees drawn by their roots. 


37. I passed over all cold and solid bodies, and the liquid paste of sandal 
wood; I rested in the cool lunar disk, and lulled myself on beds of snows and 
ice. 


38. I have tasted the sweets of all season fruits and flowers in the arbours of 
every part of this earth; I have drunk my fill in the flower-cups of spring; and 
left the lees and leavings for the beverage of bees. 


39. Then I rolled on the high and soft beds of clouds, which are spread out 
in the wide fields of the firmament; and I slept on soft and downy wings of 
clouds, as in a place bedded by heaps of butter. 


40. I reposed on the petals of flowers, and on the green leaves of trees; and 
rested on the soft bodies of heavenly nymphs, without any concupiscence on 
my part. 


41. I played with the blossoms of lilies and lotuses, in their beds and 
bushes; and I joined with the cackling geese and swans in their pleasure lakes. 


42. I moved with the course of streams, and with the rippling waters of 
lakes and rills; and I bore the orb of the earth on my back, and carried about 
me all her mountains, as hairs upon my body. 


43. The wide extending hills and mountains, the lengthening rills falling 
from them, together with all the seas and oceans, are all as pictures 
represented in the mirror of my body. 


44. All the terrestrials and celestials, that live and move at large upon my 
body; appear to be moving and flying about me as lice and flies. 


45. It is by my favor, that the sun receives the various colours with which 
he shines; and which he diffuses to the leaves of trees, in the sundry hues of 
red and black, of white, yellow and green. 


46. The earth is situated with the seven seas, surrounding the seven great 
islands (continents); as so many wristlets are encircled about the wrists of 
men. 


47. I was delighted at the sight of the celestial nymphs, also, as I see with 
gladness myself within. 


48. The earth with its rivers of pure water and its solid hills and rocks, were 
as the veins and blood, and flesh and bones of my body. 


49. I beheld innumerable elephantine clouds, and countless suns and moons 
in the starry frame on the sky; as I see the flights of gnats and flies in the 
vacuum of my mind. 


50. In my minute form of the intellect, I held, O Rama, the earth with its 
footstools of the nether regions upon my head, (because the vacuous intellect 
is capable of containing and upholding all things). 


51. I remained in my sole vacuous and spiritual state, in all places and 
things at all times, and as the free agent of myself; and yet without my 
connection with anything whatsoever. 


52. In this state of my spirituality, I had the knowledge of both the 
intellectual and material worlds; and of all finite and infinite, visible and 
invisible and formal as well as formless things. 


53. I beheld in my own spirit, a thousand worlds and mountains and seas; 
and they appeared as carved statues and engravings in the vacuous tablet of 
my mind. 


54. I bore in my spiritual body, many occult and visible worlds; and they 
showed themselves as clearly to my inmost soul, as if they were the reflexions 
of real objects in a mirror. 


55. So I perceived the four elemental bodies of earth and air, and of fire and 
water, in my vacuous soul; in same manner as we see the delusive objects of 


our dream in the vacuity of our intellect. 


56. I saw also in that state of my hypnotism, innumerable worlds rising 
before me in each particle of matter; as it appeared to fly before me in the 
hollow space of vacuum. 


57. I beheld a world in every atom, which was flying in empty air; just as 
we see the many creations of our dreams, and the many creatures in those 
dreams. 


58. I myself have become the orb of the earth, and the clusters of islands 
(as their pervading spirit, (adhydsikdtma); though my spirit never comes in 
contact with anything at all). 


59. With my earthly body, I suck the rain water and the waters of the seas; 
in order to supply the moisture of the moisture of trees, on account of their 
producing the juicy fruits, for the food of living beings. 


60. At the time of my coming to pure understanding, and the clairvoyance 
of my intellectual sight; I find the millions of worlds and all worldly things, 
disappearing from my view and all uniting in One sole unity. 


61. This is a miracle of the intellect, and it strikes with wonder in 
ourselves; that the miracles of the inner mind, manifest themselves as external 
sights before our eyes. (i.e., The subjective appearing as the objective). 


62. I felt it painful to think of the existence of nothing anywhere; but I 
found out the truth, that there is nothing in reality except one spiritual 
substance, which displays all these wonders in itself. 


63. There is but One universal soul, which is the ever undecaying cause of 
all; and produces and lives throughout the whole. (This is called the visva 
rupa hypostasis of God, as it is expressed by the poet, — “These as they 
change, are but the varied God,” and the world is full of Him). And as my 
soul was awakened to knowledge, I saw this whole in the soul of Brahma. 


64. Being awakened to the knowledge of the universal soul, as the all and 
everywhere, ubiquitous and all supporting; I became insensible of all objects, 
and was myself lost in the all subjective unity. 


65. It is in the vacuous convexity of the pure divine spirit, that the 
continuous creations appear to rise in the intellect; but it is the extinction of 
these, which extinguishes the burning flame (of worldliness) in the mind, and 
exterminates the knowledge of all these ideal particulars, into that of One 
infinite and ever existent entity. 


CHAPTER XCIII. 
The advent and psalmody of a siddha in the Aerial 
Abode of Vasishtha. 


Argument: — The appearance of the spirit of a siddha in the aerial cell of 
Vasishtha, and his heavenly canticle. 


Vasishtha continued: — As my mind was turned from the sight of 
phenomenals, and employed in the meditation of the only One; I found myself 
to be suddenly transported to my holy cell in the air. 


2. There I lost the sight of my own body, and knew not where I was seated; 
when all of a sudden the sacred person of a siddha or aerial saint, appeared in 
view, and to be seated before me. 


3. He sat in his mood of deep meditation, and was entranced in his thought 
of the supreme spirit; his appearance was as bright as the sun, and his person 
was as shining as the flaming fire. 


4. He sat quiet and steadily in his posture of padmdsana between his two 
knees and heels; and remained absorbed in meditation, having no motion of 
his body, nor any thought of anything in his mind. 


5. His body was besmeared with ashes, and his head was borne erect upon 
his shoulders; he sat quiet and quite at ease, with his bright countenance and 
in sedate posture. 


6. The palms of both his hands were lifted up, and were set open below his 
navel; and their brightness caused his lotiform heart to be as full-blown, as the 
sun-beam expands the lotuses in lakes. 


7. His eyelids were closed, and his eyesight was as weak, as to view all the 
visibles in one light of whiteness, and they seemed to be as sleepy, as the 
closing petals of the lotus of the close of the day. 


8. His mind was as calm in all its closets, (i.e., thoughts), as the sides of the 
horizon in their stillness; and his soul was as unperturbed, as the serene sky 


freed from a tempest (calm after storm). 


9. I who did not see my own person, could yet plainly perceive that of the 
saint thus placed before me; and then I reflected in my mind, with the 
perspicacity of my discernment. 


10. I find this great and perfect siddha or saint in this solitary part of the 
firmament; and I believe him to be as absorbed in his meditation, as I am at 
my ease in this lonely spot. 


11. It is very likely that this saint, being earnest in his desire of deep 
meditation, and finding this retired cell of mine most favourable to it, has 
called here of his own accord. 


12. He thought I had cast off my mortal coil, and could not perceive by his 
deep attention that I had returned to it; so he threw away my dead body as he 
thought it, and made his residence in that cell of mine. 


13. Seeing thus the loss of my body here, I thought of repairing to my own 
abode (in the constellation of Pleiades AedY HIS) and as I was attempting to 
proceed thereto, I resigned my attachment to my lone cell (which was now 
held by another). 


14. This cell was dilapidated also in time, and there remained an empty 
void only in lieu of it; and the saint that had taken my place therein, lost his 
stay also for want of the cell, and fell downward in his meditative mood. 


15. Thus that lonely cell was lost to me, together with the loss of my fond 
desire for it, just as a visionary and imaginary city vanishes with the dream 
and desire, which presented it to our view. 


16. The meditative saint then fell down from it, as the rain falls down from 
the cloud; and as a spot of cloud is blown away to the winds in empty air, like 
the disc of the moon traversing in the sky. 


17. He felt as a heavenly spirit falls to earth, after fruition of the reward of 
his meritorious acts; and as a tree falls headlong being uprooted from the 
ground, so he fell down upon the earth. 


18. So when wish for stability of our dwelling, with the continuance of our 
lives; we see on a sudden the termination of both, as it happened to the falling 
Siddha. 


19. Seeing the falling Siddha, I felt a kind concern for him; and in the flight 
of my mind, came down from heaven in my spiritual form, to that spot on 
earth where he had fallen. 


20. He fell on the wings of the current air, which conveyed him whirling as 
in a whirlwind, beyond the limits of the seven continents and their seven-fold 
oceans, to a place known as the land of gold and the paradise of the gods. 


21. He fell from the sky in his very posture of padmdsana as he had been 
sitting there before; and sat with his head and upper part of the body erect, 
owing to the ascension or upward motion of the prdna and apdna breaths that 
were inhaled by him. (The rising breath like the rope of a pitcher, keeps the 
body from sinking downward). 


22. Though hurled from such height, and carried to such distance; yet he 
did not wake from the torpor of his samddhi, — meditation, (to which he sat 
fixed and intent); but fell down insensible as a stone, and as lightly as a bale 
of cotton. 


23. I was then much concerned for his sake, and from my great anxiety to 
waken him; I roared aloud like a cloud from my place in the sky, and 
showered a flood of rain-water also upon him. 


24. I went on darting hail stones, and flashing as lightnings in order to 
waken him; and I succeeded to bring him to sense, as the clouds rouse the 
peacock in the rainy season. 


25. His body flushed and his eyes opened, as a blooming blossom and full- 
blown flowers; and the drizzling rains enlivened his soul, as the driving rain, 
gives the lotuses of lakes to bloom. 


26. Finding him awake, and seated in my presence, I cast my complacent 
look upon him; and asked him very politely, about the prosperity of his 
spiritual concerns. 


27.1 said, tell me, O great sage, who you are, and where is your abode, and 
what to do; and how is it that you are so insensible of your state, 
notwithstanding your fall from so great a distance. (It is a pity that men are so 
insensible of the fall of their heavenly souls to this miserable earth). 


28. Being addressed by me in this manner, he looked steadfastly upon me, 
and then remembering his visit at mine, he replied to me in a voice, as sweet 
as that of the chdtaka, — swallow, to the sonorous clouds. 


29. The sagely siddha said: — You Sir, shall have to wait awhile until I can 
recollect myself and my former state; and then I will relate to you the latter 
incidents of my life. 


30. So saying he fell to the recollection of his past incidents, and then 
having got them in his remembrance, he related the particulars to me without 


any reserve, and as if they were the occurrence of his present day. 


31. He then spoke to me in a voice, as soft and cooling as the sandal paste 
and moon-beams; and the words were as blameless and well spoken, as they 
were pleased to my ears and ravishing of my soul. 


32. The siddha said: — I now come to know you Sir, and greet you with 
reverence; and beg you to pardon my intrusion upon you, as it is the nature of 
the good to forgive the faults of others. (Because to err is human, to forgive 
divine). 


33. Know me, O sage, to have long enjoyed (in one of my former births), 
the sweets of the garden of paradise in the form of a butterfly; as a bee sucks 
the honey of lotus-flowers in the lake. 


34. I fluttered over a running stream, and found it swelling with sounding 
waves at pleasure; and then seeing it whirling with its horrid whirlpools, I 
began to reflect with sorrow in my mind (in the following manner). 


35. Such is the sight of the troubles in this ocean of the world, which 
overwhelms me quite in sorrow and grief; and I have become like a parching 
and plaintive swallow, that wails aloud at a draught of rain water. 


36. I find my chief delight to consist in intelligence, and perceive no 
pleasure in worldly enjoyments, therefore, I must rely only in my intellectual 
speculations, and abide without any anxiety, in the unclouded sphere of my 
spiritual felicity. 


37. I see there is no real pleasure here, but what is derived from our 
sensations of the sensible objects (of figure, sound, taste, touch and smell); I 
find no lasting delight in these, that I should depend on them. 


38. All this is either the vacuity of the intellect, or representations of the 
intellect itself; when then should I be deluded with these false appearances, as 
a madman or one of a deluded mind is apt to do. 


39. The sensibles are causes of our insensibility as poison, and women are 
deluders of men and provokers of their passions; all sweets are but gall, and 
all pleasures are only a sort of pleasing pain. 


40. And this body which is subject to sickness and decay, with its mind as 
fickle as a shrimp fish, is hourly watched upon by inexorable death, as the old 
crane lurks after the skimming fish for his prey. 


41. The frail body being subject to instant extinction, likens a bubble of 
water in the ocean of eternity; it resembles also the flame of lamp, which is 
put out in a moment, while it burns vividly before us. 


42. What is the life any more than a stream of water, running between its 
two shores of birth and death; flowing on with the currents of passing joys and 
griefs, swelling with the waves of incidents, and whirling with the whirlpools 
of dangers and difficulties? 


43. It is muddied with the pleasures of youth, and blanched with the hoary 
froths of old age; and emits but casually a few bursting bubbles of glee and 
gladness, which are afloat for and flitting in a moment. 


44. It runs with the rapid torrent of custom, sounding with the hoarse noise 
of current opinions; it is overcast by the roaring clouds of envy and anger, and 
overflows the earth in its liquid form (of evanescent bodies). 


45. The word stream of life, is as pleasing to hear and pleasant to the ear, as 
the term stream of water is soothing to the soul; but its waters are ever boiling 
with heat of tritapa, and abounding with whirlpools of illusion and avarice, 
that carry us up and down for ever more. 


46. The course of the world is as that of the waters of a river, which bears 
away the present things on its back, and brings with its current, what was 
unforeseen and unexpected before. It is thus full with these events. 


47. All that was present before us, is lost to and borne away from us, and it 
is in vain to repine at their loss; and whatever was never thought of before, 
come to pass upon us, but what reliance can there be in any one of them. 


48. All the rivers on earth, have their waters continually passing away, and 
filling them by turns from their sources; but life which the water of the river 
of the body, being once gone, is never supplied to it from any source. 


49. The vicissitudes of fortune, are incessantly turning like a potter’s 
wheel, over the destinies of people, and are entailing some person or other 
every moment, in this ocean of the world. 


50. A thousand thieves and enemies of our estate, are constantly wandering 
about to rob us of our properties, and nothing avails whether we sleep or wake 
to ward them off. 


51. The particles of our lives, are wasting and falling off every moment; 
and yet it is a wonder that, nobody is aware of the loss of the days of his life, 
as long as he has but a little while to live. 


52. The present day is reckoned as ours, but it is as soon passed as the past 
ones; and thus ignorant of the flight of days, nobody knows the loss of the 
duration of his life, until he comes to meet with his death. 


53. We have lived long to eat and drink, and to move about from place to 


place, and to rove in foreign lands and woods; we have felt and seen all sorts 
of weal and woe; say what more is there that we can expect to have for our 
share. 


54. Having well known the pain and pleasure of grief and joy, and 
experienced their changes and the reverses of fortune, I am fully imprest with 
the idea of the transitoriness of all things, and therefore, kept afar from 
seeking anything. 


55. [have enjoyed all enjoyments, and seen their transitoriness everywhere; 
and yet I found no satisfaction with or distaste to anything, nor felt my cool 
inappetency for them anywhere. 


56. I wandered on the tops of high hills, and roved in the airy regions on 
the summits of the Meru mountains; I travelled to the cities of many a ruler of 
men, but met with nothing of any real good to me anywhere. 


57. I saw the same woody trees, the same kind of earthly cities, and the 
same sort of fleshy animal bodies everywhere; I found them all frail and 
transitory, and full of pain and misery as never to be liked. 


58. I saw no riches nor friends, no relatives nor enjoyments of life, were 
able to preserve any one from the clutches of death. 


59. Man passes away as soon, as the rain-water glides down the mountain 
glades; and is carried away by the hand of death as quickly, as a heap of 
hollow ashes is blown away by the wind. 


60. No enjoyment is desirable to me, nor has the gaudiness of prosperity 
any charm for me; when I find my life to be as transient, as the transitory 
glance from the side long look of an amorous woman. 


61. How and where and whose help shall we seek, when O sage; we see a 
hundred evils and imminent death hanging every day over our heads. (i.e., 
Naught can save us from death and distress). 


62. Our lives are as frail as falling leaves, upon the withered woods of our 
bodies; and the moisture which they used to derive from them, is soon dried 
up and exhausted at the end. 


63. I passed my life in vain desires and expectations, and derived nothing 
therefrom, that is of any intrinsic good or profit to me. 


64. My delusion is at last removed from me, and I see it useless to bear the 
burthen of my body here any longer; I find it better to place no reliance in it, 
than bemoan ourselves by our dependence to it. 


65. All prosperity is but adversity, owing to its transitory and illusive 
nature; therefore, the wise accounting it as such, place no reliance on the 
vanities of this world. 


66. Men are sometimes led by the directions of the Sdstras, and at other by 
their prohibitions also; as the movables are carried up and by the rising and 
falling waters. (i.e., running in right or wrong directions). 


67. The poisonous air of worldliness, contaminates the sweet odour of 
reason in the mind of man; and makes it noxious to the person, as the canker 
in the bosom of the bud, corrodes the future flowers. 


68. The vanities of the world, are as usually taken for realities, as all other 
unrealities in nature are commonly taken for actualities. (The world is unreal, 
and all seeming realities are unreal also). 


69. Men are moving about with their bodies upon earth, with as much haste 
as the rivers are running to the seas; thus the great mass of mankind here, are 
seen to be in pursuit of the sensible objects of their desire. 


70. The desires of our hearts run to their objects, with as much speed as the 
arrow’s fly from the archer’s bow; but they never return to their seat in the 
heart or bow string, as our ungrateful friends that forsake us in our adversity. 


71. Our friends are our enemies, as the blasts of wind that blow us away 
with their breath; all our relations are our bonds and fetters, and our riches are 
but causes of our poverty. 


72. Our pleasures are (causes of) our pains, and prosperity the source of 
adversity; all enjoyments are sufferings (as leading to maladies), and all 
fondness tends at last to distaste and dislike. 


73. All prosperity and adversity, tend only to our temporary joy and 
misery; and our life is but a prologue or prelude to our extinction or quietus, 
(nirvana). All these are the display of our unavoidable delusion. 


74. As time glides along on any man, shewing him the various sights of joy 
and misery; the poor creature lives only to see the loss of his friends, and to 
repine at his hapless and helpless longevity. 


75. The enjoyment of pleasures, is as playing with the fangs of a deadly 
serpent; they kill you no sooner you touch them, and they disappear from your 
sight, whenever you look after them. 


76. The life is spent without any attempt, to attain that perfect state, which 
is obtained without any pain or toil; while it is employed every day in 
hardships of acquiring the perishable trifling pleasures. 


77. Men who are bound to their desire of carnal enjoyment, are exposed to 
shame and the contumely of the rich every moment; and are as wild elephants, 
tied with strong fetters at their feet. 


78. Our fortunes and favourites, are not only as frail and fickle, as the 
transitory waves and bubbles; but they are as pernicious as the fangs of a 
snake; and who is there so silly enough, as to take his rest under the shadow 
of the hood of enraged serpent. 


79. Granting the objects of desire to be pleasing, and the gifts of prosperity 
to be very charming; still what are they and this life also any more, than the 
fickle glances of a mistress’ eyes. 


80. Those who enjoy the pleasures of the present time with so much zest; 
must come to feel them quite insipid at the end, and fall into the hell-pit at 
last. 


81. I take no delight in riches, which are worshipped by the vulgar only; 
which are ever subject to disputes, earned with labour, kept with great care, 
and are yet as unstable as the winged winds in air. 


82. Fortune which is so favorable for a while, turns to misfortune in a trice; 
she is very charming to her possessor, but is as fickle in her nature, as the 
fleeting flash of lightning. 


83. Riches like flatterers, are very flattering at first and as long as they last; 
but they are as fleeting as those deceitful cheats, who mock at us upon their 
loss. 


84. The blessings of health, wealth and youth, are as evanescent as the 
fleeting shadow of autumnal clouds; and the enjoyments of sensual pleasures, 
are pernicious at the end. 


85. Say, who has remained the same even among the great, to the end of his 
journey in this world, the lives of men are as fleeting, as the trickling dew 
drops at the end of the leaves of trees. 


86. Our bodies are decaying in time, and our hairs are turning grey with 
age, and the teeth are falling off; thus all things are worn out in the world, 
except our desires, which know no decrease or decay. 


87. The carnal enjoyments like wild beasts, come to decay in the forest of 
the body; but the poison plant of our desire which grows in it, is ever on its 
increase. 


88. Our boyhood passes as quickly as our infancy, and our youth passes as 
soon as our boyish days; and here there is an equal transience, to be seen in 


both the comparison and the object compared with. 


89. Life melts away as quickly, as the water oozes out of the hold of our 
palms; and like the current of a river, it never returns to its receptacle. 


90. The body also passes away as hurriedly, as a hurricane sweeps in the 
air; and it vanishes even before our sight of it, like a wave or cloud, or as fast 
as the flame of a lamp. 


91. I have found unpleasantness in what I thought to be very pleasant, and 
found the unsteadiness of what I believed to be steady; I have known the 
unreality of what I took to be real, and hence have I become distrustful and 
disgustful of the world. 


92. The ease and rest that attend on the soul, upon the cool indifference of 
the mind; are never to be obtained in any enjoyment, that the upper or nether 
worlds, can ever afford to anybody. 


93. I find the pleasurable objects of my senses, are still alluring me to their 
trap, as a fruit and flower entices the foolish bee to fall upon them. 


94. Now after the lapse of a long time, I am quite released from my selfish 
egoism; and my mind has become indifferent to the desire of future rewards 
and heavenly felicity. 


95. I have long found my rest in my solitary bliss of vacuity, and have 
come here as thyself, and met with this ethereal cell. (The aerial cell is a 
creation of the saint’s imagination). 


96. I came to learn afterwards that this cell belonged to thee; but I never 
thought that thou shalt ever return to it. 


97. I saw there a lifeless body, and thought it to be the frame of a siddha or 
holy saint, who having quitted his mortal coil, has become extinct in his 
nirvana. 


98. This Sir, is my narrative as I have related to you; and am seated here as 
I am, and you can do unto me as you may like. 


99. Until a siddha sees all things in his mind, and considers them well in 
his clear judgment, he is incapable of seeing the past, present and future in his 
clairvoyance, even though he be as perfect as the nature of the lotus-born 
Brahma himself. 


CHAPTER XCIV. 
Description of a Pisacha, and the Unity of the 
World with Brahma. 


Argument: — Advent of Vasishtha and the saint to the region of Siddha 
and description of the people thereof. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now as we were at a spot of great extent (beyond the 
limit of the terraqueous); and as bright as the golden sphere of heaven, I spoke 
to the Siddha by way of friendship. 


2. I said, it is true Sir, what you said, that it is the want of due attention, 
which prevents our comprehensive knowledge of the present, past and future; 
but it is a defect not only of yours and mine, but of the minds of all mankind 
in general. 


3. I say so from my right knowledge of the defects and fallibility of human 
nature, or else Sir, you would not have to fall from your aerial seat. But 
pardon me, I am equally fallible also. 


4. Rise therefore, from this place, and let us repair to aerial abode of the 
Siddhas, where we were seated before; because one’s own seat is the most 
genial to man, and self-perfection is the best of all perfections. 


5. So saying, they both got up, and rose as high as the stars of heaven; and 
both directed their course in the same way, as an aeronaut, or a stone flung 
into the air. 


6. We then took leave of each other with mutual salutations; and each went 
to the respective place which was desirable to either of us. 


7. [have now related to you fully the whole of this story, whereby you may 
know, O Rama, the wonderful occurrences that betide us in this ever- 
changeful world. 


8. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how and with what form of body, thou didst 
rove about the regions of the Siddhas, when thy mortal frame was reduced to 


dust. 


9. Vasishtha replied: — Ah! I remember it, and will tell you the particulars, 
how I wandered throughout these worldly abodes, until I arrived at the city of 
the Loka-pala deities, and joined with the hosts of Siddhas, traversing in the 
regions of midway sky. 


10. I travelled in the regions of Indra or open firmament, without being 
seen by anybody there; because I was then passing in my spiritual body, ever 
since I had lost my material frame-work. 


11. I had then become, O Rama, of an aerial form, in which there was 
neither a receptacle nor recipient, beside the nature of vacuous and intellectual 
soul. 


12. I was then neither the subject or object of perception of persons like 
yourself, who dwell on sensible objects alone; nor did I make any reckoning 
of the distance of space or succession of time. (The spiritual Yogi has no 
cognizance of gross material things, nor of the divisions of space and time, 
which are objects of sensation only). 


13. The soul is busy with the thinking principle of the mind, apart from all 
material objects composed of earth, efc.; and is as the meditative mind or ideal 
man, that meddles with no material substance. 


14. It is not pressed nor confined by material things, but is always busy 
with its cognitions; and it deals with beings in the same manner, as men in 
sleep do with the objects of their dream (and others with their air-built cities). 


15. Know Rama, this doctrine of intellection by the simile of dreaming, to 
be quite irrefutable, although it is confuted by others; (i.e., the Nyaya 
philosophers who deny the mental conceptions without previous perceptions); 
but they are not to be regarded as right. (Since the Veda says, the spirit of God 
created all from his mind, and not from its past perceptions). 


16. As the sleeping man thinks himself to be walking and acting in his 
dream, without such actions of his being perceived by others (in the same 
room); so methought I walked before and beheld the aerials without their 
seeing me. 


17. I beheld all other terrestrial bodies lying manifest before me, but 
nobody could observe me that was hid from their sight in my spiritual form. 


18. Rama asked: — Sir, if you were invisible to the Gods, owing to your 
bodiless or vacuous form; how then could you be seen by the Siddha in the 
Kanaka land, or see others without having eyes of your own? 


19. Vasishtha replied: — We spiritual beings view all things by means of 
our inner knowledge of them; as other people behold the things they are 
desirous to see, and naught what they had not any desire for. (This desire is 
said to be satya-sankalpa, or a firm prepossession of any idea in the mind). 


20. All men though possessed of pure souls, do yet forget their spiritual 
nature, by their being too deeply engaged in worldly affairs and unspiritual 
matters. 


21. As [had then wished that this person, the Siddha, could have a sight of 
me; so it was according to the wish of mine, that I was observed by him; 
because every man obtains what he earnestly desires. 


22. Men being slack in their purposes, become unsuccessful in their 
desires; but this person being staunch to his purpose, and never swerving from 
his pursuit, succeeded in gaining his desired object. 


23. But when two persons are engaged in the same pursuit, or one of them 
is opposed to the views of the other; the attempt of the more arduous is 
crowned with success, and that of the weaker meets with its failure. 


24. Then I travelled through aerial regions of the Lokapdala regents of the 
sky, and passing by the celestial city of the Siddhas in my spiritual body; I 
beheld these people with manners quite different from my former habits. 


25. I then began to observe their strange manners in the ethereal space, and 
being unseen myself by any one there, I saw distinctly everybody there, and 
their mode of life and dealings with amazement. 


26. I called them aloud, but they neither heard nor gave heed to my voice; 
and they appeared to me as empty phantoms as the images of our dreams and 
visions. 


27. I tried to lay hold on some of them, but no one could be grasped by my 
hands; and they evaded my touch, as the ideal images of the human mind. 


28. Thus Rama, I remained as a demoniac pisdcha, in the abode of the holy 
Gods; and thought myself to be transformed to a pisdcha spirit in the open air. 


29. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, what kind of beings are Pisdchas in this 
world, and what are their natures and forms, and what are their states and 
occupations also. 


30. Vasishtha replied: — I will tell you, Rama, what sort of beings the 
Pisdchas are in this world; because it is unmannerly on the part of a preacher, 
not to answer to the interlocutory queries of the audience, (though it be a 
digress from subject). 


31. The Pisdchas are a sort of aerial beings, with subtle bodies of theirs, (as 
we see the empty forms of persons in our dreams); they have their hands and 
feet and other members of the body as thine, and see all things as thou dost. 


32. They sometimes assume the form of a shadow to terrify people, and at 
others enter into their minds in an aerial form, in order to mislead them to 
error and wicked purposes. (They, like devils, waylay unwary men, and tempt 
them to evil). 


33. They kill persons, eat their marrow, and suck up the blood of weak 
bodied people; they lay a siege about the mind, and destroy the vitals and 
viscera and the strength and lives of men. 


34. Some of them are of aerial forms, and some of the form of frost, others 
as visionary men, as seen in our dreams with airy forms of their bodies. (And 
they are at liberty to take upon themselves whatever forms they please). 


35. Some of them are of the forms of clouds, and others of the nature of 
winds, some bear illusory bodies, but all of them are possessed of the mind 
and understanding. 


36. They are not of tangible forms to be laid hold by us, or to lay hold on 
any one else; they are mere empty airy bodies, yet conscious of their own 
existence. 


37. They are susceptible of feeling the pain and pleasure, occasioned by 
heat and cold; but they are incapable of the actions of eating, drinking, 
holding and supporting anything with their spiritual bodies. 


38. They are possessed of desire, envy, fear, anger and avarice, and are 
liable to delusion and illusion also; and are capable of subjection by means of 
the spell of mantras, charm of drugs and of other rites and practices. 


39. It is likewise possible for one at some time or other, to see and secure 
some one of them by means of incantations, captivating exorcisms and 
amulets and spirit in chanting invocations. 


40. They are all the progeny of the fallen gods, and therefore, some of them 
bear the forms of gods also; while some are of human forms, and others are as 
serpents and snakes in their appearance. 


41. Some are likened to the forms of dogs and jackals, and some are found 
to inhabit in villages and woods; and there are many that reside in rivers, mud 
and mire and hell pits. 


42. I have thus told you, all about the forms and residences and doings of 
Pisdchas; hear me now relate to you concerning the origin and birth of these 


beings. 


43. Know that there exists forever, an omnipotent power of its own nature; 
which is the unintelligible Intelligence itself, and known as Brahma the great. 


44. Know this as the living soul, which being condensed becomes ego, and 
it is the condensation of egoism which makes the mind. 


45. This divine Mind is styled Brahma, which the vacuous form of the 
divine will; which is unsubstantial origin of this unreal world, which is as 
formless as the hollow mind. 


46. So the mind exists as Brahma, whose form is that of the formless 
vacuum; it is the form of a person seen in our dream, which is an entity 
without its reality or formal body. 


47. It was devoid of any earthly material or elemental form, and existed in 
an immaterial and spiritual form only; for how is it possible for the volitive 
principle, to have a material body subsisting in empty air? 


48. Rama, as you see the aerial city of your imagination in your mind, so 
doth the mind of Brahma imagine itself as the Virinchi, (vir incipience) or 
creator of the world. 


49. Whatever one sees in his imagination, he considers it as true for the 
time; and whatever is the nature and capacity of any being, he knows all 
others to be of the same sort with himself? 


50. Whatever the vacuous soul sees in its empty sphere, the same it knows 
as true, as the spirit of Brahma and the mind of Brahma, exhibit this ideal 
world for reality. 


51. Thus the contemplation of the present pageant of the world, as ever 
existent of itself at all times; strengthens the belief of its reality, as that 
protracted and romantic dream. 


52. So the long meditation of Brahma, in his spiritual form of the creative 
power; presented to him the notions of multitudes of worlds, and varieties of 
creations, of which he became the creator. (So the original thought occurring 
in the mind of any one, confers on him the title of the originator of the same. 
So says Manu: — “Brahma, after long meditation, produced the world from 
his intellect’’). 


53. The ideal then being perfected grew compact, and took a tangible form; 
which was afterwards called the world, with all the many varieties of which it 
is composed. 


54. This Brahma, — the creative mind, was self-same with Brahma the 
supreme soul; and these two are ever identic with the uncreated soul and body 
of the universe. 


55. These two, (i.e., the great Brahma and Brahma, or the Divine spirit and 
mind), are always one and the same being, as the sky and its vacuity; and they 
ever abide together in unity, as the wind and its vacillation. 


56. The Divine spirit views the phenomenal world, as a phantom and 
nothing real; just as you see the unreality of a figure of your imagination as 
real and substantial. 


57. This Brahma then displayed himself (under the name of Virdj), in the 
form of a material body, consisting of the quintuple elements of earth, water, 
etc., as the five solid and liquid parts of his person. (This is the Hindu Trinity, 
composed of the soul, mind and material frame, as Pope, the poet, has 
expressed it in the words: — “Whose body nature is, and God the souls”). 


58. As this triple nature of the Deity, is no more than the variation of his 
will, so it represented itself as the one or other, in its thought only, and not in 
reality (the substance being but a conception of the mind). 


59. Brahma himself is vacuous intellect, and his will consists in the vacuity 
of the same; therefore, the production and destruction of the world, resemble 
the rise and fall of figures in the dreaming state of the human mind. 


60. As the divine mind of Brahma is a reality, so its parts or contents are 
real also; and its acts or productions of the sun, moon and stars, as well as 
their rays, — the Marichis are real also. 


61. Thus the existence of the world and all its contents, is called the 
dominion of the mind; which is only an unsupported vacuum, like the vacuity 
of the supportless sky on high. 


62. As a city seen in dream is inane, and a hill formed in imagination a 
mere void; so both Brahma and his world are as the transparent firmament, 
and having no shape or substance of them. 


63. So the world is, but a reflexion of the divine intellect; it is ever existent 
and undecaying, and the belief of the beginning, middle and end of creation, is 
as false, as the sight of the ends and midspot of skies. 


64. Say Rama, whether you find any gross substance, to grow in the inane 
space of the mind of yours or mine or any other person; and if you find no 
such thing there, how can you suppose it to exist in the inanity of the Divine 
Intellect, and in the vacuity of the universe? 


65. Then tell me why and whence the feelings and passions, such as anger 
and affection, hate and fear, take their rise; all which are of no good to 
anybody, but rather pernicious to many. 


66. In truth I tell thee that these are not created things, and yet they seem to 
rise and fall of themselves, like our wrong notions of the production and 
destruction of the world. These are but eternal ideas, and coeternal with the 
eternal mind of God. 


67. The vast extent of infinite void, is full with the translucent water of 
Divine Intellect; but this being soiled by our imaginary conceits, produces the 
dirt of false realities. 


68. The boundless space of the Divine Intellect, is replete with the vacuous 
spirit of God; which being the primary productive seed of all, hath produced 
these multitudes of worlds, scattered about and rolling as stones in the air. 


69. There is really no field nor any seed, which is sown there in reality; nor 
is there anything which is ever grown or produced therein, but whatever there 
is, is existent forever the same; (and the rest is but fiction). 


70. Now, among the scattered seeds of souls, there were some that grew 
mature, and put forth in the forms of gods; and those that were of a bright 
appearance, became as intelligences and saints. 


71. Those that were half mature, became as human beings and Naga races; 
and such as were put forth themselves in the forms of insects, worms and 
vegetables. 


72. Those seeds which are bloated and choked, and become fruitless at the 
end; these produce the wicked Pisdchas, which are bodiless bodies of empty 
and aerial forms. 


73. It is not that Virinchi, (vir incipiens), or Brahma, made them so of his 
own accord or will; but they became so according to the desire which they 
fostered in themselves in their prior existence (which caused their 
transformations or metamorphoses in the latter ones). (Because the lord is 
impartial, and makes not one more or less than another). 


74. All existent beings are as inane, as the inanity of the Intellect in which 
they exist; and they have all their spiritual bodies, which are quite apart from 
the material forms in which you behold them. 


75. It is by your long habit, that you have contracted the knowledge of their 
materiality; as it has become habitual with us to think ourselves as waking in 
our dreaming state. 


76. It is in the same manner that all living bodies, are accustomed to think 
of their corporeality; and to live content with their frail and base earthly 
forms, as the Pisdchas are habituated to pass gladly in their ugly forms. 


77. Some men look upon others and know them, as the village people know 
and deal with their fellow villagers as with themselves; but they resemble the 
people abiding together as seen in a dream. 


78. Again, some meet with many men, as in a city constructed in dream (or 
imagination); but are quite unacquainted with one another, owing to their 
distant abodes and different nationalities. (So are we unacquainted with the 
Pisdcha race, in this crowded city of the world). 


79. In this manner, there are many races of object beings of whom we are 
utterly ignorant; and such are the Pisdchas, Kumbhandas, Pretas, Yakshas and 
others. 


80. As the waters upon earth, are collected in lowlands only; so do the 
Pisdchas and goblins dwell in dark places alone. 


81. Should a dark Pisdcha dwell at bright midday light, upon a sunny shore 
or open space; it darkens that spot with the gloominess of its appearance. 


82. The sun even is not able, to dispel that darkness, nor can anyone find 
out the place, where the dark demon makes his abode; on account of its 
delusiveness to evade human sight. 


83. As the orbs of the sun and moon, and the furnace of burning fire, appear 
bright before our eyes; so on the contrary, the abode of the Pisdchas is ever 
obscured by impenetrable darkness, which no light can pierce. 


84. The Pisdchas are naturally of a wonderful nature, that vanish like 
sparks of fire in daylight; and become enkindled in the dark. (The Pisdchas 
bear analogy to the sons of darkness or fallen angels in the black Tartarian 
regions). 


85. Now Rama, I have fully related to you about the origin and nature of 
the Pisdcha race in the course of this dis-course; and then as I had become as 
one of them, in the regions of the regents of the celestials. 


CHAPTER XCV. 
Description of the person of Vasishtha. 


Argument: — The conduct of men that are firm in the resolution and the 
behaviour of Vasishtha in the ethereal regions. 


Vasishtha continued: — I then, having my inane intellectual body, which was 
quite free from the composition of the five elements; roved about in the air in 
the manner of a pisdcha ghost, (seeing all and seen by none). 


2. I was not perceived by the sun and moon, nor by the gods Hari, Hara, 
Indra and others; and was quite invisible to the Siddhas, Ghandharvas, 
Kinnaras and Apsaras of heaven. 


3. I was astonished to think as any honest person, who is a stranger at the 
house of another; why the residents of the place did not perceive me, though I 
advanced towards them and called them to me. 


4. I then thought in myself that, as these ethereal beings are seekers of truth 
like ourselves; it is right they should observe me among them in their ethereal 
abode. 


5. They then began to look upon me standing before them, and felt 
astonished at my unthought appearance, as the spectators are startled at the 
sudden sight of a juggler’s trick or some magic show. 


6. Then I managed myself as I ought in the house of the gods, I sat quiet in 
their presence, and addressed and accosted them without any fear. 


7. Those who beheld me standing at the compound at first, and were 
unacquainted with the particulars (of my sagely character), thought me a mere 
earthly being, and known as Vasishtha by name. 


8. When I was in sun light by the celestials in heaven, they took me for the 
enlightened Vasishtha, who is well known in the world. 


9. As I was seen afloat in the air by the aerial Siddhas, they called me by 
the name of the aerial Vasishtha. 


10. And as I was observed by the holy sages to rise from amidst the waters 


of the deep; they called me the watery Vasishtha, from my birth in the water. 


11. Hence forth, I came to be renowned under different appellations, by all 
these sets of beings; some calling me the earthly Vasishtha, and others naming 
me the luminous, the aerial and so forth according to their own kind. 


12. Then in course of time, my spiritual body assumed a material form, 
which sprang from within me and of my own will. 


13. That spiritual body and this material form of mine, were equally aerial 
and invisible; because it was in my intellectual mind only, that I perceived the 
one as well as the other. 


14. Thus is my soul the pure intellect, appearing sometimes as vacuum, and 
at others shining as the clear sky; it is transcendent spirit and without any 
form, and takes this form for your admonition. (The incorporeal soul enters 
into the corporeal body for its dealing with others). 


15. The liberated living soul is as free as vacuous spirit of Brahma, 
although it may deal with others in its corporeal body; so also the liberated 
bodiless soul, remains as free as the great Brahma himself. 


16. As for myself I could not attain to Brahmahood, though I practiced the 
rules for obtaining my liberation; and being unable to attain a better state, I 
have become the sage Vasishtha as you see before you. 


17. Yet I look upon this world in the same light of immateriality, as the 
sage sees the figure of person in his dream, when it appears to him to have a 
material form, though it is a formless non-entity in reality. 


18. In this manner do the self-born god Brahma and others, and the whole 
creation at large, present themselves as visions to my view, without their 
having any entity in reality. 


19. Here I am the self-same vacuous and aerial Vasishtha, and appearing as 
a visionary shape before you, I am though habituated to believe myself over 
grown, as you are accustomed to think of the density of the world. 


20. All these are but vacuous essences of the self-born Brahma, and as that 
deity is no other than the Divine Mind, so is this world no more than a 
production of that Mind. 


21. The appearance of myself, thyself and others, together with that of the 
whole world, proceeding from our ignorance; is like the apparitions of empty 
ghosts before deluded boys, and appearing as solid realities to your sight. 


22. Being aware of this truth, it is possible for you to grow wise in course 


of time; and then this delusion of yours is sure to disappear, as our worldly 
bonds are cut off with the relinquishment of our desires and affections. 


23. Our knowledge of the density and intensity of the world, is dissipated 
by true wisdom; in the same manner as our desire of a dream of gem, is 
dispelled upon our waking. 


24. The sight of the phenomenals vanishes at once from our view, as we 
arrive to the knowledge of noumenal in time; as our desire of deriving water 
from a river in the mirage, subsides in our knowledge of the falsity of the 
view. 


25. The perusal of this work of the great Ramayana, is sure to produce the 
knowledge of self-liberation in its reader, even during his life time in this 
world. 


26. The man whose mind is addicted to worldly desires, and who thinks its 
vanities as his real good, leads a life to misery only like those of insects and 
worms, and is unfit to be born as a human being, notwithstanding all his 
knowledge of this world and all his holy devotion. 


27. The liberated man while he lives, deems the enjoyments of his life, to 
be no enjoyment at all; but the ignorant person values his temporary 
enjoyments only, in lieu of his everlasting felicity. 


28. By perusal of this Maha-ramayana, there arises in the mind a coldness, 
resembling a frost falling on spiritual knowledge. 


29. Liberation is the cold indifference of the mind, and our confinement 
consists in the passionateness of our minds and hearts; yet the human race is 
quite averse to the former, and sedulously employed in the acquisition of their 
temporal welfare only in their foolishness, and to the astonishment of the 
wise. 


30. Here all men are subject to their sense, and addicted to the increase of 
wealth and family, (/it., — wives), to the injury of one another; yet it is 
possible for them to be happy and wise, if they will but ponder well into the 
true sense of spiritual Sdstras. 


31. Valmiki says: — After the sage had said these words, the assembly 
broke with the setting sun and mutual salutations, to perform their evening 
devotion. They made their ablutions as the sun sank down into the deep, and 
again repaired to the court with the rising sun at the end of the night. 


CHAPTER XCVI. 
Establishment of Immortality. 


Argument: — Proof of the Erroneous conception of the World, and the 
Truth of the Intellectual and Immortal soul. 


Vasishtha resumed: — O intelligent Rama! I have now related to you at 
length the narrative of the stone, which shows you plainly how all these 
created things, are situated in the vacuity of the Divine Intellect. 


2. And that there exists nothing whatever, at any time or place or in the air; 
except the One undivided intellect of God, which is situated in itself, as the 
salt and water are mixed up together, (or as One is self-same with the other). 


3. Know Brahma as the Intellect itself, which presents many sight-shows of 
itself in the dream, which are inseparable from itself. (The manifestation of 
the unchangeable nature of the Divine Mind as the creation, is no more than 
its vivarta-riipa or expansion of itself, as that of our minds in the various 
imageries seen in the state of our dreaming). 


4. God being the universal spirit, and the creation full of particularities, it is 
not incongruous to the nature of the universal and immutable soul, to contain 
the endless varieties of particulars in the infinite vacuity of the Divine 
Intellect, without any variation in itself. (The universal and infinite God, 
contains the particular and finite world in itself). 


5. There is no self-born creative power (as Brahma), nor its creation of the 
world; which is but a production of the dreaming intellect, and is situated in 
our consciousness, as the sights of dreams are imprinted in the memory. 


6. As the city seen in your dream, is situated intellectually in yourself; so 
the entire universe is situated in the Divine Intellect, ever since its creation to 
its annihilation (or as the world without its end). 


7. As there is no difference between gold and the gold mountain of Meru, 
and between the dreamed city and the mind; so there is no difference 
whatever, between the intellect and its creation. (Both being of the same 
kind). 


8. There is the intellect only which exists, and not the world of its 
creations; as the mind is existent without the gold mountain of its dream. 


9. As the mind shows itself, in the form of the formless mountain in its 
dream; so the formless Brahma, manifests itself as the formal world, which is 
nothing in reality. 


10. The Intellect is all this vacuum, which is increate, unbounded and 
endless; and which is neither produced nor destroyed in thousands of the great 
makdkalpa ages. (i.e., It is both eternal as well as infinite). 


11. This intellectual vacuum is the living soul and lord of all, it is the 
undecaying ego and embraces all the three worlds in itself (as the air 
comprises all existence in it). 


12. The living body becomes a lifeless carcass, without this aeriform 
intellect; it is neither broken nor burnt with the fragile and burning body, nor 
is there any place to intercept the vacuous intellect therefrom. 


13. Therefore, there is nothing that dies, and naught that ever comes to 
being; the intellect being the only being in existence, the world is but a 
manifestation or disclosure of itself to the mind. 


14. The intellect alone is the embodied and living soul, and should it ever 
be supposed to die; then the son would be thought to die also by the death of 
the father, because the one is but a reproduction of the other. (The text says, 
the soul of the father is reborn in the son, and if the former should die, the 
latter must die also). 


15. Again, the death of one living soul, would entail the wholesale death of 
all living creatures; and then the earth, (nay even the whole world), would be 
void of all its population. (Because the one universal soul is the soul of all and 
every individual being). 


16. Therefore, O Rama, the sole intellectual soul of nobody, has ever died 
anywhere upto this time; nor was there ever any country devoid of a living 
soul in it. (The world is full of life proceeding from the eternal life of God). 


17. Knowing hence that I am one with the eternal soul, and the body and its 
senses are nothing mine own; I know not how I or anyone else, can ever die 
away at any time. 


18. He who knows himself to be the purely intellectual soul, and yet 
ignores it and thinks in himself to be dying as a mortal being; is verily the 
destroyer of his soul, and casts himself into a sea of troubles and misery. 


19. If I am the intellectual soul, undecaying and everlasting, and as 


transparent as the open air; say then what is life or death to me, and what 
means my happiness or misery in any state. 


20. Being the vacuous and intelligent soul, I have no concern with my 
body; and anyone who being conscious of it, forgets to believe himself as 
such, is verily a destroyer of his soul. 


21. The foolish man who has lost his consciousness, of being the purely 
vacuous soul; is deemed a living dead body by the wise (who know the One 
universal soul to constitute the whole). 


22. The knowledge that I am the intelligent soul, and the bodily senses are 
not essential to me; is what leads me to attain to the state of pure spirituality, 
which neither death nor misery can deprive me of. 


23. He who remains firm, with his reliance in the pure intellectual soul; is 
never assailed by calamities, but remains immune to woes, as a block of stone 
to a flight of arrows. 


24. Those who forget their spiritual nature, and rely their trust in the body; 
resemble those foolish people, who forsake the gold to lay hold on ashes. 


25. The belief that I am the body, its strength and its perceptions, falsifies 
my faith in these and destroys my reliance in the spirit; but my trust in the 
spirit, confirms my faith in that by removing my belief in these. 


26. The belief that I am the pure vacuous intellect, and quite free from birth 
and death; is sure to dispel all the illusions of feelings and passions and 
affections afar from me. 


27. Those who slight the sight of the vacuous intellect, and view their 
bodies in the light of the spirit, deserve the name of corporeal beasts, and are 
receptacles of bodily appetites and passions only. 


28. He who knows himself to be infrangible and uninflammable, and as the 
solid and impregnable stone in his intellect, and not in his unreal body; cares 
not a fig for his death (which destroys the unsubstantial body, but has no 
power over his indestructible soul). 


29. O the delusion! that over spreads the sight of clear-sighted sages; who 
fear for their total annihilation at the loss of their bodies (which are but 
component and superficial parts of themselves). 


30. When we are firmly settled in our belief, of the indestructible nature of 
our vacuous intellect; we are led to regard the fire and thunder of the last day 
of destruction, in the light of a shower of flowers over our heads. 


31. That I am the imperishable intellect itself, and naught that is of a 
perishable nature; therefore, the wailing of a man and his friends at the point 
of death, appears as a ridiculous farce to the wise. 


32. That I am my inner intelligence, and not the outer body or its sensation, 
is a belief which serves as an antidote, against the poison of all griefs and 
SOITOWS. 


33. That I am the vacuous intelligence, and can never have my quietus or 
annihilation; and that the world is full of intelligence, is a sober truth which 
can never admit any doubt or controversy. (Lit., — which you can never 
doubt). 


34. Should you suppose yourselves, as any other thing beside the 
intelligence; then tell me, ye fools, why do you talk of the soul in vain, and 
what do you mean by the same. 


35. Should the intelligent soul be liable to death, then it is dead with the 
dying people every day; tell me then how ye live and not already dead, with 
the departed souls of others? 


36. Therefore, the intelligent soul, doth neither die nor come to life at any 
time; it is a false notion of the mind only to think itself to be living and dying, 
though it never dies, (being immortal in its nature). 


37. As the intellect thinks in itself, it beholds the same within itself; so it 
goes on thinking in its habitual mode, and is never destroyed of itself (or) 
without being ever destroyed in its essence. 


38. It sees the world in itself, and is likewise conscious of its freedom; it 
knows all what is pleasurable or painful, without changing itself from its 
unalterable nature at any time or place. 


39. By the knowledge of its embodiment, it is liable to delusions; but by 
knowledge of its true nature, it becomes acquainted with its own freedom. 


40. There is nothing whatever, that rises or sets, (i.e., is produced or 
destroyed), at any time or place; but everything is contained in the sole and 
self-existent intellect, and is displayed in its clear and vacuous sphere. 


41. There is nothing, that is either real or unreal in the world; but 
everything is taken in the same light, as it is displayed unto one by the 
intellect. 


42. Whatever the intelligent soul thinks in itself in this world, it retains the 
ideas of the same in the mind. Everything is judged by one’s consciousness of 
it, as the same thing is thought as poison by one, what is believed to be nectar 


by another. 


CHAPTER XCVII. 
On the Rarity and Retiredness of Religious 
Recluses. 


Argument: — The truth of catholicity, carnality of Worldly people, and the 
retirement and Resignation of the godly. 


Vasishtha continued: — The world which is but a vision of the supreme soul, 
and situated in the vacuity of the Divine mind, appears in our consciousness, 
as the ectype of Brahma himself. 


2. The delusion of the visionary world, being too palpable to our view, has 
kept the supreme spirit quite out of our sight; as the spirit of the wine is kept 
hid in the liquor, though it can never be lost. 


3. The unreal phenomenal being discarded as delusion, and the real 
noumenal being incomprehensible; and the absence of any positive 
subsistence of existence, has necessitated our belief in the endless void and 
vacuity. 


4. That the embodied Intellect, called the purusha or soul, is the supreme 
cause (in the Sankhya system); and the world proceeds from the unknown 
principle, known as the pradhdna or its principal source. The truth of this 
view of the creation, rests wholly on the opinion of the philosopher, (Kapila). 


5. That the visible world is the form of the all-pervasive spirit of God, is the 
thesis of the Vedantists; and this opinion of theirs regarding the formal world 
and its plasmic principle, depends solely on the conception of these 
philosophers. 


6. That the world is a conglomeration of particles, is the position of the 
positive and atomic philosophers of the Nyaya system; and all these doctrines 
are relied upon and maintained, by the best belief of every party. 


7. Both the present and future worlds are as they are seen and thought to be, 


is the tenet of some; while the spiritualist looks upon it neither in the light of 
an entity nor non-entity either. 


8. Others acknowledge the outer world only, and nothing besides which is 
beyond their eye sight; and these Charvaka atheists, do not avouch even for 
the intelligent soul, which is within their bodies. 


9. There are others, who seeing the incessant changes and fluctuations of 
things with the flight of time, attribute omnipotence to it, and have become 
time-ists, with a persuasion of the evanescence of the world. 


10. The belief of the barbarians, regarding the resurrection of the soul from 
the grave, which is built on the analogy of the sparrow flying away from 
under its covering lid; has gained a firm ground in the minds of men in these 
countries, and is never doubted by any. 


11. The tolerant sage looks alike and takes in equal light all apparent 
differences; since they know that all these varieties in the world, are but 
manifestations of the One all-pervading and invariable soul. 


12. As it is the nature of the world, to go on in its course; so it is natural 
with the wise, to entertain these various opinions regarding the same. The 
truth however is quite mysterious, and hard to be found by inquiry; but it is 
certain that there is an all-creative power, that is guided by intelligence and 
design in all its works. 


13. That there is one creator of all, is the truth arrived at by all godly men 
and truthful minds; whoso is certain of this truth, is sure to arrive at it without 
any obstruction. 


14. That this world exists and the future one also, is the firm belief of the 
faithful; and that their sacred ablutions and oblations to that end and never go 
for nothing; such assurance on their part, is sure to lead them to the success of 
their object. 


15. An infinite vacuity is reality, is the conclusion arrived at by the 
Buddhist; but there is nothing to be gained by this inquiry, nor any good to be 
derived from a void nullity. 


16. It is the Divine Intelligence which is sought by all, as they seek an 
inestimable gem or the kalpa tree of life; and this fills our inward soul, with 
the fulness of the Divine spirit. 


17. The Lord is neither vacuity nor non-vacuity, nor a nonentity either as it 
is maintained by others; He is omnipotent, and this omnipotence does not 
abide in Him, nor is it without Him, but is the self-same Himself. 


18. Therefore, let everyone rely in his own belief, until he arrives to the 
true and spiritual knowledge of God. By doing so he will obtain the reward of 
his faith, and therefore he must refrain from his fickleness (of forsaking his 
own faith). 


19. Therefore, consult with the learned, and judge with them about the right 
course; and then accept and follow what is best and correct, and reject all 
what proves to be otherwise. 


20. A man becomes wise by knowledge of Sdstras, as also by practicing the 
conduct of the good; as also by associating with the wise and good, wherever 
such persons may be found upon inquiry. 


21. He who serves and attends upon the preachers of sacred Sdstras, and on 
practicers of good and moral conduct; is also deemed a wise man, and his 
company also is to be resorted to by the wise. 


22. All living beings, are naturally impelled towards whatever tends to their 
real good; as it is the nature of water to seek its own level. Therefore, men 
should choose the company of the good for their best good. 


23. Men are carried away as straws, by the waves in the eventful ocean of 
the world; and their days are passing away as insensibly (rapidly), as the dew 
drops are falling off from the blades of grass. 


24. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, who are those far-seeing persons, who 
sensing at first this world to be full of weeds and thorns, come at last by their 
right judgment, to rest in the state of ineffable felicity. (i.e., Who are they that 
are resigned to God after their troublesome journey in the thorny paths of the 
world). 


25. Vasishtha replied: — It is the wording of the sruti, that there some such 
persons among all classes of beings, whose presence sheds a lustre, as bright 
as that of the broad and shining day light. (These are gods, men). 


26. Beside them there are others, who are quite ignorant of truth, and are 
tossed about and whirled up and down like straws, by the whirling waters of 
the dangerous eddies of ignorance, in the dark and dismal ocean of this world. 


27. These are drowned in their enjoyments, and lost to the bliss of their 
souls; and are ever burning in the flames of worldly cares; such are some 
among the gods, who are burning on high, like as the mountain trees are 
inflamed by the wild fire. 


28. The proud demi-gods were vanquished by their inimical gods, and were 
cast down into the abyss by Narayana; as big elephants into the pit, with the 


ichor of their giddiness. 


29. The Gandharva songsters, (that are skilled in music only), show no sign 
of right reason in them; but being giddy with the wine of melody, they fall 
into the hands of death, as the silly stags are caught in the snare (by their 
fondness for the sweet sound of the hunter’s horn). 


30. The Vidyddharas are mad with their knowledge (of arts, of sciences); 
and do not hold in esteem the esoteric and grand science of divinity for their 
salvation. 


31. The Yakshas who are impregnable themselves, are ever apt to injure all 
others on earth; and they exercise their noxious powers, chiefly upon the 
helpless infants, old men, and weak and infirm persons. 


32. There are again the gigantic and elephant like Rakshasas, who have 
been repeatedly destroyed by Hari, and will be utterly extirpated by you, as a 
herd of sheep by a powerful lion. 


33. The Pisdcha cannibals are always in quest of human prey, and devour 
their bodies as the burning fire consumes the oblations. They are therefore, in 
utter darkness of spiritual knowledge. 


34. The Naga race that dwell underneath the ground, resemble the stalks of 
lotuses drowned under the water, or as the roots of trees buried under the earth 
(and therefore, they are quite insensible of truth). 


35. The Asura race dwelling in subterranean cells, are as worms and 
insects, grovelling in dark under the ground, and are utterly ignorant of any 
knowledge or discrimination. 


36. And what must we say of foolish mankind, who like the poor ants, are 
moving busily by night and day, in search of a morsel, (Jit., — particle) of 
bread (and have not a whit of understanding in them). 


37. All living bodies are running up and down forever, in their vain 
expectations; and the days and nights are insensibly gliding over them, as 
upon drunken men (unconscious of themselves). 


38. The knowledge of pure truth, never enters into the mind of men; as the 
dust flying over the surface of water never sink in its depth. 


39. The holy vows of men are blown away, by the blasts of their pride and 
vanity; as the husks of rice are blown off, by the wind of the threshing mill. 


40. Other people that are without true knowledge, are like the yoginis and 
Pamaras, — pariahs, are addicted to the carnalities of their eating and 


drinking; and to roll in stink and stench and mud and mire. 


41. Among the gods, only Yama, the sun and moon, Indra and Rudras, and 
Varuna and Vayu, are said to live liberated forever; and so are Brahma, Hari 
and Vrihaspati and Sukra, (the preceptors of the gods and demi-gods). 


42. Among the patriarchs Daxa, Kasyapa and others, are said to be living 
liberated; and among the seven sages, Narada, Sanaka and goddess born 
Kumara are liberated forever. 


43. Among the Danava demons, there were some that had their 
emancipation also; and these were Hiranyaksha, Vali, Prahlada and Sambara, 
together with Maya, Vritra, Andha, Namuchi, Kesi, Mura and others. (Some 
of whom were foes and others as friends of the god). 


44. Among Rdkshasas, Vibhisana, Prahasta and Indrajit are held as 
liberated; and so are Sesha, Taxaka, Karkota and some others among the 
Nagas or serpent race. 


45. The liberated are entitled to dwell in the abodes of Brahma and Vishnu, 
and in the heaven of Indra; and there are some the manes of the Pitris, 
Siddhas and Sdddhyas, that are reckoned as liberated also. 


46. Among the human race also, there are some that are liberated in their 
life time; as the few princes, saints and Brahmanas, whose names are 
preserved to us in the sacred records. 


47. There are living beings in multitudes, on all sides of us in this earth, but 
there are very few among them that are enlightened with true knowledge in 
them; there are unnumbered trees and forests growing all around us, and 
bearing their fruits and flowers and foliage to no end; but there is scarcely a 
kalpa tree to be found among them (which may yield to us the fruit that we 
ardently desire). 


CHAPTER XCVIII. 
Praise of good Society, or Association with the good 
and Wise. 


Argument: — Character of the truly Wise man, his best test, and company. 


Vasishtha continued: — Those among the judicious and wise, that are 
indifferent to and unconcerned with the world, and resigned to the divinity, 
and resting in his state of supreme felicity; have all their desires and delusions 
abated, and their enemies lessened in this world. 


2. He is neither gladdened nor irritated at anything, nor engages in any 
matter, nor employs himself in the accumulation of earthly effects. He does 
not annoy anybody, nor is he annoyed by anyone. 


3. He does not bother his head about theism or atheism, nor torment his 
body with religious austerities; he is agreeable and sweet in his demeanour, 
and is pleasing and genteel in his conversation. 


4. His company gladdens the hearts of all, as the moonlight delights the 
minds of men; he is circumspect in all affairs, and the best judge in all 
matters. 


5. He is without any anxiety in his conduct, and is polite and friendly to all; 
he manages patiently all his outward business, but is quite cool in his inward 
mind. 


6. He is learned in the Sdstras, and takes a delight in their exposition; he 
knows all people and both past and present; and knows also what is good and 
bad for any, and is content with whatever comes to pass on him. 


7. The wise act according to the established usage of good people, and 
refrain from what is opposed to it; they gladden all men with their free 
admonitions, as the zephyr regales them with the gratuitous odours of flowers; 
and they afford a ready reception and board to the needy. 


8. They treat with respect the needy that repair to their doors; just as the 


blooming lotus entertains the bee, that resorts to the same; and they attract the 
heart of people, by their endeavours, to save them from their sins. 


9. They are as cold as any cooling thing, or like the clouds in the rainy 
season; and as sedate as rocks, and capable of removing the calamities of 
people, by their meritorious acts. 


10. They have the power to prevent the impending dangers of men, as the 
mountains keep the earth from falling at the earth-quake; they support the 
failing spirit of men in their calamitous circumstances, and congratulate with 
them in their prosperity. 


11. Their countenances are as comely as the fair face of the moon, and they 
are as well-wishers of men, as their loving consorts; their fame fills the world 
as flowers of spring in order to produce the fruits of general good. 


12. Holy men are as the vernal season, and their voice as the notes of 
kokilas, delighting all mankind; and their minds are as profound oceans, 
undisturbed by the turbulent waves and eddies of passions and thoughts of 
other people. 


13. They pacify the troubled minds of others, by their wise counsels, as the 
cold weather calms the turbulent waters and seas, and puts to rest their 
boisterous waves. 


14. They resemble the robust rocks on the sea-shore, withstanding the force 
of the dashing surges of worldly troubles and afflictions; which overwhelm 
and bewilder the minds of mankind. 


15. These saintly men are resorted to by good people only, at the times of 
their utmost danger and distress; and these and the like are the signs, whereby 
these good-hearted people, are distinguished from others. 


16. Let the weary traveller rely for his rest in his Maker alone, in his 
tiresome journey through this world; which resembles the rough sea, filled 
with huge whales and dragons. 


17. There is no other means for getting over this hazardous ocean, without 
the company of the good, which like a stout vessel safely bears him across. 
There is no reasoning required to prove it so, but it must be so. 


18. Therefore, do not remain as a dull sloth in the den, to brood over your 
sorrows in vain; but repair to the wise man who possesses any one of these 
virtues for your redress, by leaving all other concerns. 


19. Mind not his fault but respect his merit, and learn to scan the good and 
bad qualities of men from thy youth with all diligence. 


20. First of all, and by all means, improve your understanding by the 
company of the good and careful study of the Sdstras; and serve all good 
people without minding their faults. 


21. Shun the society of men, (whether friends or relatives), who are 
conspicuous for some great and incorrigible crime; otherwise, it will change 
the sweet composure of your mind, to bitterness and disquiet. (So in 
Raghuvansa: — The society of wicked friend, is to be cut off as an ulcerous 
limb). 


22. This I know from my observation, of the righteous turning to 
unrighteousness; this is the greatest of all evils, (and must be feared), when 
the honest turn to be dishonest. 


23. This change and falling off of good men, from their moral rectitude, 
have been seen in many places and at different times; wherefore it is 
necessary to choose the company of the good only, for one’s safety in this and 
salvation in the next world. 


24. Therefore, no one should live afar from the society of the good and 
great; who are ever to be regarded with respect and esteem; because the 
company of the good though slightly courted, is sure to purify the newcomer 
with the flying fragrance of their virtues. 


CHAPTER XCIX. 
A Discourse on Esoteric or Spiritual Knowledge. 


Argument: — The share of the Brute creation in the enjoyments of life, and 
its varieties in various grades of Beings. 


Rama rejoined: — Verily, we (rational beings), have a great many means, for 
relieving our pains. Such as our reason, the precepts of the Sdstras, the 
advices of our friends and the society of the wise and good; beside the 
applications of mantras and medicines, the giving of charities, performances 
of religious austerities, going to pilgrimages and resorting to holy places, (all 
which have the efficacy of removing our calamities and rendering us happy). 


2. But tell me what is the state of the brute creation such as of the worms 
and insects, birds and flies, and the other creeping, crawling and bending 
animals; whether they are not alike susceptible with ourselves of pain and 
pleasure, and what means they have to remedy their pains and evils. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — All creatures, whether animals or vegetables, are 
destined to partake of the particular enjoyments, which are allotted to their 
respective shares; and are ever tending towards that end. 


4. All living beings from the noble and great to the mean and minute, have 
their appetites and desires like ourselves; but the difference consists in their 
lesser or greater proportion in us and themselves. (i.e., Mankind is actuated in 
a lesser degree by their passions and appetites than their violence in the brute 
tribes). 


5. As the great Virdj-like big bodies, are actuated by their passions and 
feelings, so also the little valyakhilyas or puny tribes of insects, are fed by 
their self-love to pursue their own ends. 


6. Behold the supportless fowls of the firmament, flying and falling in the 
air, are quite content with roving in empty vacuity, without seeking a place for 
their rest. 


7. Look at the incessant endeavours of the little emmet, in search of its food 


and hoarding its store like ourselves, for the future provision of our families, 
and never resting content for a moment. 


8. There the little mollusks, as minute as atoms of dust, and yet as quick in 
quest of its food, as when the swift eagle is in pursuit of its prey, in the 
ethereal sphere. 


9. As the world passes with us in the thoughts of ourselves, our egoism and 
meity of this and that; so it goes on with every creature, in its selfish thoughts 
and cares for its own kind. (Self-love is the prime mover of all living bodies, 
towards their own good). 


10. The lives of filthy worms are spent like ours, in their toil and anxious 
care for food and provisions, at all places and times of their duration in the 
world. 


11. The vegetable creation is somewhat more awakened, in their state of 
existence, than mineral productions, which continue as dead and dormant 
forever. But the worms and insects, are as awakened from their dormancy as 
men, in order to remain restless forever. 


12. Their lives are as miserable as ours, upon this earth of sin and pain, and 
their death is as desirable as ours, in order to set us free from misery after a 
short-lived pain. 


13. As a man sold and transported to a foreign country, sees all things with 
wonder that are not his own; so it is with the brute animals, to see all strange 
things in this earth. 


14. All animals find everything on earth, to be either as painful or pleasant 
to them, as they are to us also; but they have not the ability like us, to 
distinguish what is good for them from whatever is noxious to them. 


15. Brute animals are dragged by their bridles and nose-strings, as men 
who are sold as slaves to labour in distant lands, have to bear with all sorts of 
pains and privation, without being able to communicate or complain of them 
to anybody. 


16. The trees and plants and their germs, are liable to similar pains and 
troubles like us, when our thin-skinned bodies are annoyed by inclement 
weather, or assailed by gnats and bugs, during the time of our sleep. (i.e., The 
vegetable tribe is equally sensible of pain as the animal in their sleeping state). 


17. And as we mortals on earth, have our knowledge of things, — 
padartha-vedana, and the sagacity of forsaking a famine stricken place for our 
welfare elsewhere; so it is with the bending brutes and birds, to emigrate from 


lands of scarcity to those of plenty. (i.e., Brutes are alike discerning as men). 


18. The delightsome is equally delectable to all, and the God Indra as well 
as a worm, are alike inclined towards what is pleasurable to them; and this 
tendency to pleasure proceeds from their own option of choice. This freedom 
of choice is not denied to any but is irresistible in all, and he who knows his 
free will, (or self-agency), is altogether free and liberated. (The text uses two 
words, viz., Vikshepa or projection of the soul (or inclination), as actuated by 
Vikalpa or one’s free choice of anything. This passage establishes the doctrine 
of free choice and self-agency of all living beings, against the common belief 
in an imperious fatality). 


19. The pleasure and pain, arising from the passions and feelings, and from 
enjoyments in life; and torments of diseases and death, are alike to all living 
beings. 


20. Except the knowledge of things, and that of past and future events, as 
also of the arts of life; all the various kinds of animals, are possessed of all 
other animal faculties and propensities like those of mankind. 


21. The drowsy vegetable kingdom, and the dormant mountain and other 
insensible natures; are fully sensible in themselves, of a vacuous intellectual 
power whereon they subsist. (They are as the inactive but meditative Yogis, 
who with their external insensibility, are internally conscious of the Divine 
spirit). 


22. But there are some that deny the sensibility of an intellectual spirit, in 
the dormant and fixed bodies of arbours and mountains; and allow the 
consciousness of the vacuous intellect, but in a very slight degree, in moving 
animals and in the majority of living and ignorant part of mankind. 


23. The solid state of mountains and the sleepy nature of the vegetable 
creation, being devoid of the knowledge of a dualism (other than their own 
natures) have no sense of the existence of the world, except that of a non- 
entity or mere vacuity. 


24. The knowledge of the entity of the world, is accompanied with utter 
ignorance of its nature or agnosticism; for when we know not ourselves or the 
subjective, how is it possible for us to know the objective world. 


25. The world is situated as ever, in its state of dumb torpidity, like a dull 
block of wood or stone; it is without its beginning and end, and without an 
aperture in it, and is as the dreaming wakefulness of a sleeping man. 


26. The world exists in the same state, as it did before its creation; and it 
will continue to go on forever, even as now; because eternity is always the 


same both before and after. 


27. It is neither the subjective nor objective, nor the plenum nor vacuum; 
nor is it a mute substance nor anything whatever. 


28. Remain thou as thou art, and let me remain as I am; and being exempt 
from pleasure or pain in our state of vacuity, we find nothing existent nor non- 
existent herein. 


29. Say why you forsake your state of absolute nothingness, and what you 
get in your visionary city of this world; it is all calm and quiet without, as 
your vacuous Intellect is serene and clear within you. 


30. It is the want of right knowledge, that causes our error of the world; but 
no sooner do we come to detect this false knowledge of ours, than this error 
flies away from us. 


31. The world being known as a dream, and having no reality in it, it is as 
vain to place any reliance therein, as to place one’s affections on the son of a 
barren woman, or confide in such a one. 


32. When the dream of the world is known to be a mere dream or false, 
even at the time of dreaming it in sleep; what faith or confidence can be relied 
on it, on one’s coming to know its nothingness upon his waking. 


33. What is known in the waking state, could not be otherwise in that of 
sleep; whatever is known in the later hour of coming to its knowledge, the 
same must have been its previous state also. (i.e., The world is nothing, both 
in the states of its knowledge as well as ignorance). 


34. There are the three times of present, past and future, and our knowledge 
of these, proceeds from our ignorance of endless duration; which is the only 
real tranquil and universal substratum of all, (and this is the attribute of the 
ever unchanging One). 


35. As the breaking of breakers, by the dashing of waves against one 
another, does no harm to the waters of the sea; so the molestation or 
destruction of one body by another, does no injury to the inward soul, which 
is ever impregnable and also indestructible. 


36. It is the vacuous Intellect within us, that gives rise to the erroneous 
conception of our bodies; wherefore the loss of the body or its false 
conception, does not affect our intellect and ourselves neither. 


37. The waking soul sees the world, situated in the vacuity of Intellect, as it 
were in its sleep; and this of creation in the mind being devoid of materiality, 
is very like a dream; (which proceeds from reminiscence only). 


38. The ideas, (dhi), of material things, are produced in the beginning of 
creation, from their previous impressions left in the intellect; and the world 
being but a dream or work of imagination; it is an error of the brain to take it 
for a reality. 


39. The traces of prior dreams and reminiscences (of previous birth), being 
preserved in the memory or mind; the same things appear and reappear in it 
(in later births), and represent their aerial shapes as substantial figures (as 
some pictures appear true to life). 


40. This error has taken possession of the mind, in the same manner as the 
untrue is taken for truth; while the transcendent and clear truth of the 
omniform soul is rejected as untrue. 


41. In reality there is the Divine Intellect only, that has existed forever; and 
this being the most certain truth that Brahma is all in all, the doctrine of 
reminiscence and oblivion goes to nothing. 


42. It is sheer ignorance, which is devoid of this spiritual knowledge, and 
views things in their physical light only; and in this lies the true knowledge, 
which breaks open the door of ignorance. (i.e., Spiritualism alone, dispels the 
gloom of materialism). 


43. There remains nothing at last, after expulsion of the error of materiality; 
except the pure spirit of God, who is both the viewer and the view, or the 
subjective and objective in himself. 


44. As the reflexion of anything falling on a mirror, shows the figure of that 
thing within itself; so the world shines of itself in the vacuity of the Divine 
Intellect, and with the reflection of anything else, being ever cast upon it. 


45. As the reflexion of a thing, exhibits itself in its bosom, though nobody 
was to look at it; so the world is shown in the Divine Intellect, though the 
same is invisible to everyone. 


46. Whatever is found as true, both by reason and proof, the same must be 
the certain truth; all else is mere semblance of it; and not being actual can 
never be true. 


47. And though the knowledge of the material world, is proved to be false 
and untrue, yet it is found to mislead us, as the act of somnambulation does in 
our sleep and dreaming state. 


48. It is the lustre of the Divine Luminary, that casts its reflexion into the 
Intellect, and emblazons the intellectual sphere supremely bright. Tell me 
therefore, what are we and this pageant of the world, any more than a 


réchauffé or a print of that archetype. 


49. If there is a resuscitation of ourselves after our demise, then what is it 
that is lost to us; and should there be no regeneration of us after death, then 
there is a perfect tranquility of our souls, by our utter extinction, and 
emancipation from the pains of life and death. Or if we have our liberation by 
the light of philosophy, then there nothing here, that lends to our woe in any 
state whatsoever. 


50. The ignorant man alone knows the state of the ignorant, wherein the 
wise are quite ignorant; as the fishes alone know the perilous state of the stag, 
that is fallen amidst the waves and eddies of the sea. 


51. It is the open sphere of the Divine Intellect only, that represents the 
divers images of, I, thou, he, and this, and that, in its hollow space; as a tree 
shows the sundry forms of its leaves, fruits, flowers, efc., in its all producing 
body or stem. 


CHAPTER C. 
Refutation of Atheism. 


Argument: — Refutation of the Atheistical doctrine of the materiality of 
the soul. 


Rama rejoined: — Please to tell me, Sir, what are your arguments, for allaying 
the miseries of this world, against the position (paksha) of others who 
maintain in that: — 


2. A living being is happy so long, as the dread of death (either of himself 
or others) is out of his view; and that there is no reappearance (revivification) 
of the dead, that is already reduced to ashes. (Hence there is no happiness 
either for the living or dead (according to them)). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Whatever is the certain belief of any body, he finds 
the same in his consciousness; and that he feels and conceives accordingly, is 
a truth that is well known to all mankind, (that everyone thinks according to 
his belief). 


4. As the firmament is firm, quiet and ubiquitous, so also is the ubiquity of 
the Intellect; (i.e., the vacuous intellect is also all-pervading), and are 
considered to form a duality by the ignorant dualist, while the sapient take 
them as the one and same thing, from the impossibility of conceiving the co- 
existence of two things from eternity. 


5. It is wrong to suppose the existence of a chaos before creation began, for 
that would be assigning another (chaotic) cause to the creation when has 
proceeded from Brahma, who is without a cause and is diffused in his 
creation. 


6. He who does not acknowledge the purport of the Vedas, (that all things 
are produced from Brahma), and the final great dissolution, (when all things 
are dissolved in and return to him); are known as men without a revelation 
and religion, and are considered as dead by us. (i.e., spiritually dead). 


7. Those whose minds are settled in the undisputed belief of the Sdstras, 


that all these is Brahma or the varied god himself; are persons with whom we 
have to hold no discussion or argument. 


8. As our consciousness is ever awake in our minds, and without any 
intermission; so Brahma that constitutes our consciousness, is ever wakeful in 
us, whether the body lasts or not. 


9. If our perceptions are to produce our consciousness, then must man be 
very miserable indeed; because the sense of a feeling, other than that of the 
ever-felicitous state of the soul, is what actually makes us so. 


10. Knowing the universe as the splendours of the intellectual vacuum, 
(i.e., in the sphere of the vacuous intellect); you cannot suppose the 
knowledge of anything, or the feeling of any pleasure or pain, ever to attach or 
stick to an empty nothing. (i.e., to the vacuous spirit). 


11. Hence, men who are quite certain and conscious of the entirety and 
pure unity of the soul, can never find the feelings of sorrow or grief, to rise in 
or overwhelm it in any way than the dust of earth rising to the sky, and filling 
its sphere with foulness. (This passage rests on text of the sruti which says: — 
there is no sorrow or pain to anybody who sees the pure unity only). 


12. Whether the consciousness of unity, be true or not in all men; yet the 
common notion of it even in the minds of boys, cannot be discarded as untrue. 
(i.e., All men may differ in their conceptions respecting the nature of the 
Divine soul, but they all agree in the notion of one prime cause of all. See 
kusumanyjali). 


13. The body is not the soul nor the living spirit, nor any other thing of 
which we have any conception; It is the consciousness which is everything, 
and the world is as it conceives it to be. (There is nothing beyond our 
consciousness of it). 


14. Whether it is true or not, yet we have the conception of our bodies by 
means of this; and it gives us conceptions of all things in earth, water and 
heaven, independent of their material forms, as we see the aerial forms of 
things in our dreams. (i.e., We are conscious only of the abstract notions of 
things, and of their substantial properties). 


15. Whether our consciousness is a real entity or not, yet it is this power 
which is called the conscious soul; and whatever is the conviction of this 
power, the same is received as positive truth by all. 


16. The authority of all the Sdstras, rests upon the proof of consciousness; 
and the truth which is generally arrived at by all, must be acknowledged as 
quite certain in my opinion also. 


17. Therefore, the consciousness of atheists, which is vitiated by their 
misunderstanding, being purified afterwards by right reasoning, becomes 
productive of good results likewise. (i.e., of producing the fruit of their 
liberation also). 


18. But a perverted conscience or vitiated understanding, is never reproved 
by any means; either by performance of pious acts at any time or place, or by 
study of vedas, or by pursuit of other things. 


19. Errors of the understanding (avidyd) recur to the reprobate as often as 
they corrected from time to time; say therefore, what other means can there 
be, to preserve our consciousness from fallacy. 


20. Self-consciousness is the soul of man, and in proportion to its firmness 
or weakness, the happiness or misery of man, increases or decreases 
accordingly. (i.e., The strong minded are always prosperous). 


21. If there is a consciousness in men, and such men also who are 
conscious of the Divine essence in them, and those who are resorted to by the 
pious, for their liberation from the bonds of the world; then this world would 
appear as a dead and dumb block of stone, and a dark and dreary desert. 


22. The knowledge of nature or gross materialism, which rises in the mind 
of man, for want of his knowledge of the consciousness of himself, is like the 
dark ignorance in which one is involved in his sleep. 


23. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how is that atheist who denies the end 
of the ten sides of heaven, and disbelieves the destruction of the world; who 
believe only in what is existent, and have no thought of inexistence, (either 
prior to the creation or after its dissolution). 


24. Who does not perceive the perfect wisdom, which is displayed 
throughout the universe; but sees only whatever is visible, without knowing 
their destruction (frailty). (The atheists consider the world as eternal). 


25. Tell me Sir, what are their arguments, about allaying the evils of the 
world; and remove my doubts about it, for increase of my knowledge in this 
important truth. 


26. Vasishtha replied: — I have already given my reply to your query 
regarding the infidels (that they are not to be spoken to); hear me now to give 
the reply with regard to your second question touching the salvation of the 
soul. 


27. O best of men, Rama! you have spoken in this sense, that the human 
soul (purusha) is constituted of the intelligence alone (as you think it to be 


and which is but a flash of the Divine Intellect, and the measure of the objects 
of consciousness). 


28. This intelligence (or intelligent soul) is indestructible, and is not 
destroyed with the destruction of the body, but is joined with the Divine 
Intelligence without fail. Or if the body be indestructible, (owing to its 
resurrection after death), then there is no cause of sorrow at its temporary loss. 


29. The intelligence is said to be divided into various parts, in the souls of 
men and different members of their bodies; if so it be, then the intelligence is 
destroyed with the destruction of individual souls and bodily members also. 
(Therefore, the supremely intelligent soul is beyond these). 


30. The self-conscious soul that is liberated in the living state, has no more 
to return to earth after death; but the consciousness which is not purified by 
divine knowledge, cannot be exempted from its transmigration to this world. 


31. Those again that deny the existence of consciousness, such souls are 
doomed to the gross ignorance of stones, (i.e., to become stony block heads), 
for this disbelief of theirs. 


32. As the knowledge of sensible objects, keeps the mind in utter darkness; 
so the death of such persons is calculated as their final bliss, because they 
have no more to feel the sensibles nor view the visible world any more, 
(although they are deprived of their spiritual bliss). 


33. Men of pure understandings, who have lost the sense of their 
corporeality, are never to be reborn on earth anymore; but those of dull 
understandings, become as gross corporeal bodies and are involved in 
impenetrable darkness. (i.e., the gloom of ignorance according to the dictum 
of the sruti). 


34. Those intellectual philosophers, (vijndna-vddis), who view the world as 
an aerial city in his dream; to them the world presents its aspect as a phantom 
and no other. (The world is a day dream, and its sight a delusion. In haman ke 
didam khab bud). 


35. There are some that maintain the stability, and others asserting the 
frailty of the world and everything; but what do they gain by these opinions, 
since the knowledge of either, neither augments the amount of human 
happiness, nor lessens any quantity of mortal misery. (i.e., the misery of 
mortals). 


36. The stability or unstability, of the greatest or least of things, makes no 
difference in any of them whatever; they are all alike the radiating rays of the 
intellect, though they appear as extended bodies to the ignorant. 


37. Those who assign unlimitedness to the essence of consciousness, and of 
limitation to that of insensibility; and maintain the permanence of the one and 
the transience of the other, talk mere nonsense like the babbling of boys. 


38. They are the best and most venerable of men, who know the body to be 
the product of and encompassed by the intellect. And they are the meanest 
among mankind, who believe the intellect as the produce and offspring of the 
body; (and these are Kanada and Nyaya philosophers of gross materialism, 
who believe intelligence as a resultant of the material body). 


39. The intellect (personified as Hiranyagarbha or Brahma the Divine 
spirit), is distributed into the souls of all living beings; and the infinite space 
of vacuity, is as a network or curtain, which all animal lives, flying within its 
ample expanse like bodies of gnats and flies, and rising up and sinking below 
or moving all about, as the shoals of fishes in the interminable ocean. (The 
Divine Intellect or spirit, is the collection of all specialities). 


40. As this universal soul, thinks of creating the various species; so it 
conceives them within itself, as the seeds conceive the future plants in 
themselves, and the same are developed afterward. 


41. Whatever lives or living beings, it thinks of or conceives in itself; the 
same spring forth quickly from it, and this truth is known even to boys (from 
the repeated texts importing the Lord as the fountain of all). 


42. As the vapours fly in the air, and as the waters roll in the ocean; and as 
they form curls and waves of various kinds, so the lives of living beings, are 
continually floating in the vacuum of the Divine Intellect. 


43. As the vacuity of the Intellect, presents the sight of a city to a man in 
his dream; so the world presents its variegated aspects since its first creation, 
to the sight of the day dreaming man. 


44, There were no co-ordinate causes of material bodies (as earth, water, 
etc.), at the first formation of the world; but it rose spontaneously of itself as 
the empty sights appearing in our dream. 


45. As in a city seen in dream, its houses and their apartments, come to 
appear gradually to sight; so the dream becomes enlarged and expanded and 
divided by degrees to our vision. 


46. All this creation is but the empty void of the intellect, (or as pictures 
drawn in empty air); there is no duality or variety in it, but is one even plane 
of the intellect, like the open sky, without any spot or place attached to it. 


47. The moon-light of the Intellect, diffuses its coolness on all sides, and 


gladdens the souls of all beings; it scatters the beams of intellection all 
around, and casts its reflexions in the image of the world. 


48. The world as it is now visible to us, lies forever in the mind of God in 
the same vacuous state, as it was before its creation; and as it is to be reduced 
to nothing upon its final destruction. It is the twinkling, or the opening and 
closing of the intellectual eye, that this empty shadow of the world, appears 
and disappears amidst the universal vacuum of the Divine Mind. 


49. Whoever views this world in any light, it appears to him in the same 
manner, (as some thinking it a solid plenum, and others as an empty vacuum). 
And as it depends upon the Intellect alone, it is exhibited in various forms 
according to the caprice of its observers. 


50. The minds of the intelligent, are as pure as the clear sphere of the 
summer sky; and the pure hearted and holy people, think themselves as 
nothing else, beside their intellects or as intellectual beings only. 


51. These pious and holy people, are free from ignorance and the faults of 
society; they share the gifts of fortune, as it falls to them by the common lot of 
mankind; and they continue in the conduct of their worldly affairs, like some 
working machine (acting externally and without taking anything to mind). 


CHAPTER CI. 
A sermon on Spirituality. 


Argument: — That self-consciousness is same with the pure soul, whose 
presence is preventive of the causes of all human woes and fears. (Here 
consciousness is synonymous with conscientiousness). 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus it is the Intellect only which is the soul of the 
body also, and which is situated everywhere in the manner as said before; and 
there is nothing which is so self-evident as the Intellect (or self- 
consciousness). 


2. This is the clear expanse of the sky and, it is the medium of the vision of 
the viewer and visibles; it composes and encompasses the whole world, and 
therefore, there is nothing to be had or lost without it. 


3. The doctrinaires of the atheistic school of Brihaspati, that disbelieve the 
future state because of their ignorance of it; are believers of the present from 
their knowledge hereof. Thus knowledge or consciousness being the basis of 
their belief, we bear no favour nor disfavour to their doctrine. (We neither 
favor nor hate). 


4. The world being but a name for the dream, which is produced in the 
vacuum of our hidden knowledge; say what cause is there for the debate of 
disputants, in their one-sided view of the question. 


5. Our consciousness knows well in itself, what is good or bad, and 
therefore, acceptable or not. The pure soul is manifest in the clear vacuity of 
air, where there is neither this nor that view of it, exhibited to anyone. 


6. The conscious soul is immortal, O Rama, and is not of the form of a rock 
or tree or any animal; consciousness is a mere vacuum, and all being and not 
being. (i.e., our birth and deaths are as the waves and curling waters, in its 
ocean of eternity). 


7. We are all floating in the vacuum of consciousness, both I and thou and 
he as well as any other; and none of us is ever liable to die, because 


consciousness is never susceptible of death. 


8. Consciousness has nothing to be conscious but of itself only; and 
therefore, O big eyed Rama, where can you get a duality, except the single 
subjectivity of the Intellect? (To Make the Intellect both as subjective as well 
as objective, is something like the supposition of its riding on itself). 


9. Tell me, O Rama! what is the product or offspring of the vacuous 
Intellect, and tell me also if that Intellect would die away, whence could we 
and all others proceed any more. (This proves the immortality of the Intellect, 
whence as all things are incessantly proceeding from). 


10. Tell me what sort of beings are these atheistic disputants, the saugatas, 
Lokayatikas and others; if they are devoid of their consciousness, which they 
so strenuously deny and disallow. 


11. It is this vacuous consciousness which some name as Brahma, and 
which some style as knowledge and others as the empty vacuum. 


12. Some call it the spirit (of bodies), like that of spirituous liquors; and 
others (as the sankhyas), use the term purusha or embodied spirit for it. 
Others (as the Yogis), call it the vacuous Intellect, while others as the saivas, 
give it the names of Siva and the soul (and so it is called by various other 
names by others). 


13. It is sometimes styled the Intellect only, which makes no difference of it 
from the other attributes. The supreme soul is ever the same in itself, by 
whatever name it is expressed by the ignorance of men. 


14. Be my body as big as a hill, or crushed to atoms as dust; it is no gain or 
loss to me in any wise either, since I am the same intellectual body or being 
for ever and ever. 


15. Our sires and grand sires, are all dead and gone; but their intellects and 
intellectual parts, are not dead and lost with their bodies; for in the case of 
their demise, we would not have their regeneration in us. (Because the sruti 
says, — “atmd vai jdyate putra,”’ the soul is regenerated in the son). 


16. The vacuous Intellect is neither generated nor destroyed at any time, 
but is increate and imperishable at all times; say how and when could the 
eternal void come to or disappear from existence. 


17. The infinite and indestructible sphere of the Intellect, displays the scene 
of the universe in its ample space of vacuity, it is without its vicissitudes of 
rising or setting, and is ever existent in the supreme soul. 


18. The Intellect represents the reflexion of the world in its clear sphere, as 


a crystal mountain reflects a wild fire in its translucent bosom; and rests for 
ever in the vacuum of the supreme soul, which is devoid of its beginning, 
middle and end. 


19. As the shades of night obscure the visibles from sight, so the clouds of 
ignorance darken the bright aspect of the universe, as it is represented in the 
soul divine. 


20. As the waters of the ocean, roll of themselves in the forms of waves and 
eddies; so doth the Intellect exhibit the pageant of the universe, of itself and in 
itself from all eternity. 


21. The Intellect itself is the soul of the body, and like air is never extinct 
or wanting anywhere; therefore, it is all in vain, to be in fear of one’s death at 
any time. (Life and death are indifferent to the Yogi). 


22. It is a great joy to pass from one into another body (as there is in 
quitting a decayed house for a new one); therefore, say ye fools, why do ye 
fear and grieve to die, when there every cause to rejoice at it. 


23. If after death there be no regeneration of the dead, then it is a 
consummation devoutly to be wished; because it eases and releases at once, 
from the heart burning disease and dread, of being and not being, and their 
repeated woes and miseries by turns. (To be and not be; that is the question, 
etc.). 


24. Therefore, life and death, are neither for our weal or woe; because they 
are neither of them anything in reality, except the representations of the 
intellect. (The mind paints them in different colours). 


25. If the dead are to be reborn in new bodies, it is a cause of rejoicing and 
sorrowing; and the death or destruction of the decayed body for a sound one, 
is accounted as a change for better. 


26. If death convey the meaning of the ultimate dissolution of a person, it is 
desirable even in that sense, for the cessation of our pains altogether; or it is 
used to mean one’s resuscitation in a new body and life, it must be a cause of 
great rejoicing. 


27. If death be dreaded for fear of the punishment, awaiting on the vicious 
deeds of the dead; it is even so in this life also for the penalties waiting on our 
quilt even here; refrain therefore, from doing evil, for your safety and 
happiness in both worlds. 


28. You all are ever crying lest ye die; but none of you is ever heard to say, 
that you are going to live again. 


29. What is the meaning of life and death, and where are the lands where 
these are seen to take place? Do they not occur in our consciousness alone, 
and turn about in the vacuum of the mind? 


30. Remain firm with your conscious souls, and eat and drink and act your 
part with indifference; for being situated in the midst of vacuity, you can have 
nothing to ask or wish for. 


31. Being carried away in the reverie of your dream, and enjoying the gifts 
of time and changing circumstances; live content with what is got without 
fear, and know this as the holiest state. 


32. Regardless of the intervening evils, which over take us in every place 
and time; the holy sage conducts himself with equanimity, as a sleeping man 
over the tumults of life. 


33. The holy sage is neither sorry at his death, nor glad of his life and 
longevity; he neither likes nor hates anything, nor does he desire aught 
whatever. 


34. The wise man that knows all what is knowable, manages to live in this 
world as an ignorant simpleton; he is as firm and fearless as a rock, and 
reckons his life and death as rotten and worthless straws. 


CHAPTER CII. 
Exposition of Buddhism and Disproving of Death. 


Argument: — Showing the utility of Buddhistic doctrines in strengthening 
the Mind to cool apathy. 


Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, the perfection which a holy man attains to, 
after he is acquainted with the supreme essence, which is without its 
beginning and end. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear the high state to which the holy man arrives, 
after he has known the knowable; and the mode of his life and conduct, 
throughout the whole course of his existence. 


3. He lives apart from human society, in his solitary retreat in the woods, 
and there has the stones of the dales, the trees of the forest, and the young 
antelopes, for his friends, kindred and associates. 


4. The most populous city, is deemed as a lonely desert by him; his 
calamities are his blessings, and all his dangers are festivities to him. 


5. His pains are his pleasure, and his meditations are as musings to him; he 
is silent in all his dealings, and quiet in all his conduct through life. 


6. He is somnolent in his waking hours, and remains as dead to himself 
while he is living; he manages all his affairs with a coolness, as if he was 
engaged in nothing. 


7. He is pleasant without tasting any pleasure, and is friendly to his fellow 
beings without any selfish interest of his own; he is strict to himself but ever 
kind to others, and is undesirous of everything, with his full desire for 
common weal. 


8. He is pleased with the conduct of others, without having any course of 
action for himself; and devoid of sorrow, fear and care, yet he is seen always 
to wear a melancholy appearance. (A heavily pensive melancholy). 


9. He afflicts nobody, nor is afflicted by anybody; and though full with his 


private afflictions and privations, he is ever pleasant in company. (Pleased 
with himself, he pleases all). 


10. He is neither delighted with his gain, nor depressed at his loss, nor 
desirous to get anything; and though there may be causes, for his feeling joy 
as well as sorrow, yet they are never visible in his face. 


11. He sympathises with the unhappy, and congratulates with happy 
people; but his collected mind is always invincible, in every circumstance of 
life. 


12. His mind is not inclined to acts, beside those of righteousness; as it is 
the wont of noble-minded men by their nature, and not any effort on their part. 


13. He is not fond of pleasantry, nor is he addicted to dullness either; he 
does not hanker after wealth, but is inappetent and impossible with all his 
appetites and sensibleness. 


14. He abides by law and acts accordingly, whether he is pinched by 
poverty, or rolling in riches; nor is he ever dejected or elated, at the 
unforeseen good or bad events of life. 


15. They are seen to be joyous and sorrowful also at times, without 
changing the sedateness and serenity of their nature at any time. They act the 
part of players on the stage of the earth (that display many figures in their 
outward mein). 


16. Those that know the truth, bear no more affection for their mercenary 
relatives and false friends, than they look upon the bubbles of water (that 
swell and swim, only to burst in a moment). 


17. Without the affection of the soul, they bear full affection for others in 
their hearts; and the wise man remains quite possessed of himself, with 
showing his paternal affection to all. (Universal benevolence). 


18. The ignorant are as the winds passing over running streams; they 
slightly touch the poisonous pleasures of their bodies, as the winds touch the 
rising waves, and are at last drowned in the depth of their sensuality. 


19. But the wise man deals outwardly alike with all, with perfect coolness 
and stillness of his soul within himself; he seems outwardly to be engaged in 
business, but his inward mind is wholly disengaged from all worldly concerns 
whatsoever. 


20. Rama rejoined: — But how can a true sage of such nature, be 
distinguished from the many pretended ones and the ignorant also, who 
assume such a character falsely only to beguile others. 


21. Many hypocrites rove about as horses, in the false garb of devotees, for 
the assurance of mankind in their devout devotedness to religion. 


22. Vasishtha replied: — I say Rama, that such a nature (or disposition), 
whether it is real or feigned, is the best and highest perfection of man; and 
know that, the learned in Vedic lore, have always this state as the model of 
perfection in their view. 


23. Those who are dispassionate and unconcerned with acts, manage still to 
conduct their secular affairs and actions, like those that are actuated by their 
passions; and though they are averse to derision, yet they cannot help to 
deride at the ignorant from their kind-heartedness towards them. 


24. The visibles are all imprest in the mirror of their minds, as the shades of 
edifices are reflected in a reflector; they look upon them with full knowledge 
of their shadowiness, as they perceive the fallacy of their laying hold on a 
lump of gold in dream. 


25. There is a coolness pervading their minds, which is altogether unknown 
to others; just as the sweet fragrance of the sandal wood, is unperceived by 
brutes at a distance. 


26. They that know the knowable, and are equally pure in their minds, can 
only distinguish them from other people, as a snake only can trace the course 
of another snake. 


27. They are the best of men, that hide their good qualities from others; for 
what man is there that will expose his most precious treasure in the market, 
along with the raw produce of his land? (i.e., The hidden virtues of a man, 
unlike the aroma of flowers, aught not to be laid open before the public). 


28. The reason of concealing the rare virtues, is to keep them unnoticed by 
the public; because the wise who are undesirous of reward or reputation, have 
nothing to reap or expect from the public. 


29. Know Rama, that solitude, poverty and disrespect and disregard of 
men, are more pleasing to the peaceful sage; than the most valuable gifts and 
honors from mankind. 


30. The ineffable delight which attends on the wise man, from his 
conscious knowledge of the knowable; inexpressible in words, and invisible 
to others as to its knower also. (The secret joy of divine knowledge and grace, 
is felt unseen by the holy sage). 


31. Let men know this qualification of mine, and honour me for it, is the 
wish of the egotist, and not of that are from their egoistic feelings. 


32. It is possible even to the ignorant, to succeed to reap the results of their 
practices, such as their rising and moving about in the air (and upon the 
surface of water); by means of mantras, and the power of certain drugs, that 
are adapted to those ends. 


33. He who can afford to take the pains to any particular end; succeeds to 
accomplish the same, whether he is a clever or ignorant man. (Success 
depends on action, and not on knowledge alone). 


34. Tendencies to good or evil, are implanted in the bosom of man, as 
results of the acts of their past lives; and these come to display themselves 
into action at their proper time, as the sandal wood emits its latent fragrance in 
its season all around. 


35. He who is prepossessed with the knowledge of his egoism, coupled 
with his desire for enjoyment of the visibles; he betakes himself to the 
practice of khechari-yoga, whereby he ascends in the air, and reaps the reward 
of his action. 


36. The wise man that has nothing to desire, knows such practices to be as 
false as empty air; and refrains from displaying his actions, which he knows at 
best but cast to the winds. 


37. He derives no good from his observance of practical Yoga, nor does he 
lose aught of his holiness by his non-observance of them; and neither has he 
anything to gain from anybody, nor lose a mite at the loss of anything. 


38. There is nothing in earth or heaven, nor among the gods nor anywhere 
else, which may be desirable to the magnanimous, and to one who has known 
the supreme soul. 


39, What is this world to him, who knows it to be but a heap of dust, and 
deems it no better than a straw. What then is that thing in it, which may be 
desirable to him? 


40. The silent sage whose soul is full of knowledge, and whose mind is 
quite at rest from its fondness for human society; remains content in the state 
as he is, and quite satisfied with whatever occurs to him. 


41. He is always cool within himself and taciturn in his speech, and eternal 
truths form the ground work of his mind; which is as full and deep as the 
ocean, and whose thoughts are as bright as day light. 


42. He is as full of cool composure in himself, as a gladsome lake reposing 
with its limpid waters; and he gladdens also all others about him, as the fair 
face of the full-moon, cheers the spirits of all around. 


43. The Mandara groves of Paradise, with their woodlands strewn over 
with the dust of their blossoms, do not delight the soul so much, as the wise 
sayings of pandits cheer the spirit. 


44. The disc of the moon diffuses its cooling beams, and the vernal season 
scatters its fragrance around; but the pithy sayings of the wise and great, 
scatter their sound wisdom all about, which serve to ennoble and enrich all 
mankind. 


45. The substance of their sayings, proves the erroneous conception of the 
world to be as false as a magic show; and inculcates the prudence of wearing 
out the worldly cares day by day. 


46. The wise saint is as indifferent, to the suffering of heat and cold in his 
own person; as if they are disturbances in the bodies of other men. (Or that he 
feels the pain of others as his own). 


47. In his virtues of compassion and charity, he resembles the fruitful tree, 
which yields its fruits, flowers, shed and all to common use, and subsists itself 
only upon the water, it sucks from the ground or receives from heaven. 


48. It deals out to everybody, whatever it is possessed of in its own body; 
and it is by virtue of its unsparing munificence to all creatures, that it lifts its 
lofty head above them all (or stretches its roots in air). 


49. One seated in the edifice of knowledge, has thought of sorrow for 
himself; but pities the sorrows of others, as a man seated on a rock, takes pity 
for the miserable men, grovelling in the earth below. 


50. The wise man is tossed about like a flower, by the rolling waves in the 
eventful ocean of this world; and is set at rest, no sooner he gets over it, and 
reaches the beach on the other side. (i.e., his way to bliss). 


51. He laughs with the calmness of his soul, at the same unvaried course of 
the world and its people; and smiles to think on the persistence of men, in 
their habitual error and folly. (The laughing philosopher). 


52. I am amazed to see these aberrant men, wandering in the mazes of 
error; and fascinated by the false appearances of the phenomenal world, as if 
they are spell-bound to the visibles. 


53. Seeing the eight kinds of prosperity to be of no real good, but rather as 
causes of evil to mankind, I have learnt to spurn them as straws; and though I 
am inclined to laugh at them, yet I forbear to do so from my habitual 
disposition of tolerance and forbearance. 


54. I see some men abiding in mountain caves, and others resorting to holy 


places; some living at home amidst their families, and others travelling as 
pilgrims to distant shrines and countries. 


55. Some roving about as vagrants and mendicants, and others remaining in 
their solitary hermitage; some continuing as silent sages, and observant of 
their vow of taciturnity; and others sitting absorbed in their meditation. 


56. Some are famed for their learning, and others as students of law and 
divinity; some are as princes and others their priests, while there are some as 
ignorant as blocks and stones. 


57. Some are adepts in their exorcism of amulets and collyrium, and others 
skilled in their sorcery with the sword, rod and magic wand; some are 
practiced in their aerial journey, and others in other arts and some in nothing 
as the ignorant pariahs. 


58. There are many that are employed in their ceremonial observances, and 
others that have abandoned their rituals altogether; some are as fanatics in 
their conduct, and others that indulge themselves in their peregrinations and 
vagrancy. 


59. The soul (that you wanted to know), is not the body nor its senses or 
powers; it is neither the mind nor the mental faculties, nor the feelings and 
passions of the heart. The soul is the Intellect which is ever awake, and never 
sleeps nor dies. 


60. It is never broken nor consumed, nor soiled nor dried up (by the death 
or burning of the body); it is immortal and omnipresent, ever steady and 
immovable, infinite and eternal. 


61. The man who has his soul, thus awakened and enlightened in himself; 
is never contaminated by anything (pure or impure), in whatever state or 
wherever he may happen to remain. 


62. Whether a man goes down to hell or ascends to heaven, or traverses 
through all the regions of air, or is crushed to death or pounded to dust; the 
immortal and undecaying Intellect which abides in him, never dies with his 
body, nor suffers any change with its change; but remains quite as quiet as the 
still air, which is the increate Deity itself. 


CHAPTER CIII. 
Proof of the Unity of the Deity Amidst the Variety 
of Creation. 


Argument: — The Unity, Eternity and tranquility of the Intellect, and the 
preference of this Sdstra to others. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Intellect which is without its beginning and end, 
and is the ineffable light and its reflection, and shines forever serenely bright, 
is never destroyed or extinguished in any wise. 


2. Such is the Intellect and so too the soul, which is indestructible also; for 
it were destroyed at all at any time; there could neither be the recreation of the 
world (without a cause), nor any regeneration of human souls, (if they were 
dead upon the death of the former generations of men). 


3. All things are subject to change, and have many varieties under them; 
but not so the Intellect, which is ever immutable, and always perceived to be 
the same in all individuals. 


4. We all feel the coldness of frost, the heat of fire, and sweetness of water; 
but we have no feeling of any kind regarding the Intellect, except that we 
know it to be quite clear and pellucid as open air. (The gloss explains it to 
mean, the unchangeableness of the soul in heat and cold, which affect the 
bodies and minds of all). 


5. If the intellectual soul is destroyed at the destruction of the body, say 
then why should you lament at its loss, and not rejoice at its annihilation, 
which releases you from the pains of life? 


6. The loss of the body entails no loss on the vacuous intellect; because the 
departed souls of mlechchha savages, are seen to hover over the cemetery by 
their living friends. 


7. Should the soul be synchronous with the duration of the body, then say, 
why a death body does not move about, while it is yet unrotten and entire. 


8. If the seeing of apparitions, be an affection con-natural with the mind; 
then tell me why a man does not often see the sight of ghosts, except on the 
occasion of the demise of his friends. 


9. Should it be a misconception connate with the mind, to see the 
apparitions of departed friends; tell me then, why don’t you see the ghosts of 
friends that are dead in a distant country, but of such only as die before your 
eyes. 


10. Hence the Intellect, being the soul of all and everywhere, it is not 
confined in any place; but it is known to be of the same nature, as everyone 
thinks it to be. 


11. It is unconfined and unrestrained anywhere, and is of the nature of one 
compact consciousness that is felt by all, and is the cause of our knowledge of 
all things. (It is of what we have a notion only). 


12. There can be no other, which may be supposed as the prime cause of 
all, at the beginning of creation. Should there be any other that is supposed to 
be as such, let the doctrinaires now declare it before me. 


13. There was nothing uncreated before creation, nor was there anything 
created in the beginning; the duality that at present, presents itself in the form 
of the universe, is but a réchauffé or reflexion of the unity. 


14. The phenomenal is no more than a reflexion or copy of the noumenal, 
and our impression of its being a visible something, is as erroneous as all 
other false sights, which are mistaken for the true reality. (These errors are the 
sights of silver in sands, of water in the sandy desert, and of airy castle in the 
northern skies). 


15. It is a wonder of the almighty power, exhibited in the sphere of the 
Divine Intellect; it is the wakeful understanding that sees these visibles, as one 
sees the sights in his dream, but never in his ignorance of sound sleep. 


16. The wakefulness and insensibility of the understanding, both amount to 
the same thing; because the difference of the visible world is only verbal and 
not real; since nothing that is visible to the eye, is substantial in its essential 
nature. (Hence the perception of the visibles, is alike to their non-perception 
of them). 


17. Whatever was thought and said to be visibles by others, the same was 
the effect of their error and want of reason; and now if they are disproved by 
right season, where can you find the visibles anymore. 


18. Therefore, employ your reasoning now, in the investigation of spiritual 


knowledge; because by your diligent and persevering inquiry in this respect, 
you will secure to yourself the success in both worlds. (So says the sruti: — 
“By thy constant study of the subject, thou shalt see thy god”). 


19. Inquiry into spiritual knowledge, will dispel thy ignorance; but thou 
wilt never be successful in it, without thy constant application to it. 


20. Leaving aside all anxieties and their causes, and of every jot and 
moment of time in the observance of one’s sacred vows day by day, and the 
study of this sacred Sdstra with due attention, leads him to his welfare in both 
worlds. 


21. Whether one is proficient or not in his spiritual knowledge, he may still 
improve in it, by his constant communication of it and discussion on the 
subject with his superiors. 


22. Whoso requires this precious treasure (of his knowledge), he must exert 
for its attainment at the same ratio to be successful in it; or else he must leave 
off altogether, if he tires in his pursuit. 


23. He must also keep himself from the perusal of heretical works, and 
betake himself to the study of orthodox Sdstras; and he will then gain his 
peace of mind by these, as one obtains victory in warfare (so should one fight 
for the salvation of his soul). 


24. The course of the mind, like that of a stream of water, runs both in the 
channels of wisdom as well as folly; and forms a lake wherever it runs more 
rapidly, and settles as in its bed. 


25. There was never a better Sdstra than this, nor is any such extant at 
present, nor is likely to be in vogue in future; there let the student cogitate 
well its doctrines, for the edification of his understanding. 


26. Whoso heeds it well in himself, will find his mind instantly elevated 
with superior knowledge; and like the effect of a curse or blessing, which 
comes too late upon its recipient. (The efficacy of wisdom is instantaneous). 


27. The knowledge of his Sdstra, is calculated to do you more good, than 
you can derive from the tender care of a father or mother; or the efficacy of 
your pious actions. 


28. Know, O holy man, this world is the prison-house of thy soul, and its 
cares as the cholic pain of thy mind; and there is no release nor redress from 
these, beside the knowledge of thy soul (which is a spark of the supreme). 


29. It is the dark illusion of gross ignorance, that hath misled thee to the 
sense of thy egoism; and it is now by your reflection on the purport of the 


Sdstras only, that you can be freed from your deplorable state. 


30. The world is a hollow cave, where the horrid hydra of illusion lies in 
ambush; and feeds on the empty air of vain enjoyments, that appear at first 
pleasant to taste, but prove to be as fleeting as empty air at last. 


31. Pity it is that thy days are flying as fleet as the wind, and thou art 
insensible of their advents and exits; and while thou art employed in thy 
dealings, thou art fostering thy death in thy negligence. 


32. We all live in death, and our lives are sustained by alternate hopes and 
fears; until the few days of our life-time terminate in death. 


33. The approach of death, is attained with extreme pain and remorse; 
when the inner parts of the body are separated from the outer, which must be 
besmeared with dust as with the paste of sandal wood. 


34. They are grossly ignorant and erroneous, who purchase their wealth and 
honour at the expense of their lives; and avoid to gain their permanent bliss by 
the precepts of the Sdstras. 


35. Why should he bear the feet of his vile enemies on his head, (i.e., bow 
down his head before the meanly great); when he can attain his highest station 
of divine bliss in the sphere of his intellect, and with little or no pain. 


36. Shun ye men, your vanity and ignorance; and to persist in the course of 
your baseness; and then you will gain by the knowledge of the great soul, 
your redemption from the tribulations of the world (which is a sea of 
troubles). 


37. Seeing me in this manner, preach to you incessantly by day and night, 
for the sake of your good only; do you take my advice to turn your souls to 
the eternal soul, by forsaking the knowledge of your persons for that of your 
souls. 


38. If you neglect to make a remedy today, against the evil of your 
impending death; say, O silly man, what amends can you make for the hour of 
death, when you are laid in your sickbed. 


39. There is no other work except this, for the true knowledge of the soul; 
and this therefore, must be acceptable to you in the same manner, as the 
sesame seeds are collected, for the sake of getting their oil. 


40. This book will enlighten your spiritual knowledge, as a lamp lightens a 
dark room; drink it deep and it will enliven your soul, keep it by your side, 
and it will please you as a consort. 


41. A man having his knowledge, but untaught in the Sdstras, has many 
things unintelligible and doubtful to him; which he will find to be clearly 
expounded to him in the sweetest language. 


42. This is the best narrative among the principle works, which are taken in 
the light of Sdstras; it is easily intelligible and delightful, and has nothing new 
in it, except what is well known in spiritual philosophy. 


43. Let a man peruse with delight, the many narrations that are contained 
herein; and he will undoubtedly find this book, the best of its kind (on account 
of elaborate disquisition in this abstruse subject). 


44. Whatever has not yet appeared in full light, even to Pandits, — learned 
in all the Sdstras; the same will be found to appear in this book, as they find 
gold to appear amidst the sand. 


45. The authors of Sdstras are not to be despised at any time or in any 
country; but the reader should employ his reason and judgement, to dive into 
the true meaning of the writing. 


46. Those who are led by their ignorance or envy, or actuated by their pride 
and delusion to disregard and slight this Sdstra out of their want of 
judgement; are to be regarded as killers of their souls, and unworthy of the 
company of the wise and good. 


47. I know you well Rama, and this audience of mine, as well as your 
capacities to learn, and mine to instruct you; hence it is of my compassion to 
you that I like to teach you these things, as I am naturally communicative and 
kindly disposed to my hearers. 


48. I find the development of your understandings, and therefore, take 
interest to communicate my knowledge to you; and as I am a man and not a 
Gandharva or Rakshasa, I bear a fellow feeling towards you all. 


49. I see you all as intelligent beings, and pure in your souls also; it is by 
virtue of these merits in you that I have become so friendly to you. 


50. Now my friends, learn betimes to glean the truth of your unfondness for 
or indifference to everything you see in this world, (because there is nothing 
which is truly desirable herein). 


51. Whoso neglects to remedy his diseases, of death and hell fire in this 
life; say what will he do to avert them when they are irremediable, and when 
he goes to a place, where no remedy is to be sought. 


52. Until you feel a distaste for everything in this world, so long you cannot 
find any abatement of your desires in you. (It is better your desires to 


suppress, than toil and moil along to seek their redress). 


53. There is no other means to elevate your soul, than depressing your 
desires to the lowest ebb, (but the more you allow your wishes to grow and 
flow, the more you bind the soul and sink below). 


54. If there be anything here, you think to be good for you; they serve at 
best but to bind your soul, and then disappear as the horn of a hare. (All 
tempting good, is as fleeting as a dream). 


55. All earthly goods seem to be good, when they are untried and least 
understood; but the seeming something proves no such thing, or tends to your 
ruin at last. (All seeming good is positive evil). 


56. All worldly existences prove to be nil, by the right reasoning (of 
Vedanta philosophy; though they are declared as real by Kapila, Kanada and 
others); but how they are real and what they are, whether self-existent or 
made, or permanent or temporary, (cannot rightly be known). 


57. To say all worldly existences are self-existent, for having no prior cause 
assigned to them, nor being created in the beginning, would prove all that is 
existent, to be the increate and everlasting supreme being itself. 


58. There is no causality of sensible bodies, in the Being that is without and 
beyond the senses (the lord having no organ of sense, nor being perceptible by 
the senses as all material objects); nor is the mind the cause of sensible 
objects, (that have the six organs and are perceptible by them); the mind being 
but the sixth organ only. 


59. How can the one unspeakable Lord, be the varied cause of these 
varieties of things, passing under various denominations. How can the reality 
have these unrealities in itself, and how can the Infinite Void, contain these 
finite solid bodies in it? 


60. It is the nature of a plastic body to produce a thing of a plasmic from it, 
as the seeds of fruits bring forth their own kinds only; but how is it possible 
for an amorphous void, to produce solid forms from its vacuity, or the solid 
body to issue forth formless mind. 


61. How can you expect to derive a solid seed from a void nothing, and 
therefore, it is a deception to think the material world to be produced, from the 
immaterial and formless void of the vacuous intellect. 


62. There are no conditions, of the creator and creation in the supreme 
being; these states are the fabrications of verbiage, and bespeak the ignorance 
of their inventors (in the true knowledge of the deity). 


63. The want of co-ordinate causes, (such as the material and formal 
causes), aS co-existent with the prime and efficient cause; disproves the 
existence of an active agent and his act of creation; and this truth is evident 
even to boys. 


64. The knowledge of God alone as the sole cause, and yet acknowledging 
the causality of the earth and other elements; is as absurd as to say that, the 
sun shines and yet it is dark. (i.e., As light and darkness cannot reign together, 
so the spirit and matter cannot abide simultaneously from all eternity, which 
would amount to the belief of a duality). 


65. To say that the world is the aggregate of atoms, or an atomic formation, 
is as absurd as to call a bow made of the horn of a hare. (This is a refutation of 
the Buddhistic doctrine of the formation of the visible world, from the 
aggregation of eternal invisible atoms). 


66. If the concourse and collocation of the dull, inert and insensible 
material atoms would form the world; it would of its own accord make a 
mountainous heap here, and a bottomless deep there in the air (and not a work 
of such design which must be the product of infinite Intelligence). 


67. Again, the particles of this earth, and the atoms of air and water, are 
flying every day in the forms of dust and humidity from house to house and 
from place to place, and why do they not yet form a new hill or lake anywhere 
again? (Why no new world again). 


68. The invisible atoms are never to be seen, nor is it known whence, or 
where and how they are; nor is it possible to form an idea of the formless 
atoms, to unite together and form a solid mass. (Shapeless simples are 
indivisible and incohesive. Aphorism). And again, it is impossible for the dull 
and insensible atoms to form anything. 


69. The creation of the world, is never the work of an unintelligent cause; 
nor is this frail and unreal world ever the work of an intelligent maker also; 
because none but a fool makes any for nothing. 


70. The insensible air which is composed of atoms, and has a motion of its 
own, is never actuated by reason or sense; nor is it possible to expect the 
particles of air to act wisely (as they prayed in their hymns to the maruta 
winds). 


71. (What then are these if not composed of atoms?) We are all composed 
of intellectual soul, and all individuals are made of the vacuous selves; and 
they all appear to us, as the figures of persons appearing in our dream. 


72. Therefore, there is nothing that is created, nor is this world in existence; 


the whole is the clear void of the intellect, and shines with the glare of the 
Supreme soul in itself. 


73. The vacuous universe rests completely in the vacuum of the Intellect, as 
force (or vibration), fluidity and vacuity, rest respectively in the wind, water 
and in the open air. 


74. The form of the intellectual vacuum, is as that of the airy mind, which 
passes to distant climes in a moment (and yet holds its seat in the hollowness 
of the brain); or as that of consciousness which is seated in the hollow of the 
heart, and is yet conscious of everything in itself. 


75. Such is the vacuous nature of all things, as they are perceived in their 
intellectual forms only in intellect (which retains their vacuous ideas only on 
the hollow understanding); and so the world also is an empty idea only 
imprinted in the intellect. 


76. It is the rotatory nature of the Intellect, which exhibits the picture of the 
universe on its surface; wherefore, the world is identic and not otherwise than 
the vacuous nature of the intellect. 


77. Therefore, the world is the counter part of the intellectual sphere, and 
there is no difference in the vacuous nature, of either of them. They are both 
the same thing presenting but two aspects, as the wind and its undulations are 
one and the same thing. 


78. As a wise man going from one country to another, finds himself to be 
the same person wherever he goes; and though he sees all the varieties around 
him, yet he knows himself as the self-same quiet and unvaried soul 
everywhere. 


79. The wise man remains in the true nature of the elements, hence the 
elements never go off from the mind of the wise man. 


80. The world is a vacuous sphere of reflections only, resembling a concave 
reflector; it is a formless void in its nature, and is unimpaired and 
indestructible in its essence. 


81. There is nothing that is born or dies in it, nor any thing which having 
once come to being, is annihilated ever afterwards anywhere; it is not apart 
from the vacuum of the Intellect, and is as void as the inane world itself. 


82. The world never is, nor was, nor shall ever be in existence; it is but a 
silent semblance of the representation passing in the intellectual vacuity of the 
supreme spirit. 


83. The Divine Intellect alone shines forth in its glory, as the mind exhibits 


its images of cities, efc., in dream; in the like manner our minds represent to 
us the image of world, as day dreams in our waking state. 


84. There being no being in the beginning, how could there be the body of 
anything in existence; there was therefore no corporeality whatever except in 
the dream of the Divine mind. 


85. The supreme Intellect dreams of its self-born (or uncreated) body at 
first; and we that have sprang from that body, have ever afterwards continued 
to see dream after dream to no end. (The world is a dream both in the mind of 
God and men). 


86. It is impossible for us with all our efforts, to turn our minds to the great 
God; because they are not of the nature of the divine intellect, but born in us 
like carbuncles on the goitre, for our destruction only. 


87. The god Brahma is no real personage, but a fictitious name for 
Hiranya-garbha or totality of souls (AAf®), but ever since he is regarded as a 
personal being, the world is considered as body and He the soul of all. 


88. But in truth all is unreal, from the highest empyrean to the lowest pit; 
and the world is as false and frail as a dream, which rises in vain before the 
mind, and vanishes in a minute. 


89. The world rises in the vacuity of the Intellect, and sets therein as a 
dream; and when it does not rise in the enlightened intellect, it is as a 
disappearing from the waking mind, and flying before day light. 


90. Although the world is known as false, yet it is perceived and appears as 
true to us; in the same manner as the false appearances in our dream, appear 
true to our consciousness at the time of dreaming. 


91. As the formless dream presents many forms before the mind; so the 
formless world assumes many shapes before our sight; and all these are 
perceived in our consciousness, which is as minute in respect of the infinite 
space and sky, as an atom of dust is too small in regard to the Meru mountain. 
(i.e., the minim of our consciousness, contained in the breast, is an 
imperceptible particle only of sand in it). 


92. But how can this consciousness, which is but another name of Brahma, 
be any what smaller than the sky (when it contains the skies in itself); and 
how can the vacuous world have any solid form, when it has no formal cause 
to form it so. (God being a formless being, could not give a form and figure to 
anything, and which is therefore, ideal only). 


93. Where was there any matter or mould, where from this material world 


was moulded and formed (as we make our houses from the pre-existing mud 
and clay of the earth); whatever we see in the sphere of waking minds in the 
day light, is similar to the baseless dreams, which we see in the empty space 
of our sleeping minds, in the darkness of the night. 


94. There is no difference between the waking and sleeping dreams, as 
there is none between the empty air and the sky; whatever is pictured in the 
sphere of the intellect, the same is represented as the aerial castle in the 
dream. 


95. As the wind is the same with its undulation, so the rest and vibration of 
the spirit is both alike, as the air and vacuum is the one and same thing. 


96. Hence it is the intellectual sphere only, which represents the picture of 
the world; the whole is a void and without any support, and splendour of the 
luminary of the intellect. 


97. The whole universe is in a state of perfect rest and tranquility, and 
without its rising or setting; it is as a quiet and unwasting block of stone, and 
ever shining serenely bright. 


98. Say therefore, whence and what are these existent beings, and how 
comes this understanding of their existence; where is there a duality or unity, 
and how came these notions of egoism and distinct personalities. 


99. Be ever prompt in your actions and dealings, with an utter indifference 
to everything, and unconcern about unity or duality; and preserve an even and 
cool disposition of your inward mind. Remain in the state of nirvana, with 
your extinguished passions and feelings, and free from disease and anxiety. 
Be aloof from the visibles, and remain in the manner of a pure Intelligence 
only. 


100. This chapter is a lecture on entity and non-entity; and establishment of 
the spirituality of the universe. 


CHAPTER CIV. 
Establishment of the Non-entity of the World. 


Argument: — The Notion of the Intellect, analogous to that of the wind and 
Air. 


Vasishtha continued: — The sky is the receptacle of sound, and the air is 
perceptible to the feeling; their friction produces the heat, and the subsidence 
or removal of heat, causes the cold and its medium of water. 


Note. — The sky or vacuum is the taumatra or identic with the sound or word; 
and the void and its sound are both uncreated and eternal. (sabdho ajonitath 
great Satfcard). So it said: — In the beginning was the word, (sound), the word 
was with god, (vacuity), and the word was god, (atmd), the spirit or air. 


2. The earth is the union of these, and in this way do they combine to form 
the world, appearing as a dream unto us, or else how is it possible for a solid 
body, to issue forth from the formless vacuum. 


3. If this progression of productions, would lead us too far beyond our 
comprehension; but it being so in the beginning, it brings no blemish in the 
pure nature of the vacuous spirit, (for its gradual productions of air, heat, 
water, efc.). 


4. Divine Intelligence also is a pure entity, which is manifest in the self- 
same spirit; the same is said to be the world, and this most certain truth of 
truths. (Because Omniscience includes in it the knowledge of all things; which 
is the true meaning of the text, [Sanskrit: sarvam khalvidam brahma] all this 
verily Brahma or full of the intelligence of God). 


5. There are no material things, nor the five elements of matter anywhere; 
all these are mere unrealities, and yet they are perceived by us, like the false 
appearance in our dream. 


6. As a city and its various sights, appear very clear to the mind in our 
sleeping dreams; so it is very pleasant to see the dream like world, shining so 
brightly before our sight in our waking hours. 


7. | am of the nature of my vacuous intellect, and so is this world of the 
same nature also; and thus, I find myself and this world, to be of the same 
nature, as a dull and insensible stone. 


8. Hence, the world appears as a shining jewel, both at its first creation, as 
well as in all its kalpdnta or subsequent formations (because it shines always 
with the effulgence of the Divine Intellect). 


9. Whether the body be something or nothing in its essence, its want of 
pain and happiness of the mind, is the form of its state of moksha or 
liberation; and its rest with a peaceful mind and pure nature, is reckoned its 
highest state of bliss. 


CHAPTER CV. 
Likeness of Waking and Sleeping Dreams. 


Argument: — The Identity of the Intellect by day and night, proves the 
sameness of its day and night dreams. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Intellect conceives the form of the world, of its 
own intrinsic nature; and fancies itself in that very form, as it were in a dream. 
(The subjective Intellect, sees itself in the form of the objective world). 


2. It feigns itself as asleep while it is waking, and views the world either as 
a solid stone, or as a void as the empty air. 


3. The world is compared to a dream, exhibiting a country embellished 
with a great many cities; and as is no reality in the objects of dream, so there 
is no actuality in anything appearing in this world. 


4. All the three worlds are as unreal, as the various sights in a dream; and 
they are but day dreams to us even when we are awake. (The Intelligent 
dream by day light, as the ignorant do in the shade of night). 


5. Whether in waking or sleeping, there is nothing named as the world (or 
the turning sphere); it is but the empty void, and at best but an air-drawn 
picture in the hollow of the Intellects. 


6. It is a wondrous display of the Intellect in its own hollowness, like the 
array of hills and mountains in the midway firmament; the sense of the world 
is as a waking dream in the minds of the wise. 


7. This world is nothing in its substance, nor is it any thing of the form of 
Intellect; it is but a reflexion of the Intellect, and the vacuity of the intellectual 
world, is but an empty nothing. 


8. The triple world is only a reflexion, and like the sight of something in 
dream, it is but an airy nothing; it is the empty air which becomes thus 
(diversified), and is entirely bodiless, though seeming to be embodied in our 
waking state. 


9. It is inventive imagination of men, that is ever busy even in the hours of 
sleep and dreaming; and presents to us with many creations that were never 
created, and many unrealities appearing as real ones. 


10. The universe appears as an extensive substantiality, implanted in the 
bosom of endless vacuity; but this huge body, with all its mountains and 
cities, is in reality no other than the original vacuum. 


11. The howling of the sea, and clattering of clouds on mountains, though 
they are so very tremendous to the waking; are yet unheard by the sound 
sleeper by his side. (So the pomp of the world, is unseen by the blind). 


12. As a widow dreams her bringing forth a son in her sleep, and as a man 
thinks to be ever living, by forgetfulness of his past death, and being reborn 
again; so are men unmindful of their real state. 


13. The real is taken for the unreal and unreal for the real; as the sleeping 
man forgets his bed room, and thinks himself elsewhere; so everything turns 
to be otherwise, as the day turns to night and the night changes to day. 


14. The unreal soon succeeds the real, as night, — the want of light 
succeeds the light of the day; and the impossible also becomes possible, as 
when a living person sees his death, or thinks himself as dead in his sleep. 


15. The impossible becomes possible, as the supposition of the world in the 
empty void; and the darkness appears as light, as the night time seems to be 
daylight to the sleeping and dreaming man at night. 


16. The daylight becomes the darkness of night, to one who sleeps and 
dreams in the daytime, (as it is to owls and bats and so to cats and rats); the 
solid ground seems to be hollow, to one who dreams of his being cast into a 
pit. 

17. As the world appears to be a nullity in our sleep at night, and so it is 
reality even in our waking state, and there is no doubt of it. (It is doubtful that 
the world exists, but no doubt in its inexistence). 


18. As the two suns (of yesterday and today), are the one and same with 
one another, and as two men are of the same kind; so it is doubtless that the 
waking and sleeping states are alike to another. 


19. Rama rejoined: — That of course cannot be admissible and reliable as 
true, which is liable to objection and exception; the sight of a dream is but 
momentary and falsified upon our waking; wherefore, it cannot be alike to the 
waking state. 


20. Vasishtha replied: — The disappearance of the dreamed objects upon 


waking, does not prove their falsity, nor make any difference between the two 
states of dreaming and waking; because the objects which one sees in his 
dream, are like those that a traveller sees in foreign country, which are lost 
upon his return to his own country, and the sights of this are soon lost upon 
his death. Hence both are true for the time being, and both proved equally 
false and fleeting at last. 


21. A man being dead, he is separated from his friends, as from those he 
sees in his dream; and then the living is said to be awakened, as when a 
sleeper awakes from his slumber. 


22. After seeing the delusions of the states of happiness and misery, and 
witnessing the rotations of days and nights, and feeling many changes, the 
living soul at last departs from this world of dreams. 


23. After the long sleep of life, there comes at last an end of it at last; when 
the human soul becomes assured of the untruth of this world, and that the past 
was a mere dream. 


24. As the dreamer perceives his death in the land of his dream, so the 
waking man sees his waking dream of this world, where he meets with his 
death, in order to be reborn in it and to dream again. 


25. The waking beholder of the world, finds himself to die in the same 
manner in his living world; where he is doomed to be reborn, in order to see 
the same scenes and to die again. 


26. He who finds himself to die in the living world in his waking state, 
comes to revisit this earth, in order to see the same dreams, which he believed 
to be true in his former births. (Hence the sleeping and waking dreams, that 
view the same things over again, are both alike). 


27. It is the ignorant only, that believe their waking sights as true; while it 
is the firm conviction of the intelligent, that all these appearances are but day 
dreams at best. 


28. Taking the dreaming state for waking, and the waking one for 
dreaming, are but verbal distinctions implying the same thing; as life and 
death are meaningless words for the two states of the soul, which never born 
nor died. 


29. He who views his life and death in the light of a dream, is said to be 
truly waking; but the living soul that considers itself as waking and dying, is 
quite the contrary of it. 


30. Whoso dwells upon one dream after another, or wakes to see a waking 


dream; is as one who wakes after his death, and finds his waking also to be a 
dream. (All states of sleeping and waking, and of living and dying are mere 
dreams). 


31. Our waking and sleeping, are both as events of history to us; and are 
comparable to the past and present histories of nations. (Both being equally 
fleeting and fluctuating). 


32. The dream-sleep seems as waking, and the waking dream is no other 
than sleeping; they are both in fact but unrealities, and the mere réchauffé or 
reflexions of the intellectual sky. 


33. We find the moving and unmoving beings on earth, and creatures 
unnumbered all around us; but what do they all prove to be at last, than the 
representations of the eternal ideas in the Divine Intellect. 


34. As we can have no idea of a pot, without that of the clay which it is 
made of; so we can have no conception of the blocks of mould and stone, 
unless they were represented to our minds, from their prints in Divine 
Intellect. 


35. All these various things, which appear unto us both in our waking as 
well as dreaming states; are no other than the ideas of blocks, which are 
represented in our dreams from their archetypes in the Intellect. 


36. Now say, O Intelligent Rama, what else must this Intellect be, than that 
infinite and vacuous essence which acts in us, both in our dreaming and 
waking states. 


37. Know this Intellect to be the great Brahma, who is everything in the 
world, as if it were in the divided forms of his essence; and who is yet of the 
figure of the whole world, as if he were the undivided whole himself. (i.e., He 
is all and everything collectively and individually). 


38. As the earthen pot is not conceivable, without its formal substance of 
the earth; so the intellectual Brahma is inconceivable, without his essence of 
the Intellect. 


39. Again, as a stone-made jar is beyond our conception, save by the idea 
of its stony substance; so the spiritual God is beyond our comprehension, 
besides our idea of the spirit. 


40. As the water is a liquid substance, which cannot be conceived without 
its fluidity; so is Brahma conceived as composed of his chit or Intellect only, 
without which we can have no conception of him. 


41. So also we have the conception of fire by means of its heat, without 


which we have no concept of it; such too is our idea of God that he is the 
Intellect, and beside this we can form no idea of him. 


42. We know the wind by its oscillation only, and by no other means 
whatsoever; so is God thought as the Intellect or Intelligence itself; beside 
which we can have no notion of him. 


43. There is nothing, that can be conceived without its property; as we can 
never conceive vacuum to be without its vacuity, nor have any conception of 
the earth without its solidity. 


44. All things are composed of the vacuous Intellect, as the pot or painting 
appearing in the mind, is composed of the essence of the intellect only; and so 
the hills, etc., appearing in dream, are representation of the Intellect alone. 
(All the material world is composed of matter, so is the intellectual world 
made of intellect only). 


45. As we are conscious of the aerial sights of the hills and towns, 
presented to our minds in the dream; so we know all things in our conscious 
in our waking state also; so there is a quiet calm vacuity only both in our sleep 
and waking, wherein our intellect alone is ever busy to show itself in endless 
shapes before us. 


CHAPTER CVI. 
Invalidation of the Doctrine of Cause and Effect. 


Argument: — Arguments in proof of the intellectual vacuum, and the 
representation of the world therein. 


Rama said: — Tell me again, O Venerable Sir, how is intellectual vacuity 
which you say to be the entity of Brahma; because I am never satiate to hear 
the holy words, distilling as ambrosia from your lips. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — I have fully explained to you that the two states of 
sleeping and waking imply the same thing; as the twin virtues of composure 
and self-control are both the same, though they are differentiated by two 
names. 


3. There is in reality none difference of them, as there is none between two 
drops of water; they are both the one and same thing, as the vacuous essence 
of Brahma and the Intellect. 


4. As a man travelling from country to country, finds his self-consciousness 
to be everywhere the same; so and the very same is the Intellect, which dwells 
within himself in its vacuous form, and is styled the intellectual sphere. 


5. This intellectual sphere is as clear, as the ethereal sky; wherein the 
earthly arbours display their verdure, by drawing the moisture of the earth by 
their roots. (This passage rests on a text of the Sruti; and means that the 
intellectual sphere of men as the sky of trees is always clear, though they live 
upon the sap of earth). 


6. Again, the intellectual sphere is as calm and quiet, as the mind of a man, 
who is free from desires and is at rest in himself; and whose composure is 
never disturbed by anything. 


7. Again, the intellectual sphere is like the quiet state of am; who had got 
rid of his busy cares and thoughts, reposes himself at ease; before he is lulled 
to the insensibility of his sleep. 


8. Again, as trees and plants growing in their season, rise in and fill the sky, 
without being attached to it; such also is intellectual sphere, which is filled by 
rising worlds after worlds, without being touched by or related to any. 


9. Again, the intellectual sphere, is as clear as the cloudless sky; and as 
vacant as the mind of the saintly man, which is wholly purified from the 
impressions of visibles, and its thoughts and desires are about anything in the 
world. 


10. The intellectual state is as steady as those of the stable rocks and trees; 
and when such is the state of the human mind, it is then said to have attained 
its intellectuality, (or else its restless state is called the active mind and not the 
intellect). 


11. The intellectual chasm, which is void of the three states of the view, 
viewer and visibles (or the subjective and objective); is said to be devoid also 
of all its modality and change. (It means the imperceptibility of soul). 


12. That is called the intellectual sphere, where the thought of the various 
kinds of things, rise and last and set by turns, without making any effect of 
change in its immutable nature. 


13. That is said to be the intellectual sphere, which embraces all things, and 
gives rise to and becomes everything itself; and which is permeated 
throughout all nature forever. 


14. That which shines resplendent in heaven and earth, and in the inside 
and outside of everybody with equal blaze; is said to be the vacuity of the 
intellect. 


15. It extends and stretches through all, and bends altogether, connected by 
its lengthening chain to infinity; and the vacuity of the intellect envelops the 
universe, whether it rises before us an entity or non-entity. 


16. It is the intellectual vacuum which produces everything, and at last 
reduces all to itself; and the changes of creation and dissolution, are all the 
working of this vacuity. (But how can the vacuous nothing produce anything 
from itself or reduce any into it? (Ex nihilum nihil fit, et in nihilo nihil reverti 


posse; there the whole universe is a void nothing)). 


17. The vacuity of the intellect produces the world, as the sleeping state of 
the mind, presents its sights in our dream; and as the dream is dispersed in our 
deep sleep, so the waking dream of the world is vanished from view, upon 
dispersion of its fallacy from the mind. 


18. Know the intellectual vacuum to be possessed of its intellection, and as 
quiet and composed in its nature; and it is by a thought of it, as by twinkling 
or winking of the eye, that the world comes to exist and disappear by turns. 
(Manu calls these the waking and sleeping states of the soul, and as causes of 
the existence and inexistence of the world). 


19. The intellectual Vacuum is found in the disquisitions of all the Sdstras, 
to be what is neither this nor that nor any thing anywhere; and yet as all and 
everything in every place and at all times. (ie., Nothing concrete, but 
everything in the abstract). 


20. As a man travelling from country to country, retains his consciousness 
untravelled in himself; so the intellect always rests in its place in the interim, 
though the mind passes far and farther in an instant. 


21. The world is full of the intellect, both as it is or had ever been before; 
and its outward sight being dependent on its ideas in the mind, gives it the 
form and figure as they appear unto us. 


22. It is by a slight winking of its eye, that it assumes and appears in varied 
shapes; though the intellect never changes its form, nor alters the clearness of 
its vacuous sphere. 


23. Look on and know all these objects of sense, with thy external and 
internal organs, and without any desire of thine for them; be ever wakeful and 
vigilant about them, but remain as quite sleepy over them. 


24. Be undesirous of anything and indifferent in your mind, when you 
speak to any one, take anything or go anywhere; and remain as deadly cold 
and quiet, as long as you have to live. 


25. But it is impossible for you to remain as such, so long as you fix your 
eyes and mind on the visibles before you; and continue to view the mirage of 
the world, and look upon its duality rising as two moons in the sky. 


26. Know the world to be no production from the beginning; because the 
want of its prior cause prevents its sequence; and there is no possibility of a 
material creation, proceeding from an immaterial causality. 


27. Whatever appears as existent before you, is the product of a causeless 
cause; it is the appearance of the transcendent One, that appears visible to 
you. (The world is the visible form of the invisible One). 


28. The world as it stands at present, is no other than its very original form; 
and the same un-dual and undivided pure soul appears as a duality, as the disc 
of the moon and its halo present their two aspects to us. 


29. Thus, the strong bias that we have contracted from our false notion of 
the duality; has at last involved us in the error of taking the false for true, as to 
believe the shadow of a dream for reality. 


30. Therefore, the phenomenal world is no real production, nor does it 
actually exist or is likely ever to come to existence; it is likewise never 
annihilated, because it is impossible for a nihility to be nil again. 


31. Hence that thing which is but a form of the serene vacuum, must be 
quiet, calm and serene also; and this being exhibited in the form of the world, 
is of its own nature quite clear and steady, and imperishable to all eternity. 
(The Beo-vyom or vacuum being a void, cannot be annulled to a nullity 
again). 


32. It is nothing what is seen before us, nor aught that is visible, is ever 
reliable as real; neither also is there ever a viewer for want of visible, nor the 
vision of a thing without its view. 


33. Rama rejoined: — If it is such, then please to explain moreover, O most 
eloquent Sir, the nature of the visibles, their view, and viewer; and what are 
these that thus appear to our view? 


34. Vasishtha replied: — There being no assignable cause, for the 
appearance of the unreal visibles; their vision is but a deception, and yet it is 
maintained as true by the dogmatism of opponents. 


35. Whatever there appears as visible to the vision of the viewer, is all 
fallacy and offspring of the great delusion of Mdyd only. But the world in its 
recondite sense, is but a reflexion of the Divine mind. 


36. The intellect is awake in our sleeping state, and shows us the shapes in 
our dream, as the sky exhibits the various in its ample garden; thus, the 
intellect manifests itself in the form of the world in itself. 


37. Hence there is no formal cause or self-evolving element, since the first 
creation of the world; and that which sparkles anywhere before us, is only the 
great Brahma Himself, (not in his person or formless form, but in his spirit or 
intellectuality). 


38. It is the sunshine of the Intellect within its own hollow sphere, that 
manifests this world as a reflexion of his own person. 


39. The world is an exhibition of the quality, of the unqualified vacuity of 
the Intellect; as existence is the quality of existent beings, and as vacuity is the 
property of vacuum, and as form is the attribute of a material substance. 


40. Know the world as the concrete counterpart, of the discrete attribute of 
the transcendent glory of God; and as the very reflexion of it, thus visibly 
exposed to the view of its beholders. 


41. But there being in reality no duality whatever, in the unity of the 
Divinity; He is neither the reflector nor the reflexion himself; say who can 
ascertain what he is, or tell whether he is a being or not being, or a something 
or nothing. 


42. Rama rejoined: — If so it be as you say, that the Lord is neither the 
reflector nor reflexion, and neither the viewer nor the view. (i.e., if he is 
neither the prototype nor its likeness, and neither the subjective nor objective); 
then say what is the difference between the cause and effect, what is the 
source of all these, and if they are unreal why do they appear as realities? 


43. Vasishtha replied: — Whenever the Lord thinks on the manifestation of 
his intellect, He beholds the same at the very moment, and then becomes the 
subjective beholder of the objects of his own thought. 


44. The intellectual vacuum itself assumes the form of the world, as the 
earth becomes a hill, etc., by itself; but it never forgets itself for that form, as 
men do in their dream. Moreover, there is no other cause to move it to action, 
except its own free will. 


45. As a person changing his former state to a new one, retains his self- 
consciousness in the interim, so the Divine Intellect retains its identity, in its 


transition from prior vacuum to its subsequent state of the plenum. 


46. The thought of cause and effect, and the sense of the visible and 
invisible, proceed from errors of the mind and defects of vision; it is the 
erroneous imagination that frames these worlds, and nobody questions or 
upbraids himself for his error. The states of cause and effect, and those of the 
visible and invisible, efc., are mere phantoms of error, rising before the sight 
of the living soul and proceeding from its ignorance, and then its imagination 
paints these as the world, and there is nobody that finds his error or blame 
himself for his blunder. 


47. If there be another person, that is the cause, beholder and enjoyer of 
these, (other than the Supreme One), then say what is that person, and what is 
the phenomenal, that is the point in question; or it is liable to reproof. 


48. As the state of our sleep presents us only, an indiscernible vacuity of 
the Intellect, (which watches alone over the sleeping world); how then is it 
possible to represent the One soul as many, without being blamed for it? 


49. It is the self-existent soul alone, which presents the appearance of the 
world in the intellect; and it is the ignorance of this truth, which has led to the 
general belief of the creation of the world by Brahma. 


50. It is ignorance of this intellectual phenomenon, which has led mankind 
to many errors, under the different names of illusion or mdyd, of ignorance or 
avidyd, of the phenomenal or drisya, and finally of the world or jagat. 


51. The manifestation in the intellectual vacuum, takes possession of the 
mind like a phantom; which represents the unreal world as a reality before it, 
as the false phantom of a ghost, takes a firm hold on the mind of an infant. 


52. Although the world is an unreality, yet we have a notion of it as 
something real in our empty intellect; and this is no other than the 
embodiment of a dream, which shows us the forms of hills and cities in empty 
air. 


53. The intellect represents itself as a hill or a Rudra, or as a sea or as the 
God Virdj himself; just as a man thinks in his dream, that he sees the hills and 
towns in his empty mind. 


54. Nothing formal that has any form, can be the result of a formless cause 
(as God); hence the impossibility of the existence of the solid world, and of its 


formal causes of atomic elements, at the great annihilation both prior to 
creation, as also after its dissolution. It is therefore evident, that the world is 
ever existent in its ideal form only in the Divine Mind. 


55. It is a mere uncaused existence, inherent in its vacuous state in the 
vacuous Mind; and what is called the world, is no more than an emptiness 
appertaining to the empty Intellect. 


56. The minds of ignorant people are as glassy mirrors, receiving the dim 
and dull images of things set before their senses; but those of reasoning men 
are as clear microscopes, that spy the vivid light of the Divine Mind that 
shines through all. (This light is called Pratyagndndtma or the nooscopic 
appearance of Divine soul). 


57. Therefore, they are the best of men, who shun the sight of visible 
forms; and view the world in the light of intellectual vacuity; and remain as 
firm as rocks in the meditation of the steady Intellect, and place no faith or 
reliance on anything else. 


58. The Intellect shows the revolution of the world in itself by its incessant 
act of airy intellection; as the sea displays its circuition throughout the watery 
world, by the continual rotation of its whirlpools. 


59. As the figurative tree of our desire, produces and yields our wished for 
fruits in a moment, so the intellect presents everything before us, that is 
thought of in an instant. (It is the subjective mind, that shows the objects of its 
thought within itself). 


60. As the mind finds in itself, its wished-for gem and the fruit of its desire; 
in the same manner doth the internal soul, meet with its desired objects in its 
vacuous self in a minute. 


61. As a man passing from one place to another, rests calmly in the interim; 
such is the state of the mind in the interval of its thoughts, when it sees neither 
the one nor another thing. 


62. It is the reflection of the Intellect only, which shines clearly in 
variegated colours, within the cavity of its own sphere; and though devoid of 
any shape or colour, yet it exhibits itself like the vacuity of the sky, in the 
blueness of the firmament. 


63. Nothing unlike can result from the vacuous Intellect, other than what is 


alike inane as itself; a material production requires a material cause, which is 
wanting in the Intellect; and therefore, the created world is but a display of the 
Divine Mind, like the appearance of dreams before our sleeping minds. 


CHAPTER CVII. 
The Nature of Ignorance or Illusion of the Mind. 


Argument: — Proof of the cosmos as the reflexion of the gem of the 
Intellect, and the Immateriality of the objective material world. 


Vasishtha continued: — The world is the subjective Intellect and inborn in 
it, and not the objective which is perceived from without. It is the empty space 
of the Intellect which displays the noumenals in itself, and here the tripart or 
the triple state of the Intellect, its intellection and the chetya or intellectual, 
combine together. (i.e., The thinking principle, its thinking and thoughts all 
unite together). 


2. Here in its ample exhibition, all living beings are displayed as dead 
bodies; and I and you, he and it, are all represented as lifeless figures in a 
picture. 


3. All persons engaged in active life, appear here as motionless blocks of 
wood, or as cold and silent bodies of the dead; and all moving and unmoving 
beings, appear to be seen here as in the empty air. 


4. The sights of all things are exposed here, like the glare of the chrystalline 
surface of the sky; and they are to be considered as nothing, for nothing 
substantial can be contained in the hollow mind. 


5. The bright sun-beams and the splashing waves, and the gathering 
vapours in the air; present us with forms of shining pearls and gems in them, 
but never does anyone rely on their reality. 


6. So this phenomenon of the world, which appears in the vacuum of the 
Intellect; and seems to be true to the apprehension of everybody, yet it is 
never relied on by anyone. 


7. The Intellect is entangled in its false fancies, as a boy is caught in his 
own hobby; and dwells on the errors of unreal material things rising as smoke 


before it. 


8. Say ye boys, what reliance can you place on your egoism and meity, so 
as to say, “this is I, and that is mine.” Ah, well do I perceive it now, that it is 
the pleasure of boys, to indulge themselves in their visionary flights. 


9. Knowing the unreality of the earth and other things, men are yet prone to 
pass their lives in those vanities and in their ignorance of truth, they resemble 
the miners, who instead of digging the earth in search of gold, expect it to fall 
upon them from heaven. 


10. When the want of prior and co-ordinate causes, proves a priori the 
impossibility of the effect; so the want of any created thing, proves a 
posteriori the inexistence of a causal agent. (i.e., there is no creation nor its 
creator likewise). 


11. They who deal in this uncreated world, with all the unreal shadows of 
its persons and things; are as ignorant as madmen, who take a hobby to 
nourish their unborn or dead offspring. 


12. Whence is this earth and all other things, by whom are they made, and 
how did they spring to sight; it is the representation of the Intellectual 
vacuum, which shines in itself, and is quite calm and serene. 


13. The minds of those that are addicted to fancy to themselves, a causality 
and its effect, and their time and place; are thus inclined to believe in the 
existence of the earth, but we have nothing to do with their puerile reasoning. 


14. The world whether it is considered as material or immaterial, is but a 
display of the intellectual vacuum; which presents all these images like 
dreams to our minds, and as the empty sky shows its hues and figures to our 
eyes. 


15. The form of the vacuous intellect is without a form, and it is only by 
our percipience that we have our knowledge of it; it is the same which shows 
itself in the form of the earth, efc., and the subjective soul appears as the 
subjective world to our sight. 


CHAPTER CVIII. 
Description of the Knowledge and Ignorance Of 
The Soul. 


Argument: — The Knowledge of the objective continuing with our 
ignorance of the subjective and the story of the wise prince Vipaschit, 
attacked by his rude enemies. 


Rama rejoined: — He whose mind is bound by his ignorance, to the bright 
vividness of visible phenomenal; views the palpable scenes of the noumenal, 
as mere his idle dreams, and as visionary as empty air. 


2. Now, O sage, please to tell me again, the nature and manner of this 
ignorance of the noumenal; and to what extent and how long, does this 
ignorance of the spiritual bind fast a man. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, those that are besotted by their 
ignorance, think this earth and the elementary bodies, to be as everlasting as 
they believe Brahma to be. Now, O Rama! hear a tale on this subject. 


4. There is in some corner of the infinite space, another world with its three 
lokas of the upper and lower regions, in the manner of this terrestrial world. 


5. There is a piece of land therein, as beautiful as this land of ours; and is 
called the sama bhimi or level land, where all beings had their free range. 


6. In a city of that place, there reigned a prince well known for his learning, 
and who passed his time in the company of the learned men of his court. 


7. He shone as handsome as a swan in a lake of lotuses, and as bright as the 
moon among the stars; he was as dignified as the Mount Meru or polar 
pinnacle among mountains, and he presided over his council as its president. 


8. The strain of bards, fell short in the recital of his praises, and he was a 


firm patron of poets and bards, as a mountain is the support of its refugees. 


9. The prosperity of his valour flourished day by day, and stretched its 
lustre to all sides of the earth; as the blooming beauty of lotus blossoms, under 
the early beams of the rising sun, fills the landscape with delight every 
morning. 


10. That respectable prince of Brahmanic faith, adored fire as the lord of 
gods, with his full faith; and did not recognize any other god as equal to him, 
(Because agni is said to be the Brahma or father of the gods). 


11. He was beset by conquering forces, consisting of horse, elephants and 
foot soldiers; and was surrounded by his councillors, as the sea is girt by his 
whirlpools and rolling waters. 


12. His vast and unflinching forces, were employed in the protection of the 
four boundaries of his realm; as the four seas serve to gird the earth on all its 
four sides. 


13. His capital was as the nave of a wheel, the central point of the whole 
circle of his kingdom; and he was as invincible a victor of his foes, as the 
irresistible discus of Vishnu. 


14. There appeared to him once a shrewd herald, from the eastern borders 
of his state; who approached to him in haste, and delivered a secret message 
that was not pleasing unto him. 


15. Lord! may thy realm be never detached, which is bound fastly by thy 
arms, as a cow is tied to a tree or post; but hear me relate to you something, 
which requires your consideration. (The word go, — Greek. ge, — Persian. 
gao, — cow, means both the earth and a cow and hence their mutual simile). 


16. Thy chieftain in the east is snatched away from his post, by the 
relentless hand of a fever where upon he seems to have gone to the regions of 
death, to conquer as it were, the god Yama at thy behest. 


17. Then as thy chief on the south, proceeded to quell the borderers 
thereabouts; he was attacked by hostile forces who poured upon him from the 
east and west, and killed by the enemy. 


18. Upon his death as the chieftain of the west, proceeded with his army to 
wrest those provinces (from the hands of the enemy). 


19. He was met on his way, by the combined forces of the inimical princes 
of the east and south, who put him to death in his half way journey to the spot. 


20. Vasishtha continued: — As he was relating in this wise, another 
emissary driven by his haste, entered the court-hall with as great a rush, as a 
current of the deluging flood. 


21. He represented, saying: — O lord, the general of thy forces on the 
north, is overpowered by a stronger enemy, and is routed from his post, like 
an embankment broken down and borne away by the rushing waters. 


22. Hearing so, the king thought it useless to waste time, and issuing out of 
his royal apartment, he bade as follows. 


23. Summon the princes and chiefs and the generals and ministers, to 
appear here forthwith in their full armour; and lay open the arsenal, and get 
out the horrible weapons (of destruction). 


24. Put on your bodies your armours of mail, and set the infantry on foot; 
number the regiments, and select the best warriors. 


25. Appoint the leaders of the forces, and send the heralds all around; thus 
said the king in haste, and such was the royal behest. 


26. When the warder appeared before him, and lowly bending down his 
head, he sorrowfully expressed: — “Lord, the chieftain of the north is waiting 
at the gate, and expects like the lotus to come to thy sunlike sight.” 


27. The king answered: — Go thou quickly there, and get him to my 
presence; that I may learn from his report the sterling events of that quarter. 


28. Thus ordered, the warder introduced the northern chief to the royal 
presence; where he bent himself down before his royal lord, who beheld the 
chieftain in the following plight. 


29. His whole body and every part and member of it, was full of wounds 
and scars; it breathed hard and spouted out blood, and supported itself with 
difficulty. 


30. While he with due obeisance, and faltering breath and voice, and 
contortion of his limbs, delivered this hasty message to his sovereign. 


31. The chieftain said: — My lord, the three other chiefs of the three 
quarters, with numerous forces under them, have already gone to the realms of 
Yama, (Pluto), in their attempt to conquer death at thy behest. (Ze., to 
encounter the enemies on every side). 


32. Then the clansmen finding my weakness, to defend thy realms alone on 
this side, assembled in large numbers, and poured upon me with all their 
strength. 


33. I have with great difficulty, very narrowly escaped from them to this 
palace, all gory and gasping for life as you see; and pray you to punish the 
rebels, that are not invincible before your might. 


34. Vasishtha continued: — As the yet alive and wounded chieftain, had 
been telling his painful story in this manner to the king; there appeared on a 
sudden another person entering the palace after him, and speaking to the king 
in the following manner. 


35. O sovereign of men, the hostile armies of your enemies, likening the 
shaking leaves of trees, have all beset in great numbers, the skirts of your 
kingdom, on all its four sides. 


36. The enemy has surrounded our lands, like a chain of rocks all around; 
and they are blazing all about with their brandishing swords and spears, and 
with the flashing of their forest-like maces and lances. 


37. The bodies of their soldiers, with the flying flags and shaking weapons 
on them, appear as moving chariots upon the ground; while their rolling war- 
cars, seem as sweeping cities all about. 


38. Their uplifted arms in the air, appear as rising forests of fleshy arbours 
in the sky; and the resounding phalanx of big elephants, seem as huge bodies 
of rainy clouds roaring on high. 


39. The grounds seeming to rise and sink, with the bounding and bending 
of their snoring horses; give the land an appearance of the sea, sounding 
hoarsely under the lashing winds. 


40. The land is moistened and whitened around, by the thickening froth 
fallen from the mouths of horses; and bears its resemblance to the foaming 
main, fell with its salt spray all over. 


41. The groups of armed armaments in the field, resemble the warlike array 
of clouds in the sky; and likens to the huge surges, rising upon the surface of 
the sea, troubled by the gusts of the deluge. 


42. The weapons on their bodies, and their armours and coronets, are 
shining forth with a flash that equals the flame and fire of thy valour. 


43. Their battle array, in the forms of circling crocodiles and long 
stretching whales; resemble the waves of the sea, that toss about these marine 
animals upon the shore. 


44. Their lines of the lancers, etc., are advancing with one accord against 
us; and flashing with their furious rage and fire, are uttering and muttering 
their invectives to us. 


45. It is for this purpose, that I have come to report these things to my lord, 
so that you will deign to proceed in battle array to the borders, and drive these 
insurgents as weeds from the skirts. 


46. Now my lord, I take leave of you, with my bow and arrows and club 
and sword as I came, and leave the rest to your best discretion. 


47. Vasishtha added: — Saying so, and bending lowly to his lord, the 
emissary went out forthwith; as the undulation of the sea disappears, after 
making a gurgling noise. 


48. Upon this the king with his honorable ministers, his knights and 
attendants and servants; together with his cavalry and charioteers, the men and 
women and all the citizens at large were struck with terror; and the sentinels 
of the palace, trembled with fear, as they shouldered their arms and wielded 
their weapons, which resembled a forest of trees shaken by a hurricane. 


CHAPTER CIX. 
Fighting with the invading armies at the Gate of the 


City. 
Argument: — Adopting ways and means to quell the disturbances of the 
hostile enemies. 
Vasishtha continued: — In the meanwhile, the assembled ministers 


advanced before the king, as the sages of yore, resorted to the celestial Indra, 
being invaded by the Daityas, — Titans around. 


2. The ministers addressed: — Lord! We have consulted and ascertained, 
that as the enemy is irresistible by any of the three means (of peace, 
dissension and bribe or concession); they must be quelled by force or due 
punishment. 


3. When the proffer of amity is of no avail, and the offer of hostages doth 
also fail; it is useless to propose to them, any other term for a reconciliation. 


4. Vile enemies that are base and barbarous, that are of different countries 
and races, that are great in number and opulence; and those that are 
acquainted with our weakness and weak parts; are hardly conciliated by terms 
of peace or subsidy. 


5. Now there is no remedy against this insurrection, save by showing our 
valour to the enemy; wherefore, let all our efforts be directed, towards the 
strengthening of our gates and ramparts. 


6. Give orders to our bravos to sally out to the field, and command the 
people to worship and implore the protection of the gods; and let the generals 
give the war alarm with loud sounding drums and trumpets. 


7. Let the warriors be well armed, and let them rush to the field; and order 
the soldiers to pour upon the plains in all directions, as the dark deluging 


clouds inundate the land. 


8. Let the outstretched bows rattle in the air, and the bowstrings twang and 
clang all around; and let the shadows of curved bows, obscure the skies as by 
the clouds. 


9. Let the thrilling bow strings, flash as flickering lightnings in the air, and 
the loud war whoop of the soldiers, sound as the growling clouds above; let 
the flying darts and arrows fall as showers of rain, and make the combatants 
glare, with the sparkling gold rings in their ear. 


10. The king said: — Do you all proceed to the battle, and do promptly all 
what is necessary on this occasion; and I will follow you straightaway to the 
battle field, after finishing my ablution and the adoration of Agni, — the fiery 
god. 


11. Notwithstanding the important affairs, which waited on the king; yet he 
found a moment’s respite to bathe, by pouring potful’s of pure Ganga water 
upon him, in the manner of a grove watered by a showering of rain water. 


12. Then having entered his fire temple, he worshipped the holy fire with as 
much reverence, as it is enjoined in the Sdstras; and then began to reflect in 
himself, in the following manner. 


13. I have led an untroubled and easy life, passing in pleasure and 
prosperity; and have kept in security all the subjects of my realm stretching to 
the sea. 


14. I have subdued the surface of the earth, and reduced my enemies under 
my foot; and have filled the smiling land with plenty, under the bending skies 
on all sides. 


15. My fair fame shines in the sphere of heaven, like the clear and cooling 
beams of the lunar orb; and the plant of my renown, stretches to the three 
worlds, like the three branches of Gangd. 


16. I have lavished my wealth, to my friends and relatives, and to 
respectable Brahmans; in the manner, as I have amassed my treasures for 
myself; and I quenched my thirst with the beverage of the cocoanut fruits, 
growing on edges of the four oceans. (That is to say: — his realms were 
UgaleatAT or bounded by the four oceans on all sides). 


17. My enemies trembled before me for fear of their lives, and they 
groaned before me as croaking frogs with their distended pouches, and my 
rule extended over and marked the mountains, situated in the islands amidst 
the distant seas. 


18. I have roved with bodies of Siddhas, over the nine regions beyond the 
visible horizon; and I have rested on the tops of bordering mountains, like the 
flying clouds that rest on mountain tops. 


19. With my full knowing mind, and my perfection in Divine meditation; I 
have acquired my dominions entire and unimpaired, by cause of my good will 
for the public weal. (It means the prince’s high attainments in spiritual, 
intellectual as well as territorial concerns). 


20. I have manacled the lawless Rdakshasas, in strong chains and fetters; 
and kept my cares of religious duties, and those of my treasures and personal 
enjoyments within proper bounds, and without letting them clash with one 
another. 


21. I have passed my life time, in the uninterrupted discharge of those triple 
duties of mine; and have relished my life with great joy and renown. But now 
hoary old age hath come upon me, like the snow and frost fallen upon the 
withered leaf and dried straw. 


22. Now hath old age come, and blasted all my pleasures and efforts; and 
after all, these furious enemies have overpowered upon me, and are eager for 
warfare. 


23. They have poured upon me in vast numbers on all sides, and the victory 
is doubtful; it is therefore, better for me to offer myself as a sacrifice, to the 
god of this burning fire, which is known to crown its worshipper with victory. 


24. I will pluck this head of mine, and make an offering of it to the Fire- 
god, (as a fit fruit to the shrine; and say: — O Igneous god, I make here an 
offering of my head to thee). 


25. I give this offering, as I have ever before given my oblations to fire; 
therefore, accept of this also, O god, if thou art pleased with my former 
offerings. 


26. Let the four urns of thy fiery furnace, yield four forms of mine, with 
brilliant and strong bodies, like that of Narayana, with his mighty arms. 


27. Thus will I be enabled, with those four bodies of mine, to meet my 
enemies on all the four sides; and be invulnerable like thyself, by keeping my 
thought and sight, ever fixed in thee. 


28. Vasishtha replied: — So saying, the king took hold of a dagger in his 
hand; and separated the head from his body with one blow of it, as boys tear 
off a lotus bud from the stalk with their nails. (In many instances, the head is 
mentioned to be torn off by the nails). 


29. As the head became an oblation, to the fire of dusky fumes; the 
headless trunk of the self-immolated sovereign, sprang and flew also upon the 
burning furnace. 


30. The sacred fire, being fed with the fat and flesh of the royal carcass; 
yielded forth with four such living bodies, from amidst its burning flames; as 
it is the nature of the good and great, to make an instantaneous of four-fold, of 
what they receive in earnest. 


31. The king sprang from amidst the fire, in his four-fold forms of his 
kingly appearance, and these were as luminous with their effulgence, as the 
radiant body of Narayana, when it rose at first from the formless deep. (The 
spirit of god rising over the surface of the deep). 


32. These four bodies of the king, shone forth with their resplendent lustre; 
and were adorned with their inborn decorations of the royal crown and other 
ornaments and weapons. (The fire born form allude to the Agniculas or fiery 
races of men). 


33. They had their armours and coronets on, together with helmets, 
bracelets and fittings for all and every part of the body; and necklaces and ear- 
rings hung upon them as they moved along. 


34. All the four princes were of equal forms, and of similar shapes and 
sizes in all the member of their bodies; and were all seated on horse-back, like 
so many Indras riding on their Uchai-srava horses (having their ears pricked 
up, as in the plight of their heavenward flight). 


35. They had their long and capacious quivers, full with arrows of golden 
shafts; and their ponderous bows and bowstrings, were equally long and 
strong with the god of war. 


36. They rode also on elephants and steeds, and mounted on their war-cars 


and other vehicles in their warfare; and were alike impregnable by the arms of 
the enemy, both themselves as well as the vehicles they rode upon. 


37. They sprang from the bosom of the sacred fire, as the flames of the sub- 
marine fire, rise from amidst the ocean, by being nourished with the oblations 
that were offered upon it. 


38. Their flowery bodies on jewelled horses, made resplendent on all sides 
as four smiling faces of the moon; and their good figures looked like Hara- 
Hari, as if they have come out from fire and water. 


CHAPTER CX. 
Battle of the Wise Princes, with the Ignorant 
Barbarian. 


Argument: — Description of the warfare before the city gates, betwixt the 
Royal armies and the Rude Invaders of the Realm. 


Vasishtha continued: — In the meantime, the battle was raging in its full 
fury, between the royal forces, and the hostile bands that had advanced before 
the city gates. 


2. Here the enemies were plundering the city and villages, and there they 
set fire to the houses and hamlets; the sky was obscured by clouds of smoke 
and dust, and the air was filled by loud cries of havoc and wailing on every 
side. 


3. The sun was obscured by the thickening shadow, of the network of 
arrows spread over the skies; and the disk of the sun now appeared to view, 
and was then lost to sight the next moment. 


4. The burning fire of the incendiaries, set to flame the leaves of the forest 
trees; and the fire brands of burning wood, were falling as loosely all around, 
as the iron sleets of arrow breast were hurling through the air. 


5. The flame of the blazing fire, added a double lustre, to the burnished and 
brandishing weapons; and the souls of the great combatants falling in battle, 
were borne aloft to the regions of Indra, where they were ministered by the 
heavenly nymphs. 


6. The Thundering peals of fierce elephants, excited the bravery of 
bravados; and missile weapons of various kinds, were flung about in showers. 


7. The loud shouts and cries of the combatants, depressed the spirits of 
dastardly cowards; and the hoary clouds of dust flying in the air, appeared as 
elephants intercepting the paths of the midway skies. 


8. Chieftains eager to die in the field, were roving about with loud shouts; 
and men were falling in numbers here and there, as if stricken by lightnings in 
the battle field. 


9. Burning houses were falling below, and fiery clouds dropt from above; 
flying arrows in the form of rocks, were rolling on high; and descending upon 
and dispatching to death, numbers of soldiers that were ready to die. 


10. The galloping horses in the field gave it the appearance of wavy ocean 
afar; and the crashing of the tusks of fighting elephants, crackled like the 
clashing clouds in air. 


11. The shafts of the arrows of the combatants, filled the forts and its 
bastion; and the flashing of the same on the top of it, made a glare of fire 
around. 


12. The dashing of one another in passing to and fro, tore their garments 
into pieces, and the furling of flags in open air and the clashing of shield 
between combatants made a pat-pat noise all around. 


13. The flash of the tusks of elephant, and the crash of weapons dashing on 
stony rocks, and the loud uproar and clangour of the battlefield, invited the 
elephants of heaven to join in the fray. 


14. The flights of arrows, ran as rivers into the ocean of the sky; and the 
flying lances, swords and discuses, which were flung into the air, resembled 
the sharks and alligators, swimming in the ethereal sea. 


15. The concussion of the armours of the clamorous combatants, and the 
clashing of the arms in commingled warfare, represented the sounding main 
beset by islands. 


16. The ground was trodden down to a muddy pool, under the feet of the 
foot soldiers; and the blood issuing out of their bodies from the wounds of the 
arrows, ran as river carrying down the broken chariots and slain elephants in 
its rapid course. 


17. The flight of the winged shafts, and the falling of the battle axes, 


resembled the waves of the arrowy sea in the air; and the broken arms of the 
vanquished, floated as aquatic animals upon it. 


18. The sky was set on fire, by the flames issuing forth from the clashing 
arms; and the celestial regions were filled with the deified souls of departed 
heroes, now released from the fetters of their wrinkled and decaying frames of 
earth. 


19. Clouds of dingy dust and ashes filled the firmament, with flashes of 
lightnings flaming as arches amidst them; the missile weapons filled the air, as 
the tractile arms occupied the surface of the earth. 


20. The contending combatants hooted at one another, and broke and cut 
their weapons in mutual contest; the cars were cleft by clashing at each other, 
and the chariots were reft by dashing together. 


21. Here the headless trunks of the kabandhas, (anthropophagi), mingled 
with the gigantic bodies of the vetd/a demons, were disastrous on every side; 
and there the demoniac vefdla plucking their hearts for their hearty meal. 


22. The bravos were tearing the arteries of the slain, and breaking asunder 
their arms, heads and thighs; while the uplifted and shaking arms of the 
Kabandhas, made a moving forest in the air. 


23. The demons moving about with their open and jeering mouths, made 
their maws and jaws as caskets for carrion; and the soldiers passing with their 
helmets and coronets on, looked fiercely on all around. 


24. To kill or die, to slay or to be slain, was the soldier’s final glory in the 
field; as it was their greatest infamy, to be backward in their giving or 
receiving of wounds. 


25. He is the gladdener of death, who dries up the boast of soldiers and 
chieftains, and drains the flowing ichor of ferocious elephants; (i.e., puts an 
end to them); and one who is entirely bent on destruction. 


26. There were loud applauses given to the victory, of unboasting and 
unrenowned heroes; as there were the great censures, which were poured upon 
the nameless and dastardly cowards. 


27. The rousing of the sleeping virtues of prowess and others, is as glorious 
to the great and strong; as the laying out of their treasures, for the protection 


of their protégés. 


28. The proboscides of the elephants, were broken in the conflict of 
elephant riders and charioteers; and oozing of the fragrant fluid of ichor from 
their front, was altogether at a stop. 


29. Elephants left loose by their flying leaders, fell into the lakes, and cried 
like shrill storks in them; and here they were pursued and overcome by men 
who inflicted terrible wounds upon them with their hands. 


30. In some place the unprotected as well as the uninvaded people, being 
downtrodden and half-dead in their mutual scuffle; fled to and fell at the feet 
of their king, as the daytime takes its shelter under the shining sun. 


31. They being maddened by pride with the force of giddiness, became 
subject to death; (i.e., they called death, to be re-born); as millionaires and 
traders seek a better place in dread of their life. 


32. The red coats of soldiers, and the red flags lifted upon their arms as a 
wood of trees; spread a rubicund colour all around, like the adoration of the 
three worlds. 


33. White umbrellas, resembling the waves of the Milky ocean, when 
churned by the Mandara mountain; covered the weapons of the soldiers under 
them, and made the sky appear as a garden of flowers. 


34. The eulogies sung by the bards and Gandharvas, added to the valour of 
the warriors; and profluent liquor of the tall palma trees, (i.e., the toddy juice), 
infused a vigour to their veins, as that of Baladeva, (who fought dead drunk in 
battle). 


35. There was the clashing of arms of the Rakshasas, who fought together 
in bodies; who were as big as lofty trees, and fed on carcasses, with which 
they filled their abodes in the caverns of mountains. 


36. There was a forest of spears rising to the sky on one side, with the 
detached heads and arms of the slain attached to them; and there were the 
flying stones on another, which were flung from the slings of the combatants, 
and which covered the ground below. 


37. There was the clapping of the arms and hands of the champions, 
resembling the splitting and bursting of great trees; and there was heard also 


the loud wailings of women, echoing amidst the lofty edifices of the city. 


38. The flight of fiery weapons in the air, resembled the flying fire brands 
on high, with a hissing and whistling sound; and the people betook themselves 
to flight from these, leaving their homes and treasures all behind. 


39. The lookers were flying away, from the flying darts all about, in order 
to save their heads; just as the timid snakes hide themselves, for fear of the 
devouring phoenix, darting upon them from the sky. 


40. Daring soldiers were grinded under tusks of elephants, as if they were 
pounded under the jaws of death, or as the grapes are crushed in their pressing 
mills. 


41. The weapons flying in the air, were repelled and broken by the stones, 
flung by the ballistics; and the shouts of the champions, resounded as the re- 
echoing yells of elephants, issuing out of the ragged caverns. 


42. The hollow sounding caves of mountains, resounded to the loud shouts 
of warriors; who were ready to expose their dear lives and dearly earned 
vigour in the battle field. 


43. The burning fire of firearms, and the flames of incendiarism flashed on 
all sides; these and mutual conflicts and chariot fightings, went on unceasingly 
all around. 


44. The battle field was surrounded by the surviving soldiers, who were as 
staunch hearted as the Mount Kaildsa, with the strong god Siva seated therein. 


45. The brave men that boldly expose their lives in battle, enjoy a lasting 
life by their death in warfare, and die in their living state, by their flight from 
the field. (The text is very curt and says: — The brave live by dying, and die 
by their living). 


46. Big elephants being killed in the battle field, like lotus flowers 
immerging into the waters of lakes; great champions were seen to stalk over 
the plains, as towering storks strutted on the banks of lakes. 


47. Here showers of stones were falling in torrents, with a whizzing sound; 
and the showers of arrows, were running with a whistling noise around; and 
the uproar of warriors were growling in the skies. The flying weapons were 
hurtling through the air, and the neighing of horses, the cries of elephants and 


the whirling of chariot wheels, together with the hurling of stones from the 
height of hills, deafened the ears of men all about. 


CHAPTER CXI. 
The flight of the soldiers on all sides. 


Argument: — Description of the Discomfiture of the Royal army, and their 
use of pneumatic arms. 


Vasishtha continued: — Thus the war waged with the fury of the four 
elements, in their mutual conflict on the last doomsday of the world; and the 
forces on all sides, were falling and flying in numbers in and about the battle 
field. 


2. The sky was filled with the stridor of the four-fold noise of drums and 
conch-shells; and the rattling of arrows and clattering of arms on all sides. 


3. The furious warriors were violently dashing on one another, and their 
steel armours were clashing against each other, and splitting in twain with 
clattering noise. 


4. The files of the royal forces, were broken in the warfare; they fell 
fainting in the field, and were lopped off as leaves and plants, and mown down 
as straws and grass. 


5. At this time, the trumpets announced the advance of king, with a peal 
that filled the quarters of the sky; and the cannons thundered with a treble 
roar, resounding with uproar of the kapa or doomsday clouds. 


6. They rent asunder at the same time, the sides of the highest hill and 
mountains; and split in twain, the rocky shores and banks everywhere. 


7. The king then issued forth to all the four sides, in the four-fold or four 
parted form of himself; like the four regents of the four quarters of the sky, or 
like the four arms of Narayana, stretching to so many sides of heaven. 


8. Being then followed by his fourfold forces, (composed of horse, 
elephants, war-cars and foot soldiers); he then rushed out of the confines of 
his city of palaces, and marched to the open fields lying out of the town. 


9. He saw the thinness of his own army, and the strong armament of his 
enemies all around; and heard their loud clamour all about, like the wild roar 
of the surrounding sea. 


10. Flights of arrows flying thickly through the air, appeared as sharks 
floating in the sea; and the bodies of elephants, moving in the wide battle 
field, seemed as the huge waves of the ocean. 


11. The moving battalions wheeling circular bodies, seemed as the whirling 
eddies in the sea; and the coursing chariots with their waving flags, appeared 
as the sailing ships with their unfurled sails. 


12. The uplifted umbrellas were as the foams of the sea, and the neighing 
of horses, likened the frothing of whales. The glaring of shining weapons, 
appeared as the flaring of falling rain under the sunshine. 


13. The moving elephants and sweeping horses, seemed as the huge surges 
and swelling waves of the sea; and the dark Dravidian barbarians gabbled, 
like the gurgling bubbles of sea waters. 


14. The big elephants with their towering and lowering bodies, seemed as 
they were mounting or dismounting from the heights of mountains, and 
breaking their hollow caves, howling with the rustling winds. 


15. The battle field looked like the vast expanse of water, in which the slain 
horses and elephants seemed to be swimming as fragments of floating rocks, 
and where the moving legions, appeared as the rolling waves of the sea. 


16. The field presented the dismal appearance of an untimely dissolution; 
appeared as an ocean of blood, stretching to the borders of the visible horizon. 


17. The fragments of the shining weapons, showed themselves as the 
sparkling gems in the womb of the sea; and the movement of forces, 
resembled the casting of ballast stones into it. 


18. The falling weapons, were as showers of gems and snow from above; 
and presented the appearance of evening clouds in some place, and of fleecy 
vapours in another. 


19. Beholding the ocean like the battalion of the enemy, the king thought of 
swallowing it up, as the sage Agastya had sucked in the ocean; and with this 
intent, he remembered his airy instrument, which he thought to employ on this 
occasion; (and which would disperse the cloud of the hostile force like the 
wind). 


20. He got the airy instrument, and aimed it at all sides; as when the god 
Siva had set the arrow to his bow on Mount Meru, to slay the demon Tripura. 
(This passage shows the slaughter of Tripura, when the Indo-Aryans had their 
habitation on Meru or the polar mountains). 


21. He bowed to his god Agni, — Ignis, and let fly his mighty missile with 
all his might; in order to repel the raging fire, and preserve his own forces 
from destruction. 


22. He hurled his airy bolt, together with its accompaniment of the cloudy 
arms; both to drive off as well as to set down the fire of the enemy. 


23. These arms being propelled from his octuple cross bow, burst forth into 
a thousand dire weapons, which ran to and filled all the four sides or quarters 
of the sky. 


24. Then there issued forth from these, an abundance of darts and arrows; 
and currents of iron spears and tridents; and volleys of shots and rockets. 


25. There were torrents of missiles and mallets, as well as currents of discs 
and battle axes. 


26. There were streams of iron clubs, crows and lances; and floods of 
bhindipalas or short arrows thrown from the hand or through tubes; and also 
swashes of spring nets, and air instruments of incredible velocity. 


27. There was an effusion of fire bolts, and a profluence of lightnings, as 
also showers of fallings shorts, and scuds of flying swords and sabres. 


28. There were falls of iron arrows, and javelins and spears of great force 
and strength; and purling of huge snakes, that were found in mountain caves, 
and grew there for ages. 


29. It was in no time, that the force of these flying arms, blasted the ocean 
of the hostile forces; which fled in full haste and hurry in all directions, as 
heaps of ashes before the hurricane and whirlwind. 


30. The thunder showers of arms, and the driving rain of weapons, were 
driven away by the impetuous winds; and invading hosts hurried to all sides, 
as the torrent of a river breaks its embankment, and overflows on the land in 
the rains. 


31. The four bodies of troops, (consisting of horse, elephant, chariots and 
foot-soldiers), fled vanquished from the field to the four directions; just as the 
mountain cataracts precipitate on all sides during the rains. 


32. The lofty flags and their posts, were torn and broken and hurled down 
as large trees by storm; and the forest of uplifted swords were broken to 
pieces, and scattered like the petals of mariche flowers over the ground. 


33. The sturdy bodies of stout soldiers, were rolling as stones on the 
ground, and besmeared with blood gushing out of their wounds; while the 
groans of their agony, broke down the stoutest hearts. 


34. Large elephants rolled upon the ground with their elevated tusks rising 
as trees; and roared aloud with their crackling sounds, vying with thunder 
claps and roaring clouds. 


35. The clashing of the weapons against one another, was as the crashing of 
the branches of trees against each other; and the horses clashing on one 
another, sounded as the clashing of waves of the sea. 


36. The crackling of war cars and their huge wheels, sounded as the rattling 
of the hail storm on high; and the mingled noise of the clashing of carriages, 
horse, elephants and foot-soldiers, sounded as the crashing of stones. 


37. The harsh sound of war hoops and shouts, was loud on all sides; and 
cries of dying soldiers, crying, “we die, we are slain,’ swelled in the air all 
around. 


38. The army appeared as a sea, and their march was as the whirling of an 
eddy with its gurgling sound; and the bloodshed on their bodies, exhibited the 
roseate hue of the evening sky. 


39. The waving weapons, appeared as a lowering cloud moving upon the 
shore; and the ground besmeared in blood seemed as the fragment of a purple 
cloud. 


40. The lancers, mace bearers and spearmen, seemed to bear the tall tala 


trees in their hands; while the cowardly crowds of men, were seen to cry 
aloud like the timid deer in the plain. 


41. The dead bodies of horses, elephants and warriors, lay prostrate on the 
ground liken the fallen leaves of trees; and the rotten flesh and fat of the 
bruised carcasses, were trodden down to mud and mire in the field. 


42. Their bones were pounded to dust under the hoofs of the horses; and the 
concussion of wood and stones under the driving winds, raised a rattling 
sound all around. 


43. The clouds of dooms-day were roaring, and the winds of desolation 
were blowing; the rains of the last day were falling, and the thunders of 
destruction were clapping all about. 


44. The surface of the ground was all muddy and miry, and the face of the 
land was flooded all over; the air was chill and bleak, and the sky was 
drizzling through all its pores. 


45. The huts and hamlets, and the towns and villages, were all in a blaze; 
and the people and their cattle, with all the horses and elephants, were in full 
cry and loud uproar. 


46. The earth and heaven, resounded with the rolling of chariots and 
rumbling of clouds; and the four quarters of heaven, reverberated to the 
twanging of his four-fold bow on all the four sides. 


47. The forky lightnings were playing, by the friction and clashing of the 
clouds; and showers of arrows and missiles fell profusely from them, with the 
thunder bolts of maces, and darts of spears. 


48. The armies of the invading chiefs, fled in confusion from all the four 
sides of the field; and the flying forces fell in numbers like swarms of ants and 
troops of gnats and flies. 


49. The myrmidons of the bordering tribes, were burnt amidst the 
conflagration of fiery arms; and were pierced by the fiery weapons, falling like 
thunderbolts upon them, from the darkened sky. The flying forces resembled 
the marine animals of the deep, which being disturbed by the perturbed waters 
of the sea, plunge at last into the sub-marine fire. 


CHAPTER CXII. 
Flight of the Foreign Foes. 


Argument. — Account of the routed soldiers, and the names of their 
countries and places of retreat. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Chedis of Deccan, who were as thickly 
crowded as the sandal wood of their country, and girt with girdles resembling 
the snakes about those trees, were felled by the battle axes, and driven afar to 
the southern main, — the Indian Ocean. 


2. The Persians flew as the flying leaves of trees, and striking against one 
another in their madness, fell like the vanjula leaves in the forest. 


3. Then the demon-like Darads, who dwell in the caverns of the distant 
Dardura mountains, were pierced in their breasts, and fled from the field with 
their heart-rending sorrow. (The Dardui is a people of Afghanistan). 


4. The winds blew away the clouds of weapons, which poured down 
torrents of missile arms, that shattered the armours of the warriors, and 
glittered like curling lightnings. 


5. The elephants falling upon one another, pierced their bodies and gored 
each other to death with their tusks; and became heaps of flesh, similar to the 
lumps of food with which they filled their bellies. 


6. Another people of the same country, and of the Raivata mountains, who 
were flying from the field by night; were waylaid by the horrid Pisdchas, that 
tore their bodies and devoured them with voracity. 


7. Those that fled to the tala and tamala forests, and to the old woods on 
the bank of the dasdrnd river; were caught by lions and tigers crouching in 
them; and were throttled to death under their feet. 


8. The yovanas living on the coasts of the western ocean, and those in the 
land of cocoanut trees; were caught and devoured by sharks, in the course of 
their flight. 


9. The sdkas or Scythians, being unable to endure the impulse, of the black 
iron arrows for a moment, fled to all directions; and the Rumatha people were 
blown away and broken down, like the lotus bed by the blowing winds. 


10. The routed enemy flying to the Mahendra mountain, covered its three 
peaks with their armours of black mail, and made them appear as mantled by 
the sable clouds of the rainy weather. 


11. The legions of these hostile forces, being broken down by the arms of 
the king, like the large mines of gold, were first plundered of their raiments by 
the highway robbers, and then killed and devoured by the nocturnal cannibals 
and hobgoblins of the desert. 


12. The surface of the land was converted to the face of the sky; by the 
broken fragments of weapons glistering on like the stars of heaven twinkling 
in myriads above. 


13. The caverns of the earth, resounding to the noise of the clouds above, 
appeared as a grand orchestra, sounding the victory of the king both in earth 
and heaven. 


14. The peoples inhabiting the islands, lost their lives under the whirling 
disks; as those dwelling in the watery marshes perish on dried lands for want 
of rain. 


15. The vanquished islanders fled to the Sahya mountains, and having 
halted there for a week, departed slowly to the respective places. 


16. Many took shelter in the Gandhamadana mountains, while multitudes 
of them resorted to the Punndga forests; and the retreating Gandharvas 
became refugees in the sanctuaries of the Vidyadhara maidens. 


17. The Huns, Chins, and Kiratas, had their heads struck off by the flying 
discuses of the king; and these were blown away by the opposite winds, like 
lotus flowers by the blast. 


18. The Nilipa people, remained as firm as trees in a forest, and as fixed in 
their places as thorns on stalks and brambles. 


19. The beautiful pastures of antelopes, the wood-lands and hilly tracts on 
all sides; were desolated by showers of weapons, and the rush and crush of the 
forces. 


20. The thorny deserts became the asylum of robbers, after they deserted 
their habitations to be over grown by thorns and thistles. 


21. The Persians who were abundant in number, got over to the other side 
of the sea, (the Persian Gulph); and were blown away by the hurricane, like 
stars blasted by the storm of final desolation. 


22. The winds blew as on the last day of destruction, and broke down the 
woods and forests all about; and disturbed the sea by shaking its hidden rocks 
below. 


23. The dirty waters of the deep, rose on high with a gurgling noise; and the 
sky was invisible owing to the clouds of weapons, which obscured its face on 
all sides. 


24. The howling winds, raised a clapping and flapping sound all about; and 
there fell showers of snow also, which flowed on earth, like the waters of the 
sea. 


25. The charioteers of Vidura country, fell down from their cars, with the 
loud noise of waves; and were driven to fall into the waters of the lake, like 
bees from lotuses. 


26. The routed foot soldiers who were as numerous as the dust of the earth, 
and well-armed from head to foot; were yet so overpowered under the 
showers of darts and discs, that they were blinded by the tears of their eyes, 
and disabled to beat their retreat. (i.e., They were as dust, set down by the 
showers of darts from above, and tears of their eyes below). 


27. The Huns were buried with their heads and heels, in their flight over the 
sandy deserts of the north; and others were as muddied as the dirty iron, by 
their being fastened in the miry shores of northern seas. (The Huns had been 
the progenitors of the present Hungarians, residing beyond the Baltic. They 
are said to have been as dark complexioned as their cognate Dravidians of 
Deccan in Southern India). 


28. The Saks, (Saccae or Scythians), were driven to cassia forests on the 
bank of the eastern main; there they were confined for some time, and then 


released without being despatched to the regions of death. 


29. The Madrasees were repulsed to the Mahendra mountains, whence they 
lightly alighted on the ground as if fallen from heaven; and there they were 
protected by the great sages, who preserved them there with tender care as 
they bear for the stags of their hermitage. 


30. The fugitives flying to the refuge of the Sahya mountains, found in lieu 
of their imminent destruction, in the subterranean cell, the two-fold gain of 
their present and future good therein. Thus, it comes to pass that, many times, 
good issues out of evil, where it was least expected. (We know not what were 
the two great gains made at this place, except it be made to mean, that the 
hidden cell of sahya or patience is the door to prosperity and success). 


31. The soldiers flying to Dasarna at the confluence of the ten rivers, fell 
into the Dardura forest like the fallen leaves of trees; and there they lay dead 
all about by eating the poisonous fruits thereof. 


32. The Haihayas that fled to Himalayas, drank the juice of Visalya-karani 
or pain killing plants by mistake; and became thereby as volant as 
Vidyadharas, and flew to their country. 


33. And then the people of Bengal, who are as weak as faded flowers, 
showed their backs to the field, and fled to their homes; from which they dare 
not stir even to this day, but remain as Pisdchas all along. 


34. But the people of Anga or Bihar, that live upon the fruits of their 
country; are as strong as Vidyadharas, and sport with their mates, as if it were 
in heavenly bliss. 


35. The Persians being worsted in their bodies, fell into the tala and tamala 
forests; whereby drinking their intoxicating extracts, they became as giddy as 
drunken men. (The addictedness of Persians to their delicious drinks, is well 
known in their Ana Cronatics). 


36. The light and swift mettled elephants of the swarthy Kalingas, pushed 
against their four-fold armies in the field of battle, where all lay slain in 
promiscuous heaps. 


37. The salwas passing under the arrows and stones of the enemy, fell into 
the waters which girt their city, wherein they perished with the whole of their 
hosts, that are still lying there in the form of heap of rocks. 


38. There were numbers of hosts, that fled to different countries in all 
directions; and many that were driven to the distant seas, where they were all 
drowned and dead, and borne away by the waves. 


39. But who can count the countless hosts, that fled to and lay dead and 
unnoticed in every part of the wide earth and sea, on the fields and plains, in 
forests and woods, on land and water, on mountains and dales, on shores and 
coasts and on the hills and cliffs. So there is nobody who can tell what 
numbers of living beings are dying every moment, in their homes and abodes 
in cities and villages, in caves and dens, and everywhere in the world. 


CHAPTER CXIII. 
Description of the Ocean. 


Argument: — Relation of the cessation of arms, and description of majestic 
ocean. 


Vasishtha continued: — The hostile forces of the enemies thus flying on all 
sides, were pursued to a great distance by the four forms of Vihaschit as said 
before. 


2. These four forms of almighty power, and of one soul and mind; went on 
conquering the four regions on every side, with one intent and purpose. 


3. They chased the retreating enemies without giving them any respite, to 
the shores of the seas on all sides; as the currents of rivers keep on their 
course without intermission, to the coast of the far distant ocean. 


4. This long course of the royal forces, as well as of the enemies, soon put 
an end to all their provisions and ammunitions, and all their resources and 
strength were exhausted at last, as a rill is lost under the sands ere it reaches 
the lake. 


5. The king beheld his forces and those of his enemies, to be as exhausted 
at the end; as the merits and demerits of a man are lost up on his ultimate 
liberation. 


6. The weapons ceased to fly about, as if they were at rest after they had 
done their part in the sky; and as the flames of fire subside of themselves, for 
want of fuel and the combustibles. 


7. The horses and elephants went under their shelters, and the weapons 
stuck to trees and rocks; and they seemed to fall fast asleep, like birds upon 
their spray at night fall. 


8. As the waves cease to roll in a dried up channel, and the snows to fall 
under the clouded sky; and as the clouds fly before the storm, and the 
fragrance of flowers is borne away by the wind. 


9. So the flying weapons were submerged like fishes, under the falling 
showers of rain; and the dripping drops of darts, were thwarted by the 
thickening showers of snow. (i.e., the dropping arrows were driven away, by 
the drifts of snow). 


10. The sky was cleared of the whirling disks, that were hurled by 
hundreds, and hurtling in the hazy atmosphere; and it got a clean sweep of the 
gathering clouds, that were soaring up in surges, and pouring down in floods 
of rain. 


11. The firmament presented the appearance of an immense ocean, 
composed of the limpid fuel of the vast void; and containing the sparkling 
gems of the stars in its bosom, and the burning sub-marine fire of the sun in 
the midst of it. 


12. The great vacuum appeared as extensive and deep, and as bright and 
serene, and devoid of the dust of rajas or pride, as the minds of great men, 
(which are of equal extent and depth of knowledge, etc.). 


13. They then beheld the oceans, lying as junior brothers of the skies; being 
of equal extent and clearness, and stretching to the utmost limits of the 
horizon. 


14. These with their deep sounding waves and foaming froths, are as 
gratifying to the minds of people; as the roaring clouds with their showers of 
snow, are ravishing of human hearts. 


15. They having fallen down from high heaven, and stretching wide their 
huge bodies on the earth below; seem to be rolling grievously on the ground, 
with their deep groanings and breathings, and raising up their billowy arms, in 
order to lift themselves on high. 


16. They are gross and dull bodies, yet full of force and motion, and though 
they are mute and dumb, yet full of noise and howling in their hollow cavities; 
they are full of dreadful whirlpools, as is this world with all its dizzy rounds. 


17. The gems sparkling on the banks, add to the brightness of the sun- 
beams (in the morning); and the winds blowing in the conch shells, resound 


all along the coast. 


18. Here the huge waves are growling, like the big clouds roaring loudly on 
high; and the circling eddies are whirling around, as the shattered corallines 
were scattered along. 


19. The hoarse snorting of sharks and whales, is howling in the bosom of 
the deep; and the lashing of the waters by their tails, sounded as the splashing 
of the oars of vessels in them. 


20. Here are the horrid sharks and alligators, devouring the fleecy 
mermaids and marine men in numbers; and a thousand suns shining in their 
reflexions on the rising waves. 


21. Here are seen fleets of ships floating on the surface of the waters, and 
rising aloft on the tops of the waves; and driven forward by the blowing 
winds, howling horribly through the furling sails and cracking cordage. 


22. The ocean with his hundreds of arms of the heaving waves, handles the 
orbs of the sun and moon; and displays varieties of sparkling gems, with 
reflexions of their beams in them. 


23. Here were the shoals of sharks, skimming over the foaming main; and 
there were the water spouts, rising like columns of elephants’ trunks to the 
skies, and representing a forest of bamboos. 


24. In some places, the rippling waves were gliding, like curling creepers, 
with hairy tufts and frothy blossoms on them; and in others, little rocks 
resembling the backs of elephants and bearing the vernal flowers, were 
scattered in the midst of the waters. 


25. Somewhere were the heaps of froth and frost and hills of icebergs, 
resembling the edifices of the gods and demi-gods; and elsewhere were the 
groups of sparkling little billows, that laughed to scorn the clusters of shining 
stars in the skies. 


26. Here are branches (chains) of rocks concealed in its depth, like little 
gnats hidden in the hollows underneath the ground; and there are the huge 
surges, which make pigmies and dwarfs of the high hills on earth. 


27. Its coasts are spread over with sparkling gems, like beds of gemming 
sprouts and shoots of flowers on the ground (or) as the ground strewn over 


with the germinating shoots and sprouts of gemming blossom; while the 
glistening pearls bursting out of their silvery shells sparkle amidst the 
spreading sands. 


28. The sea seems to weave a vest of silken stuff, with its fleecy waves; and 
decking it with all its floating gems and pearls; while the rivers flowing into it 
from all directions, serve to colour it with their various waters. 


29. The coasts studded with gems and pearls of various hues, display as it 
were the beams of a hundred moons, in the versi-coloured nails of its feet. 


30. The shadows of the beaching tali forests, falling on the swelling waves 
of the sea, were imbued with the hues of the marine gems; and appeared as 
moving arbours with their variegated foliage, fruits and flowers. 


31. There are seen the shadows of sundry fruit trees, reflected in the waters 
gliding below; and as rising up and falling down with their reflexions in the 
moving waves and billows. The false and falling shadows, gathered numbers 
of marine beasts under them, for gorging the falling fruits. (This is pursuing a 
shadow). 


32. Again, the greedy fishes were collected somewhere, and leaping to 
catch the birds that were sitting on the fruit trees, and seen in their reflexions 
on the waves. 


33. Here are seen many sea monsters also, that break the embankments, and 
rove about at random in the watery maze, as birds fly freely in the vacuous air. 


34. The ocean being a formless deep, bears the image of the three worlds 
impressed on its bosom; it bears also the image of the pure vacuum in itself, 
as it bore the image of Narayana in its breast. 


35. Its great depth, clearness and immeasurable extent, gives it the 
appearance of the majestic firmament, which is reflected in its bosom, as it 
were imprest upon it. 


36. It bears the reflexion of the sky and of the flying birds thereof, as if they 
were the images of aquatic fowls swimming on its surface, or resembled the 
black-bees fluttering about its lotus like waves. 


37. Its boisterous waves are borne to the skies by the violent winds, and 
washing the welkin’s face with their briny sprays; and the deep sounding 


main, resounding from its hollow rocks, is roaring aloud like the diluvian 
clouds. 


38. The gurgling noise of the whirlpools, resembles the loud thunder claps 
of heaven; and the sub-marine fire is sometimes seen to burst out of the deep, 
like the latent flame of Agastya, that consumed the waters of the main. 


39. The watery maze presents the picture of a vast wilderness, with its 
waves as the waving trees; the billows as its branch boughs, its surfs as 
blossoms, and the foams and froths as flowers. 


40. The high heaving surges with the shoals of fishes skimming and 
skipping upon them; appear as fragments of the sky fallen below, and carried 
away by the gliding waters. 


41. Thus, the hostile forces were driven afar to the shores of the salt seas; 
extending far and wide and bounding the earth on every side; while the lofty 
mountains rising to the skies with their verdant tops, intercepted the sight on 
all sides. 


CHAPTER CXIV. 
Description of the Prospects all around. 


Argument: — Description of the forest trees, the hills and seas, the forest 
and hill peoples, and clouds on high. 


Vasishtha continued: — Then the royal army beheld whatever there was on 
sides of them; namely, the forests and hills, the seas and the clouds, and the 
foresters and hill people, and the trees of the forest. 


2. They said: — behold, O lord, that high hill, which lifts its lofty top to the 
sky, and invites the clouds to settle upon it; while its midmost part is the 
region of the winds, and the base is composed of hard and rugged stones. 


3. See, O lord, how they abound with fruit trees of various kinds, and the 
groves whose fragrance is wafted around by the gentle winds. 


4. The sea breaks down the peninsulas with its battering breakers, and 
disperses the stones of the rocks on its banks; it shatters the bordering forests 
with its wavy axes, and scatters their fruits and flowers all over the waters. 
(The gloss explains the peninsula to mean the maritime lands of Madras). 


5. Behold the sea-breeze wafting away the clouds, settling on the tops of 
mountains, by the sufflation of the leafy boughs of trees dancing over them; in 
the manner of men, blowing away the smoke with their fans. 


6. Here are arbours on its coasts, like the trees in the garden of paradise; 
whose branches are as white as the conch-shells growing in the full-moon- 
tide, and whose fruits are as bright as the disk of the moon. 


7. Lo, these trees with their spouses of the creepers, are honouring you with 
offerings of gemming flowers, from the rosy palms of their rubicund leaves. 


8. There is the Rikshabana rock, howling as a ferocious bear; and 
devouring the huge sharks and swallowing the swelling waves, in its cavern- 
like mouth, and under its stony teeth. 


9. The Mahendra mountain with loud uproar, growls at the roaring clouds 
(moving below its height); as the stronger champion hurls defiance against his 
weaker rival. 


10. There the enraged Malaya mount lifts his lofty head, decorated with 
forests of sandalwood; and threatens the loud ocean below, rolling with its 
outstretched arms of the waves on the shore. 


11. The ocean rolling incessantly, with its gemming waves on all sides; is 
looked upon by the celestials from high, as if he bore away the treasured gems 
of the earth. 


12. The wild hillocks, with woods and ruddy rocks on the tops, and waving 
with the wafting gales; appeared as huge serpents, creeping with their crescent 
gems, and inhaling the breeze. 


13. There were the huge sharks and elephants, moving and grappling with 
each other upon the surges; and this sight delights the minds of men, as that of 
a rainy and light cloud opposing and pursuing one another. 


14. There is an elephant fallen in a whirlpool, and being unable to raise 
itself from the same, it left its proboscis on the water, and dies with sputtering 
the water from snout on all sides. 


15. The high hills as well as the low seas, are all equally filled with living 
beings; and as the oceans abound with aquatic animals, so are all lands and 
islands full of living beings. 


16. The sea like the earth and all the worlds, are full of whirlpools and 
revolutions of things, and all these are mere falsities, that are taken for and 
viewed as realities. 


17. The ocean bears in its bosom the liquid waves, which are inert in 
themselves, and yet appearing to be in continual motion; so Brahma contains 
the innumerable worlds, which seem to be solid without any substantiality in 
them. (The worlds are as empty and unstable waves). 


18. It was at the churning of the ocean, by the gods and giants of yore; that 


it was despoiled of all its bright and hidden treasures, which have since fallen 
to the lot of Indra and the gods. 


19. It has therefore, adopted to wear on its breast, the reflexions of the 
greatest and brightest lights of heaven, as its false and fictitious ornaments. 
These are seen even from the nether worlds, and of these no one can deprive 
it. 


20. Among the shining sun is one, whose image it bears in its bosom, with 
equal splendour as it is in heaven. This bright gem is daily deposited as a 
deposit in the western main, to give its light to the nether world. It is called 
the gem of day fH, because it makes day wherever it shines. 


21. There is a confluence of all the waters from all sides to it, and 
assemblage of them in its reservoir, gives it the clamorous sound, as it is heard 
in the crowds of men in mixed processions. 


22. Here is a continued conflict of the marine monsters in their mutual 
contentions, as there is a jostling of the currents and torrents of the waters of 
rivers and seas, at the mouths of gulfs and bays. 


23. There the large whales are rolling and dancing on the rising waves; and 
spurting forth spouts of water from their mouth; and these shedding showers 
of pearls, are borne aloft and scattered about by the blowing winds. 


24. The streams of water, flowing like strings of pearl, and bearing the 
bubbles resembling brilliant pearls, (abdas), amidst them; adorn the breast of 
the ocean as necklaces, and whistling by their concussion. 


25. The sea winds serve to refresh the spirits of the siddha and sddhya 
classes of spirits, that dwell in their abodes of the caverns of Mahendra 
mountains; and traverse the howling regions of the sounding main. 


26. Again, the winds exhaled from the caves of the Mahendra mountains, 
are gently shaking the woods growing upon it, and stretching a cloud of 
flowers over its table lands. 


27. Here is the Mount Gandhamadana, full of mango and kadamba trees; 
and there the fragments of clouds, are seen to enter into its caves like stags, 
with their eyes flashing as lightnings. 


28. The winds issuing from the valleys of Himalaya mountains, and passing 


through the encircling bowers of creeping plants, are scattering the clouds of 
heaven, and breaking the breakers of the sea. 


29. The winds of the Gandhamadana mountain, are exhaling the fragrance 
of the kadamba flowers growing upon it; and ruffling the surface of the sea 
with curling waves. 


30. After twisting the fleecy clouds, in the form of the curling locks of hair, 
on the pinnacles of Alaka; (the residence of Kubera); the winds are passing by 
the alleys of the Gandhamadana groves, and forming a cloud or canopy of 
flowers at this place. 


31. Here the odoriferous airs, bearing the sweet burthen of fragrant flowers 
and gums, and moistened by the admixture of icy showers, are creeping 
slowly amidst the alleys. 


32. Lo there the ndlikera creepers, diffusing their sourish scent to the 
breezes, which being acidulated by their sourness, are turning towards the 
regions of Persia. 


33. Here the winds are wafting the odours, of the flowery forests of Isana 
on the Kailasa mountain; and there they are breathing with the perfume of the 
lotuses of the mountain lakes; and blowing away the camphor-white (fleecy) 
clouds from the face of the sky. 


34. The fluid ichor which flows from the frontal proboscis of elephants, is 
dried and stiffened by the breezes issuing out of the caverns of the Vindhya 
mountain. 


35. The females of the savara foresters, covering their bodies with the dry 
leaves of trees, and accompanied by their swarthy males, in leafy apparel, 
have been making a town of their jungle, by extirpating the wild animals, with 
their iron arrows. 


36. Behold, great lord, these seas and mountains, these forests and rivers, 
and these clouds on all sides, look as if they are all smiling under your 
auspices, as under the brightness of sun-beams. 


37. Here they also describe the flowery beds, of the Vidyddhari wood 
nymphs; and their sports, (which is omitted on account of their uselessness). 


CHAPTER CXV. 
The same subject continued. 


Argument: — Description of the hills and forests, rivers and other objects 
on all sides. 


The Royal companions related: — Hear, O high minded lord! the Kinnara 
females from their abodes of leafy bowers, where they enjoy themselves with 
singing their songs; and the Kinnara also being enrapt with the music, listen to 
it attentively by forgetting their business of the day. 


2. There are the Himalaya, Malaya, Vindhya, Krauncha, Mahendra, 
Mandara, Dardura and other mountains; which from their distant view, appear 
to the sight of the observer, to be clothed in robes of hoary clouds, and seen as 
heaps of stones covered with the dry leaves of trees. 


3. Those distant and indistinct chains of boundary mountains, appear to 
stretch themselves like the walls of cities; and those rivers which are seen to 
fall into the ocean with their gurgling noise; appear as the woof and texture 
threads of the broad sheet of waters of the ocean. 


4. The ten sides of the sky, which are spread over the tops of mountains; 
appear as the royal consorts, looking on thee from their lofty edifices, and 
smiling gladly at thy success. The many-coloured and roaring clouds in the 
sky, resembling the variegated birds of air, warbling their notes on high; and 
the rows of trees which are dropping down the showers of flowers from high, 
appear as the arms of heavenly nymphs, shedding their blessings upon thy 
head with their hands. 


5. The high hills overgrown with rows of trees, and stretching all along the 
sea shore; appear as ramparts; and these being beaten by the surges, seem as 
mere moss gathered on the coast. 


6. O! the extensive, all sustaining and wondrous body of the ocean, that 
supported the body of Hari sleeping upon it; contained the unrighteous 
creation at the great deluge, and it covered all the mountains and rocks and the 
sub-marine fire under it. 


7. There is the northern ocean, to which the Jambu river, pours all the gold 
of the Meru or polar mountain, and it contains numerous cities and forests and 
mountains and countries. It washes the face of the sky and all its lights, and is 
therefore, adored by gods as well as men. 


8. Here is this polar mountain, reaching to the solar sphere, and presenting 
the trees on its top as its cloud-capt head; may the earth extending to this 
mountain be thine, and may not this mount which hides the sun under its 
clouds, obstruct the extension of thy realm. 


9. Here is this Malaya mount on the south, growing the fragrant sandal 
wood, which converts all other woods to its nature. Its sweet paste decorates 
the persons of gods, men and demons, and is put as a spot on the forehead like 
the frontal eye of Siva; and is sprinkled over the body belike the bedewed 
persons of females with sweat. 


10. The waves of the ocean are continually laving the coast, overgrown 
with forests of the sandal wood, and encircled by folds of snakes; while the 
woodland nymphs wandering on this mount, throw a lustre about it by the 
beauty of their persons. 


11. Here is the hill called Krauncha, with its groves resonant with the 
cooing of cuckoos; and its rugged caves and rivers resounding harshly to one 
another; while the bamboos are crackling with their mutual friction, and the 
humble bees have been humming about; among these is heard the warbling of 
emigrating cranes on high, and the loud screams of peacocks, which are 
terrific to the serpent tribe. 


12. Behold here, O great lord, the sport of woodland nymphs, in the groves 
of their soft leafy bowers; and listen to the tinkling sound of their bracelets, 
which are so sweet to the ears of hearers. 


13. There behold the drizzling ichor, exuding from the foreheads of 
elephants, and the swarming bees giddy with the drink; which has made the 
sea to melt in tears, on account of its being slighted by them. 


14. Lo, there the fair moon, with his train of fairy stars, sporting in their 


reflexions, in the lap of his sire, the milky ocean, from which it was churned 
as its butter or froth. 


15. See there the tender creepers, dancing merrily on the table-lands of the 
Malaya mountain; displaying their red petals as the palms of their hands, and 
winking with their eyes formed of fluttering bees. The blooming flowers 
bespeak their vernal festivity, and the warbling cuckoos fill the groves with 
their festive music. 


16. Here the rain-drops produce the pearly substance of vansa-lochana, in 
the hollows of bamboos; and the gaja-mati or frontal pearl, in the skull of 
elephants; and large pearls in the womb of pearl-shells. So the words of the 
wise, are productive of unlike effects in different persons. 


17. So the gems are productive of various effects, according as they are 
produced in varied forms in different receptacles; as in men and stones, in seas 
and forests, in frogs, clouds and elephants. They gladden and distract the 
mind, cause fear and error, fever and death, and many other preternatural and 
supernatural effects. 


18. Lo, here the city smiling under the rising moon, and singing in praise of 
that ambrosial luminary, through all its windows, doorways and openings, as 
it were from the mouths of its females; and responsive to his eulogy sung by 
the Mandara mountain, from the many mouths of its caves and caverns, and 
the pipes of hallow bamboos. 


19. The wondering women of the Siddhas, behold with their astonished and 
uplifted faces and eyes, a large body of cloud borne away by the winds; and 
dubitate in their minds, whether it is a mountain peak carried away by the 
winds, or is it a forest of the snowy mountain flying upward in the air, or is it 
a column to measure the distance of the earth and sky, or a balance to weigh 
their weight. 


20. See the moorlands at the foot of the Mandara mountain, how cool they 
are with the cooling breezes wafting the coldness of the waves of Ganges; and 
see its footlands inhabited by the fair Vidyddhara tribe; and behold its flowery 
woodlands all around, overtopped by shady clouds of flowers above. 


21. See the forests and groves and the hursts spread there abouts, with the 
huts and hamlets and habitations of men scattered therein. Look at the holy 
shrines, and the sacred brooks and fountains lying in them, the very sight of 
which, disperses our woes, poverty and iniquities. 


22. Mountain craigs and ridges, overhung on all sides of the horizon; the 
dales and caverns, and the groves and grottos, are overshadowed by clouds; 
the limpid lakes, resemble the clear firmament; such sights are sure to melt 
away masses of our crimes. 


23. Lo, here my lord, the ravines of the Malaya mountain, redolent with the 
odour of the aromatic sandal wood; and there the Vindhyan hills, abounding 
with infuriate elephants; the Kailasa mount yielding the best kind of gold, in 
its olden laureate lore; and the Mount Mahendra, fraught with its mineral ore, 
(aguru, — agallochum); the summits of the snowy mountain are plenteous, 
with the best kind of horses and medicinal plants; thus while every place is 
found to abound with richest productions of nature, why does man set to 
repine in his time worn cell, like an old and blind mouse in its dirty hole. 


24. Behold the dark and rainy cloud on high, appearing as another world, to 
submerge the earth under its flood; and threatening it with its flashing and 
forky lightnings, and gliding as frisky shrimp fishes in the ethereal ocean. 


25. Oh! the bleak rainy winds, blowing with the keen icy blasts of frozen 
snows, poured down profusely by the raging rainy clouds on high. They are 
now howling aloud in the air, and now chilling the blood, and shaking the 
body with horripilation. 


26. Oh! the cold winds of winter are blowing, in their course with the dark 
clouds of heaven; and scattering cluster of flowers, from the twigs and 
branches of trees. And there are the drizzling rain drops dropping in showers, 
amidst the thick forests, redolent with the odours of kadamba blossoms. 


27. There the winds are bearing the fragrance of the breaths of languid 
females, as if it were the celestial odour of ambrosia, stolen by and borne on 
the wings of zephyr. 


28. Here the gentle breezes are breathing, with the breath of the new blown 
lilies and lotuses of the lake, and sweeping their tender odours to the land; and 
the blasts are bursting the flakes of the folded clouds, and wafting the 
perfumes from the gardens and groves. 


29. Yonder the mild airs are lulling our toils, cooled by their contact with 
the evening clouds of heaven; and resembling the vassal florists, perfumed all 
over in their culling the flowers from the royal gardens. 


30. Some of these are perfumed with the odours of different flowers, and 


others with the fragrance of lilies and lotuses; in some places they are 
scattering showers of blossoms, and shedding the dust of flowers at others. 
Some where the air is blowing from the hoary mountain of frost, and at others 
from those of blue, black and red minerals. 


31. The sun is scattering his rays, as firebrands in some places, and these 
are spreading a conflagration with loud cluttering in the woods, like the 
riotous rabble in a country. 


32. The winds like wicked attendants on the sun, are spreading the 
conflagration caused by the solar rays; and carry their clattering noise afar. 


33. The cooling winds blowing from the woods, and bedewed by the gentle 
beams of the moon, or moistened by the watery particles of heaving waves; 
though cheering to the souls of others, appear yet as fiery hot to separated 
lovers. 


34. Lo, here, O lord! how the savara women, on the low lands of the 
eastern main, are covered in their rude and rough leafy garments, and wearing 
their sounding bracelets of brass; and see how they are strutting about, in the 
giddiness of their prime youth. 


35. See how these newly loving lasses, are clinging round the bodies of 
their mates, for fear of darkness of the approaching night; in the manner of 
timid snakes twining about the trunk of sandal wood trees. 


36. Struck with fear by the alarm, given by the sounding bell at day break; 
the loving consort leans on the bosom of her lover, as the darkness lingers in 
the enclosed room. 


37. There is a furze of kinsuka flowers, blooming as firebrands, on the 
border of the southern sea, which is continually washing them with lavations 
of its waves, as if it wanted to extinguish them. 


38. The winds are wafting their fuming farina, which are flying upwards 
like mists of hazy clouds to heaven; the flowers are falling about like flames 
of fire, and the birds and black-bees are hovering over them as extinguished 
cinders of fire. 


39. Behold there on the other side, the real flashes of living wild fire, 
blazing in the forests on the east; and to their flames are borne above the 
mountain tops, by the flying winds of the air. 


40. See the slow moving clouds, shrouding the lowlands lying at the foot of 
the Krauncha mountain; and observe the crowding peacocks dancing under 
them, and screaming aloud with their grave and shrill cries to the clouds. Lo, 
there the gusts of rain-winds rising high, and blowing the fruits and flowers 
and leaves of trees afar on all sides. 


41. Behold the sun setting mountain in the west, with its thousand peaks of 
glittering gold; shining amidst the dusky hue of the evening sky; and the 
sloping sun descending below in his chariot whirling down with its rattling 
wheels in the rustling of evening winds. (But the solar car is a velocipedes 
with a single wheel only). 


42. The moon that rises upon the eastern mount of Meru like a full-blown 
flower, in order to give light to the darkened mansion of this world; is itself 
accompanied by its black spots, sitting as black-bees upon the blossom. 
Hence, there is no good thing in this perverted world, which is free from its 
fault and frailty. 


43. The moon light is shining like the laughter of the god Rudra, amidst his 
dome of the triple world; or it is as the white wash of the great hall of the 
universe, or it likens to the milky fluid of the milky ocean of the sky. 


44. Look on all sides of the sky, tinged with the evening twilight, and the 
variegated hues of mountain tops; and filled with the milky beams of the 
moon, that was churned out by the Mount Mandara from the milky ocean. 


45. Look there, O incomparable lord! those hosts of Guhyka ghosts, that 
are as hideous as the large tdla or palm trees; and also those puny Vetdla 
younglings are pouring upon the ill-fated dominions of the Hunas; and 
devouring troubled inhabitants at night. 


46. The face of the moon shines brightly like the beauteous face of a fairy, 
so long as it does not appear out of its mansion at night; but it is shorn of its 
beams, and appears as a piece of fleecy cloud, by its appearance at day light; 
as the fairy face becomes disgraced, by appearing out of the inner apartment. 


47. Look at the lofty peaks of the snowy mountain, covered with the fair 
vesture of the bright moon beams; and see its craigs washed by floods of the 
falling Ganges; behold its head capped by perpetual snows, and begirt by 
creepers of snowy whiteness. 


48. Behold there Mandara mountain touching the sky, and crowning the 


forest with its lofty ridges; here the winds are wafting the cradle chimes of 
Apsara nymphs, and there the mountainous mines gemming in various hues. 


49. See the high hills all around, abounding with blooming flowers like 
offerings to the gods; see the thickening clouds round their loins, and 
resounding hoarsely within their hollows, while the starry heaven shines over 
their heads. 


50. There is the Kailasa mountain on the north, vying with firmament in its 
brightness; below it there is the hermitage of Skanda, and the moon shines in 
her brilliance above. 


51. Lo, the god Indra has let loose his winds, to break the branches of trees, 
and demolish the huts on the ground, the fragments of which they have been 
carrying afar. 


52. The winds are wafting the profuse fragrance of flowers after the rains, 
and filling the nostrils of men with their odours; while the flights of bees are 
floating as clouds in the azure sky. 


53. Methinks the goddess Flora has chosen for her abode, the blooming 
flowers in the forests; limpid waters in the marshy grounds, and in villages 
abounding in fruitful trees, and flourishing fields. 


54. The windows are overgrown with creeping plants in the rains, and the 
house tops are decorated with the flowers of the climbing creepers upon them. 
The ground is strewn over with the dropping flowers up to the heels, and the 
breezes are blowing the dust of the flowers all about. All these have made the 
woodlands the seats of the sylvan gods. 


55. The rains have converted the rustic village, to a romantic paradise or 
fairy land; by the blooming champaka flowers, the swinging of the rural 
nymphs in their cradles, of creepers, by the warbling of birds and gurgling of 
water-falls, the blossoming of the tall palm trees in the skirts; the tender 
creepers blooming with clusters of snow white blossom, the dancing of 
peacocks on the tops of houses, and the borders shaded by the sal trees; and 
the rainy clouds hanging over the village and the bordering hills. 


56. Again, the soft and sweet breathing breezes, the variegated leaves of the 
plants and creepers, the verdure of the village, the cries of cranes and other 
fowls, and the wild notes of the foresters; these together with the jollity of the 
swains, and the merriment of the pastoral people, over their plenty of milk, 


curd, butter and ghee, and their glee in their peaceful abodes, add a charm to 
this hilly tract. 


CHAPTER CXVI. 
Narration of the Speech of Crow and Cuckoo. 


Argument. — Description of the battle field, and of the hills and sky, and 
the story of the foolish crow. 


The companions added: — Look lord, the field of battle, stretching to the 
bordering hills; look upon the heaps of shining weapons, and the scattered 
forces of elephants, horse, infantry and war chariots. 


2. Look at the slain and their slayers, and the combatants attacking their 
corrivals; and how their dying souls are borne by celestial nymphs in heavenly 
cars to heaven. 


3. The victor finding his adversary worsted in warfare, ought not slay him 
unjustly, unless he is justified to do so by laws of warfare, (as a youth is 
justified to take unto him no other woman but his legal wife). 


4. As health and wealth and prosperity, are good for men when they are 
rightly gained; so it is right to fight for those by whom one is supported. 


5. When one kills his opposing corrival in combat, without violation of the 
laws of warfare, he is justly styled a heavenly champion, and not one who 
takes undue advantage of his enemy. 


6. Behold there the bold champion brandishing his sword, as if he is 
swinging a blue lotus in his hand; and casting the dark shadow of the evening 
dusk on the ground. Such a hero is courted by Laxmi for her spousal. 


7. Look at those flourishing weapons, flaming as the flying embers of wild 
fire, in a mountain forest; or as the dreadful dragons of the sea, dancing on 
land with hundreds of their flashing hoods and heads. 


8. Look at the sky on one side, resembling the sea with its watery clouds, 
and shining with strings of its stars on another; see how it is covered by dark 
clouds on one side; and how it is brightened by moon beams on the other. 


9. Look at the firmament, ranged by multitudes of revolving planets, 
resembling the rolling chariots of warriors; and crowded by myriads of 
moving stars, likening the soldiers in the battle field; and yet it is the error of 
the ignorant to think it an empty vacuum; an error which is hard for the wise 
to remove. 


10. The sky with its over spreading clouds, its fiery lightnings, its thunder 
bolts that break down the mountain wings; its starry array, and the battle of 
gods and demi-gods that took place in it; is still as inscrutable in his nature, as 
the solid minds of the wise, whose magnitude no one can measure. 


11. O wise man, thou hast been constantly observing before thee, the sun, 
moon and all the planets and stars in the firmament, together with all the 
luminous bodies of comets, meteors and lightnings; and yet is astonishing that 
your ignorance will not let see the Great Narayana in it. 


12. Thou dark blue sky, that art brightened by moon-light, dost yet retain 
thy blackness, like the black spot amidst the lightsome disk of the moon; and 
such is the wonder with ignorant minds, that with all their enlightenment, they 
will never get rid of their inward bias and prejudice. 


13. Again, the clear sky which is full with endless worlds, is never 
contaminated by their faults, nor ever changed in its essential state; and 
resembles the vast and pure mind of the wise, which is full with its knowledge 
of all things, and devoid of all their pollutions. 


14. Thou profound sky, that art the receptacle of the most elevated objects 
of nature, and containest the lofty clouds and trees and summits in thy womb; 
that art the recipient of the sun, moon and the aerial spirits that move about in 
thee; art yet inflamed by the flames of the fiery bodies that rise in thee to our 
great regret, notwithstanding thy greatness, which helps them to spread 
themselves high in heaven. 


15. Thou sky that art replete with pure and transparent light, and great with 
thy greatness of giving quarters to all the great and elevated objects of nature; 
but it is greatly to be pitied, that the dark clouds to whom thou givest room to 
rise under thee, molest us like base upstarts, with pelting their hailstones at 
random. 


16. Again, thou dark sky, art the attestor of all lights; as the touchstone is 
the test of gold; and thou art a void in thy essence, yet thou dost support the 
substances of stars and planets of clouds and winds and all real existences at 
large. 


17. Thou art the day light at daytime, and the purple red of evening, and 
turnest black at night; thus, devoid of all colour of thyself, thou dost exhibit 
all colours in thee; hence it is impossible even for the learned, to understand 
aright thy nature and its convertible conditions also. 


18. As the helpless man is enabled to achieve his purposes, by means of his 
patient perseverance; so the inane sky has risen above all, by means of its 
universal diffusion. (The gloss says that, extension of knowledge, is the cause 
of elevation). 


19. The sun that persists in his wonted course, rises to the vertical point in 
time; but the unmoving straws and trees, and the dormant hills and places, and 
stagnant pools and ponds, are ever lying low on the ground. 


20. The night invests the sky with a sable garb, and sprinkles over it the fair 
moonlight like the cooling dust of camphor; with the decoration of stars like 
clusters of flowers upon it. The day mantles the firmament with bright sun 
beams, and the seasons serve to cover it in clouds and snows, and in the gaudy 
attire of vernal flowers. Thus is time ever busy, to decorate the heavenly paths 
of his lords the sun and moon, the two time keepers by day and night. 


21. The firmament like the magnanimous mind, never changes the firmness 
of its nature; although it is ever assailed by the disturbances of smokes and 
clouds of dust and darkness, of the rising and setting sun and moon and their 
dawns and dusks, and of the confluence of stars and combat of gods and 
demons. 


22. The world is an old and decayed mansion, of which the four sides are 
its walls, the sky its covering roof above and the earth its ground floor below; 
the hills and mountains are its pillars and columns, and the cities and towns 
are its rooms and apartments; and all the various classes of animal beings, are 
as the ants of this abode. 


23. Time and action are the occupants of this mansion from age to age, and 
all its ample space presents the aspect of a smiling garden; it is feared every 
day to be blown and blasted away, and yet it is a wonder how this frail flower 
should last so long and forever more. 


24. It is the air methinks, that puts a stop to the greater height or rising of 
trees and hills; for though it does not actually restrain their growth, yet its 
influence, (pressure from above), like the authority of noble men, puts a check 
to the rise of aspiring underlings. 


25. O fie for that learning, which calls the air as void and vacuity; seeing it 
to contain millions of worlds in its bosom, and producing and reducing also 
unnumbered beings in its boundless bosom. 


26. We see all things to be born in and to return into the air; and yet we see 
the madness of men, that reckon the all containing and all-pervading air, as 
something different from God. 


27. We see the works of creation, to be continually producing, existing and 
extinguishing in air, like sparks of fire; I ween this pure and sole air, which is 
without beginning, middle and end, as the universal source and terminus of 
all, and no other distinct cause as God. 


28. The vacuum is the vast reservoir of the three worlds, and bears in its 
ample space the innumerable productions of nature; I understand infinite 
vacuity as the body of the Intellect, and that transcendent being, in which this 
erroneous conception of the world, has its rise and fall. 


29. Therein the woodlands on mountain tops, the solitary forester chants his 
charming strains amidst his sylvan retreat; and attracts the heart of the lonely 
passenger, who lifts up his head to listen to the rapturous times. 


30. Hearken, O Lord, to the sweet music, proceeding from the thick groves 
on yonder lofty mountain; and emitted with the heart rending strains, of love 
born Vidyadhara nymphs; and behold the lonely and lovesick passenger, 
whose lovesick heart being smitten by the sound, has neither the power to 
proceed forward or recede backward from the spot, or utter a word. 


31. I hear a lovelorn Vidyddhara damsel, singing her love ditty amidst the 
woods of the hill with her heaving sighs and tears flowing profusely from her 
eyes. She sang, saying: — “Lord, I well remember the day, when thou ledst 
me to the recess of the bower, holding my chin and giving kisses on my 
cheeks with thy smiling face, and now the pleasing remembrance of that 
gladsome moment, hath left me to deplore its loss for years.” 


32. I heard her tale, O Lord, thus related to me from the mouth of a forester 
on the way. He said: — Her former young lover, was cursed by a relentless 


sage to become an arbour for a dozen of years; and it is since this ill-fated 
change of his, that she has been reclining on that tree, and singing her 
mournful ditty unto the same. 


33. And now observe the wonder, that on my approach, the arborescent 
lover was released of his sad curse, and shedding a shower of flowers upon 
her, he changed his form and clasped her unto his arms with his face smiling 
as his blooming flowers. 


34. The tops of hills are decorated with flowers, as the heads of elephants 
are painted with white dye; the sky is whitened with the stars and falling 
meteors, as the summit of the mountain is etiolated with hoar-frost and snows. 


35. Behold there the beautiful stream of Kaveri, gliding along with shoals 
of fishes skimming in its waters; to its boisterous waves resounding with the 
cries of shrill and clamorous cranes; see its banks mantled in vests of flowers, 
and its shores freely grazed by timid fauns without any fear. 


36. Look the Bela rock, which is washed by the billows of Varuna, — the 
god of the sea; its stones shining as gold under the solar rays; and sparkling as 
the marine fire when they are laved by the waves. 


37. Look at the abodes of the Ghosha shepherds at the foot of the mountain, 
which are continually covered under the shrouding clouds; and behold the 
beauty of the blossoming paldsa and patala trees thereabouts. 


38. Look at the plains, whitened by the full-blown whitish flowers; see the 
mandara tree with twining and flowering creepers; look at the banks crowded 
by cranes and peacocks; look at those villages and the water falls, resounding 
as music from the mouths of mountain caves and forests, and redounding to 
the joy of the happy inhabitants of the valley. 


39. Here the buzzing bees are sporting about the new blown petals of 
plantain flowers; and inspiring fond desire in the breasts of the Pamara 
foresters; who enjoy a bliss in their rustic pastures and hidden hilly caverns, 
which I ween, is not attainable by the immortal gods in their garden of Eden. 
(So says Hafiz: — Thou canst not have in heaven, the blissful fount of 
Roknabad, nor the flowery groves of Mossella). 


40. Behold the black bees sporting and swinging in their cradles of the 
flowery creepers of the forest; and to the Pulinda forester singing to his 
beloved, with his eyes fixed upon her face; and mark also the sportive Kirdata, 


forgetting to kill the deer roving beside his lonely cavern. 


41. Here the weary traveller is regaled, by the sweet scent of various full- 
blown flowers, and is cooled in his body by the odorous dust, wafted by the 
breeze from the flowering creepers; while the winds bearing the watery 
particles of the waves, which lave the vale on all sides, render the spot more 
delightful than the spotted disc of the moon. (i.e., the people have more of 
coolness here, than the gods have in the moist sphere of the moon). 


42. Here the unceasing gliding of waters, and the continued waving of the 
palm trees; together with the dancing of the blossoming branches, and the 
undulation of the spreading creepers in the air; the forest of lofty sdla trees in 
the borders, and the hanging clouds over the bordering hills, all combine to 
add a charm to this village of the vale, not unlike to that of the gardens in the 
orb of the moon. 


43. The flashing of lightnings, and the deep roaring of clouds; the merry 
dance of peacocks and their loud shrieks and screams, and their trailing trains 
displayed in the air, decorate the valley with a variety of variegated gems. 


44. The bright orb of the moon appearing on one side, and the dark clouds 
rising as huge elephants on the other; serve to embellish the village in the 
valley, and the hills in the skirts, with a beauty unknown in the heavenly 
kingdom of Brahma; (which is the empyrean or city of fire only). 


45. O! how I long to lodge myself in the mountain grotto, amidst the 
fragrant arbours of the beauteous Mandana forest, and in the delightsome 
groves of blooming santdnaha blossoms, and where the busy bees are 
continually fluttering, over the manddra and paribhadra arborets. 


46. O, how much are our hearts attracted, by the cries of the tender deer, 
browzing the verdant and delightsome verdure; and by the blooming blossoms 
on hills and in dales, as by sight of the cities of mankind. 


47. Look on yonder village in the valley, where the waterfall appears as a 
column of clear chrysolite; and the peacocks are in their merry dance, all 
about the precipitate cascade. 


48. See how the joyous peacocks, and the gaysome creepers, bending down 
under the burden of their blossoms; are dancing delightfully, beside the 
purling water of the cataract. 


49. I believe the lusty god of desire, (Kama or Cupid), sports here at his 
pleasure, in this village of the valley protected by the hills all around. He is 
sporting with the handsome /arita birds, (the green partridges and parrots) in 
the verdant groves, and beside the crystal lakes, resounding with the sweet 
warblings of water-fowls. 


50. O most prosperous and magnanimous lord, that art the centre of all 
virtues, and the highest and gravest of men; thou art like the towering 
mountain, the refuge of mankind from heat, and the cause of their plenty. (i.e., 
the rainy clouds on mountain tops, are the causes of plenteous produce). 


51. Thou cloud that bathest in holy waters, (i.e., that resist from the waters 
of seas and rivers); that art exalted above all earthly beings, and choosest to 
abide in hills and wildernesses like holy hermits, and art taciturn like them, 
from the pure holiness of thy nature; thou appearest also as fair in the form 
when thou art emptied (of thy waters) in autumn; all this is good in thee; but 
say why dost thou rise in thy fulness with flashing lightnings in thy face, and 
roaring thunders in thy breast, like lucky upstarts of low origin? 


52. All good things being misplaced (or out of their proper place), turn to 
badness; as the water ascending to the clouds, turns to hoar frost and cold ice. 


53. O, wonder! that the drops distilled by the clouds, fill the earth with 
water; and wonder it is that this water supports all beings, and makes the poor 
grow with plenty (of harvest). 


54. Ignorant people are as dogs, in their unsteadiness, impudence, in their 
impurity and wayfaringness; hence I know not whether the ignorant have 
derived their nature from dogs or these from them. 


55. There are some persons, who notwithstanding all their faults, are yet 
esteemed for certain qualities in them; as the dogs are taken into favour, on 
account of their valour, contentedness and faithfulness to their masters. (So 
are men serviceable to their masters for these virtues in them). 


56. We see all worldly people pursuing the course of their worldliness as 
madmen, and pushing on in the paths of business at the sacrifice of their 
honor, and likely to tumble down with fatigue. I find them flying to and fro as 
trifling straws, and know not whether it is of their will or madness or 
stupidity, that they have made choice of this foolish course. 


57. Among brute creatures, the brave lion hears the tremendous thunder 


claps without shuddering; while the cowardly dog trembles and shuts his eyes 
with fear at the sound. 


58. I believe, O vile dog, that thou hast been taught to bark at thy fellows, 
and to ramble about in the streets, by some surly and strolling porter or peon 
(among men). 


59. The divine creator, that has ordained varieties in all his works, has 
made the nasty breed of his daughter Saroma all equal in their filthiness. 
These are the dogs, that make their kennels or dog holes in dirt, that feed upon 
filth and carrion and copulate in public places, and carry about an impure 
body everywhere. (This is a slur against the progeny of one’s daughters, who 
generally turn to be vicious). 


60. “Who is there viler than thee”; says a man to his dog; to which he 
answered, “the silly man as thee is the vilest of all.” There are the best 
qualities of valour, fidelity and unshaken patience, combined in the canine 
tribe; and these are hard to be had in human kind, who grovel in the darkness 
of their ignorance amidst greater impurities and calamities. (The instinctive 
sagacity of beasts, is a surer safe guard to them, than the boasted reason of 
man). 


61. The dog eats impure things and lives in impurity; he is content with 
what it gets, feeds upon dead bodies and never hurts the living, and yet men 
are fond of pelting stones on him everywhere; thus, the dog is made a 
plaything by men, contrary to the will of God. 


62. Looking at the crow flying there upon the offerings, left on the lingam 
or phallus of Siva on yonder bank; and there appearing to sight to tell its tale 
to people, saying, — “Behold me on high, with all my degrading sin,” (of 
stealing from the altars of deities). 


63. Thou croaking crow, that crowest so harshly, and treadst the marshy 
lake; it is no wonder that thou wouldst vex us with thy cries, that hast put 
down the sweet buzz of humming bees. 


64. We see the greedy rook, devouring ravenously the dirty filth, in 
preference to the sweet lotus stalk. It is no wonder that some would prefer 
sour to sweet, from their long and habitual taste of it. 


65. A white crow sitting in a bush, of white lotus flowers and their snowy 
filaments, was taken at first for a hansa or heron, but as it began to pick up 


worms, it came to be known as a crow. 


66. It is difficult to distinguish a crow, sitting in company with a cuckoo, 
both being of the like sable plumes and feathers; unless the one makes itself 
known as distinct from the other, by giving out its own vocal sound. 


67. The crow sitting on a forest tree, or on a mould of clay or high built 
building, looks on all sides for its prey; as a nightly thief mounts on a chaitta 
tree; and sits watching there from the ways of people. 


68. It is impossible for a crow, to abide with cranes and storks by the side 
of a lake, which abounds in lotus flowers, that diffuse their sombre farina all 
about. 


69. For shame that the noisy crow, should have a seat on the soft lotus bed 
in company with silent swans, and play his disgraceful part and tricks among 
them. (i.e., It is impudence on the part of the ignorant, to open their mouths, 
where the learned hold their silence). 


70. Thou crow that criest as the hardest saw, say where hast thou left or lost 
thy former reservedness today. Why dost thou brood over the young cuckoo, 
the sweetness of whose voice thou canst never attain, and whom thou canst 
not retain as thy young. 


71. One seeing a dark crow sitting as a black steg, in a bed of white lotuses, 
and crowing aloud with delight at that place, said unto him saying: — It is 
better for thee, O clamorous crow, to rend ears of those with thy cracking 
voice, that are not tired with splitting the head of others with their wily 
verbiage. 


72. It is well when the cunning consort with the cunning, as the crow and 
the crab meeting at a pool; or the rook and the owl joining in an arbour; for 
the two rogues though seemingly familiar, will not fail to foil one another by 
their natural enmity, (kd ko lu kikd). 


73. The cuckoo associating with the crow, and resembling him in figure 
and colour; is distinguished by his sweet notes from the other; as the learned 
man makes himself known by his speech in the society of the ignorant. 


74. The blossoming branch is well able to bear, the spoliation of its flowers 
by the cuckoo; and will not yet suffer the association of crows and cranes, and 
cocks and vultures upon its twigs. (i.e., It is possible to bear with an injury 


from the good, but not to tolerate the society of bad people). 


75. How delightfully do people listen to the sweet notes of the cuckoo, 
which unites the separated lovers together; but who can brook to hearken unto 
the jarring cries of the crow or hooting of the owl, without disgust. 


76. When the sweet notes of the young kokila, serve to ravish the ears of 
hearers, with the gladsome tidings of the vernal season; there is the grating cry 
of the crow, immediately obtruding upon their ears, and demanding the 
melodious cuckoo as its foster child. (It is well known to all here, that young 
cuckoos are fostered in the nests of crows). 


77. Why and what hast thou been cooing so long, O thou tender cuckoo, 
with so much joy and glee in yonder grove; lo! thy pleasant vernal season is 
too soon over with its fading flowers, and behold the stern winter approaching 
fast, to blast the blossoming trees with its icy breath, and bidding thee to hide 
thy head in thy nest. 


78. A separated mistress seeing a sweet kokila, pour forth his notes to the 
tender blossoms of the vernal season thus address to him saying: — “say, O 
sweet cuckoo! who taught thee to tell, that vernal season is tava tava tua tua, 
i.e., “for thee and thy enjoyment,” this is verily a woeful lie thou tellest me, 
instead of saying, “it is mine and mine,” that art enjoying thy companion.” (It 
would better rendering in English to reverse the application of the words mine 
and thine). 


79. The cuckoo sitting silent in an assemblage of crows, appears as one of 
them in its form and colour of its feathers; and the graceful gait of the cuckoo, 
makes it known from the rest, as the wise man is marked in the company of 
fools. It is hence that everybody is respected by his inward talents and 
outward deportment, more than by outer form and feathers. 


80. O brother, kokila! it is in vain that thou dost coo so sweetly, when there 
is none to appreciate its value; it is far better therefore, that thou shouldst sit 
quiet in thy secluded covert under the shady leaves, when these flocks of 
crows are so loud in their cries; and when it is time for the falling dews, and 
not of vernal flowers. 


81. It is to be wondered, that the young cuckoo forsakes its mother for its 
fostering crow; which on her part begins to prick it with its bill and claws. As 
I reflect on these, I find the young cuckoo growing in its form to the likeness 
of its mother; and hence I conclude, that the nature of a person prevails over 


his training everywhere. 


CHAPTER CXVII. 
Description of the Lotus-Lake, Bee and the Swan. 


Argument: — Description of a Lake of lotus, and the bees and swans 
frequenting them. 


The companions said: — Behold there, O lord! the lotus lake on the 
tableland of the mountain; reflecting the sky in its bosom, and resembling the 
pleasure pond of Kama or Cupid. Behold there the beds of white, red and blue 
lotuses, with their protruding stalks; and listen to the mingled sounds of the 
water fowls sporting thereon. 


2. Lo, the full-blown lotus standing on its stalk with its thousand petals, and 
the royal gander or swan resting on its pericarp; it is crowded by double 
streaked bees, and birds of various kinds, as if it were the abode of the lotus- 
seated Brahma himself. 


3. All the sides are overspread by mists and fearful frost, and the red dust of 
the farina of full-blown flowers and lotuses, have been flying all about; the 
bees and birds giddy with the odours spread around, are humming and 
warbling their tunes and notes in the open air; and the clouds are spreading 
above as an aerial canopy. 


4. There is the lashing sound of the breaking waves, beating against the 
shore; and here is the rumbling noise of the humming bees, vying with one 
another; somewhere the silent waters are sleeping in the deep, and elsewhere 
the fair lotus of the lake, are lying hid in the bushes. 


5. The pearly particles of water, are lulling away the heat of the people; 
wild beasts are prowling on the bank, overgrown by wild thickets all around; 
the waves are laving the stones on the bank, and the land appears as the clear 
sky on the earth. 


6. The bosom of the lake displays the rays of lightnings, from the redness 
of the clouds by the dust of flowers borne above by the winds; and one side of 
it is obscured by a dark rainy cloud hanging over it, while the other side 
exhibits the variegated rays of the evening skies above it. 


7. There is a fragment of the autumnal cloud, borne aloft by the driving 
winds; and appearing as it were a part of the sky supported upon the air. 


8. The rippling waves of the lake by gentle breeze, and the wettish 
humming bees fluttering over the bed of the lotus lake, made a noise all 
around; like the falling of flowers from the branches of trees, lying on the 
bank of a river. 


9. The large lotus leaves are waving like fans made of palm leaves, and the 
foaming froths were puffing as the snowy chowries of princes; the buzzing 
bees and cooing cuckoos, were singing to and lauding the lake which lay like 
a lord, in the assemblage of lotuses, resembling the consorts of his harem. 
(The lake is likened to a lord). 


10. Lo, the chorus of black bees, singing their charming chimes before him; 
and the yellow farina of the lotus flowers, have strewn his waters with dust of 
gold. The yellowish froths are floating like fragments of its gold-coloured 
flowers; and the flowery furzes on the bank, decorate it as its headdress. 


11. The deep fountain, having the beautiful lotuses on its bosom; enjoys 
their sweet fragrance, as princes derive from the assemblage, of talented men 
in their courts. 


12. The pellucid lake, reflecting the clear autumnal sky on its surface; 
resembles the mind of the wise man, which is ever clear and composed, with 
the light of the true Sdstra. 


13. The limpid lake is little discernible in winter, when the keen blasts have 
covered it with hoar frost, and converted its blueness to white. 


14. So the world appears to the wise, a vast sheet of the glory of God; and 
all these distinct forms of things, like waves of the sea are lost at last, into the 
bright element of Eternity. 


15. It is by one’s own exertion, that everybody should try to raise himself 
above the sea of error, or else he must be continually whirling in the whirlpool 
of blunder, like all other ignorant men. 


16. As the waters of wells, tanks, lakes and seas, differ from one another in 
their quality; so the persons of men and women, are different from each other 
in their respective dispositions. 


17. Who can count the aquatic plants and lotuses, which grow in the lakes 
as plentifully, as the passions and desires spring in the fountain of the human 
heart; and which are carried away by the waves of accidents, or hurled into 
the whirlpool of perdition. 


18. Oh, the wonderful effect of bad company, that the lotus growing in the 
company of aquatic plants, loses its fragrance in the current waters, and shows 
its thorny stalks to view. 


19. The good qualities of a person, like those of the lotus, are lost under the 
assemblage of vicious faults in the same; such as the pores, the hollowness 
and the too fine and fragile fibres of the lotus stalks, make them entirely 
useless to anybody. 


20. But the lotus which adorns its natal waters, and fills the air with its 
fragrance; is as a nobleman born with the noble qualities of a noble family, 
and whose virtues are impossible for the hundred hooded serpent, — Vasuki, 
also to relate. (Such a person is called the lotus of his family). 


21. What other thing can equal the lotus in its praise, which in form of 
Laxmi, rests on the bosom of Hari, and graces his hand in the manner of a 
bouquet or nose gay. 


22. The white and blue lotuses, are both esteemed for their quality of sweet 
scent, though they differ in their colour; and hence the one is sacred to the sun 
and the other to the moon. 


23. The blooming beauty of the lotus-bed, is not comparable to that of the 
full-blown flowers of the forest; nor does the lotus-lake bear comparison with 
the starry heaven also; but they are to be compared with the comely and 
smiling face of the dancing girl in her fete. 


24. Blessed are bees, that have all along enjoyed their lives in revelling 
over the sweets of flowers, without having any other thing to care about. 


25. Blest are the bees and cuckoos, that feast upon the flavour of mango 
fruits, and regale themselves with the fragrance of their flowers; all others not 
so blest, are born only to bear the name of the species. 


26. The bees cloyed with honey, and giddy with the flavour of lotuses, in 
the lake where they revel; laughed to scorn some others of their tribe, that led 
their humble lives on the common farina of flowers. 


27. The black bee that buzzed to the lotus, lived and sported in its company 
and slept in its honey cup at night; was in trouble at the approach of autumn, 
not knowing what flower to choose for its fare, and were to resort for its rest. 


28. A black bee sitting on the unblown bud of a flower, appeared as a black 
man placed over a trident by kdla. 


29. O thou insatiate bee! that ever rovest over hills and dales, and suckest 
the sweets of all kinds of flowers; why wanderest thou still, unless it were for 
thy restless discontent. 


30. Thou soft bodied bee, that art bred up in sweets, and feedest upon the 
farina of flowers; it is better for thee to resort to the lotuses of the lake, than 
bruise thy body in thorns and thistles. 


31. O humble bee, if thou art deprived of thy mellifluous food and thy fair 
fare of the farina of flowers in stern winter; thou shouldst yet repair as wise 
men do to such as may suit thy taste, and be congenial to thy nature; rather 
than be mean and debase thyself, by thy attendance upon the base and mean. 


32. Look there, O lord! the assemblage of milk white swans, swimming in 
the lake, and feeding upon the silvery fibres of lotus stalks, and guggling as 
gravely, as the chaunters of the Sama Veda. 


33. Here the gander pursuing the geese, seated in their cradles of lotus 
bushes; thinks the limpid lake as the blue sky, and the lotus cradle as a cloud, 
and stops from his pursuit, (for fear of falling down on earth). (Mistake of the 
terrestrial lake, for the aerial manddkini). 


34. Let nobody be so unfortunate, O lord, as was this gander, which was in 
pursuit of the shadow of the goose. 


35. The sweet music of the swan as it sings of its own accord, is inimitable 
by the crow or crane, although they are taught to learn it for many years in its 
society. 


36. Although the swan and drake are both of the same kind, and of like 
form and figure, and live upon the same sort of food; yet they differ widely 


from one another in their respective species and qualities. 


37. The swan soaring in the sky, with his snow-white wings and feathers; 
appears as the hoary lotus sitting upon its stalk; and then it gladdens the minds 
of men, as the full-moon with her icy beams. 


38. The elevated stalks of lotuses, rising as the lofty stems of plantain trees, 
with the lotuses sitting as the goddess Flora upon them, afford delight to 
swans only, and to no other bird. 


39. Lo, how the lake is adorned like a beauteous lady, with the waves 
resembling her waving bracelets, and the ripples likening her necklaces; while 
the aquatic plants and flowers, represent wreaths and garlands on her bosom. 


40. The strings of fluttering bees, are as streaks of black spots on her 
person; the swelling of cranes and storks are as the tinklings of her anklets, 
and the rippling waves are as the glances of her eyes. 


41. The lake is graced like a lady, by the young swans crying by her side as 
her young ones; and looking up to the mountain as her lord, for a fresh supply 
of fresh water from his profluent cascade. 


42. Don’t you, O harmless swan, says one, reside with the malicious water 
fowls and birds of prey, in one and the same lake; it is better that thou dost 
remain with thy own kind, that may assist thee in distress. 


43. Look to thy end, O silly bee, says one, that art now so giddy with thy 
drink of the sweet honey of flower, and treadst on the heads of elephants, to 
sip and suck their exuding ichor, and ramblest at large among the blooming 
lotuses, that the winter of scarcity is fast approaching to thee, when thou shalt 
be constrained to live upon the dewdrops drizzling on blades of grass or 
dripping from stones. 


44. O lord! the milk white swan with wide stretched wings entered into the 
lotus bush, to see after his young ones, they on seeing him, begin to cackle, as 
a child does on seeing his father before him. The young ones said, O father, it 
is all delusion, like white pearl in silver and one sees fog over his head at mid- 
day. 


45. The swan is as silently floating over the limpid waters of the lake, as the 
bright moon is gently gliding along the translucent atmosphere of the 
firmament; and as it passes through, the beds of lotuses, its wings bruise 


against the blossoms, causing them to distil their fragrant fluid, which is 
gulped in by fishes, in the manner of the holy water of Ganges. 


CHAPTER CXVIITI. 
Description of Deer, Peacocks, cranes etc. 


Argument: — This chapter is devoted to the description of some beasts and 
birds, some fishes and a traveller. 


Some companion said: — Behold the crane, which notwithstanding its 
destitution of all good qualities, has one special instinct of uttering the 
onomatopoeia signifying the rain. 


2. O crane that resemblest the swan in the colour of thy feathers, thou 
mightest well be taken for a young swan, wert thou but without the rapacity of 
the king-fisher, (mudgu). 


3. So there is a line of king-fishers, that are expert in diving amidst deep 
waters, and catching the fishes in its wide extended beaks, now sitting idle on 
the shore, and not venturing to dart themselves into the water, for fear of the 
sharks, floating there with their open mouths and wide stretched jaws. 


4. Thus, murderers also dart upon men, in the manner of diving king- 
fishers, and cry out saying, “madgu madguru, this king-fisher is our instructor 
in killing.” 


5. Seeing a white heron with its long neck and uplifted head, sitting silently 
and watching on the shore, the people took it at first for a hansa or hernshaw; 
but finding it afterward to catch a shrimp from the marsh water, they came to 
know it as a heron at last. 


6. A crane was observed by a woman, to be sitting on the shore like a 
devotee the live long day, while it was in reality watching for prey, until the 
evening shade, as the day labourers are wont to do for their bread. 


7. Look there, says a wayfaring woman to her companion, how these rustic 


women are culling the lotuses amidst the frosty lake; if you like, you can 
follow them, but I will fall back from you. 


8. Look there, O lord! (says the companion to the king), how that traveller 
appeases his angry mate, and leads her to the flowery bower of the weedy 
bush. 


9. Look then, O lord, at the dalliance of the lady, and at her smiling face 
mixed with her frowning looks; and hearken to her speech to her associate. 


10. The crane, king-fisher and other rapacious birds, that live together in 
the same place, are all of the same mind and purpose; but the fool and wise 
man can never agree, though they abide together in the same society forever. 


11. As the cricket caught under the bill of wood pecker, whistles to his 
face; so the retribution of our past misdeeds, flies as a flag before us, and 
unfolds itself unto us (wherever we may happen to go, or chance to be 
reborn). 


12. As long as the cruel crane of fate, keeps clucking upon the tall tree on 
the shore; so long doth the fearful shrimp (of the living soul), keep itself 
concealed in the bog (of the body) with its inward trepidation. Hence, there is 
no rest or quiet of the body and soul, until the ultimate guietus of both. 


13. The bodies of animals, which are devoured by rapacious beasts and 
birds, and then disgorged unhurt and entire out of their bowels; resemble, I 
ween, to their rising from the lap of sleep, or a state of profound trance. 


14. The fear that overtakes the fishes in their native waters, at the sight of 
rapacious animals, is far greater than those of thunder claps or thunder bolts 
falling upon them; and this I know from remembrance of my past life of a 
fish, and cannot be denied by the wise. 


15. Behold, there the herd of deer before thus reposing in raptures over the 
bed of flowers, under the shade of trees on the borders of the lake; and look 
also at the hive of the bees about the new blown flowers of the grove. 


16. Look the high minded and lofty headed peacock craving and crying 
aloud for rain water, to the great god of the clouds and rains; and the god 
Indra in return pours in floods to fill the whole earth with water; for the 
greatness of gods looks to the general and individual good. 


17. The peacocks, like suckling babes, attend on the clouds as their wet 
nurses; or it may be, that the black peacocks are the offspring of dark clouds 
(that endears and unites them thus to one another). 


18. Lo, the wanderer looking with wonder on the eyes of the antelope, and 
finding their resemblance with those of his dear one at home, remains 
stupified as statue at the sight of the objects exposed to his view. 


19. The peacock, instead of drinking water from the ground, snatches by 
force the snake from underneath; wherefore, I am at a loss to know which of 
these to blame for its malice. (The peacock kills the snake, but this one 
destroys all living creatures). 


20. Why is it that the peacock shuns to drink in the large lake, which is as 
liberal as the minds of great men; and is content to swallow the drops of rain 
water, spit out and spirted by the cloud; unless it be for shame of stooping 
down his head, to drink the water of the lake. 


21. See the peacock dancing, with displaying his gaudy train to the clouds; 
and oscillating their starry plumage in the rain, as if they were the offspring of 
the rainy season. 


22. The rainy dark cloud which was carried by the wind from the bed of 
ocean, appeared over the forest lake and met with the gleeful dancing peacock 
below. 


23. It is better for thee, O chdtaka! to pick up the blades of grass for thy 
food, and drink the water of the fountains, and rest in the shady plantain grove 
of the forest; than to dwell in the hollow cave of a withered tree in sultry heat, 
by thy pride of never stooping down for thy subsistence. 


24. Think not, O peacock! this cloud to be a sea and the abode of sharks; 
but know to be a watery cloud, born of the smoke of wild fire, and of the 
vapours of the mountain and ascending to the sky. (Therefore, thou canst not 
fear to dance before it). 


25. The peacock seeing the cloud that was so profuse of rain even in 
autumn, becoming sometimes so scant of its supply as not even to fill a tank, 
(such as in times of drought), sustains its thirst with patience, in gratitude to 
the past favours of the cloud; nor does it fain to blame its former supporter for 
failing, nor deigns to drink any other earthly water like the common people. 


26. The peacock that was wont to drink the crystal drops of the clouds, 
would not now stoop to drink the dirty water of the ditch, though pressed and 
pinched by drought and thirst; because the sweet remembrance of his past 
beverage, supports him from fainting, and the expectation of fresh draughts, 
preserves him from dying. 


27. Travellers mitigate the toils of their journey, by mutual conversation on 
the way; as the ignorant that cannot commune with themselves, communicate 
their thoughts with others, to beguile the tediousness of their lives. 


28. Look there, O lord! to the slender stalks of the lotuses, supporting the 
burden of the water on the lotus leaves; like yon tender damsels carrying the 
water pots on their heads. 


29. Being asked why they were carrying those of lotus flowers and leaves 
and for what use; they replied, to make cooling beds for assuaging the fever 
heat of the love sick wives of travellers from their homes. 


30. These impassioned damsels, with their swollen breasts and youthful 
dalliance, and the motions and gestures of their bodies, served to excite the 
remembrance of the separated brides, whom the travellers had left behind at 
their far distant abodes. 


31. Ah surely, says a traveller, that dear one of mine, must now be weeping 
and wailing, or falling down and rolling on the ground, at the sight of yonder 
dark cloud in the sky in my absence. 


32. Lo, there the lines of black bees, fluttering on the cups of lotuses, and 
the little bees giddy with the dulcet liquor of flowers; the gentle breezes are 
blowing on all sides, and wafting the fragrance of the opening blossoms; 
while the leaves of trees are dancing to the tunes of the rustling winds. 


CHAPTER CXIX. 
Lamentation of the Lovelorn Traveller. 


Argument: — The lovesick traveller, relating the woes of his separation to 
his beloved one. 


The companions continued: — The traveller having returned home, and 
finding his beloved one by the arbour of mandara trees, began to relate to her 
the pangs of his protracted separation. 


2. Listen to my marvellous tale, said he, and what happened to me one day, 
when I sought to send someone to thee with my tidings. 


3. I sought long but sought in vain, at the time of my painful separation, to 
send one to thee at this house of mine; but where such a one be found in the 
world, who would take a severe interest in the affliction of another, for the 
sake of charity or mere friendship? 


4. Lo, I came to behold even then and there, a big cloud on the top of a 
mount, resembling the steed of cupid, that appeared jocundly before me, 
accompanied by the swift lightning as his precursor. 


5. I advanced before him and addressed unto him, saying: — ah brother 
cloud, thou bearest the rainbow of Indra, as a collar about thy neck, and are 
graceful in thy course, have pity on me for a moment. Please go to my dear 
one and tell her my tidings, with thy low voice, sympathetic tears and breath 
of sighs; because the tender form of the pliant creeper, will not be able to bear 
thy loud uproar. 


6. I know not, O dark cloud! to what abode to direct thee to find my 
beloved one, who is pictured in the plate of my heart by the pencil of my 
mind, and is forever situated in my bosom. 


7. But now, O my friendly cloud! my distracted mind has lost that figure of 
my beloved in my breast, together with the sight of her person from my eyes; 
and now having lost the freedom of my body in a foreign country, I have 
become but a wooden framework without my love, which is its living soul; for 
what living body can bear the pangs of separation. 


8. People then thought me dead, and with tears in their eyes, began to 
prepare my obsequies and collect wood for my funeral. 


9. I was borne away to be burnt on a dreadful funeral pile, which was 
horribly crackling with the cracking wood, of the blazing fire on the burning 
ground. 


10. There, O my lotus eyed love, I was laid on the pile by some persons 
with their weeping eyes; and the pyre was surrounded by a number of men, 
who stood as spectators of the horrible sight. 


11. At that time the curling smoke of the pyre, began to enter into my 
nostrils like the creepers or stalks of lotus plants; and as when the dark and 
lengthy body of the curvilinear snake, enters into a hole in the ground. 


12. But in all this, I was defended by the strong armour of my firm love to 
thee; as the unborn or self-born son of god Brahma, was defended from the 
showers of darts, of the whole host of demons and thinking myself to be 
plunged in the cooling pool of thy love within my heart; I was untouched by 
the flames of fire burning all about me. 


13. All this time I lay in the ecstacy of my love to thee, and I felt raptures 
of joy rise in my breast, from my fancied association with thee. I deemed 
myself as drowned in an ambrosial lake, while I was in that state of rapture, 
and thought sovereignty of the whole world, too insignificant before my 
ecstatic transport. 


14. Methought I felt raptures of inexpressible delight fill my whole soul, at 
the thought of all thy blandishments and graces, and in the allurements of thy 
speech, sweet smiles and sidelong glances, and all the gestures and motions of 
thy person, that spread an ambrosial charm all around me. 


15. Methought we clasped in mutual embraces, and together in amorous 
folds; till exhausted with surfeit, I lay upon the cool soft bed, as if I was 
drowned in the cold and icy ocean of the lunar disc. 


16. At this moment as I lay long in my bed, bedewed with cool sandal 
paste, and the cooling beams of the full-moon; I heard a thundering noise 
accompanied with flames of fire, rising from the burning pile of woods under 
me, as it was the sub-marine fire, proceeding from the milky ocean wherein I 
was lying. 


17. The companions resumed: — When the husband had said so far, his 
listening spouse cried out aloud; saying, “Ah me! I am dead, I am gone,” and 
for fear of hearing the sad consequence, fell into a swoon and became 
senseless. 


18. The husband finding her fainting, began to wave over her a fan of lotus 
leaves, besprinkled with water; and taking her up to his bosom, tried to restore 
her to her senses. 


19. Being then desired by her to finish his tale, he began to relate the 
remainder by holding her chin with his hand. 


20. As I felt the pain of the burning flame touching my body, I cried out 
and groaned in affliction; the spectators hastened to extinguish the blazing 
pile, and felt delighted to find me alive. 


21. The attendants then with loud shouts of joy, like the sound of drums, 
etc., and with garlands of flowers, raised and embraced me to their bosoms; 
and went on shouting and singing and dancing and laughing with exultation. 


22. I then saw the funeral ground resembling the formidable body of 
Bhairava, — the god of destruction. It was equally covered with ashes, 
wreathed with snakes and studded with human skulls; and the scattered bones 
that were strewn over the ground, seemed as the beams of the moon crowning 
the head of Siva. 


23. Here hot winds were blowing from the funeral piles, as from the 
burning fire on Hara’s head; and bearing the burnt ashes of the dead bodies, as 
a dark mist all around; they bore stink of the rotten bones to the air, and 
carried about the rustling noise of the bones jostling against one another. 


24. The burning piles and their flashing flames and flying sparks, and the 
fiery winds scorching the trees and herbage; give this place the appearance of 
the playground, of the gods of wind and fire, and of the sons of sun, — Yama 
and Saturn. 


25. Thus I saw the funeral ground full of terrors, and covered with 
skeletons of half-burnt bodies and putrid carcasses also; it is infested by 
hungry dogs and howling jackals, and other voracious beasts, and the 
ravenous ravens and vultures. It is a place where the Vetala, — demons, and 
Pisadcha, — hobgoblins, revel with fearful shrieks and jarring sounds. 


26. I beheld there the biers of dead bodies, borne by their mourning friends, 
with loud cries and lamentations that filled the air all about. I saw the beasts 
and birds, that tore their entrails and arteries, yet moist with blood, and I saw 
the ground strewn over with half burnt logs of wood and bushes. 


27. In some places the glaring pyres, gave a gloomy light, and in others the 
tufts of hair, were heaped as spots of clouds; somewhere the ground was 
besmeared with blood, and looked like a lurid sheet of cloth; and elsewhere 
the clouds were roaring, as the setting sun went down the western hill (or 
horizon). 


CHAPTER CXX. 
Description of Various objects on all sides. 


Argument: — Prolusion on the winds and the forest trees and wild bees; 
then on celestial nymphs, birds, etc. 


The companions continued: — Thus the loving pair after taking to one 
another in the aforesaid manner; began to sip their delicious wine. And now 
attend, O lotus eyed lord to the other things of things of this place. 


2. Lo, there the winds, shaking the plantain leaves and clusters of their 
flowers, and blowing to all sides, with the dust of various sorts of flowers, 
with which they have adorned themselves. 


3. There the breezes are blowing, loaded with odours exhaled by the 
flowers of the forest; and there the gentle zephyrs are wafting the perfumes, 
which they have stolen from the locks of their favourite fairies. 


4. Here are the blasts blowing from the salt sea on the south; and driving as 
fastly as the stern lion rushes into the fastness of woods and mountain caves; 
and as forcibly, as the fierce giants attacked the gods on the top of Mount 
Meru. 


5. Again, there is the high wind playing and shaking with the high tamdla, 
tdla and other palma trees; while the gentle gales, are softly gliding over the 
waves, and wafting their moisture to the tender plants below. 


6. There the soft breezes are wheezing, with the dust thrown out by the 
flowers; while gentle zephyrs are moving about as princes amidst the bowers 
and flower gardens. 


7. There the god Aeolus plays his sweet sylvan pipe, in the holes of the 
hollow bamboo; in the manner of the female sweet musicians, tuning their 


reeds in the city of Pandu or Hastinapura. (Here is a palpable anachronism 
with regard to the anterior of prince Pandu). 


8. Here every plant is fraught with bees, except the karnikara flower; which 
is avoided by them, on account of its disregard of the god of air, by 
withholding to pay him the tribute odour and farina. 


9. The tdla or palm tree, that rises as high as a column but yields no fruit 
nor flower to the hungry passenger, owing to its inaccessible height, is as 
disgraceful in itself as the uncharitable rich man. 


10. Ignorant and unworthy people, build their pride on outward show, as 
the kinsuka flower displays the beauty of its colour to view, in absence of its 
fragrance. 


11. Look at the Karnikara flower, blooming only to decay; because its want 
of fragrance makes it as worthless and despicable, as unworthy and ignorant 
men are disregarded by all. 


12. So the tamdla tree with its blushing blossoms, beguile the thirsty 
chataka by its false appearance of a rainy cloud, so the fair outside of the foul, 
deceives the unwise by his inward foulness. 


13. Look at these robust, woody, shady and cloud-capt hills, which afford 
shade and shelter to others; and are possessed of many more qualities, 
befitting the kings of men; are standing in the manner of lofty bamboos, 
(having all these qualities in them). 


14. Look at yonder cloud on the mountain top, resting as it were upon the 
seat of its table land of bright gold, and twirling its yellow mantle of 
lightnings; appearing as the god Hari clad in his vest of aureate yellow. 


15. Look on the blooming kinsuka flower, with the flutter-bees and birds 
about them appearing as a fighting warrior, pierced by flying arrows, and 
besmeared with crimson blood. 


16. Lo, the golden mandadra flowers, touching the amber-coloured clouds of 
heaven; appearing as the giddy Gandharva lads, lying on the top of the 
Mahendra mountain. 


17. Behold the weary wayfarers, laying and lulling themselves to rest, 
under the shade of the Kalpa trees in the garden of paradise; while the Siddhas 


and Vidyadharas are sitting there at ease, and singing their songs to the tune 
of their stringed instruments. 


18. Behold also the celestial nymphs, stretched there at ease, tittering and 
singing in the groves-bowers of the Kalpa arbour of Eden. 


19. There is the silent abode of the great sage Mandapala, famed in the 
legends; and the cave of the celebrated vulture said to be his wife. 


20. See there the line of hermitages of the ancient sages; where the envious 
animals forget their mutual animosities, and live together in perfect concord 
and amity. 


21. There are the coral plants, growing with other shrubs and bushes, by the 
side of the sea coast; and the drops of water trickling upon them, glisten as 
gems by the solar rays. 


22. The waves are rolling with precious gems, on the bosom of the ocean; 
like playful damsels rocking on with their ornaments on the breasts of their 
lovers. 


23. Here the jingling noise of the jewelleries of the celestial nymphs, 
sauntering from the celestial regions, to the infernal abodes of the serpents 
through the midway skies. 


24. Here those hollow mountain caves, whistling with a sound resembling 
the buzzing of wild bees, falling down giddy with drinking the ichor exuding 
from the forehead of elephants. 


25. Lo, the sea ebbing with the waning moon during the dark fortnight of 
the month; and the receding tides describing and leaving the linear marks of 
their regression upon the sands on the shore. 


26. Lo, the woodland decorated as a beauty, with clusters of flowers 
hanging as wreaths and garlands on every side; breathing fragrance all about, 
and attired in the robe of its cooling shade. 


27. The variegated foliage from its party-coloured dress, and the waterfalls 
seem as its sweet smiles; and the flowers strewn about, appear as the flowery 
bed of the happy woodland dame. (The word vana means the vana-devi or 
woodland goddess, corresponding with a dryad, sylva or Flora). 


28. Here the high-minded sages and hermits, are as highly delighted with 
their quiet sylvan retreats; as the celestials are joyous in gardens of Eden. 
(Eden and Udy4ana are both the same). 


29. The placid and indifferent minds of sages, are equally delighted with 
these solitary woodlands, as the restless and impatient minds of lovers and 
worldly people. 


30. The waters of the sea, whether running into the land, or washing the 
foot of the rock on the sea-shore; are equally shining and sounding as their 
tinkling ornaments or anklets, (nupurs). 


31. The punndga flowers blooming on mountains, appear as golden mines 
upon them; and the goldfinch birds flying over them, look like winged angels 
in the aerial course. 


32. The mountain forests appear to be in a conflagration, with their full- 
blown champaka flowers blazing as fire, and the bees and clouds hovering 
over them as smoke; while the current winds are spreading above their dust 
and petals like the sparks of fire. 


33. Lo, the kokila swinging and singing, on his seat of the topmost stalk of 
a karavira tree; when his mate comes and embraces him there, and sings 
responsive to his songs with her clamorous chattering. (It is a sarcasm on 
pettish wives, that often interrupt the silent musings of their consorts with 
their tastelessness). 


34. See the salt waters of the briny ocean, roaring aloud against shore; but 
the coast-lands are kept in subjection under the hands of their able masters. 
(The rule of kings stretched to the seashore). 


35. O lord! deign to make this earth, (i.e., the continent of Jambudwipa or 
Asia), stretching to the four seas on the four sides, as thy footstool; and 
establish thy rule over the remaining potentates, that escaped the brunt of thy 
valour; appoint rulers over all the provinces on all sides; and provide them 
with proper force and arms, which are necessary to keep them in order; and 
continue to govern thy realms with mercy and moderation. 


CHAPTER CXXI. 
Exposition of the Story of Vipaschit. 


Argument: — Boundaries of Vipaschit’s Realms. His adoration of fire and 
attempt to proceed further. 


Vasishtha related: — Then the king Vipaschit and his companions, sat on 
the coast of the sea, and did whatever was requisite for the establishment of 
his sovereignty. 


2. They then chose spots for their abodes at that place, and made houses for 
themselves according to their positions; they settled the boundaries of the 
provinces, and set guards for their defence. 


3. At last they went down into the ocean, and then proceeded to the other 
side of the world; in order to show his glory; like that of Vipaschit, to other 
parts of the world. 


4. Then came on the dark night, in the form of an all-overshading cloud; 
and the people all sank into the lap of sleep, after finishing their daily works 
and rituals. 


5. They were amazed to think in themselves, how insensibly they were led 
to so great a distance in so short a space of time, and to meet the ocean like 
currents of rivers falling into it. 


6. They said: — “It is a wonder that we have come so far, without any 
attempt on our part; and therefore, this great velocity must be attributed, to the 
swiftness of the vehicles of the great god Agni, (or Electricity itself).” 


7. Lord! say they, how extensive is the view that lies before our sight; 
stretching from one end of the Jambudwipa to its other extremity of the vast 
salt ocean, and thence again to the islands in it, and other lands and seas 


beyond them. 


8. There are islands and seas beyond these, and others again beyond them; 
how many such and many more, may there be of this kind, and how 
inscrutable is the delusion which is thus spread before our minds. (ie., All 
these are but our mental delusions). 


9. Let us therefore, pray the god of fire, (electricity), that we may see at 
once everything on all sides by his favour, and without any exertion or pain 
on our side. 


10. So saying and thinking in this manner, they all reflected on the god with 
one accord, and meditated on him, as they sat in their respective places. 


11. The god appeared to them, and stood manifest before their sight in his 
tangible form, and spoke to them saying: — “Ask ye my sons, what favor you 
desire of me.” 


12. They said: — O lord of gods, that abidest beyond this visible and 
elemental world, ordain, that by means of the vedic mantra and our purified 
minds, we may know the knowables in our minds. 


13. Give us, O God, this great and best boon, that we ask of thee; that we 
may know by thy light, whatever is knowable by either the external senses; 
mind or by our self-consciousness. (i.e., By the three means of knowledge). 


14. Enable us to see with our eyes O lord! the paths, which lead the Siddhas 
and Yogis to the sight of the invisibles; and make us also to perceive in our 
minds the things, that are imperceptible to them. 


15. Let not death overtake us, till we have reached to the ways of the 
Siddhas; and let thy grace guide us in the paths, where no embodied being can 
pass. (i.e., in our journey to the next world, when we have shuffled our mortal 
coil). 


16. Vasishtha said: — “So be it,” said the igneous god, and instantly 
disappeared from their sight; as the sub-marine fire bursts forth, and vanishes 
at once in the sea. 


17. As the fiery god disappeared, there appeared the dark night after him; 
and as the night also fled after a while, the sunshine returned with the reviving 
wishes of the king and his men, to survey the wide ocean lying before them. 


CHAPTER CXXII. 
The King’s survey of the sea, and his Locomotion 
on it. 


Argument: — The king walks on foot on the sea, his chase of sharks and 
other marine animals. 


Vasishtha related: — Rising then in the morning, they regulated the affairs 
of the state according to the rules prescribed by law; and were eager to see the 
sea, as if they were impelled by some preternatural force, which nothing less 
than the power of ministerial officers could restrain. 


2. But they were so exasperated by their mad ambition, that they forgot 
their affection for their families, and forsook them all weeping before them, 
for undertaking their perilous sea voyage. 


3. They said, — “we will see what there is on the other side of the sea, and 
then return instantly to this place.” Saying so, they muttered the invocatory 
mantras of the Fire god, who inspired them with the power of walking on foot 
and dry-shod over the sea. 


4. All the representatives of the king, being followed by their companions 
on all sides, proceeded to the borders of the several seas, and then walked on 
their feet over to watery maze. 


5. They walked on foot upon the waters, as if they were walking upon the 
surface of the ground, and all the four bodies of the quadruple king, now met 
together in one place, and immediately afterwards they separated apart with 
all their forces. 


6. Marching on foot over the vast expanse, they surveyed all that was in 
and upon the sea; and disappeared altogether from the sight of the people on 


the shore, as a spot of cloud, vanishes from view in autumn. 


7. The forces travelled on foot all over the watery path of the ocean, with as 
much fortitude; as the elephants of the king, traverse with patience on land, 
when they are bound to a distant journey. 


8. They mounted high and went down, along with the rising and lowering 
waves; as when men climb upon and descend from steep mountains, and as 
one rides and goes galloping on horseback, or in the manner of Hari floating 
upon the billowy ocean, or in his act of churning the sea. 


9. They paced over the whirlpools, as the straws float upon waters; and they 
promenaded as gracefully amidst the encompassing waves, as the beauteous 
moon passes through the surrounding clouds. 


10. The brave soldiers that were so well armed with weapons in their 
hands, and so well protected by the power of their mantras and amulets; that 
they were as often disgorged from bowels of the sharks, as they came to be 
devoured by them; (because they could neither masticate nor digest them). 


11. Pushed onward by the waves, and driven forward by the winds, their 
bodies were carried to the distance of many a league in a moment. 


12. The huge surges which lifted them to great heights, represented the 
enormous elephants, on which they used to mount, and ride about in their 
native land. 


13. The vast expanse of water appears as the void space of the sky; and the 
succession of heaving waves in it, represents the folds of gathering clouds in 
heaven, and as they were dashing against one another, they emitted the flash 
of lightnings anon. 


14. The loose and loud surges of the sea, resembled the loosened elephants 
in the battle field; and though they dashed against the shore with all their 
force; yet they were unable to break them down, as the elephants are baffled in 
their attempt to break down a stone-built rampart. 


15. The waving waves reflecting the rays of the brilliant pearls and gems, 
which they bore with them from shore to shore; resemble the eminent men, 
who though they pass alone from place to place, appear yet to be accompanied 
by their train and glory everywhere. 


16. The surf tramples over the mass of hoary froth with contempt, as the 
snowy white swan treads upon the bed of whitish lotuses in disdain. (The surf 
and the swan, being whiter far than the froth and the lotus). 


17. The sounding main, which was as loud as the roaring clouds, and the 
re-billowing billows, which were louder than they, bore no terror to them that 
stood as rocks thereon. 


18. The cloud-kissing waves of the ocean, now rising above the mountains, 
and now falling low at their feet, were likely to touch the solar orb, and then 
sink into the infernal. 


19. They were not afraid of the rising or falling waters; but passed over the 
sea as upon sheet of cloth; and shrouded by the drizzling clouds, which 
formed a canopy over them. 


20. Thus the companions of the king crossed the ocean, which was full of 
sharks and alligators, and tremendous eddies; they were sprinkled by water 
like showers of flowers, and adorned with marine gems and pearls; and they 
crossed over on foot, as others do in navies. 


CHAPTER CXXIII. 
The King’s Excursions on all Sides. 


Argument: — The King and his train, pass over the islands and proceed 
towards the west. 


Vasishtha related: — Thus they proceeded onward, to explore into the 
visible phenomena, exposed before them by Ignorance, (avidyd or external 
nature); and continued to walk on foot, over the watery maze and the islands it 
contained. 


2. They passed over the ocean to some island, and then from that island to 
the sea again; and in this manner they traversed on foot, over many a 
mountain and wilderness in interminable succession. 


3. Then as the king was proceeding towards the western main, he was 
seized and devoured by a voracious fish, which was as the undying breed of 
Vishnu’s fish, and as fleet as a boat in the stream of Bitasta Beyah. (Vishnu’s 
fish was the deathless incarnation of himself). 


4. The fish fled with him in his belly to the milky ocean; but finding him 
too hard for his digestion, he bore him in his bowels to a great distance in 
another direction. 


5. He was then borne to the saccharine ocean on the south, and was there 
cast out in the island of Yakshas; where he was overpowered to the love of a 
female fiend by her art of enchantment, (or) where he was enchanted into the 
amour of a female Yakshi, by her skill in sorcery. (The Yakshas are the present 
yakhas of Ceylon, or Egypt, and are said to be equally adept in the art of maya 
or magic). 


6. He then went towards the east, and passing by the Ganges, he killed a 
shark that had pursued him, and arrived at last at the district of Kanya Kubja 


the modern Cawnpore. 


7. Then proceeding towards the north, he came to the country, of Uttara- 
kurus, where he was edified by his adoration of Siva, and became exempted 
from the fear of death, in all his wanderings on all sides of the earth. 


8. In this way, travelling long and afar, both by land and sea; he was often 
attacked by wild elephants on the boundary mountains, and repeatedly gorged 
and disgorged by sharks and alligators in the seas. 


9. Then proceeding towards the west, he was picked up by an eagle and set 
upon his back; and the bird took to his golden pinions, and bore him in an 
instant to the Kusa-dwipa, across the ocean. 


10. Thence he passed to the Krauncha-dwipa on the east; where he was 
seized and devoured by a Rdkshasa of the mountain, but whom he killed 
afterwards by ripping up his belly and its entrails. 


11. Roving then in the south, he was denounced to become a Yaksha by 
curse of Daksha the king of that part; until he was released from that state by 
the king of the Saca-dwipa after some years. 


12. He then passed over the great and smaller seas lying in the north, and 
after passing over the great frigid ocean, he arrived at the country of gold, 
where he was changed to a stone by the Siddhas of that place. 


13. In this state he remained a whole century, till by the grace of his god 
Agni, — ignis, he was released from the curse of the siddha, who received 
him again into his favour. 


14. Then travelling to the east, he became king of the country of cocoanuts; 
and after reigning there for full five years, he was restored to the remembrance 
of his former state. 


15. Then passing to the north of the Meru Mountain, he dwelt among the 
Apsaras, in the groves of kalpa trees for ten years, and subsisted on the bread 
fruits of cocoanuts. 


16. Going afterwards to the Salmali-dwipa in the west, which abounds in 
trees of the same name, he dwelt in the society of birds for many years, 
having been previously instructed in their language, when he had been carried 
away by Garuda. 


17. Thence journeying in his westerly course, he reached to the Mandara 
mountain which abounded in verdure and maddra forests; and here he 
sojourned for a day in company with Mandari, — a Kinnera female. 


18. He then journeyed to the Nandana garden of the gods, which abounded 
in kalpa trees rising as high as the waves of the milky ocean; and he remained 
in the company of the woodland gods for a septenary, sporting with the 
Apsara damsels in their amorous dalliance. 


CHAPTER CXXIV. 
Quadripartite State of the King Vipaschit. 


Argument. — The actions of the Individual prince, appertaining to his 
quaternary forms. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, whether the different states and acts of the 
prince, relate particularly to any one part of his quadripartite body, or 
generally or severally to all and each part of himself; because it is equally 
impossible that all and every part should act the same part, as that the several 
parts of the same person, could act differently from the other. (It is 
unnecessary to be multipartite to act alike, as well as impossible for the same 
personality to act differently in its many persons or parts or forms, which are 
all one and the same being). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Any person that is conscious of his self-identity, 
and its invariability and indivisibility, may yet think himself as another person 
and doing different things, as a man does in his dream. 


3. Again, it is the clearness of the soul, that shows the abstract images of 
things in itself, as it did in that of Vipaschit or the wise prince; and as a mirror 
reflects the discrete figures of objects, and of the sky and sea, in its clear and 
empty bosom. 


4. As reflectors made of the same metal, reflect one another in themselves; 
so all things which are in reality but of an intellectual or ideal nature, reflect 
themselves in the intellect. (The mind is the repository of the ideal forms of 
things, and it is mental fallacy only which makes them appear as real ones. 
This is the idealistic theory of Berkeley). 


5. Hence whatever object presents itself, to any one of the senses of 
anybody, is no other than the concretion or density of his intellectual idea of 


the same in its nature. (Hence, the sensibles are but solidified ideas, and 
ectypes of the ideal; and not as causes or prototypes of our eternal ideas). 


6. It is the one and self-same thing that appears as many, and the varied 
ones are but the invariable one in reality; there is no positive variety nor 
uniformity either in esse, because all apparent variety is positive unity. (i.e., 
all is one, and the one in all). 


7. Hence, whatever part of the prince, was conscious of anything, which 
presented itself before him of any time; the same is said to be the state of his 
being during that time. (Ze., Whatever a man is conscious of doing or 
suffering at any time, the same forms the state or mode of living for the time 
being). 


8. And as it is possible to a Yogi, who sits secluded in one place; to see all 
present, past and future events at one view before him; so it is possible for a 
prince, sitting retired in his palace, to manage all affairs of his whole domain; 
and much more for the king Vipaschit, who delegated his viceroys, as 
members of his body to all parts. (This passage explains the quadripartite 
kings, to mean himself and his three viceroys on three sides). 


9. So doth a cloud stretch itself to all the quarters of the sky, and perform at 
once the several functions of quenching the parched earth with its water, and 
of growing the vegetables and fructifying the trees. So also doth a man boast 
of his manifold acts at the same time. 


10. So also are the simultaneous acts of the lord God, and those of the lords 
of men and Yogis; who design and perform at the same time, the multifarious 
acts relating to the creation, preservation and management of the world. 


11. So doth the one and self-same Vishnu, with his four arms and as many 
forms, act many parts and separably also, as the preservation of the world on 
the one hand, and the enjoyment of his fair consorts on the other. 


12. Again, though the two hands of a person are enough to discharge the 
ordinary affairs of life; yet it is requisite to have many arms, in order to wield 
many weapons in warfare. 


13. It was in the same manner, that the self-same monarch was situated 
with his four-fold persons, in all the four sides of the earth; where though they 
were impressed with the consciousness of their self-identity, yet they all acted 
their several parts as quite distinct and apart from others. 


14. They were all alike conscious of the pains and pleasures attending on 
their lying down on naked grounds, their passing to distant islands and their 
travelling to different forests and groves, and desert lands also. 


15. They all remembered their journeys over hills and mountains, as well as 
their voyages by water and air; they knew how they floated on the seas, and 
rested on clouds. 


16. They knew how they mounted upon waves of seas, and rode on the 
back of flying wind; and how they lay on the shores of seas, and at the foot of 
mountains. 


17. Again the prince proceeding to Scythea, or the land of sacas on the 
east; passed into the enchanted city of the Yakshas, lying at the foot of the 
Eastern mountain or Udaya-giri; where being spell-bound by their sorcery, he 
lay asleep for full seven years in the wood of the leafless mansd sijad trees. 


18. Rising afterwards from his drowsiness, he was converted to the torpid 
state of a stone by his drinking some mineral water, and was condemned to 
remain for seven years more with the mineral substances of the earth. 


19. He was then confined in a cave of the western mountain, — Astachala, 
which reaches to the region of the clouds and is shrouded by darkness; and he 
became enamoured of the company of Pisdcha and Apsara females. 


20. He then arrived at a region which was free from fear, and where there 
rose a high mountain with water-falls in all sides of it; here the prince was lost 
in the forest of haritaki or chebula — myrobalans, and become invisible for 
years. 


21. The prince that had erewhile been spell-bound by the Yaksha, travelled 
afterwards to the frigid climate; and there being transformed to a lion, he 
roved about the Raivata hills for ten days and nights. 


22. And then being deluded by the black art of Pisdchas, he was changed to 
the form of a frog, and lived in that state in the caves of the golden mountain 
for a decade of years. 


23. Travelling afterwards to the country of Kumarika, (Cape Comorin), he 
dwelt at the bottom of the northern ridge of the Black mountain. Then going 
to the saca country, he was transformed to a hog, and lived in a dark hole for 
a hundred years in that shape. 


24. He lived for fourteen years as a squint-eyed, in the land of marivaca; 
when the western form of the prince was turned to a Vidyadhara, by virtue of 
his skill in learning various lore. 


25. There he enjoyed sexual intercourse at his full satisfaction under the 
scented bower of ald, and passed his time in amusement. 


CHAPTER CXXV. 
On the Living Liberation of the Prince. 


Argument: — Mutual assistance of the four persons of the prince to one 
another, and their true meaning. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now of the quadripartite bodies of the prince, that 
which was transformed to a tree, in the valley called the vale of fearlessness in 
sacadwipa: supported itself by sucking the bitter water of the rock which it 
drew by its roots. 


2. It was then that the western part of the royal person, came up to the relief 
of the former or eastern part, and released it from the curse of its vegetable 
state of full seventy years, by the power of its incantations. 


3. Again, the western person of the king, passing to the frigid clime, was 
there transformed to a stone by curse of the chief of the Pisdcha tribe; but was 
released afterwards from that state by a southern personage, by his offering of 
meat food to the carnivorous Pisdcha. 


4. At another time, as this western personage was settled beyond the 
western horizon, it was changed to the form of a bull by a female fiend, that 
had assumed on her the form of a cow, and was freed at last from that state by 
the southern person. 


5. Again, the southern figure of the prince, was doomed to live as a demon 
on a mountain tree in the Kshemaka, and was liberated at last from it by the 
Yaksha prince. 


6. Then again, the eastern person of the prince, was metamorphosed to the 
shape of a lion, on a mountain in the province of Vrishaka, and was delivered 
for its metamorphoses by the western personality. 


7. Rama rejoined: — How is it Sir, that the single individuality of the 
prince, which was confined in one spot as that of a Yogi; could be ubiquious at 
one and the same time, could perform the various acts of different times and 
places at once, by the all-comprehensive universality of the mind. 


8. Vasishtha replied: — O Rama! Let the unenlightened think whatever 
they may, respecting this world; (i.e., let them take its unreality for positive 
reality); but do you attend to what I say, regarding the light in which it is 
viewed by the enlightened Yogis, (who view it in its spiritual light, and 
conduct all their operations in the mind only). 


9. According to spiritualists, there is no other essence, except one universal 
Intellect; the phenomenal are an utter inexistence, and the creation or increate 
entity of the world, blends into nothing. (The intellect is a formless and all- 
pervading essence, and acts in many ways in all places). 


10. This universal Intellect is the eternal residence of and one with the 
eternal and universal soul; and it is this that constitutes the essentiality and 
universality of the Supreme soul at all times. 


11. Say, who can obstruct anywhere or by any force the course of the great 
mind, which is ubiquious and all comprehensive, and exhibits itself in various 
forms in the endless varieties of its thoughts. (Hence, there is nothing in 
reality, except they be but representations of the inward thoughts of the mind; 
or manifestations of the omnipresent One in various shapes). 


12. What is it to us and what can we call to be ours, when all these sights 
are exhibited in the supreme soul or Intellect in all places and times; and all 
that is present, past and future, are comprised in that all-comprehending mind. 


13. So that the far and near, a moment and an age, are the same to it, which 
is never altered in its nature. (so says the sruti: — It is both near and afar, the 
past and the present, etc.). 


14. All things are situated in the soul, and yet look at the act of Ignorance, 
that they appear to be placed without it, as we behold them with our naked 
eyes (as phantasms of the hidden soul). 


15. The soul is the substantial omniscience of vacuous form, and exhibits 
the three worlds in its vacuity, without changing its vacuousness, (but shows 
like the magic lantern, the phantasmagoria of these in itself). 


16. The universal soul appears in the universe, as both its viewer and the 
view in itself, or as the subjective and objective in its self-same nature; but 
how is it possible for the inherent soul of the apparent world, to admit of a 
visible form in any way, unless it be by the delusion of our understanding to 
think it so. 


17. But tell me thou sage that knowest the truth, what thing is impossible to 
the active agency of the self-same Deity, to whom all things are alike, and 
possible at all times and places; and so also to the wise king Vipaschit, who 
was alike conscious of his self-identity in all his quadruple forms. (The Lord 
that spreads unspent, and acts alike in all. — Pope). 


18. The enlightened Intellect of the Yogi, that has not yet arrived at its 
transcendent state of unity with the Deity; and retains the sense of its 
individuality; can yet readily unite itself with the souls of others in all places. 


19. There is nothing impossible to the supreme soul; but the half- 
enlightened soul, that lingers between its knowledge and ignorance, and has 
not attained to transcendent wisdom, is confounded in its intellect regarding 
the true knowledge of things. 


20. The soul that is somewhat advanced in its knowledge, is said to have 
partly progressed towards its perfection, (siddhi); hence the four parts of 
Vipaschit situated on the four sides, made up a perfect whole. (The whole 
number in common calculation, is usually divided into and made up of four 
quarters). 


21. These four parts were as so many states or degrees of perfection, which 
lighted on Vipaschit like the rays of heavenly light; and these states mutually 
helped and healed each other, as the members of the body assist and supply to 
the defects of one another. 


22. Rama said: — Tell me, O venerable Brahman, why the quadruple king 
Vipaschit, ran on all sides like brutes, if he was so enlightened in every part, 
and why he did not sit collected in himself as he was. 


23. Vasishtha replied: — What I have related to you regarding 
enlightenment, applies only to the case of Yogis, who though they are 
combined of many parts in their minds, do yet remain sedate in themselves in 
the same state. 


24. But the Vipaschitas were not so wholly enlightened as the holy Yogis, 


but being partly enlightened, they remained in the midmost state between the 
two, as if hanging betwixt both state of enlightenment and ignorance at the 
same time. 


25. They bore upon them the marks of both at once, namely of the one by 
their discretion and discernment, and of the other by the passions and 
affections of their minds, that led them to the two different ways of liberation 
as well as of bondage. 


26. Those who are ever vigilant in the discharge of their pious acts, and are 
wavering between their temporal and eternal concerns, as the Vipaschitas 
continued in their course of action, such persons cannot be perfect and 
esoteric Yogis in this life. 


27. The devotees that are devoted to their devotion of a particular deity as 
the Vipaschitas were of the god of fire, are styled as the dhdrand Yogis; and 
not transcendent or param Yogis, unless they attain to transcendental 
knowledge, (or jndna Yoga, which removes the avidyd, — ignorance). 


28. The learned Yogi does not see any mist of ignorance, to obstruct his 
sight of the lights of truth; but the ignorant devotee is blind to truth, though he 
may be received into the favour of his favorite deity. 


29. The Vipaschitas were all of them subject to ignorance, and they 
rejected the knowledge of the true soul, by their attachment to gross material 
bodies, which are at best but vain unrealities. Listen therefore, to what I will 
now relate, regarding those that are liberated from their grossness even in 
their lifetime. 


30. The Yogis retain of course their knowledge of the concrete, in their 
conduct of the external affairs of life; but liberation is the virtue of the mind, 
consisting in its freedom from subjection to gross materials, and subsisting in 
the mind only, and not in the body or its sensibility. 


31. But as the bodily properties are inseparably connected with the body, 
and its sensibility can in no way be separated from it; the liberated soul is 
therefore, in no way attached to it, nor doth the Yogi ever take any heed of it 
in his mind; (his thoughts being solely fixed in the soliety of the soul). 


32. The mind of the liberated Yogi, is never reunited with his body, any 
more than pollen is ever rejoined with its parent stalk; although the bodily 
properties of the living liberated Yogi, ever remain the same as those of 


worldly persons. (Freedom consists in the minds and soul, and not in the 
bonded body). 


33. The bodies of both are of course equally perceptible by all, but not the 
minds which are hidden in them; the liberated soul cannot be seen by others; 
but the incarcerate spirit is known to everybody, by its addictedness to the 
discharge of its bounded duties. 


34. Self-liberation is as well perceptible to oneself, as his perception of the 
sweetness of honey and the taste of other things, are well known to himself; 
and one is well acquainted with his liberation and bondage, from his 
consciousness of pleasure and pain from the one or other. 


35. It is thus by one’s inward perception of his liberation, that he is called 
the liberate; and it is also the inward coolness of his soul, as well as the 
indifference of his mind, that constitute his liberation even in his life time. 


36. Neither the bondage, or liberation of the soul, nor the pleasure or 
painfulness of one’s mind can be any how known to another; whether you 
divide the body into pieces or place it upon a royal throne. (Though the 
features of the face, are said to be indicators of the inward mind). 


37. Whether laughing or crying, the liberated soul feels no pleasure or pain 
therein; because it is situated in both states in the unalterable spirit of God. 


38. The minds of liberated persons, are settled in the divine spirit and 
nowhere else, even when they are in the act of receiving or doing anything 
with their bodies: But the learned men of the different schools, are seen to be 
quite otherwise from their unacquaintance with liberation (and being moved 
by the circumstances of life). 


39. The bodies of liberated persons, are not affected by external events, and 
though such a one may appear to be weeping, yet he never weeps in grief; nor 
does he die, with the death of his mortal body. 


40. The great man that is liberated in his life time, does not smile though he 
has a smiling face; nor is he affected by nor angry at anything, though he 
seems to be moved by affections and anger. (i.e., His feelings are never 
lasting). 


41. Undeluded he sees the delusions of the world, and unseen by any he 
sees the failings of others; and all pleasure and pain seem as ideal unto him. 


42. Everything is as nil to the liberate, as flowers growing in the garden of 
the sky; and the existence of the world is non-existence unto him, who sees 
the unity alone in all existence. (The One being all and all being one; all 
others are lost in the only One). 


43. The words pleasure and pain, are as aerial flowers to him, who are 
indifferent to them, who have become victorious over their feelings, by their 
liberation from all sensations in their life time. 


44. They that have known the truth, are unaltered in their natures; as the 
mouths of Brahma, are unflinching in the recital of Vedas. (?) 


45. And as Siva ripped the upper head of Brahma, as a bud of lotus, with 
the nail of his hand; and the god neither resented it, nor grew another head 
instead, which he was well able to do; so the meek Yogi remains unresentful 
at any harm done to him. 


46. Of what use is the upward or sky-looking face to him, whose inner or 
intellectual eye shows him the voidness of all things around; hence the 
possession of the external organ of sight, is useless to him, who sees 
everything within himself. 


47. Everyone gets as it is allotted to him by his fate, in retribution of his 
past actions; and his fatality (of retributive justice), does not betide mortals 
only; but binds the god Siva also to the sweet embraces of Gauri, as well as to 
his melancholy contemplation forever; and so also doth the milky ocean, bear 
the ambrosial moon in his ample bosom. (An irrevocable binds even Jove 
himself, as Hara to his nakedness, and Hari to his serpent bed). 


48. Good minded men are seldom seen to abandon their passions, though 
they are capable of doing so in their life time; but they become quite 
dispassionate upon their death, when the five elemental principles of their 
bodies, are burnt away upon the funeral pile. (All lie level with the dust in 
their silent graves). 


49. But the living liberated man, gains nothing by his doing anything, nor 
loses aught by his doing of naught; nor has he any concern with any person, 
nor interest whatever with anything here on earth. 


50. What avails one’s passionateness or dispassionateness in this world; 
since what is fated in this life, cannot be averted by any means. 


51. The god Hari, who is liberated in his life, does not yet cease from his 
work of slaying the Asuras, or to have them slain by the hands of Indra, etc.; 
he becomes incarnate, to die himself or by hands of demons; and is repeatedly 
born and grown up, to be extinct at last. (Such is the general doom of all). 


52. No one can give up his alternate activity and rest at once, nor is there 
any good to be reaped by his attachment to the one, or relinquishment of the 
other. 


53. Therefore, let a man remain in whatever state he may be, without 
having any desire of his own; because the god Hari is without any desire in 
himself, being the form of pure Intellect or Intelligence only. (Desire subsists 
in the mind, and not in the intellectual soul). 


54. The changing time changes and moves the steady soul, like a ball on 
every side; as it turns about the fixed sun round the world in appearance (and 
not in reality). 


55. The lord of the day, is not able to restrain his body, from its apparent 
course; though he is seated in his nirvdna as he is, without any desire of 
changing his place. 


56. The moon also appears to be waning under her wasting disease, though 
she remains ever the same in all Kalpa ages of the world; so the soul of the 
liberated person continues the same, though his body is subject to decay by 
age. 


57. The fire too is ever free and liberated in itself, because nothing can 
extinguish its latent heat at any time; and though it was suppressed by the 
sacrificial butter of marutta, and the seminal liquid of Siva for a while, yet it 
revived again as it was before. (Light and heat are coeternal elements). 


58. Vrihaspati and Sukra, the preceptors of the gods and demi-gods, were 
liberated in their life time, and with all their ambitious views of 
predominance, they appeared as dull and miserable persons. 


59. The sagely prince Janaka is perfectly liberated in his mind, and yet he is 
not loathe to rule over his princedom, and to quell his enemies in battle. 
(Liberation consists in the mind, and not in cessation from action). 


60. The great kings Nala, Mandhata, Sagara, Dilfpa, Nahusa and others, 
were all liberated in their lives; and yet they reigned and ruled over their 


realms, with all the vigilance of sovereigns. 


61. A man acting either wisely or foolishly in life, is neither bound to or 
liberated in this world; but it is his ardent desire of or apathy to worldliness, 
that constitutes his bondage to or liberation from it. 


62. The demoniac princes Vali, Namuchi, Vritra, Andhaka, Mura and 
others, lived quite liberated in their lives; though they acted as unwisely, as if 
they were elated by their ambition and passions. 


63. Therefore, the existence or disappearance of the passions, in the 
conduct of any body, makes no difference in his spiritual character; but it is 
the pure vacancy of the human soul and mind, that constitutes his liberation in 
this world. 


64. Being possessed of the knowledge of God as pure vacuum, the living 
liberated person is assimilated to the likeness of vacuity itself; and is freed 
from the duality of thinking himself otherwise than the divine spirit. (The 
sense of self personality, is lost in the knowledge of the universality of the 
divine soul). 


65. He is conscious of the fallacy of phenomenal appearances, which he 
knows to be no more than as the variegated rainbow reflected in empty air (by 
the ineffable light of the glory of God). 


66. As the various colours are seen to shine in the rainbow, in the field of 
empty air; so these myriads of brilliant worldly bodies, are but vacuous 
particles appearing in infinite space. (The great worlds are as minute atoms in 
the sight of great God). 


67. This world is an unreality, appearing as a reality in view; it is unborn 
and increate, and yet it is irresistibly conspicuous to our sight, like the 
appearance of the sky in the empty firmament. 


68. It is without its beginning or end, and yet appearing to have both of 
these; it is a mere void, and seeming as a real substantiality; it is increate, and 
yet thought to be a created something; it is indestructible, though thought to 
be subject to destruction. 


69. Its creation and destruction are phenomena occurring in the vacuous 
essence of God, as the structure of a wooden post and statue, takes place in 
the substance of the wood. (Here the Divine essence is considered as the 


material cause of the world, and the one being void the other is considered 
equally void also). 


70. The mind being freed from its imagination, and drowned in deep 
meditation, (samddhi), as in the state of a sleepless sleeper; it comes to the 
sight of an even intellectual vacuity, engrossing the sights of all the worlds, as 
if absorbed in it. 


71. As a man passing from one place to another, is unmindful of the 
intermediate scenes; so the attention being directed solely to the sight of the 
intellectual void, the thought of all the world and other existences is wholly 
lost in the same. (Such sight of the single point in view is called the sakhd 
chandra darsana. — Nyaya). 


72. In this state of intense meditation, the thought of a duality is lost in that 
of the unity; and this idea of oneness disappears in that of a vast void, which 
terminates to a state of conscious bliss; (which is the summum bonum of Yoga 
philosophy). 


73. In this state of insouciance, the duality of the world is lost in the nullity 
of vacuity; the knowledge of self-personality is dwindled to spirituality, and 
all futurity presents itself clearly to the view of the clairvoyance of the enrapt 
Yogi. (This forms the purnatd or perfectibility of Yoga practice). 


74. The perfect Yogi remains with his mind, as clear as the vacuous sky, 
enveloping the phenomenals in its ample sphere; he sits silent and as still and 
cold as a stone; he views the world in himself, and remains quiet in rapturous 
amazement at the view. 


CHAPTER CXXVI. 
Resuscitation and conduct of the Vipaschitas. 


Argument: — Release of the Dead from the error of the world, their 
wanderings and fancies of themselves. 


Rama said: — Now tell me Sir, what the Vipaschitas did, being cast in the 
seas, islands and forests, in the different parts of the earth. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Hear now, Rama, of the Vipaschitas, in all their 
wanderings amidst the forests of tala and tamdla trees, upon the hills and in 
the islands of different sides. 


3. One of the Vipaschitas, that was roving about the westerly ridge of a 
mountain in Kraunchadwipa, was crushed to death by the tusk of an elephant, 
as it tears a lotus in the lake. 


4. Another of these was smashed in his contest with a Rakshasa, who bore 
his mangled body aloft in air, and then cast it amidst the marine fire, where it 
was burnt to ashes. 


5. The third was taken up by a Vidyadhara, to the region of the celestials; 
where he was reduced to ashes by curse of the god Indra, who was offended at 
the prince’s want of respect towards him. 


6. The fourth that went to the farthest edge of a mountain in the 
Kusadwipa, was caught by a shark on the sea shore, which tore his body to 
eight pieces. 


7. In this manner did all these four lose their lives on all sides, and they all 
fell as sorrowfully as the regents of the four quarters, at the last dissolution of 
the world on the doomsday. 


8. After they were reduced to the state of vacuity amidst the vast vacuum, 
their vacuous and self-conscious souls, were led by the reminiscence of their 
former states to behold the earth, (to which they had been so much attached). 


9. They saw the seven continents with their belts of the seven oceans, and 
also the cities and towns with which they were decorated everywhere. 


10. They beheld the sky above, with the orbs of the sun and moon forming 
the pupils of its eyes; and also the clusters of stars, that were hanging as 
chains of pearls about its neck, and the flaky clouds that formed its folded 
vest. 


11. They saw with their intellectual eye, the stupendous bodies that rose out 
of chaos at the revolutions of past Kalpa cycles, and filled the amplitude of 
the sky and all sides of the horizon with the gigantic forms. (These were the 
big bodies of the many Unitarian Saivas that appeared at the beginning of 
repeated creations). 


12. Being possessed of their consciousness in their spiritual forms, they 
descended to observe the manners of elemental bodies that were exposed 
before them. 


13. All the four Vipaschitas were actuated by their previous impressions, to 
the inquiry into the measure and extent of the ignorance, which led people to 
the belief of the body as soul itself, in want of their knowledge of the spiritual 
soul; (as it is the case with gross materialists). 


14. They roved from one continent to another, to witness in what part of 
this ideal globe of the earth was this ignorance (avidyd) most firmly seated, so 
as to give it the appearance of a visible substance. 


15. Then passing over the seven continents and oceans, the western 
Vipaschit, happened to meet with the God Hari standing on a parcel of firm 
land. 


16. Receiving then the incomparable knowledge of divine truth from him, 
he remained in his samddhi meditation at that spot for full five years. 


17. Finding afterwards his soul to be full with divine presence, he 
relinquished even his spiritual body, he fled like his vital breath, to the 
transcendent vacuum of final extinction nirvana. 


18. The eastern Vipaschit was translated to the region of moon, (by his 
adoration of that luminary), and was seated beside that full bright orb (for his 
great purity and piety). But the prince, though placed in the exalted sphere of 
the moon, continued ever afterwards to lament for the loss of his former body. 
(So heavenly souls are said to long for their bodies). 


19. The southern prince being forgetful of his spiritual nature, thinks 
himself to be reigning in the Salmalidwipa, and employed in the investigation 
of external and sensible objects. 


20. The northern one dwelling amidst the limpid waters of the seventh 
ocean, thought himself to be devoured by a shark, which retained him in his 
belly for the space of a thousand and one years. 


21. There he fed upon the bowels of the shark, which killed the animal in a 
short time; and then he came out of its belly, as if it gave birth to a young 
shark. 


22. Then he passed the frigid ocean of snows and over its icy tracts, 
stretching to eighty thousand yojanas (or leagues) in dimension. 


23. He next arrived at a spot of solid gold, which was the haunt of gods, 
and stretched to ten thousand yojanas, and here he met with his end. 


24. In this land the prince Vipaschit attained the state of a Godhead, in the 
same manner as a piece of wood is turned to fire in a burning furnace. 


25. Being one of the principal gods, he went to the Lokaloka or polar 
mountain, which surrounded the globe of the earth, as an aqueduct begirds the 
base of a tree. 


26. It rises to the height of fifty thousand yojanas, and has the inhabited 
earth on one side of it which faces the sunlight, and eternal darkness reigning 
on the other. 


27. He ascended to the top of the polar mount, which pierced the starry 
sphere; and as he was seated upon it, he was beheld in the light of a star by the 
beholders below. 


28. Beyond that spot and afar from this highest mountain, lay the deep and 
dark abyss of infinite void. 


29. Here was the end of the globular form of this earth, and beyond it was 
the vacuity of the sky, of fathomless depth, and full of impervious darkness. 


30. There reigns a darkness of the hue of a swarm of black bees, and as the 
shade of the black tamdla trees; there is neither the stable earth nor any 
moving body under the extended sky; this great void is devoid of support, nor 
does it support anything whatever at any time. (This is chaos). 


CHAPTER CXXVII. 
Cosmology of the Universe. 


Argument: — Account of the Earth and the starry frame below the endless 
Vacuum, which envelops the Universe. 


Rama said: — Please, tell me Sir, how this globe of the earth is situated, 
how and where the polar mountain stands upon it, and do the stars revolve 
about the same. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — As boys build their fancied castles in empty air, so 
is this world the creation of the imagination of the mind of Brahma, and no 
more than this. 


3. As the dim-sighted man sees the shadow of the moon, and other false 
sights before his eyes, so the creative Power, — Brahma, sees in the 
beginning, the phantoms of the phenomenal world in the vacuity of its 
Intellect; (like a shadow of the prototype in the Divine mind). 


4. As an imaginary city is situated in the mind, and is invisible to the eye; 
so the notion of the world is posited in the intellect, and not exhibited in 
actuality. 


5. Whenever there is the reflexion of anything whatever in the mind, and 
arising spontaneously of its own nature (from previous reminiscence); the 
same presents itself even then and in that state before the sight (as in a dream). 


6. As the dim-sighted eye, sees false sights in the sky; so the deluded mind, 
sees the earth and the orbs of heaven. (i.e., the heavenly bodies). 


7. As the current water flows on the surface of rivers, and there resides the 
latent fire underneath; so the notions of things presenting themselves as 
dreams of the mind, are manifested as real ones before the sight. 


8. Hence, as thoughts and notions of things occur and subside continually 
in the mind; so the earth and heavenly bodies, appear incessantly to revolve in 
their spheres (and the stars to rise and set in endless succession). 


9. The world is entirely inexistent, to dull and inanimate beings; it is visible 
to those that have the visual organs but utterly invisible to the blind, and 
altogether unknown to them that are born as such. It is imperceptible to the 
insensible, and perceptible only in the same manner as it is presented in the 
mind. So it is in the power of the mind alone, to represent it in some form or 
other to one’s self. 


10. It is thus according to the mental conception (of some astronomers), 
that the bodies of stars, are considered to be as large as the earth; and the 
unreal world (of spiritualist), is believed as a real entity (by the materialist). 


11. The world has both light and darkness, owing to the presence or 
absence of the sun; beyond which there is the great abyss of vacuity, which is 
a vast expanse of darkness, except where there is a glimpse of Zodiacal light. 


12. The polar circle is called the polar mountain, from the protuberance of 
the poles at both ends; it is termed also the Lokdloka or having a light and 
another dark side, owing to the course of the sun towards or away from it. Its 
distance from the starry circle, derives it also of Zodiacal light. 


13. Beyond the polar circle, and afar from the sphere of the sky, there is the 
sphere of the starry frame, which revolves around them at a great distance on 
all the ten sides. 


14. This starry (zodiacal) belt, girds the firmament up and down, from the 
heavens above to the infernal regions below, in the vast vacuity of space; and 
extends to all sides. 


15. The starry sphere (or belt of the zodiac), turns round the polar circle of 
the earth, and its nether regions, as it appears to our imagination, and not 
otherwise, (as fixed and motionless). 


16. The sphere of zodiacal stars, is twice as distant from the poles, as those 
are distant from the middle of the earth; in the same manner as the covering 
crust of a ripe walnut is aloof from the sheath of its seeds. 


17. Thus the starry belt is settled at double the distance from the poles, as 
the polar circle is situated from the equator; and it turns all about the ten sides, 


as a bel fruit whirls in the sky. 


18. The aspect of the world is according to the modality, in which it is 
situated in the imagination of Brahma, and as it is reflected from its archetype 
in the Divine mind (or its consciousness of it). 


19. There is another sphere of the heavens, which is afar from the starry 
frame, and twice in its extent than that; this is lighted by the zodiacal light and 
beyond it there reigns a thick darkness. 


20. At the end of this sphere, there is the great circle of the universe; having 
one half of it stretching above and one below, and containing the sky in the 
midst of them. (This is called the Brahmdnda kharpara, or the mundane 
sphere). 


21. It extends to millions of yojanas, and is compact with all its contents; it 
is a mere work of imagination, and formed of vacuity in the immensity of 
vacuum (which is the mind of God). 


22. The sphere of light turns on every side, of the great circle of vacuity, 
with all the lightsome bodies of the sun, moon and stars in its circumstance; 
there is no upside nor downward in it, but are all the same herein. 


23. There is no actual ascending, descending nor standing, of any planetary 
body therein; they are mere manifestations of the intellect, which exhibits 
these variations in the workings of the mind. 


CHAPTER CXXVIII. 
The Vacuum of Brahma and the sight of the World 
therein. 


Argument: — Vipaschita’s wanderings beyond the sphere of the world and 
the regions of darkness. 


Rama! I have told you all these by my personal perception of them, and not 
by any guess-work of mine, because it is by means of their purely intelligent 
bodies, that Yogis like ourselves have come to the clear sight of these things in 
nature, which are otherwise unknowable to the material body or mind. 


2. Thus, the world of which I have spoken, appears to us as in a dream, and 
not in any other aspect as it is viewed by others (As either an imaginary or 
solid material body). 


3. Now, whether the world is viewed in the light of a dream or any other 
thing, it is of no matter to us; since it is the business of the learned, to speak of 
its situation and what relates thereto (and not of its nature or essence). 


4. There are the two poles (merus) situated at the utmost extremities of the 
north and south of the world; and it is the business of the learned, to enquire 
into the endless kinds of beings lying between them. 


5. These varieties are well known to the people of those particular parts; 
and not to us here, where they do not appear in their native beauty. 


6. The two poles (as said before), standing at the farthest extremities of the 
globe, limit the earth with its seven continents and seas, and stretch no farther 
beyond them. 


7. Now hear, O Rama, that the whole body of water on earth, is ten times as 


much, as the extent of the two continents, (Jit., valves), which are surrounded 
by it. 


8. The two continents attract the circumambient waters around them, as the 
magnet attracts the needles about it; and the water (in its turn), upholds the 
continents (and islands), as the kalpa tree supports the fruits upon it. 


9. All things on earth are supported by it, as the fruits of a tree are 
supported by its stem; wherefore everything on earth falls down on it, as fruits 
fall upon the ground. 


10. Far below the surface of the water, there is a latent heat underneath, 
which is ever burning without any fuel, which is as still as air, and clear as the 
flame of fire. 


11. At the distance of ten times from it, there is the vast region of air; and 
as many times afar from that, there is the open space of transparent vacuum. 


12. At a great distance from that, there is the infinite space of the vacuity of 
Divine spirit; which is neither dark nor bright, but is full of Divine 
Intelligence. 


13. This endless void of the supreme spirit, is without its beginning, middle 
or end; and is named as the universal soul, the great Intellect and perfect bliss; 
(nirvana or insouciance). 


14. Again, there are myriads of orbs, in the distant parts of these spheres; 
that appear to and disappear from view by turns. 


15. But in reality, there is nothing that either appears or disappears, in the 
uniformly bright soul of Brahma; where everything continues in the same 
manner, throughout all eternity. 


16. I have thus related to you, Rama, all about the phenomenal worlds, that 
are perceptible to us; hear me now to tell you, what became of Vipaschit in 
the polar region. 


17. Being led by his former impressions and accustomed habit, he kept 
wandering about the top of the mountain (as he was wont to do before); but 
fell down afterwards in the dark and dismal pit therein. 


18. He found himself lying as dead at that spot, when the birds of air, as big 


as mountain peaks, alighted upon his dead body, which they tore to pieces and 
devoured at last. 


19. But as he died on the holy mount, and had a spiritual body of himself; 
he did not feel the pains and pangs which are inevitable upon the loss of the 
material body, but retained his clear consciousness all along. 


20. Yet as his self-consciousness, did not attain the transcendent 
perceptivity of his soul; he remembered the grossness of his past acts and 
deeds, and was sensible of them, as any living body. 


21. Rama asked: — How is it possible Sir, for the unembodied mind, to 
perform the outward actions of the body; and how can our spiritual 
consciousness, have any kind of perception of anything? 


22. Vasishtha replied: — As desire drives the home-keeping man from his 
house, and as imagination leads the mind to many places and objects, so the 
mind of this prince was led from place to place, (as his reminiscence 
portrayed them before it). 


23. As the mind is moved or led by delusion, dream, imagination and by 
error or misapprehension and recital of stories, (to the belief of things); so the 
mind of the prince was led to the credence (of whatever appeared before him). 


24. It is the spiritual or intellectual body (or the mind), which is subject to 
these fallacies, (and not the corporeal body); but the human mind, forgets in 
course of time, its spiritual nature; and thinks on its materiality. (7.e., takes it 
for a material substance). 


25. But upon disappearance of these fallacies, in the manner of the 
mistaken notion of the snake in a rope; there appears the spiritual body only, 
in lieu of the corporeal one. 


26. Consider well, O Rama! that the spiritual body is the only real 
substantiality; because all that appears to exist here beside the intellect, is no 
existence at all (without the mind, which makes and unmakes them). 


27. As the mind of a man going from one place to another, passes on 
quietly over the intermediate places, and is quite unconscious of them; such is 
the case with the intellect, which passes to endless objects, without ever 
moving from its fulcrum, or changing itself to any other form. 


28. Say therefore, where is there a duality, and what object is there 
deserving your amity or enmity, when all this totality is but one infinite Deity, 
and known as the transcendent understanding. 


29. The transcendental understanding is that calm and quiet state of the 
Intellect, which is without the workings of the mind; and though the prince 
Vipaschit was settled in his spiritual body, he had not yet attained to that state 
of transcendentalism. (This is Platonism or musing of the soul in itself). 


30. He being in want of this percipience, found his mind on the stretch; and 
with his spiritual body, he saw a dark gloom, as it appears to a foetus confined 
in the embryo. 


31. Amidst this gloom, he beheld the mundane egg split in twain, and 
perceived the surface of the earth, situated in the lower valve thereof. It was a 
solid substance, as bright as gold, and extending to millions of yojanas. 


32. At the end of this he saw the waters, eight times in extent to that of the 
land; and these in the form of crusts of the oceans, formed the two valves 
(continents) of the earth. (i.e., the Eastern and Western hemispheres). 


33. After passing over this, he reached to the region of light, blazing with 
the sun and stars; emitting flames of conflagration issuing from the vault of 
heaven. 


34. Having passed that region of fire, without being burnt or hurt in his 
spiritual body; he was led by his mind to another region, where he thought 
and felt himself to be borne aloft by the winds to his former habitation. 


35. As he was carried in this manner, he felt himself to be of a spiritual 
body; for what is it beside the mind, that can lead anybody from one place to 
another. 


36. With this conviction of himself, the patient prince passed over the 
region of the winds; and got at last to the sphere of vacuum, which was ten 
times in extent to that of the former. 


37. Passing over this, he found the infinite space of the vacuum of Brahma; 
wherein all was situated, and whence all had proceeded, which is nothing and 
yet something, of which nothing can be known or predicated. 


38. Moving along this empty air, he was carried far and farther onward in 


his aerial journey; until he thought in his mind, he could see from there, all the 
other spheres of the earth and water, and of fire and air, which he had passed 
over before. 


39. There were again the formations of worlds, and repeated creations and 
dissolutions of them to be seen in it; and trains of gods and men, and those of 
hills and all other things; going on in endless succession therein. 


40. There was a recurrence of the primary elements, and their assuming of 
substantial forms; and repetitions of creations, and reappearances of worlds 
and the sides of the compass. 


41. Thus the prince is still going on in his journey through the infinite void 
of Brahman; and finds the succession of creations and their dissolutions in it 
to no end. 


42. He has no cessation from his wanderings, owing to his conviction and 
assuetude of thinking the reality of the world; nor does he get rid of his 
ignorance, which is from God also. (Man is created in ignorance, and barred 
from tasting the forbidden fruit of knowledge). 


43. Whatever you view in your waking, or see in your dream; is the 
perspicacity of the Divine soul, and ever displays these sights in itself. 


44. This world is an apparition of our ignorance, like the spectres that are 
seen amidst deep darkness; but know that it is the transparent intellect of God 
which represents it so, and will ever do the same. 


45. And as the dark sight of the gross world, as well as the clear light of its 
transparency, do both of them proceed alike from the self-same mind of God; 
it is impossible to conceive, whether it is the one or the other, or both alike. 


46. Hence, O Rama, this prince being uncertain of the transparency of the 
Divine spirit has been wandering for ever more, in the dark maze of his 
preconceived worlds; as a stray deer, roves amidst the tangled wilderness. 


CHAPTER CXXIX. 
Vipaschit’s becoming a stag. 


Argument: — The fates of the four Vipaschitas, and the transformation of 
one to a stag. 


I have heard of the liberation of two Vipaschitas, by grace of Vishnu; and 
want now to know what became of the two brothers, that have been 
wandering all about. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — One of these two, learnt by long habit to subdue 
his desires, and by his wandering in many islands, had at last settled in one of 
them, and obtained his rest in God. 


3. Having relinquished the sight, of the outward livery of the world, he saw 
millions of orbs rolling in the vacuity and is still enrapt with the view. 


4. The second one (or other) of them, was released from his personal 
wanderings, by his continuance in the contiguity of the moon, where his 
constant association with the stag-like mark on the disc of that luminary, 
changed his form to that of that animal, which he still retains in his situation 
upon a hill. 


5. Rama asked: — How is it Sir, that the four persons of Vipaschit, having 
but one mind, and the same desire and aim in view, could differ so much in 
their acts, that brought upon them such different results of good and evil? 


6. Vasishtha replied: — The habitual desire of a person, becomes varied 
according to the various states of his life, in course of time and in different 
places; it becomes weaker and stronger in degree, though it is never changed 
in its nature. 


7. It is according to circumstances that the self-same desire or object of a 


person, is modified in different forms; and whatever of these is greater in its 
intensity, the very same takes the precedence of others, and comes to pass in a 
short time. 


8. In this divided state of their desires, the four persons of the prince, 
arrived to four different states in their modes in life; so that two of them were 
immerged in their ignorance, the third became a deer, and the last gained his 
liberation at last. 


9. The two former have not yet arrived at the end of their nescience, but 
have been grovelling in darkness by their blindness to the light of truth; which 
can hardly dispel the darkness, that is continually spread by ignorance. 


10. It is only the light of philosophy, that is able to drive the gloom of 
ignorance; which however deep rooted it is, then flies at a distance, as the 
shade of night is dispersed before the light of day. 


11. Attend now to what this Vipaschit did in the other world, where he was 
cast on the coast of gold, across the far distant ocean of sweet waters, and 
which he mistook for the habitable earth. 


12. Beyond this he beheld an orb in the vacuity of Brahma, which was as 
he thought the vacuum of the great Brahma himself. 


13. Here he was led by his excellent virtues, amidst the society of the 
learned; and learning from them the visible world in its true light, he was 
amalgamated into the state of Brahma himself. 


14. No sooner had he arrived at that state, than his ignorance and his body 
disappeared from him, as the sea in the mirage vanishes before the closer 
view, and as falsehood flies before truth. 


15. Thus I have related to you all the acts of Vipaschit, and about the 
eternity of ignorance as that of Brahma, because it is coeval with him 
(because the positive idea of knowledge, is always blended with that of its 
counterpart or the negative idea of ignorance). 


16. See the millions of years, that have been passing in eternity, but the 
mind by its nature, is quite unmindful of their course and number. (So also is 
the idea of eternity, of which we have no definite idea). 


17. As the knowledge of horses is said to be false, when known, so the 


knowledge of the world (as a separate existence) is a falsity, but being truly 
known, it is found to be Brahma himself. (?) 


18. There is no difference of avidyd or ignorance, from the essence of 
Brahma; because the one subsists in the other; for Brahma is the perfect 
Intellect himself that shows the difference in the modes of intellection. (All 
differences are displayed in the Divine Mind). 


19. Another Vipaschit, that was wandering all about in the universal 
sphere, could not come to the end of his ignorance, (avidyd), in his course of a 
millennium. 


20. Rama said: — How was it, Sir, that he could not reach to the utmost 
pole of the universe, nor could he pierce its vault to get out of it? Please 
explain this fully to me, which you have not yet done. 


21. Vasishtha replied: — When Brahma was born at first in mundane egg, 
he broke the shell with both his hands, into the upper and lower halves. 


22. Hence the upper valve of the shell, rose too far upwards from the lower 
half; and so the lower valve, descended as far below the upper part. 


23. Then there are the circles of earth, water and air, which are supported 
upon these valves; while these two serve as bases for the support of other 
spheres. 


24. In the midst of these there is the vacuous sky, which is infinite in its 
extent, and which appears unto us, as the blue vault of heaven. 


25. It is not bounded by the circles of earth and water, but is a pure void, 
and basis of all other spheres that rest upon it. 


26. He passed by that way into the infinite void, as the circles of the starry 
frame revolve amidst the same; in order to examine the extent of ignorance 
and to obtain his release from it, as he was taught to find. 


27. But this avidyd or ignorance, being coalescent with Brahma, is as 
infinite as the Deity himself; and there she is as unknowable as God, as yet 
nobody has been able to know her nature. (God and Nature are both 
unknowable). 


28. Vipaschit continuing to mount afar and higher in the heavens, found the 


nature of avidyd or ignorance to be coextensive with the extent of the worlds, 
through which he traversed on high. 


29. Now see how one of these persons was liberated, and another grazing 
about as a stag; see the other two fast bound to their former impressions, and 
constrained to rove about the worlds, which they took for realities in their 
ignorance. 


30. Rama said: — Tell me kindly, O sage, where and how far and in what 
sorts of worlds, have these Vipaschitas been still roaming, with getting their 
intermission. 


31. At what distance are those worlds, where they are born over and over 
again; all this is very strange to me, as they have been related by you. 


32. Vasishtha said: — The worlds to which the two Vipaschitas are carried, 
and where they have been roving; are quite invisible to me, notwithstanding 
all my endeavours to look into them. (It is the terra incognita). 


33. So the place where the third Vipaschit is roving as a deer, is also in a 
land which is known to nobody on earth. 


34. Rama said: you have said Sir, that the Vipaschit who is transformed to 
a deer, has been roving on a hill; tell me therefore, O most intelligent seer, 
where is that hill situated, and how far is it from here. 


35. Vasishtha answered: — Hear me tell you, how far off is that world from 
here, where Vipaschit has entered after passing through the vast vacuity of the 
supreme spirit; and has been wandering there in his form of a deer. 


36. Know it to be somewhere amidst these three worlds, where he has been 
roving as a stray deer; because this is the vast vacuity of the Divine spirit; in 
which all these worlds are interspersed at great distances from one another. 


37. Rama rejoined: — How is it consistent, Sir, to say with good reason, 
that Vipaschit was born and dead in this world, and is still roving as a deer in 
it? (Why did he wander about in infinity, if he were to remain a finite being 
herein? — gloss). 


38. Vasishtha replied: — As the whole must well know all the parts of 
which it is composed, so do I know everything everywhere, which is situated 
in the all comprehensive soul of God, whereto I have assimilated myself. 


(Vasishtha means to say, that he knew all in his svanubhava or all-knowing 
mind. — Gloss). 


39. I know the absent, (Ze., all things past and future), and all that is 
destroyed, as well as all forms of things whether small or great, are all 
interwoven together and exhibited before me, as if they were the production 
of this earth of ours. 


40. Hence, all that I have told you, O Rama, regarding the adventures of the 
prince, was the work of his fancy, and took place in some part of this world, 
where he lived and died. 


41. The Vipaschitas all wandered about the other worlds in empty air, and 
all this was the work of their imagination, which is unrestricted in its flight 
through boundless space. 


42. One of these has happened to be born here as a deer, and it is in the dale 
of a mountain, somewhere upon this earth. (It is believed that all mortal souls 
transmigrate to this again, after their wanderings are over in other spheres). 


43. The place where the prince is reborn in his form of a stag, after all his 
wanderings in other spheres were over; is in this orb of earth, where he is 
placed on a certain spot by an act of unaccountable chance; (kaka tdliya). 


44. Rama said: — If it is so, then tell me Sir, in what region of this earth, 
on what hill and in what forest of it, is this stag placed at present. 


45. What is he doing now, and how does he nibble the grass in the verdant 
plain; and how long will it be, before that veteran seer may come to the 
remembrance of his former state and past actions. 


46. Vasishtha replied: — It is the same stag, which has been presented to 
you by the ruler of the province of Trigarta; and is kept close in your pleasure 
garden for your sport. 


47. Valmiki said: — Rama was quite surprised with all the people sitting at 
the court, upon hearing the sage say so; and ordered his attendant lads in the 
hall to bring it forthwith before his presence there. 


48. Then the brute stag was brought and placed before the open court, when 
the court-people found it plump and fat, and quite tame and gentle. (Lit: 
content with its own state). 


49. Its body was spotted all over, as with the stars of heaven; and its eyes 
were as outstretched as the petals of lotus flowers, and by far more handsome 
than the eyes of beauteous damsels. 


50. It looked with its timorous glances, on the blue sapphires which 
decorated the court; ran to bite them with its open month, thinking them to be 
blades of grass. 


51. Then as it gazed at the assemblage, with its raised neck, uplifted ears 
and staring eyes through fear; so they raised their heads, pricked up their ears, 
and looked upon the animal with their open eyes, for fear of its leaping and 
jumping upon them. 


52. At last the king with all his ministers and courtiers, were all amazed at 
the sight of the animal, and thought it was all a magic, which they saw before 
them. 


53. The wondering eyes of the assembled people, and the shining gems on 
the persons of the princes, made the court hall appear, as if it were studded 
with full-blown lotuses all around. (The simile of blooming eyes and 
blossoming lotuses, is common in all Indian poetry). 


CHAPTER CXXX. 
Entering of the stag into the fire. 


Argument: — The stag burnt in the meditation of Vasishtha, and turned in 
its former figure of the Prince. 


Valmiki related: — Rama then asked Vasishtha, to tell him by what means 
Vipaschit was released from his brutish shape and restored to his human form 
again. 


2. Vasishtha said: — The way by which a person has had his rise, is the 
only means that conduces to his success, welfare and happiness in life; (and a 
departure from this course, brings on his ruin). 


3. Vipaschit had been a worshipper, and it is by his re-entrance into the 
refuge of that deity only; that his changed form of the stag, may be altered and 
restored to its former figure, of bright and unalloyed gold. 


4. I will now try the means of his restoration in your presence, as you may 
all witness it with your open eyes; and this stag will of itself enter into the fire 
before your sight. 


5. Valmiki related: — Saying so, the benevolent sage, touched his water 
pot with his hand, and muttered his mantras upon it in the proper form; (Z.e., 
with fixed attention). 


6. He thought intently upon the god of fire, with his flashing flames all 
around him; and immediately there sprang a blaze of fire, upon his reflection 
on it (in the midst of the royal hall). 


7. This was a pure flame, kindled without any coal or fuel, and burning 
with a rumbling noise, without emitting any smoke or soot or sloe. 


8. Brighter and brighter it burnt in its beauty, and shone as a dome of gold, 
by shedding a golden lustre all about; it was as flushing as the blushing 
kinsuka blossom, and as glowing as the evening clouds of heaven. 


9. The assembled hosts receded backward, upon beholding the spreading 
flame; but the stag flushed with the fervour of its former faith, on seeing its 
adored deity manifest before its sight. 


10. As it looked on the fire with its ardent desire, he got rid of his sins, as if 
they were burnt away by its flames; and then advancing slowly towards it, he 
jumped at once amidst the blaze, as a lion springs aloft on his prey. 


11. At this moment, the Muni moved his mind to meditation, and found the 
sins of the prince were burnt away from his soul; and then addressed the god, 
saying: — 


12. O lord, that bearest the sacrificial butter to the celestials, recall to thy 
mind the past acts of the prince, in his faith to thee; and kindly restore him, to 
his former handsome figure again. 


13. As the sage was praying in this manner, he saw the stag to be released 
from the flame, and running towards the assembled princes, with the velocity 
of an arrow flying towards its butt end or mark. 


14. Having entered into the burning fire, he appeared as a flaming body, 
and was seen by the assembly to be of a form, as bright as the appearance of 
an evening cloud. 


15. Thus the stag was changed to the form of a man, before the sight of the 
assembled princes; as a spot of cloud is seen to assume another figure in the 
face of the bright vault of heaven. 


16. It was seen amidst the flame, to assume a figure as that of pure gold; 
which afterwards took the form of a man, of handsome shape and appearance. 
(So the funeral fire purifies the soul of its impurities, and gives it a brighter 
form afterwards). 


17. He appeared as the orb of the sun, or as the disc of the moon in the sky; 
or as the god Varuna in the waters of the deep, or as the evening cloud or 
rising moon. 


18. There was the reflexion of the sun in the pupils of his eyes, as it was 


reflected on the surface of water, or on a mirror or bright gem; and the fire of 
his faith, blazed serenely in the sockets of his eyeballs. 


19. Shortly afterwards this blaze of light disappeared from the court, as the 
light of a lamp is blown away by the breath of wind; or as the tinges of 
evening clouds vanish in the sky under the shades of night. 


20. The man then stood as plainly in the hall, as the idol of a deity is seen 
to stand in a dilapidated temple (without its brightness); or as an actor is seen 
behind the scene (without his dress). 


21. He stood silent holding a rosary on his hand, and having his sacred 
thread, hanging down a chain of gold about his neck; he wore a robe of pure 
white blanched by the fiery heat; and appeared as the bright moon, rising 
before the assembly. 


22. On seeing the brightness of his person and attire, the courtiers all and 
every one, cried out saying, — “O to the lustre”; and because he was as 
lustrous as day light, he was named, “Lustre” by all. 


23. The courtiers also confirmed it by saying that, because he is as bright as 
brightness itself, let him be styled the “bright or Bhasa,” the name that he bore 
on him ever afterwards. 


24. He sat in the hall in his meditative mood, and remembered all the 
incidents of his past life and former body. 


25. The assembly was struck with wonder, and remained quite motionless 
and speechless and absorbed in thought; as Bhasa was reflecting in his mind 
the adventures of his past life. 


26. Then the prince rose from his reverie after a short while, and advanced 
towards the assembly, under his newly obtained title of Bhasa or the light. 


27. He advanced at first towards Vasishtha, and saluted him with delight; 
and then addressed him saying: — “I bow down, Sir, before thee, as the giver 
of my life and light of knowledge of myself.” 


28. Vasishtha raised him by touching his head with his hand; and said: — 
“May thy protracted ignorance, O prince, dissipate this day and for ever 
after.” 


29. Victory to Rama, said Bhasa, and bowed down to Dasaratha; who rising 
a little from his seat, thus accosted him smilingly and said: — 


30. Dasaratha said: — You are welcome, O prince! be seated on this seat; 
you have wandered through many difficulties of the world, now take your rest 
here. 


31. Valmiki related: — Thus accosted by the king, the prince now bearing 
the name of Bhasa, took his seat on a cushion, after making his salutation, to 
the venerable sages Visvamitra and others. 


32. Dasaratha exclaimed: — O the pains, that Vipaschit has so long 
undergone, under the thraldom of Ignorance; in the manner of a wild elephant, 
tied in fetters at his feet by ruthless huntsmen. 


33. O to what miseries is man exposed, owing to his want of precise 
understanding, and by his false knowledge of the reality of these worlds, that 
are seen to be revolving in empty shape. 


34. How wondrous are these worlds, so extensive and so remote, which 
Vipaschit has traversed out, and how incredible are the pains, through which 
he has passed so long. 


35. O how wonderful is the nature and glory, of the inane Intellect of the 
vacuous spirit of the Supreme, that exhibits in empty air, the blank thoughts of 
his all-comprehensive mind, as sole and substantial ones (to the apprehension 
of ignorant mortals). 


CHAPTER CXXxXI. 
Bhasa’s Account of the Worlds and his Journeys 
throughout. 


Argument: — There is no substantive world, separate from the thoughts in 
the Eternal mind. 


Dasaratha said: — I understand that Vipaschit has acted unwisely, in taking 
so much pains in his wanderings for a knowledge of the spheres; because it is 
all in vain to inquire into unrealities and useless matters, and it was his 
ignorance or avidyd alone, that led him to the search. 


2. Valmiki related: — At this moment the sage Viswdmitra, who was 
sitting beside the king; opened his mouth and said on the subject now under 
consideration. 

3. Viswamitra said: — O king, there are many such men, who without a 


good understanding, and for want of best knowledge; are apt to think that all 
things are possible to be known by them. 


4. Hence it is that the sons of king Vatadhana, have been wandering in this 
manner, and for very many years, in search of true knowledge, all over this 
earth, and without ever being able to arrive at it. 


5. It is for exploring the limits of this earth, that they have been employed 
with ceaseless toil and unwearied labour, as a river runs in its incessant course 
for ever. 


6. This great world (the earth), is situated as an orb in the air, like an 
imaginary tree of boys growing in the sky, or as a toy ball of fanciful Brahma, 
rolling about in empty air. 


7. As creeping emmets move about a sugar ball, without falling off from it; 
so do all living bodies move about their support of this earth, which is 
sustained in the empty air. 


8. Those that are situated on the lower surface of this globe, are moving 
thereabouts as erectly, as those that are on its upper side (and though this earth 
is turning up and down yet no one sides away from it). 


9. The sun, moon and planets, together with the starry frame and the 
heavenly stream (the milky way); are attracted to turn round it incessantly, 
without ever coming in contact with it. 


10. The sky girds and surrounds it on all sides, though the firmament 
appears to be above our heads, and the earth below our feet. 


11. The living beings below the earth, are both moving downward or flying 
upward, as the beasts and birds on the upper side of it; and the region to which 
they fly is called the upper sky (whether it be in this or that side of it). 


12. There is on some part of this earth, a warrior race by name of 
Vatadhanas; and there were born three princes of this royal family, in days of 
yore, (and are said to be living still). 


13. They were firmly intent like Vipaschit, to know the limits of the visible 
world; and set out in their journey to explore the same, with a firm and 
unfailing resolution. 


14. They passed from the land to water, and the waters to other lands again; 
and thus they passed many lives and ages, in their repeated inquiries with their 
resuscitated bodies in reiterated births (because the steady pursuit of one, 
follows him in his successive births). 


15. Thus wandering forever all about the earth, they like ants moving on a 
sweet cake, found no end of it, nor reached to any other spot, beyond the same 
even in their thought of another one. 


16. They are still turning around it in the air, like busy emmets about a roll; 
and they are yet in the same search without being tired of it. (Alexander said, 
“Earth is this thy end?” but these princes found no end of it). 


17. Because whoever stands on any part of the globe, thinks it as the 
uppermost, and all other places on every side of it, to be lower than it; and so 


the antipodes below think themselves as upmost. 


18. They then said among themselves that, if they could not find the end of 
the earth all their toil, they must give up the pursuit and remove themselves 
elsewhere. 


19. So it is with this world, O king! which is no more than display of the 
thoughts of Brahma; it is a work or creation of the mind only, and a delusion 
as that of a protracted dream. 


20. The mind is the Supreme Brahma, and Brahma is self-same with his 
very mind; they are both of the form of the intellect, and there is no more 
difference between them, than that of open air and the sky. 


21. The intellect operates in itself, like the running waters in whirlpools; 
and as the eddies and their swelling bubbles, are no other than the very water, 
so the operations of the mind, are modifications of the mind itself. 


22. The sky, which is but vacuum, and was a void in the beginning; shows 
itself in the form of the world; which is neither created nor ever destroyed. 


23. Whatever the intellect suggests (from its preconceptions and 
predilections); the mind (which is the active principle), obeys the same and is 
inclined in the same way; and continues to view the outer world, as it has ever 
existed in thought. 


24. The visible world is of the same form, and equally imperishable as the 
intellectual; it is the eternal God that manifests himself in this manner, which 
is otherwise nothing of itself. 


25. There is an atom of the divine Intellect, an infinity of minuter atoms in 
the shape of ideas, just as there are innumerable stones in the body of a rock; 
they reside in the spirit of God, and are as translucent as the divine spirit. 


26. They abide in their own natures in the unexpanded spirit of God; but 
they do not live independent of themselves, as there is nothing that is separate 
from the supreme spirit. 


27. Therefore, this world is said to be the manifestation of the Divine Mind; 
and this conclusion is arrived at by the learned, by means of their logical 
consideration of the antecedent and subsequent. (i.e., by both their a priori as 
well as a posteriori arguments). 


28. It is strange therefore, that the human soul, should sorrow for its 
degradation and think itself as a different thing, though it is inseparable from 
the one universal soul. 


29. Now let the so-called prince Bhdsa, who is otherwise known as the 
mighty monarch Vipaschit by his former appellation; what other strange 
things, he remembers to have seen, in all his wanderings through worlds. 


30. Bhasa replied: — I have seen many sights, and wandered untired 
through many regions; and remember also to have felt various vicissitudes in 
my life. 


31. Hear, O king, how much I have known and felt, in my course through 
remote regions in the spacious firmament on high; and know the joys and 
griefs, which I have enjoyed and suffered, in my transmigrations in different 
bodies and distant worlds, from a long long time out of mind. 


32. It was by favour of the god of fire, and by the good and bad turns of 
fate; that I have seen a great many scenes, in my course in various forms and 
lives, like the revolving waters in a whirlpool, with a calm and constant and 
resolute mind. 


33. Actuated by past reminiscence and misled by mistaken view of visibles; 
I was impelled by my firm zeal to inquire into all worldly things, in the 
different forms and changes of my body. 


34. I had been an arbour for a thousand years, having my senses 
undeveloped in me, and feeling the rigours of all climates and seasons within 
myself. I had no mind nor mental action, save those of drawing the sap of the 
earth by my roots, and expanding myself into fruits and flowers. 


35. I had been a mountain stag for a hundred years, with my skin of golden 
hue, and my ears as flat as leaves of trees; I fed on blades of grass, was 
charmed with all kinds of music, and being the weakest of all animals of the 
forest, I could do no injury to anyone. 


36. I lived for half a century as a Sarabha, a wild animal with eight legs; I 
dwelt in the caves of Krancha mountain, and brought on my death by falling 
down from a craig, in attempting to fight with the raining clouds on high. (The 
Sarabha is a fabulous beast that dies by jumping down the hill). 


37. I had also been born once as Vidyddhara, and had lived upon the table 


land of Malaya mountains, and amidst the happy bowers of Mandara, redolent 
with the sweet scent of sandal woods and kadamba flowers. Here I have 
breathed the sweet air perfumed by gum agallochum, and enjoyed the 
company of Vidyadhari-fairies. 


38. I was born as a cygnet of the swan of Brahma, and tasted the honey of 
aureate lotuses for more than a century, and sported on the banks of the 
heavenly stream of Mandakinf, on the celestial mount of Meru. 


39. For a hundred years, I remained by the side of milky ocean, feeling the 
cooling breezes wafting the moisture of its waves, and the fragrance of the 
forests and listening to the songs of the songsters of springs, which join to 
vanish the infirmities and sorrows of life. 


40. I was once born as a jackal, in the woods of Kalenjara mountains, and 
roved about the blossoming gunja and Karanja forests; here I was trodden 
down by an elephant, and was about to expire, when I beheld that elephant to 
be killed by a lion in his turn. 


41. I was at one time transformed to the form of a celestial nymph, and 
accursed by a siddha to dwell alone in some other sphere; where I lived for 
the period of half a yuga upon the sahya mountain, smiling with the blooming 
blossoms of santanaka arbours. 


42. I next lived as a Valmika bird of raven, in my nest amidst the karavira 
plants, growing on the marshy grounds at the foot of a mountain; and there I 
passed my solitary life of a hundred years, with a fearful breast and ceaseless 
scrambles on the dreary rocks. 


43. I saw afterwards a level plain somewhere, with shady bowers of sylvan 
creepers under the shade of sandal trees; and beheld some females amusing 
there with swinging, like fruits on the branches of trees, and to be ravished 
away by the passing Siddhas. 


44. At another time, I passed my days as an anchorite, under the shade of 
Kadamba trees at the foot of a mountain; where I dwelt on the meditation of 
the single object of my devotion, and thus foolishly met my end with the pain 
of not meeting my object. 


45. I saw also this universe to be full of beings, which fill it as fishes people 
the ocean on every side; the air, sky and light, are all inhabited by beings, as 
well as this earth of ours. 


There is another wonder which fills this universe, as the shadow of the sky 
fills the ocean on all sides; it pervades in the air, water, sky and light, as well 
in all forms of things on earth. (This is the reflexion of Brahma in all creation, 
as that of the sky in water. — Gloss). 


46. I also saw another wonder in a woman, who contains the three worlds 
in her ample womb; and who is pictured with the forms of hills and all things, 
resembling their reflexions in a mirror. 


47. L asked her saying: O thou big bodied and big bellied one! tell me who 
thou art; to which she replied and said: — know me Sir, to be the pure and 
clear Intellect, that contains all these worlds within herself. 


48. She added and said: — O Sir, as you see me so wondrous in my form, 
so must you know all things in the world to be of the same kind; but people 
who view them in their natural form find them otherwise, unless they look 
into them in their spiritual light, when the gross forms vanish into nothing. 


49. These numberless beings on earth, are continually hearing, even 
without the directions of the Vedas and Sdstras, a warning voice arising from 
some part of their bodies, bidding them what is right or wrong for them to do. 
(This is called andhata dhwani or the voice of conscience). 


50. Nature reigns over all elements like andhata dhwani. The elements 
appear immovable at sight, but in fact, they possess inherent mobile forces; no 
one can assign any cause over them except delusion or mdyd. 


51. I once went to a place, where there were no females to be found, nor 
had the people any desire for them; and yet many among the living there were 
fastly passing away, and many others newly coming to existence. 


52. I have seen the wonder of some portentous clouds in the sky, charging 
against each other with a jarring noise; and pouring down their rains with 
fragments of things on all sides, which were picked up and used as weapons 
by men. 


53. I have seen another wonder somewhere that, these earthly cities and 
buildings, were passing in their aerial course, amidst a mist of thick darkness; 
and then vanishing in the air, returning to be your habitations here below. 


54. Another wonder that I saw was, that all these men and gods and 
reptiles, having left their differences of species, came to be of one kind in 


common with all other beings. (All distinctions are lost in the end). Because 
all things proceed at first from vacuum, and to this they return at last. 


55. I also beheld a spot which was full of light, and shone forth brightly 
without the lights of the sun, moon and stars. I remember well that effulgent 
glory, before which there was neither darkness nor day and night, and nothing 
else in existence. 


56. I saw also a place never seen before, which was devoid of gods and 
demons, men and animals of all kinds, it was without the vegetable creation, 
and habitation of any kind of being; and a world where the present and future, 
and all worlds are blended into eternity. 


57. In short, there is no place which I have not seen, nor any side (of the 
compass) where I have not been; there is no act or event which I have not 
known, and in a word, there is nothing unknown to me, that is unknown to the 
knower of all. (The soul that becomes one with Omniscient soul, becomes all- 
knowing like the same). 


58. I remember to have heard the jingling sound of the armlets of Indra, 
which resembled the noise of the rattling clouds on high; or likened the 
jangling jar of the gems, which glistened on the peaks of the Mandara 
mountain, in its trepidation of churning the milky ocean. 


CHAPTER CXXXII. 
Bhasa’s Relation of the Transmigrations of his soul. 


Argument: — Bhasa relates his repeated births, the wonders he has seen, 
and the vanity of the world. 


Bhasa continued: — It was once at the foot of the Mandara mountain, that I 
dwelt as a siddha under the shady bower of Manddra trees; and had been 
sleeping in the sweet embrace of an Apsara, Mandara by name; when it 
happened, that the current of a river bore us both away, as it carries down a 
straw in its course. 


2. I supported my partner now floating on the water, and asked her to tell 
me how could it happen to be so; when she with her tremulous eyes answered 
me thus, saying: — 


3. Here it occurs at the full moon, that this mountain which is sacred to the 
moon, gives rise to its outlets, which then rush out as rapidly, as ladies run to 
meet their consorts at the rising of the moon. 


4. It was owing to my rapture in your company, that I forgot to tell you of 
this; saying so, she lifted me up, and fled with me into the air, as a female bird 
mounts into the sky with her young. 


5. I was to the top of that mountain, where I remained seven years, with my 
dried and unsoiled body, as a bee remains unsullied on the pericarp of a lotus 
flower growing in the bed of the Ganges. 


6. I thence saw some other worlds beyond the starry circle, which were 
encircled by one another like the coatings of a plantain tree. They were bright 
by their own light, and were peopled by luminous bodies. 


7. There were no distinctions of directions nor divisions of daytime (for 


want of the sun); there were no Sdstras or rules of conduct, nor vedas for 
religious guidance; there was no difference of the gods and demi-gods, but the 
whole was bright with its own light. 


8. I was next born as a Vidyadhara, and lived for twice seven years as an 
ascetic under the name of Amarasoma, dwelling in the grove of kadamba 
trees, at the foot of a cloud-capt mountain, which was frequented by aerial 
cars of the celestials, for their pleasure, the sport and diversion. 


9. Then I was borne with the velocity of winds, afar amidst the ethereal 
regions on high; whence I beheld numberless elephants and horses, lions and 
deer, and woods and forests filled with beasts and birds, all moving along in 
the form of clouds beneath. 


10. It was thus with the force of the bird of heaven, — Garuda, that I 
mounted up to heaven from earth, and passed through infinite space, by favour 
of the god of fire, in order to see the extensive range of the delusion of Avidyd 
or Ignorance, which was displayed all around. 


It was thus by favour of the god of fire, and the fervour of my desire to see 
the extensive range of the delusion of Avidyd or Ignorance; that I mounted up 
to heaven from earth, with the force of the bird of heaven, — Garuda; and 
passed through the infinite space, that was spread all around. 


11. I felt in myself to fall off once, away and afar from the solar world; it 
seemed to be an ethereal ocean inhabited by stars, amidst which I was situated 
as one, with the consciousness of my fall and course of time. 


12. With the only consciousness of my fall from the sky on high, I felt in 
myself the sense of falling fast asleep from fatigue; and then in that state of 
sound sleep of my body, I thought I saw the sensible world in my mind, as if 
it were in my waking state. 


13. I saw again the same world within the horizon, and the same mandara 
mountain of the gods amidst it; whilst I had been fluttering in the midst of its 
abyss, as a bird sitting on a slender twig, is shaken and tossed about by the 
blowing wind. 


14. saw with my eyes to the utmost extent of the sensible world, and again 
and again, I was led to the sight of the visibles, and enjoyment of the sensibles 
only (in the repeated transmigrations of my soul). 


15. Thus I passed a long series of years, in viewing the visible and invisible 
objects (both of my waking and dreaming hours); as well as in passing 
through the passable and impassable paths (of this and other worlds). 


16. I could not find anywhere, the limit of this Avidyd or Ignorance, which 
showed unto me the visibles only (in my waking and dreaming, and in this 
world and others). It is a fallacy that has taken the possession of our minds, as 
the apparition of a goblin takes a deep root in the breasts of boys. 


17. This and this, (i.e., the visible), are not realities, is the firm conviction 
of all in their right reasoning; and yet the false sight of this and this as a 
reality, is never to be removed from anybody. 


18. We find our pleasures and pains, occurring to us every moment, with 
the changes of time and place; their course is as constant as the currents of 
rivers, which are ceaselessly succeeding one another. 


19. I remember to have seen a world, with all kinds of moving and 
unmoving beings in it; and a verdant mountain top in the midst, rustling with 
the blowing breeze, and shining of itself without the light of the luminaries. 
(This is the pinnacle of the glory of God). 


20. This mountain peak is delightsome to solitary recluses, it is quite free, 
alone and unlimited, and beyond all fear of change or decay. I have never seen 
in this brightsome world, a glory which is comparable to this divine 
effulgence. 


CHAPTER CXXXIII. 
Story of the Wonderful Carcass. 


Argument: — Description of a carcass falling from above, and covering the 
whole surface of the Earth. 


Vipaschit said: — I saw another great wonder, in some part of some other 
world, which I will now rehearse unto you; it was a horrible sight that attends 
on sin, and which I had to see by my blind attachment to ignorance. 


2. There is somewhere amidst the vast vacuum, a wonderfully bright 
sphere, which is quite impassable by you; it is situated in a vacuity like this of 
ours, and so different from it, as a city in dream differs from one in sight. 
(Because the romantic view of the vision is not realizable to ocular sight). 


3. As I saw rambling in that sphere, in search of the object that I have in my 
heart, and looking to all sides of the void; I saw a huge and unmoving 
shadow, like that of a body of locusts spread over the earth. 


4. I saw astonished at the sight, and cast my eyes on all sides to see what it 
was; I came to find the mountainous form of a man, falling fast from the sky; 
and hurling down like a whirlpool upon the earth. 


5. Who can be this person? said I, is it the lord Virdj with his mountainous 
body, or a mountain falling from the clouds? It fills the sky and the whole 
space of heaven, and hides the light of the day under its all developing 
shadow? 


6. As I saw pondering in me what might this portent mean; (as whether it 
was the figure of Virdj or the form of Brahma himself); I saw soon after, the 
bulky body of the sun falling down from heaven, it seemed to be hurled down 
by the hurricane of desolation and dashing with a hideous crash against the 
backbone or great belt of the mundane egg of Brahma. 


7. Soon as this hideous and prodigious body, fell down upon the earth, it 
filled its whole surface, and covered the face of the seven continents and 
oceans. 


8. I dreaded my imminent destruction, together with that of whole earth 
under its blow; and determined to enter into the ever-burning fire by my side. 


9. Then the lord fire, — the source of vedas, and my adored divinity in a 
hundred repeated births, appeared manifest before me in his cooling moon- 
like form, and said, fear not, no evil will betide thee. 


10. I then addressed the god, saying: — be victorious, O my lord and 
adored one in repeated births; save me from this untimely desolation, which is 
now impending on all. 


11. Thus invoked by me, the god responded again saying the same words: 
— “Fear thou not, but rise, O sinless one, and follow me to my region of the 
empyrean.” 


12. Saying so, he made me sit on the back of his parrot, and flew with me 
up to heaven; by burning athwart a part of the falling body. 


13. Getting to the upper sky, I found the body as if it were made of wood, 
and it was this which struck so much terror below, as it is attended with the 
falling of a portent, — a comet or meteor from above. 


14. Then as it felt down in full force, the earth shook beneath its weight, 
with all trembling waters and tottering mountains, and shaking woods and 
forests. The mountains burst forth in cataracts, which overflowed on the land, 
and bored it to horrible holes. 


15. The earth groaned from her bowels, and the sky roared on all its four 
sides; the heavens resounded to the roar, and mountains growled with the 
fearful howling of all beings, as at the approach of their last doom. 


16. The earth groaned under the burden, and all the quarters trembled with 
fear; the vacuum was filled with the echo of cries rising from the earth, and 
the Garuda-eagles were on their flight through fear. 


17. There arose a harsh and hideous uproar on high, from the loud bursting 
of the mountains below; and like the crashing and clattering of the dark and 
dense clouds of deluge, when they are shattered and scattered, by the blasts of 


diluvian winds. 


18. The earth trembled and roared at the impetuous fall of the hideous 
carcass, and the resounding sky re-bellowed to the sound from its hundred 
mouths; the mountains burst out on all sides, and their falling fragments and 
pinnacles, were hurried headlong, and buried underneath the ground. 


19. Its fall was as the breaking down of a mountain pinnacle or fragment, 
smashing the tops of the lower hills, rending and splitting the ground, and 
levelling all things on earth with the dust. 


20. It perturbed the waters of the deep, and hurled down the hills to the 
ground; it crushed all living beings, and gave ample range to the sport of the 
agents of destruction; (the Rudras). 


21. The falling of the sun upon the earth, and his hiding the face of the 
continents under him; the crushing of mountains and the breaking down of 
towering cities. 


22. The celestials saw all these from above this earth, which forms one half 
of the mundane egg, turning to a vacuum form; (i.e., vanishing into the air). 


23. As I was looking on that mountainous body of flesh, (i.e., the huge 
carcass); I observed that the ample space of all the seven continents of the 
earth was not enough to contain this single body. 


24. Seeing this, I applied to the good grace of the god of fire; and asked 
him saying, — Lord what is this and what does it mean. 


25. Why did the sun also fall down from heaven, along with that corpse; 
and how is it that the space of the whole earth and all its oceans, has not 
sufficient room to compass it? 


26. The God of fire replied: — Hold your patience, my son, for a while, 
until this portentous event passes away; when I will explain this marvellous 
matter fully to you. 


27. Soon as the God had said these words, there flocked an assemblage of 
the celestials all around us; and it consisted of all kinds of beings that are born 
and move about in the aerial regions. 


28. There were the Siddhas, sadhyas, Apsaras, Daityas, Gandharvas and 


Kinnaras among them; together with the Munis, Rishis, Yakshas and Patres, 
Matres and the gods also with them. 


29. All these celestials then, bowed down their heads in veneration; and all 
joined with their prostrate bodies to praise the dark goddess of Night, who is 
the refuge and resort of all. 


30. The celestials said: — May that goddess protect us her protégés, who is 
immaculate and incomparable, and has the grey braids of Brahma’s hairs, tied 
at the top of her khattanga ensign, and the heads of the slain Daityas, strung 
to the neck-chain hanging on her breast; who wears the feathers of Garuda on 
her head, and who after devouring the world, drinks off the deep also at the 
end. 


CHAPTER CXXXIV. 
The story of the Carcass Continued. 


Argument: — Description of the body of the Goddess, and her food of the 
carcass, and drink of the blood. 


Vipaschit continued: — All this time, I was looking at the carcass that had 
fallen from above, and covered the whole surface of the earth under it. 


2. I distinguished that part of its body which was its belly, and had hid in it 
the whole earth, with all its seven continents and immeasurable mountain. 


3. I was then told by the god of fire, that there was no limitation of its arms 
and thighs, and of the extent of its head; and that it had fallen from beyond the 
polar region, which is inaccessible to mankind. 


4. The Goddess, who is so much lauded by the celestials, is the 
manifestation of vacuum, which of itself becomes dry. (i.e., is naturally empty 
and void). 


5. She is represented as accompanied by ghosts and furies, as followed by 
demons and hobgoblins, which walk in her train, and shine as stars and 
meteors in the open firmament. 


6. Her long and muscular arms, are stretched to the skies as the tall pines of 
the forest; and her eyeballs flash forth with living fire, and scatter the solar 
beams all around. 


7. The flashing weapons in her hands, were jangling in the sky; and her 
missiles were darting like flocks of birds flying from their aerial nests. 


8. Her flaming body and flashing eyes and limbs, glistened with the glare of 
a bush of reeds set on fire, or as the sparkling of a flight of arrows in the 


midway air. 


9. Her glittering teeth, shed the lustre of the beaming moon, and brightened 
the faces of the four quarters of heaven, with a milk white splendour; while 
her tall slender stature, reached to and touched the sky. 


10. She stood supportless, like the stretching clouds of the evening sky; and 
was mounted on a dead body, as if she rested on the blessed seat of Brahma. 
(Brahma pada the throne of God, Elysium, Valhalla or Nirvana). 


11. She shone in her brilliant form, like the crimson clouds of evening; and 
added to the ocean of the ethereal expanse, the burning blaze of sub-marine 
fire. 


12. She was flaunting in her decorations of human skeleton and bones, and 
flourishing her weapons of the mallet and others; and darting her arrows all 
around, as a mountain scatters its flowers all about. 


13. She mounted aloft in the air, with her neck-chain of human skulls, 
sounding with a harsh clattering noise; resembling the rattling of stones, 
falling down a mountain with the precipitate rains. 


14. The gods then prayed to her saying: — O mother goddess! we make an 
offering of this carcass to thee; do thou join with thy adherents, and soon take 
this corpse for your food, and make an end of it. 


15. Upon this prayer of the gods unto her, the goddess began to draw in 
with her inhaling breath, the blood and pith of the carcass into her bowels and 
intestines. 


16. As the goddess was absorbing the dead blood, by her inhalation of it, 
the red fluid rushed into her wide-open mouth, like the entrance of the evening 
clouds, into the cavity of the western mountain (of the setting sun). 


17. The ethereal goddess drank the blood, thus drawn in by her breath; as 
long as her lean skeleton-like frame, grew fat from her satiety, and she stood 
confest in her form of Chandika. 


18. Being thus filled and fattened, by full draughts of the sanguineous 
beverage; she had the appearance of a blood red cloud, with flashing 
lightnings shooting from her eyes. 


19. The pot-bellied goddess, being then giddy with her bloody drink; 
became loose in her attire, began to flounce her ornaments, and flourish all her 
weapons in the empty air. 


20. She began to dance and toss about in the air, which was almost filled by 
the bulk of her body; while the gods kept watching on her movements, from 
their seats on the distant border or boundary mountains. 


21. Immediately upon this, the whole host of her female ghosts and goblins, 
composed of Rupikas and others, flew upon the carcass, as the rainy clouds 
alight upon mountains. 


22. The mountainous carcass, was laid hold by the clutches of 
Kumbhandas, and torn to a thousand pieces by them; while the Rupikas bored 
its belly, and the Yakshas gored its back with their elephantine tusks. 


23. But they could not get or break its arms, shoulders and thighs; because 
these members of its body, stretched far beyond the limits of the mundane or 
solar system. 


24. They could not therefore, be reached unto by the ghosts, who are 
confined within the limits of this world, and could not go beyond, where those 
parts were rotten away of themselves. 


25. As the goddess was dancing in the air, and her hobgoblins were 
prancing over the carcass; the celestials remained sitting on the mountain tops, 
and kept looking on this dreadful scene. 


26. The disgusting morsels of putrid flesh, and the stench of the rotten 
carcass filled the air and blood red clouds shrouding the scene, seemed as 
burning bushes, forming the fuel of the furnace (for roasting the rancid meat). 


27. The chopping of the fetid flesh, raised a sap-sap sound; (meaning the 
sap of the carcass); and the breaking of its hard bones, sent forth a kat-kat 
noise (purporting to cut them to pieces). 


28. The concourse of the demons, caused a clashing sound; resounding as 
the clashing occasional by the collision and concussion of rocks and 
mountains against one another. 


29. The goddess devoured her mouthfuls of flesh, roasted in the fire that 
flashed forth from her mouth, and the offals and fragments that fell down from 


it, covered the earth below with filth; while the drops of blood that distilled 
from the draughts she had drank, reddened the ether with tints of vermilion 
hue. 


30. The celestial spectators saw their premises, within the precincts of the 
visible horizon; and the surface of the continents of the earth, to present the 
sight of an universal ocean of blood. 


31. All the mountains on earth, were covered with blood, which reflected 
their redness to the cloud on high; which gave the appearance of a red 
mantling veil, spreading over the faces of the female regent deities of all sides 
of heaven. 


32. The sky below blazed with the flash of the weapons, which brandished 
in the hands of the goddess all around; and there was no vestige of any city or 
habitation to be seen on earth. (Lit.: — they were lost to sight, but retained in 
memory, i.e., things absent from sight, are present in the mind). 


33. It was an incredible sight to see, that all the moving and unmoving 
objects of nature should be engrossed and absorbed in the bodies of the ghosts 
of insatiate death. 


34. The dancing demons were waving their arms in air, in a manner as if 
they were weaving nets for catching the aerial birds; and were lifting and 
dropping them up and down, so as they seemed to measure the height and 
depth of the firmament. 


35. They stretched out the entrails of their victims, from the earth below to 
the solar circle above; and appeared to measure the distance with lines and 
cords. 


36. The gods seeing the earth thus endangered by the portentous carcass 
and its surface converted to an extensive sheet or ocean of blood. 


37. They felt themselves dismayed and distressed, from their seat above the 
polar mountain; and beyond the boundary of the seven continents, where the 
stench of the putrid carcass could not stink into their nostrils. 


38. Rama asked: — How is it Sir, that the stench of the carcass could not 
infect the gods, in their seats on the polar mountain; when the fallen dead 
body is said to extend even beyond the limits of the mundane system? 


39. Vasishtha replied: — It is true, O Rama, that the dead body stretched 
beyond the limits of the mundane sphere; but its belly lay within the 
boundaries of seven continents, and that its head and thighs and its head and 
feet were without it. 


40. But from its breasts and the two sides and its loins and waist, which lay 
out of this sphere, one could have a clear view of the polar circle, as well as 
that of its mountainous top. 


41. Sitting in those parts and places, the gods could well behold the 
pinnacles of the mountain; which were surely bright to sight, and as white as 
the rainless clouds of the skies. (i.e., white as fleecy clouds). 


42. Then the maters of furies of heaven, kept on dancing on the wide 
spread dead body; while the hosts of ghosts were devouring its flesh, as the 
corpse lay its face turned downwards. (i.e., upside down or topsy turvy). 


43. Seeing now the streams of reddish blood running around and the putrid 
stink of rotten body spreading on all sides; the gods all felt sorrowful at heart, 
and grieved among themselves with exclaiming (as follows). 


44. Ah alas! whither hath that earth disappeared, with all the bodies of 
waters upon her; where are those multitudes of men fled from it, and where 
are the mountains swept away from its surface. 


45. Alas, for those forest of sandal, mandara and kadamba woods which 
had so ornamented the earth! and woe for the flower gardens, and the happy 
groves of Malaya mountains! 


46. Where are those uplands of the lofty and gigantic snowy mountains of 
Himdalaya which appear now to be reduced to lurid clay, by ire of the red-hot 
blood, of the bloody ghost of the carcass. 


47. Even the gigantic kalpa trees, that grew below the Krauncha mountains, 
in the continent of the Krauncha dwipa; and which had spread its branches up 
to the Brahma-loka, are now reduced to dirt. 


48. O thou lordly milky ocean! where art thou now, that hast produced the 
moon and the goddess Laxmi from thy bosom; and that didst yield the 
pGrijata flower and the celestial ambrosia of the gods of yore. 


49. O thou ocean of cards! what has become of thee, that was full with thy 


waving forest of billows; which rose as high as mountains, and bore about 
sweet butter with their foaming froth. 


50. O thou mellifluous sea of honey, which was bordered by mountains 
studded by cocoa-nut trees; whose fruits afforded sweet liquor for the 
beverage of goddesses, where hast thou and they fled at present. 


51. O Krauncha dwipa! that didst abound in kalpa arbour which were 
inseparably clasped by the twining ivy of golden hue; say where art thou hid 
with thy towering Krauncha mountain. 


52. O Puskara dwipa! where art thou now with thy limpid fountains, which 
were ever decked with beds of lotus bushes, sported upon by the silvery swans 
of Brahma? 


53. O where are thy Kadamba groves gone, with their outstretched 
branches on all sides; and whose sheltered coverts were frequented by aerial 
nymphs, for their secluded amusements. 


54. O where is the Gomedha dwipa gone with its springs of sweet waters, 
and the flowery gardens about its holy places? And where are those vales and 
dales, which were beautified by kalpa trees and their golden creepers? 


55. Ah! where is the Saka dwipa with its forests of heavenly and ever 
verdant arbours, the very remembrance of whose fair spectacles, raises in the 
minds the sense of holiness and the sensations of heavenly bliss. 


56. Ah! where are those tender plants, which waved their leaves at the 
gentle breeze; and where are those blooming flowers, which had brightened 
the scene all around. 


57. The devastation of all these beauties of the landscape, fills our mind 
with pity and grief; and we know not how much more piteous and painful 
must it be to the majority of mankind. 


58. Ah! when shall we see again, the sugar-cane field beside the sea of 
saccharine waters; and the hardened sugar candy on the dry lands about; when 
shall we see the sweetmeats made of molasses and confectionary dolls of 
sugar. 


59. When shall we see again, sitting on our golden seats on Mount Meru 
the merry dance of the beauteous Apsaras daubed with sandal paste in their 


arbours of fdla and tamdla trees; and wafted by the cooling breeze of 
Kadamba and Kalpa trees on sylvan mountains? 


60. Ah! we remember the memorable Jambuvati river, which flows with the 
sweet juice of jambu fruits, and passes through the Jambudwipa to its 
boundary ocean. (i.e., the Indian ocean in the south). 


61. I oft remember, said one, the giddy song and dance of celestial nymphs, 
in the thick and shady groves of sailendra-trees, and in the coverts of 
mountains beside the heavenly stream; and it rends my heart like the lotus 
flower, as it opens its petals in the morning. 


62. Another one said: — Look at this ocean of blood, sparkling like the 
melted gold on the top of the golden mountain of Meru; and brightening the 
beams of the rising and setting sun, or as the moon-beams spread over the 
face of all sides of heaven. 


63. Alas! we know not where the earth is gone, with all her circumambient 
oceans about the continents; nor do we know where that high hill of Himalaya 
has fled, which was the resort of many rainy clouds, and yielded the lotus 
flowers on its summit. 


64. We know neither where those rivers, forests and groves have gone, 
which decorated the earth before; and pity for the cities and villages and their 
people, that are now to be seen no more. 


CHAPTER CXXXV. 
Disappearance of the Carcass, and the 
Reappearance of the Earth. 


Argument: — The corpse was eaten up by the ghosts, and its blood sucked 
up by the goddess. 


Vasishtha resumed and said: — After the corpse had been partly devoured 
by the demons, the gods who had been sitting on the polar mount, with 
Vasava or Indra at their head spoke to one another in the following manner. 


2. Lo! the voracious goblins have not yet wholly devoured the corpse; but 
flung its fat and flesh into the air to prove the paths of vehicles of 
Vidyadharas; and these being wafted away and scattered about by the winds, 
appear as huge masses of clouds overspreading the skies. 


3. See them also throwing away the relics of their food and drink, over the 
seven continents and oceans of the earth, and making it again to reappear to 
view (in the forms of its mud and waters). 


4. Alas! that the once delightsome earth, is now polluted by the impure 
carrion and blood; and covered under the garniture of its forests, as the sky is 
over shadowed by clouds. 


5. The big bones of its bulky body, form the mountains of this earth; and 
what is this high Himdlaya, but the huge back bone of the gigantic skeleton. 


6. Vasishtha said: — As the gods were speaking in this manner, the demons 
were employed in the meantime to construct the earth anew with the materials 
of the carcass, after which they flew in the air, and kept on dancing and 
flouncing there. 


7. As the ghosts were disporting in their giddy dance in the air, the god 
commanded the liquid portion of the dead body, to be collected together in 
one great basin of the ocean the abodes of whales and sharks. 


8. And as this ocean was from the pleasure (gaudium) of the gods, it is 
thenceforth styled the ocean of wine (or merriment of the deities; in 
distinctions from the oceans of milk and other beverages). 


9. The demons having done their dancing in the pandemonium in air, come 
down to drink their full draughts of that Stygian pool; after which they repair 
to their aerial abysm to dance again. 


10. The demoniac orgies are still wont, to indulge themselves in drinking of 
that bloody pool; and to dance in their airy circles, in company with their co- 
partners. (It refers to strong drink and drunken sots). 


11. And because the earth was besmeared, with the fat and flesh (medhas) 
of the corpse, it is thenceforward termed the medini or corpus. (The earth is 
said to have been formed of the flesh of the dead body of the demon Madhu, 
killed by Hari in the beginning of creation). 


12. At the last disappearance of the dead body of the demon, there appeared 
again the succession of day and night; and the lord of creatures having formed 
all things anew, restored the earth to its former shape. (This is event of the 
war between the gods and titans of yore). 


CHAPTER CXXXVI. 
Story of the Gnat and Hunter. 


Argument: — Explication of the story of the carcass, and the Narrative of 
Asura and others. 


Bhasa said: — Hear now, O lord of the earth, what I then said to the god of 
fire, from my seat under the wing of his riding parrot, and the answer which 
the god made to my query. 


2. I said, O lord, of the sacrificial fire and sacrifice, deign to explain unto 
me the mystery of the carcass, and the accompanying events (of the goddess 
and her demons). 


3. The god of fire replied: — Attend, O prince, and I will tell you all of 
what has happened; and relate to you all about the carcass, as it is well known 
in all the three worlds. (i.e., in the traditions of all people). 


4. Know there is an eternal formless and transcendent Intellect, in the form 
of the boundless and formless vacuity; wherein there are countless worlds, 
subsisting as minute atoms in endless space. 


5. This intellectual void, which contains all and everything in itself; 
happened of its own spontaneity, to be conscious of its contents in course of 
time. 


6. I conceived by its innate knowledge, the abstract idea of igneous 
particles of in itself, just as you find yourself to be in the state of travelling in 
your dream; by thinking yourself as such in the state of your waking. (One 
dreams whatever he thinks in himself). 


7. It was thus that the Divine Intellect saw the particles of fire, as in the 
unconscious state of its dream; and as one sees the lotus dust (for anything,) 


before him in his imagination. 


8. Then, as this Intellect reflected on the expansion of these particles, it 
became itself assimilated with them; and evolved itself in the thought in the 
shape of powers and organs of sense, in those particles of its body. 


9. It then beheld the sensible organs, as receptacles of their particular 
faculties; and saw the world with all its beings, appearing before it as in its 
dream; and as we see a city in our dreaming state. 


10. There was one among the living by name of Asura, who became 
haughty and proud of his dignity, he was vain and addicted to vanities, and 
had no parents nor forefathers of his own. 


11. Being elated with giddiness, he entered once into the holy hermitage of 
a sage, and destroyed and defiled the sacred asylum in his rage. 


12. The sage denounced his curse upon him and said, — “whereas thou 
hast demolished my abode with thy gigantic figure, be thou now be born as a 
contemptible gnat, by thy immediate death under my curse.” 


13. The burning fire created by the rage of the sage, burnt down the Asura 
to ashes, even at that moment and on the very spot, as the wild fire consumes 
the woods, and as the sub-marine fire dries up a channel. 


14. Then the Asura became as air, without his form and its supporting 
body; and his heart and mind became as insensible as in a swoon. 


15. His sensibilities fled from him, and became mixed with the ethereal air; 
and were hurled up and down thereabouts, by the course of the flying winds. 


16. They existed in the form of the intelligent and airy soul, which was to 
be the living soul in connection with the body; composed of particles of the 
undivided elements, of earth, fire, water and air; (or the air in motion as 
distinguished from the vacuous air). 


17. The quintessence of five elements being joined with a particle of the 
intellect, begets a motion of their own accord as the vacuity of the sky, 
produces the wind by its breath and of its own nature. 


18. At last the particle of intellect, is awakened in the airy soul; as the seed 
develops its germs in connection with the earth, water and air, and in course 


of time. 


19. The understanding (or intellectual part) of the Asura, being fully 
occupied with the thought of the sage’s curse and that of its having the nature 
of a gnat; brooded over the reflection of the parts of its body, and became the 
very gnat in its shape. 


20. This puny insect which is born by daylight in dirt, and is blown away 
by the breath of wind, is the short-lived ephemeral of a day. 


21. Rama asked: — How can living animals be born from other sources, (as 
dirt, etc.), if they are but the creatures of our dream as you said before? So 
please to tell me, whether they have really their birth; or be anything 
otherwise. 


22. Vasishtha replied: — Know Rama, all living beings from the great 
Brahma to the animalcule and vegetable below, have two kinds of birth; the 
one is that they are all full of Brahma, and the other that they are the creatures 
of our errors. 


23. The false but rooted knowledge of the previous existence of the world, 
and of all creatures besides, leads to the belief of the regeneration of beings 
from the reminiscence of the past; and this called the erroneous conceptions of 
births in the visible world. 


24. The other is the viewing of the representation of Brahma, in all things 
appearing to exist in this non-existent and unreal world; and this called the 
pantheistic view of the world, and not as a production either by birth or 
creation of it. 


25. Thus, the gnat being produced by its delusive knowledge of the world, 
and its continuance in the same state of blunder; did not allow it to see the one 
Brahma in all, but led to different views and attempts, as you shall hear just 
now. 


26. It passed half a day of its lifetime in whistling its faint voice, among the 
humming gnats in the bushes of reeds and long grass; and drank merrily their 
juice and dews, and sported and flew all about. 


27. The next day it kept fluttering over a pool of mud and mire, in company 
with its female copartner. 


28. Being then tired with its swinging, it rested on a blade of grass in some 
place, where it was trodden over by the foot of a deer, which killed him on the 
spot, as it was by the fall of a rock upon him. 


29. Now as it died by looking at the face of a deer, it was reborn in the 
shape and with the senses of the same, (from its reminiscence of them). 


30. The deer grazing in the forest, was killed by arrow of an archer; and as 
he saw the countenance of the huntsman in his dying moment, he came to be 
born next in the same form. 


31. The huntsman roaming in the forest, happened to enter into the 
hermitage of a hermit, by whom he was reclaimed from his wickedness, and 
awakened to the light of truth. 


32. The muni said: — O erring man! why did you roam so long, afflicting 
the innocent deer with your arrows; why do you not rather protect them, and 
observe the law of universal benevolence in this transitory world? 


33. Life is but a breath of air, and overhung by the clouds of calamities, and 
is as frail as a drop of falling water; our enjoyments are a series of clouds 
interspersed by fickle and flickering lightnings; youth is fleeting and its 
pleasures are as the gliding waters, and the body is as transient as a moment; 
therefore, O my child! attain thy felicity while in this world, and expect thy 
nirvdna-extinction at the end. 


CHAPTER CXXXVII. 
Description of the states of waking, sleeping and 
Dreaming. 


Argument: — The Hunter’s Inquiry into the means of salvation and the 
sage’s instruction about them. 


The Huntsman said: — Instruct me now, O sage, the way to my salvation 
from misery; and teach me the best mode of conduct, which may neither be 
too difficult nor too facile to practice. 


2. The sage replied: — Now be submissive to me, and throw away your 
bow and arrows; and betaking yourself to taciturnity and conduct of sages, be 
free from trouble and remain herein. 


3. Vasishtha related: — Being thus advised by the sage, the huntsman 
threw away his bow and arrows; and betaking himself to the conduct of sages, 
remained still even without asking for food. 


4. In course of a few days, his mind turned to the investigations of Sdstras; 
as a full-blown flower enters into the minds of men, by means of its far 
smelling fragrance. 


5. Once he asked his preceptor, O Rama, to tell him, how and in what 
manner, outward objects come to be seen within us in our dream. 


6. The sage said: — This very question, O my good fellow, had also arisen 
at first under my scrutiny; how these shadows of things beyond us, rise like 
the bodies of clouds in our sleeping hours in the sphere of our minds. 


7. I then applied to my meditation, and practiced the closeness of my 
attention for my introspection into this matter; and steadily sat in my 


padmasana posture of folded legs, and intensely intent upon investigation of 
this incident. 


8. Sitting in this manner, I stretched my thought all about and afar; and then 
retracted them, into the recess of my mind; as the rising sun stretches out his 
beams in the morning, and afterwards draws them back into its disc in the 
evening. 


9. I sent forth my breathings in quest of knowledge, and then called to 
myself; and thus continued in exhaling and inhaling my breaths, as flowers let 
out and contract their fragrance by turns. 


10. My breath being accompanied with my mind, was reposed in the air 
before me; and then it was with the air inhaled by the pupil sitting before me, 
and intromitted into his nostrils. 


11. Thus my breath being mixed with his, was admitted into his heart; as a 
snake is drawn in by the breath of a bear, sitting with his wide-open mouth at 
the entrance of his hole. 


12. Thus I entered into his heart, by means of my vehicle of my breath; and 
was put into difficulty of being confined therein, by my folly of following my 
breath in its passage into his breast. 


13. I passed there amidst the arteries and aorta, and was led through all the 
conduits and blood-vessels into all the nerves and veins, both large and small 
and inside and outside the body. 


14. I was at last confined in the cage of the ribs on both sides of the body, 
and had the fleshy masses of the liver and spleen presented before me. This 
was the painful habitation of my living soul, and these were as potfuls of meat 
set before it. 


15. My intestines kept coiling within me with a hissing sound, and were 
surrounded by a flood of red-hot blood continually flowing and boiling, like 
the waves of the ocean heated under the hot sunshine. 


16. I had fresh supplies of sweet scents, incessantly borne to my nostrils by 
the blowing breeze; and these tended to infuse both life to my body, and 
sensibility to my soul. 


17. But then I was tormented, as in hell-fire, by the boiling blood, bile and 


phlegm; in my dark and dismal dungeon. (Which was moreover infected by 
the stink of dirt within). 


18. It is the free and slow passage of the vital airs through the lungs, that 
regulates the circulation of blood in all parts of the body; and this determines 
the state of the bodily humours, a derangement of which tends to generation 
of future diseases. 


19. The vital airs, pushing against each other, burst forth in explosion 
within their cavities; while the culinary fire is burning as the sub-marine 
blaze, through the tubular stomach, resembling the hollow pipe of a lotus 
stalk. 


20. The external air carries the particles of things, through the outer organs 
of sense into the body; and these then enter into the mind, either in their gross 
or pure state, as thieves enter into a house at night. 


21. The chyle is carried with a chyme by the internal winds, to all parts of 
the body by the passage of the intestines; as the outer air bears the low and 
loud sounds of songs in all direction. 


22. I then entered into his heart, which is difficult of access, and I passed 
therein with as much jostling, as a strong man makes his way amidst a thickly 
crowded throng of men. 


23. Soon afterwards, I found the sight of some shining substance, at a 
distance from the heart; (i.e., the culinary fire); as a man scorched by sun 
shine, finds the sight of cooling moon in the gloom of night. 


24. It was the spiritual light, which reflected like a mirror all this triple 
worlds in itself, and threw its rays upon all things therein; it was the essence 
of whatever there is in existence; and the receptacle of all living souls. 


25. The living soul or life, says the sruti pervades the whole body, as the 
fragrance of a flower runs through all parts of it. Yet it is the heat of the heart 
in which it chiefly resides, as the perfume of the flower dwells in the pistils, 
after the blossom is expanded by the solar heat. 


26. I then crept unperceived into that heat, which was the cell of the living 
soul; and was there preserved by the vital airs from extinction, as a burning 
lamp in a lantern, is preserved by its interior airs from its being blown out or 
extinguished. (Because the light is put out in a receptacle). 


27. I entered into that heat as fragrance passes into the air, or as the hot 
wind pushes into the cold air, or as water rushes into a pot. (i.e., I pass 
through several sheaths, to the seat of bliss). 


28. I passed into the second sheath, which is as bright as moon light and as 
clear as a spot of white cloud; and thence, I ascend to the fair sheaths known 
by the names of the cells of butter, sweets and milk-white water. 


29. Being tired with my arduous passage through these sheaths, I returned 
and rested in the genial warmth of my breast, where I saw the full view of the 
world, appearing as a dream before my sight. 


30. It showed the images of the sun and moon, and the pictures of the seas 
and hills, with the shapes of gods and demi-gods and human forms; it 
presented also the sights of cities and countries, and the face of the sky on all 
sides around. 


31. It exhibited also the oceans with their islands, and the course of time 
and seasons and all moving and unmoving objects to my view. 


32. This vision of my dream, continued steadfast and quite alike even after 
I was awake, wherefore, I remained in the same state after my sleep as I had 
been when sleeping, because the view recurred to me in my waking state, as it 
had occurred to me in my sleep. (i.e., The world is but a waking dream). 


33. Now listen to me, O huntsman, what then I did. I said to myself, “what, 
is this a waking dream I see before me?” and as I was thinking in this manner, 
I had this knowledge of it awakened in me. 


34. Verily it is the representation of the Divine Intellect, and it is the 
manifestation of the Deity himself; and all these objects under the different 
names, are but manifestations of the Divine spirit in various shapes in the 
world. 


35. Wherever there is the substance of Intellect, there is the cosmical image 
of the Deity impressed upon it; in its empty vacuous form, which it never 
forsakes (for aught of a gross nature). 


36. Ah! it is now I perceive, said I to myself, that all these appearances 
passing under the names of the world; are mere representations of the 
intellect, in the form of a passing dream. 


37. It is a little expansion of the essence of the intellect, which is termed a 
dream (or an imperfect view of things); and it is also a greater expansion and 
extension of the same, which is said to be waking; both being the display of 
the self-same intellectual essence. 


38. A dream is said to be dream in the waking state, and not while one 
continues in his dreaming state, when it appears as waking; so our waking is 
but a dream, whence the two states of our waking and sleeping dream. 


39. Even our death is a dream, which continues with our intellect even after 
our death; because the intellect which resides in the body, does not die even in 
a hundred deaths of the body; for who has ever heard of the death of the soul 
(which is same with intellect) of anybody. 


40. This Intellect is a void and vacuous substance, dwelling in and 
expanding with the body; it is infinite and undivided, and remains indivisible 
and indestructible, both with as well as without the destructible body. 


41. The vacuous particle of the intellect, which is indestructible by its 
nature, and shines forth eternally and ad infinitum by itself; has the so-called 
world for its pith and sap and ever attached to itself. 


42. The vacuum of the intellect, contains within its bosom, the minute 
particles of ideas; each of which represents a part of the great variety of 
objects, that compose its totality, (“as parts of an undivided whole’). 


43. The soul breaking off from its view of the visibles, rests in its 
receptacle of heart; and sees the various sights in its dream, which are 
unfolded by the intellect before it. 


44. Again, the soul being inclined to the outer mind of sights, exposed 
before it by its own intellect; it comes to see the visions of the external 
objects, which pass under the phenomenal world. 


45. The soul sees in itself and in the same state, the sights of all things both 
within and without it; such as, this earth and sky, the winds and waters, the 
hills and cities, and all things spread on all sides. 


46. As the solar disc which is situated in the heaven above, appears also in 
the waters below in full blaze; so the soul is situated both in the inside and 
outside, in the form of the world, (or with the form of imprest ideas in it). 


47. Therefore, knowing that it is the intellectual soul, that sees the internal 
dream and the external world in itself; whoso abstains from craving anything 
is surely blest (because he has everything in himself. Every soul or mind 
being full of the thoughts and sights of all things in itself, can be no more in 
want of anything). 


48. The soul is both inseverable and uninflammable. (i.e., it can neither be 
cut asunder nor burnt away); and whoso says otherwise, he must be betrayed 
by the delusion of duality, as a boy is decoyed by the deceitful Yaksha; 
(hocus-pocus). 


49. He who sees his inward soul, to view the world internally in itself, is 
said to be dreaming in himself; and whoso finds his soul looking outwardly on 
the external world, is known to be waking. 


50. Thinking so for regarding the dreaming and waking states, I was 
inquisitive to know the state of sound sleep, and went on making my inquiries 
therein. 


51. But I thought of what good is the sight of the visible to me? Better 
remain quiet in myself, because it is the thoughtless oblivion, and 
consciousness of self, that is true insouciance or the stupor or susupti, — 
somnum or hypnotism. 


52. As the hair and nails of the body, are never thought of, though they are 
well known to belong to and to be attached to it; so the mind is quite 
unconscious of all material and immaterial objects in nature, in its state of 
sound sleep when it rests in its self-consciousness alone. 


53. Tired with the rambles and sights of my waking and dreaming states, I 
sought my quiet rest in the state of my thoughtless self-consciousness; and 
this being the sole aim and end of sound sleep, there is no other meaning of 
the susupti hypnotism. 


54. It is possible even in the waking state, to have this sound sleep of 
susupta hypnotism; by our determination of thinking of naught, save that of 
sitting quiet in one and same state (of abstractedness). 


55. The state of abstraction being arrived at, is termed susupti, — sound 
sleep; but when the sleep is light (Vikshepa), it is called swapnam, — somnum 
or dream. 


56. Having ascertained my torpor to the hypnotic susupti, I was resolved to 
seek after the turiya or fourth state of supreme bliss; and with this resolution, I 
set out in search of it with my best introspection and diligence. 


57. I tried my utmost, but could get no indication of its true form and 
feature; and found out at last, that it was not to be had without our clear- 
sightedness, as the sunlight is imperceptible to the dim-sighted eye. 


58. That is called clear-sightedness, wherein our view of the world, as it 
appears unto us is utterly lost; and whereby we see in that light in which it 
exists in the Divine Mind. 


59. Therefore, the three states of waking, dreaming and sound sleep, are all 
included under this fourth state; wherein the world is seen as it exists, in the 
light of a nihility. 


60. This then is the turya or ultimate view of the world, that it is produced 
by no cause and from nothing; but it is Brahma himself that exists in this state 
of tranquillity, from all eternity. 


61. The impossibility of the pre-existent and primordial causes, precludes 
the possibility of the production of anything and of the creation itself; it is the 
Intellection of the intellect only, that gives rise to the conception of creation; 
as it is the nature of water to assume its fluidity and exhibit its dilation. 


CHAPTER CXXXVIII. 
The Pervasion of the Mind throughout the 
Universe. 


Argument: — The joining of the two souls of the sage and his pupil 
together made them twain, and gave a two-fold view of objects; but their 
union in unity made them one, and presented the one and same view of things 
to both the united pair. 


The ascetic sage continued: — I then thought of being united with his 
consciousness, and breathed out the breath of my life to be joined with his, as 
the ripe mango sends forth its flavour, to mix with the fragrance of lotus 
flowers. 


2. I did not forsake my vital heat (or energy), until I entered into his 
intellect; and began with infusing my outward sensations, into the organs of 
his external senses. 


3. I then attracted my outward sensations, by the internal sensibility of my 
heart, and mixed them with those of his, as a drop of oil is mixed with and 
diluted in water. 


4. As my sensuousness was intermingled with his sensations, I became 
sensible of a duplex feeling of all external objects, which appeared in their 
reduplicated forms to my senses. 


5. All things on all sides seemed to be doubled about me, and there 
appeared two suns and two moons to be presented to my sight. So the heaven 
and earth appeared in their two-fold forms before me. 


6. As one face is seen as two in some glasses, so all things presented their 
double forms to the mirror of my eyes. And all these biplex shapes seemed to 
be as closely united together as the world. (i.e., the body and mind). 


7. And as the same intellect resides in the form of oil in two sesame seeds, 
so I saw the two worlds mixed up together with my intellect united with his in 
his body. 


8. And though my consciousness was united with his in the same body, yet 
it was not wholly assimilated with his (owing to the difference of our desires); 
but they view the world respectively, in the different lights of milk and water 
(i.e., aS appearing pleasant to the one and painful to the other). 


9. Yet as I looked awhile into his consciousness, and compared and 
measured it with mine; they were both found to be the same thing and of the 
self-same essence. (Consciousness is joint knowledge of ourselves in 
connection with others). 


10. My consciousness was joined with his in the same manner, as one 
season joins with another (at its end); or as the confluence of two rivers runs 
together, and as the smoke mixes with the clouds, or the wind carries the 
fragrance of flowers with it. 


11. This our consciousness being mixed up together, the double view of the 
world now became one; just as the erroneous sight of the two moons in the 
sky, is soon changed to one upon aright its right view. 


12. Then my power of discernment which was in his person, became finer 
and finer without wholly losing itself in his, and resided together in his very 
body. 


13. Afterwards, the faculties of the mind which resided in his breast, were 
found to be directed to the observation of external objects; and to take delight 
in noticing the occurrences of the day. (i.e., the present objects). 


14. He being at rest from his weariness, after taking his meal and drink; felt 
drowsy and inclined to sleep, as the lotus flower shuts its petals at nightfall, 
after sucking the nectarious liquid of the lake. 


15. He withdrew his mind from observing occurrences, that circulated all 
about the busy scene of the external world; as the setting sun retrenches his 
rays from the face of the world, as he goes to take his rest in the evening. 


16. The functions of his senses receded into his heart, and the operations of 
his mind retired to his brain, and remained hidden therein, like the members 
of a tortoise drawn inside its shell. 


17. His eyelids were closed, as his heart had shut up; and he remained as 
dead as a lifeless block or as a figure in painting or statuary. 


18. I also followed the course of his mental faculties, and settled with them 
in his mind, and my senses being under the direction of the mind were 
reposed in the recess of his heart. (The sensations are said to pass from their 
organs, and run through the veins and arteries to the recess of the heart). 


19. Then, insensible of all outward perceptions, and their conceptions too 
in my mind; I remained with that heat (or spirit) in me, as sleeping on a soft 
bed, and perceiving naught but a void all about me. (This is termed the 
blissful state of dnanda-maya, — felicity). 


20. And as the breathing of our vital breath, was neither obstructed in the 
aorta, nor passed with rapidity through the lungs, as it does in cases of excess 
in eating and drinking and fatigue, it passed evenly by its passage of the 
nostrils. 


21. Then our souls remained with the supreme soul in the breast, and kept 
the course of the naturally ungovernable mind under subjection (of the blissful 
soul). 


22. The soul is then employed in its consciousness of supreme bliss in 
itself, and takes no notice of the actions of others; and the body also then rests 
in perfect blissfulness, in that state of sound sleep. (Sound sleep of 
hybernation or hypnotism is the perfect rest of the body and soul, when 
undisturbed by dreams). 


23. Rama asked: — Say Sir, what does the mind do now in its subjection 
under the vital breath, which was the cause of its operations in the waking 
state? The mind has no form also beside the breath, how then does it subsist 
without the same. 


24. Vasishtha replied: — Even so, there is neither the body beside its being 
the notion of one’s self; it is the imagination of the mind alone that makes the 
body, just as the dream causes the appearance of a mountain and other things. 
(There is no existence of the mind independent of the vital air of breathing. — 
Gloss). 


25. So there is not the mind also in absence of its idea or thought of 
something; as there is no production of the visible world, for want of its 
causes at the beginning of creation. (Therefore, the phenomenal world is only 


the effect of our previous reminiscence. — Gloss). 


26. Therefore, all these are forms of Brahma, as he is the soul of all; and 
the world itself is not otherwise than the image of God. (Hypothesis of 
theological Pantheism, that all things are manifestations of God). 


27. The mind and body are both Brahma, to them that know the truth; 
though they are otherwise to our knowledge of them, than what they are in 
theirs. (The common knowledge of them, is that of Soulism). 


28. The manner in which the triple world is Brahma, and how he is the soul 
of all these varieties; is as you, O intelligent prince, shall now hear me to 
relate unto you. 


29. There exists forever, the only pure Intellect (or Intelligence), which is 
of the form of infinite vacuum; and it is that alone which shows itself always 
in all forms, without being either the world itself or its visible appearance. 
(The formless God exhibits all forms). 


30. The Lord, being omniscient, took upon him the form of hypostasis of 
the mind, without forsaking his nature of pure intelligence, and exemption 
from disease and decay (which the material body is subject to). 


31. Then as the Lord thought upon the movement of his mind, he assumed 
the substantivity of the vital breath upon himself; and know, O Rama, that 
best knowest the knowable, that these are but modalities of the self-same 
being of God. 


32. Now, as this inflation of the air appears to be a model form of the 
Divine essence; so the sensations and bodily perceptions, and the entities of 
space and time, are but various modifications of the same being. 


33. Thus the whole world is entirely the formation of the Divine Mind, and 
as this mind is the very intellect of the supreme Brahma; so the totality of 
creation is only the expansion of the mind of Brahma himself. 


34. The formless Brahma who is without his beginning and end, who has 
no reflexion of himself, and is free from disease and decay, is the quiet 
intellect and the only quiescent Ens of Brahma, that was the whole universe 
for its body. (Whose body nature is, and God the soul. — Pope). 


35. The supreme being is omnipotent, and so the mind also retains its 


potency everywhere, though it remains as empty air. 


36. The volitive mind is Brahma, which immediately produces in itself, 
whatever it wills at any time; and the reproduction of everything in the mind, 
is a truth too well known even to boys. 


37. Now behold, O Rama, the almighty power of the mind, which at first 
made itself (or became) a living being by its breathing; and then an intelligent 
being, by its power of thinking; and next became the living soul, with its 
body; it made the three worlds, and became the prime male in the form of 
Brahma; it became embodied from its aerial form, in the shape of Virdj; thus 
it created everything in itself of its own will, as men produce all things in their 
imagination, and see the cities of their fancy in dream. 


CHAPTER CXXXIX. 
Description of the Dissolution of the World. 


Argument: — Predominance of the mind over the vital breath, and the view 
of final Dissolution in Dream. 


Vasishtha related: — Whatever the mind wills, regarding the creation of 
the world, the same immediately appears before it; whether it be the 
production of the non-existent to view, or annihilation of existing ones, or the 
representation of one as the other, — pratibhdshika. 


2. [Now in an answer to Rama’s question, — “how does the mind subsist 
or have its action or thought without being moved by the vital breath,” he says 
that] whenever the mind fancies itself as the vital breath, and can neither 
subsist nor do anything without its being actuated by the air of respiration; it 
is then said to be subject to vitality. (7.e., to exist with the breath of a living 
being and no more). 


3. It thinks it cannot live long without the association of respiration (as in 
the state of transient and breathless dream), but must come back to its life and 
living action (of thinking) with the return of breathing. (The thinking power of 
the mind is suspended with the breathing, in the states of dreaming and 
wondrous sight-seeing). 


4. Again, as the mind fancies itself to be accompanied with the vital breath 
in some living body; it finds itself instantly joined with same, and beholds the 
world rising as an enchanted city to view. 


5. The mind thinks of the convenience of its union with the vital breath and 
body; and with this persuasion it is pleased to remain forever as a triplicate 
being, combined with its intellectuality, vitality and corporeality. 


6. Know now that the uncertainty of knowledge, which, keeps the mind in 


suspense, is the cause of great woe to mankind; and that there is no way of 
getting rid of it except of the true knowledge of tattwajndna. 


7. He who has the knowledge of the distinction of his self and another, (i.e., 
of the ego and nonego, — the subjective and objective as different from 
another); can have no redress from his error, save by means of his spiritual 
knowledge of the only spirit. 


8. There is no way to true knowledge, except by means of the 
investigations of liberation; therefore, be employed with all vigilance to 
inquire into the means of liberation. 


9. Verily the very conceptions of ego, and alias I, and another, are 
erroneous, and proceed from utter ignorance; and there is no other means to 
remove them, except by means of liberation. (The knowledge of ego and tu is 
the bondage of the soul; and the want of egoism and tuism, leads it to its 
liberation from all). 


10. Hence, any thought which is habitual to the mind, comes to be firmly 
impressed upon it in time; and hence the idea that the vital breath is one’s life 
and all, makes his mind dependent upon the breath. (i.e., As the thought of 
one’s being this or that, makes him as such; so the firm belief of the mind as 
breath, makes it subject to the same). 


11. So also when the body is in a healthful state with its vitality, the mind is 
dependent on it and has its free play; but being in ill health, it feels its life 
embittered and forgets to know itself in its true nature. 


12. When the respiration is quick in discharging the duties of the body, and 
the mind is engaged in its busy thoughts, then neither of them is capable of 
meditation, unless they are repressed in the breast. 


13. These two the mind and respiration, stand in relation of the car and 
driver to one another, and what living being is there, that is not driven along 
by them in their train? 


14. It was in this manner that the supreme spirit, hath ordained the mind 
and vital breath, in the very beginning of creation; and therefore, this law of 
their co-operation, continues unaltered to this day. 


15. Hence, the mind and vital airs are acting in concert in all living bodies, 
and conducting them at all times in all places in their stated course or action 


all along, (except those of Yogis who have repressed them under their 
subjection). 


16. The co-equal course of both, serves to the regular conduct of the 
functions of life (as in the waking state); but their unequal course, produces 
dissimilar effects (as that of dreaming when the mind alone is active); and the 
inactivity of both causes the inertness of the body and soul (as in the state of 
sound sleep). 


17. When the intestines are blocked by the chyle of food taken into them, 
and the breathing becomes dull and slow; the mind also becomes calm and 
quiet, and then ensues the blissful state of sound sleep. 


18. When the stomach is filled with food, and the lungs are languid with 
weariness, the breathing then remains without its inflation, and brings on a 
state of sweet and sound sleep of susupti or hypnotism. 


19. Again, when the intestinal parts are cool and phlegmatic, or exhausted 
by effusion of blood owing to some sore or wound, and the breathing being 
stopped in the body, there comes the state of numbness of sleep. 


20. The ascetic said: — Then I had entered into his heart, it became all dark 
to me as night; and he fell into a sound sleep, from his satiety with the fulness 
of his food. 


21. I was there assimilated into one with his mind, and lay in deep sleep 
with himself without any effort of my own. 


22. Then as the passage of his lungs was re-opened, after digestion of the 
food in his stomach; his breathings resumed their natural vibration, and he 
began to breathe out slowly and softly in his slumbering state. 


23. After the sound sleep had become light and airy, I beheld the sunny 
world arising out of my breast, and appearing manifest before me in my 
dream. 


24. This world seemed to rise out of the troubled ocean, and to be filled 
with water (seas) upon its surface; it was released from the darkness of 
diluvian clouds, which had enveloped it, like the mists overhanging on 
oceans. 


25. There was a hurricane blowing over it, bearing aloft the rocks and 


stones, in its whirling and uproarious course; and carrying away uprooted 
arbours, with the furze and grassy turfs along with them. 


26. It was carrying away and casting all about, the fragments and remains 
of the last conflagration of desolation; and hurling down the detachments of 
celestial cities from high. 


27. Then as I was looking at a certain place, I found myself situated with 
my consort in one of the abodes of a splendid city rising at that spot. 


28. And there as I was sitting in company with my consort and children, 
and attended by my friends and servants, and supplies with dishes and cups of 
food and drink, I was all on a sudden carried away by the waves of the 
deluging waters. 


29. The flood swept me away together with the edifice and the city, wherein 
we were situated; and we were floating on the tops of mountainous waves, and 
buffeting in the water. 


30. There arose a loud dashing noise louder than the roaring sea; I was 
stunned by the stridor, and was insensible of the fates of my family. 


31. Men were driven away and hurled down into the whirling eddies, and 
were buried deep into the dreadful mud, with their wailings and loud cries, 
with the beating of their breasts. 


32. The houses and huts were breaking and cracking, their beams and posts 
were splitting, the pillars and supports were bursting, and the roofs and 
coverings were falling down, while the females were looking out with their 
faces fixed at the windows. (i.e., Women stared from within the doors and 
windows and dared not to stir without). 


33. As I was looking awhile at all this, being affected at the sight; and was 
weeping sorrowfully at the event, I saw the whole edifice falling down on the 
ground. 


34. The walls on the four sides broke down, and buried the old and young 
and female inmates under them; and these were borne away by the waves at 
last, as the impetuous waterfall carries away the shattered and scattered stones 
to a hundred different ways. 


35. I was then blown away into the waters of the deluge, leaving behind me 


my family and friend; and accompanying only my mind and vital breath with 
me. 


36. I was tossed about by the waves, and borne away to the distance of 
leagues after leagues; and was thrown upon the floating woods, which roasted 
me by their inburning wildfire. 


37. I was dashed against the floating planks and timbers, and slashed in 
many parts of my body, then falling into a whirlpool I was hurled into the 
abyss of pdtdla. 


38. Being thus tossed all about, and hurled up and down, I had been for a 
long time, buffeting amidst the waves and waters, and their gurgling, roaring 
and rumbling sounds. 


39. I was then buried under the mud, caused by the friction of the drowned 
mountains against one another; and was again lifted upward like an elephant, 
by the influx of a flood of water. 


40. As I was halting on a hill covered with foam and froth; immediately I 
was run over by a rush of water, as a man is overtaken by his enemy. 


41. Being then ingulfed in the water, and carried away by the waves and 
current wheresoever they pleased, I lost the sight of whatever I was seeing, 
and was greatly dejected in my mind. 


42. At this moment there, I had come to know by my reminiscence, that a 
certain muni will lecture to the public, the Vasishtha’s address of Rama 
hereafter. 


43. I remembered my former state of holy trance (samadhi) and exclaimed: 
— O, had I been an ascetic in another world. 


44. I have entered into the body of another person, in order to see the sights 
in his dreaming; and all that I am now seeing (of this flood and others), is no 
more than a dream, and mere error of the mind and falsehood. 


45. It is from our habitual bias in the present scene, that I believed these 
falsehoods as true in me; and though I was troubled to see myself to be borne 
away by the flood in my dream; yet I feel myself happy at present to find, it 
was but the unreality of a dream. 


46. What I saw as water, was the whirling eddy in the ocean of the 
universal deluge, and as false as the water of mirage; and the hills and woods, 
and the cities and towns, that were swept away by the flood, were as false as 
any visual deception. 


47. There were the gods and aerials, men and women, and huge snakes also 
borne away by the flood; and the great cities and mansions of the rulers of 
men, (i.e., royal edifices), all floating upon the waters. 


48. I saw the mountain merged in and mixed up with the waters, and being 
battered and shattered by the waves; I saw the approaching dissolution of the 
world, and thus considered within myself. 


49. There is even the god Siva with his three eyes, swimming upon and 
swept away as a straw by the waves; O fie for shame! that there is nothing 
impossible for the fates. 


50. Fragments of houses floating upon the waters, looked like lotus flowers 
flaunting under the sun-beams. 


51. It was astonishing to see the bodies of Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and of 
men and Nagas, floating on the waters, like swarms of bees fluttering over 
lotus-beds in the lake. 


52. The fragments of the splendid edifices of the gods and demi-gods and 
others, decorated with the ornamental works of the vidyadharas, were floating 
like golden vessels on the wide expanse of the ocean. 


53. The god Indra was floating on the glassy water, as if he were lying in 
his crystal palace; he mounted over the waves, as if he rode on his elephant; 
and was swinging on the surges as upon his cradle. 


54. The waves rising to the sky, were washing the faces of the stars, and the 
winds were scattering them all about; as they drop down the flowers of the 
garden of Eden on the mansions of the gods, and as men strew the ground 
with fried rice. 


55. Waves as high as mountains rose to the sky, and then their breakers 
flying aloft like stones flung by ballistas, fell upon the lotus seat of Brahma, 
and turned it about with the god also, who was sitting upon it in his deep 
meditation. 


56. The clouds were roaring aloud with deep and appalling thunder, and the 
billows were flashing like frightful lightnings in the air; elephants, horses, and 
ferocious lions were wandering in the atmosphere, and forests as large as the 
earth, were floating in the sky. 


57. The dark blue waves of over-flowing waters, pushed with such violent 
force against one another; as if the god of destruction was propelling them one 
after another to the act, of utter annihilation; (or as the powers of destruction 
were propelling one another). 


58. The waves were carrying down into the deep, the gods, men, and 
Nagas, together with their abodes in heaven, earth and the regions below. 


59. The irresistible flood having flooded over all sides, of earth, heaven and 
the infernal region, the bodies of the gods and demi-gods, were all floating 
together like shoals of fishes; and their heavenly cars and vehicles were 
swimming over on the surface of the waters, as in the field of battle. 


60. The body of dark blue waters, resembled the azure form of Krishna; 
and their foaming froths, likened the milk white calves about him. (The text is 
utterly meaningless). 


61. The waves pushed one another, with the burber sound for drowning 
everything; and the females both of the gods and giants were heard to wail 
aloud with cries of hola and howling. (Hola is the exclamation of wailing, 
corresponding with waild in Persian). 


62. The loud cries raised by all, at the falling down of their houses, were 
resounded by the waters on all sides; and the clouds roving over the rolling 
waves, appeared as the covers of fallen and floating domes. 


63. Ah, it was piteous to behold, how the whirling waters of whirlpools, 
hurled down even the gods into the deep; and how Indra, Yama, and Kubera, 
breathed out their last breaths in the form of flying and flimsy clouds. 


64. There the learned and saintly persons, were carried away with the 
ignorant, in the shape of dead bodies and devoid of their pride; and the cities 
of the gods Brahma, Vishnu, and Indra, were swept away, all broken and 
crushed to pieces. 


65. The bodies of weak women, were washed and carried over by the 
waves, and there was no body left to save them from the grasp of death; which 


devoured them altogether under his horrid jaws. 


66. The floods which flowed at first with their serpentine course into the 
caves of mountains, overflooded them to their tops at last; and the cities of the 
gods, which floated at first as boats upon the waters on mountain tops, were 
hurled to the bottom at last. 


67. The gods and giants and all other beings, together with their residences 
in heaven, and the continents and mountains on earth, were all submerged and 
shattered like lotus-beds by the waters; and the three worlds were turned to an 
universal ocean and all their grandeur and splendour were swallowed up by 
time, together with all the sovran powers of earth and heaven. 


CHAPTER CXL. 
Workings of Imagination. 


Argument: — The sage’s situation at the end of the Deluge, and his 
description of the reproduction of creation. 


The Huntsman said: — Tell me Sir, how a sage as yourself, could be 
exposed to that state (of the dream or delusion of the Deluge); and why were 
you not delivered from your meditation. 


2. The sage replied: — At the end of the Kalpa age, all kinds of beings 
meet with their destruction; namely, there is a termination of the erroneous 
forms of the worlds, and a cessation of the luminous bodies in the heaven. 


3. Sometimes, the dissolution takes place gradually at the end of a Kalpa; 
and at others it comes on all on a sudden, with a simultaneous turmoil and 
disorganization on all sides. 


4. So when there was an outbreak of waters on every side, and the gods 
were repairing to Brahma the first cause of all; for redress from the impending 
danger, they were all swept away by the overflowing tide. 


5. Moreover, O forester! know time to be the most mighty destroyer of all 
things; and everything must occur in its time, as it is predestined at the 
beginning. (Time devours all things). 


6. The time of one’s dissolution being nigh, there ensues a detriment in the 
strength, intellect and prowess of everybody not excepting even the great. 
(Nothing is of any avail before fate). 


7. [have told you also, O fortunate forester! that all that is seen in a dream 
is mere dreaming; and nothing of it, comes to take place in reality herein. 


8. The forester responded: — Sir, if the dream is a mere falsity and error of 
imagination; then what was the good of your relating all this, that know well 
what is good and useful for mankind. 


9. The sage replied: — There was much use of my relating all this to you, 
O intelligent huntsman, for improvement of your understanding; and as you 
have come to know, that the visibles are all as false as the sights in sleep, you 
shall now know what is real and true. 


10. Now as long as the waters of deluge lasted, I remained seated in the 
heart of the said medium, and saw some other false sights in his dream. 


11. I saw the waters of the deluge, to recede to the unknown region from 
where they had overflown; and the huge waves disappeared altogether, as 
when the winged mountains fled away for fear of the thunders of Indra. (Who 
lopped of their pinions of yore. See the legend in stanza, — Book I. Kumara 
sambhava of Kaélidasa). 


12. I was borne aloft by my good fate to some distant shore, where I was 
seated as firmly as upon the elevated peak of a high and solid mountain. 


13. Thence I saw the waters to subside in their basins, and the stars of 
heaven shining upon them, like the sparkling particles of their splashing 
billows, or as their foaming and floating froths. 


14. The reflexions of the stars in water, seemed as the shining gems in the 
bosom of the ocean; and the stars that shone above in the firmament, appeared 
as the nightly flaming bushes on the tops of mountains. (There are the 
medicinal plants that are said to burn by night. Vide Kumara Sambhava 
Stanza, — Book I.). 


15. The firmament studded with lustrous stars, and had the appearance of 
an island beaming with gold; and the azure sky seemed wrapt over with the 
blue garments of celestial dames. 


16. The blue diluvian clouds that floated in the sky, resembled a bed of 
cerulean lotuses in the ethereal lake; and the lightnings that flashed in their 
bosoms, likened the yellow farina of flowers, flying all about the midway sky. 


17. Masses of mountain-like clouds flushed with frost, and poured down 
showers of rain on all sides; the floods of the deluge rolled down with their 
reflexions, as bearing the huge kalpa forests in their bosom. 


18. Afterwards, the basin of the universal ocean was dried up, and turned to 
an empty and dry hollow on all around; and the mountain of the Mandara and 
Sahya hills, that had been drowned under the waters were found to be melted 
down to mud or washed away by the receding flood. 


19. Here the sun and moon were found to be sunk in the slough, and there 
the gods Yama and Indra to be hid under the soil; somewhere, the serpents 
and takshakas were rolling in the mire, and elsewhere the kalpa woods lay 
buried with their tops and branches underneath the mud. 


20. In some places, the heads and hands of people were scattered over the 
ground, and looked like lotus buds and flowers torn from their stalks and 
strewn about the bare and barren land. 


21. There were the Vidyddhara females drowned up to their necks in the 
slime, and crying in their piteous chimes in one place; and there were the big 
bodied buffaloes of Yama lying in another, and resembling the huge bodies of 
dead elephants appearing in dream. (The buffalo of Yama is no less bulky 
than the Airavata elephant of Indra). 


22. In some place the bulky body of Garuda, bulged out like the huge 
mountain of the gods; and in others the embankments were swept away; as if 
they were slashed by the mace of Yama fallen upon the ground. 


23. There were the remains of the dead hansa of Brahma, muddled in the 
mire somewhere, and the relics of Indra’s elephant were huddled in the mud 
in another place. 


24. In the meanwhile, I found a flat land in one spot, where I resorted for 
rest from my weariness; and was there overtaken by sound sleep, that 
insensibility stole upon me. 


25. Then waking from my sound sleep, I found myself seated in the heart 
of the hunter; and retaining the possession of my sensibility, I was led by my 
innate desire to see the similar sights of desolation as before. 


26. I beheld upon my waking, the said flat land to lie in the very heart of 
the hunter where I was situated; and was seized with greater grief and sorrow 
at my sight of the spectacle. (The reproduction of the world being but the 
renovation of our woe, and happy are they who work no more to the sight). 


27. I saw therefrom, the rising of the bright and beautiful sun on the next 


day; and by means of the solar light, I came to the sight of the worlds and the 
sky, of this earth and its hills, which presented themselves to my view. 


28. But I soon found that, the earth and sky, the air and all its sides, 
together with the hills and rivers, were all but the reproduction of my mind 
(from its previous ideas of them); as the leaves shoot forth from the trees. 
(Because the insensible stones, have no perception of the visibles). 


29. Then, on seeing the things, as they were exposed to my sight on the 
earth; I began to manage with them in a manner as I had somewhat forgotten 
their right and proper use. (Reminiscence of the past being often liable to 
obliteration). 


30. After my birth, I passed sixteen years at that spot, and had the 
knowledge of this person as my father, and that one as my mother, and this 
spot as my dwelling place, and all this knowledge rising spontaneously from 
my self-cogitation. 


31. I then saw a village and the hermitage of a Brahman at that place; and 
there I beheld a house and found a friend therein, and many more other places. 


32. Thus I remained in the society of my friends, in the village huts and 
hamlets; and passed many days and nights, in the states of repeated 
watchfulness and returning sleep. 


33. Remaining thus in company with these, I came to lose in course of 
time, the light of the understanding I had attained before, and forgot myself as 
one of them by my habitual mode of thinking, as the man forgot himself to a 
fish, (as it is related before in the story of Dama, Vydala and Kata). 


34. In this manner, I remained as a village Brahman (or parish-person) for a 
long time; relying only in my body as begotten by a Brahman, and quite 
forgetful of other. 


35. I believed my material body only to constitute my person, and my wife 
alone as my copartner; I understood my desires only to be the essence of my 
soul, and thought that riches only were the sole object of gain in life. 


36. I had an old cow only for my treasure, and the greens of my garden as 
my only provision; my collections were only the sacred fire and sacrificial 
animals, and my utensil an only water pot. (Kines constituted the wealth of 
the ancient Indians, as the pecus or sheep were reckoned as riches by the old 


Latins; hence godhana means kine money, as pancha godhanam, — the value 
of five cows corresponding with the penta pecuniae of the Romans). 


37. My hopes were as frail as perennial plants, and my conduct the same 
with that of other men; and the state of my living was as mean, as of the mud 
and mire about my dwelling. 


38. I passed my days in pruning and weeding the garden of my greens; and 
in performing my daily ablutions, in the rills and rivulets reckoned as holy by 
men. 


39. I was employed in providing my food and drink, and in procuring the 
fuel and cow-dung for fire; and remained entangled in the snare, of 
scrutinizing about what was right or wrong for daily observance. 


40. In this way, a whole century of my lifetime passed away at that place, 
when it happened on a time that a holy hermit passed by that way from a great 
distance, and became my guest in my humble abode. 


41. Being welcomed and honoured by me, he entered in my dwelling, and 
took his rest after washing and bathing himself. Then after his meal he sat on 
his bed, and began to tell his fate at the approach of night. 


42. He spoke of many climes and countries, and of many lands and 
mountains; and talked of their different customs and manners, which were 
pleasant to hear, and related to various subjects. 


43. All these, he said, are the display of the One Intellect, which is infinite 
and immutable in its nature; and manifests itself in the form of cosmos, which 
is forever present with it as it is now seen to be. 


44. Being thus enlightened by him, I was filled as it were with a flood of 
light, and remained listening to him with attention, all whatever he said on 
this and other subjects. 


45. I heard also my own tale from him, and learning that the person which 
contained me within its womb, is no less than the body of Virdj himself, I was 
eager to come out of the same. 


46. So long as I was not aware, that its mouth is the only door way for my 
exit of that body; I kept moving through it, as if I were wandering amidst the 
vast extent of the earth and oceans. 


47. I then left that spot, beset as it was by my friends and relations; and 
entered into his vital part, in order to make my egress with the vital breath. 


48. Intending then to see both the inside and outside of the Virdja’s body, 
in which I resided, I continued to mark well the process of its outer 
movements as also of its inner thoughts. 


49. I fixed my attention to my consciousness, and remained settled at my 
station without changing its spot; and then breathed out with his breath, as the 
fragrance of flowers accompanies the wind. 


50. The rising with his respiration, I reached the cavity of his mouth; and 
mounting afterwards on the vehicle of the wind, I went on forward, and 
beheld all that lay before me. 


51. I observed there the hermitage of a sage, situated in the grotto of a 
mountain at a distance; and found it full with anchorites, and myself sitting in 
my padmdsana among them. (He saw the sight to which he was habituated all 
along his life). 


52. These anchorites stood before me as my pupils, and were employed in 
their duty of taking care of my person in its state of anaesthesia. 


53. After a while, that man was seen among them, in whose heart I had 
been residing; and he appeared as lying flat and at ease upon his back, after 
taking some food which he got in the adjacent village. 


54. Seeing this wonder I remained quiet, and did not speak anything about 
it to anybody waiting upon me; I then re-entered that body for my own 
amusement. 


55. I got to the region of vitality which was situated within the heart, and 
was by my lasting desire to see the friends I had before, and I left behind. 


56. As I was looking around, I saw the end of the world approaching with 
its direful aspect; and changing the course of nature, together with the 
positions of the world. 


57. The mountains appeared altered and changed to another state, the sky 
presented another face, and the whole world seemed to be dislocated from its 
place. 


58. I could find no trace of my former friends or habitation nor mark the 
situation of that tract of land, nor find the direction where it lay before; all 
these seemed to be swept away by the winds, nor could I know where they 
were taken. 


59. I then found the world appearing in another form, and presenting a sight 
altogether different from what it had been before, and quite anew to view. 


60. I saw the twelve suns of the twelve signs of the zodiac, shining all at 
once and burning in all the quarters of heaven and melting down the high 
mountains, like snows and icebergs to water. 


61. The volcanic fire spread from mountain to mountain, and the fire of 
conflagration flew from forests to forests; the earth was parched with all the 
gems in her bowels, so that there remained no vestige of them save in the 
memory of men. 


62. The seas were dried up, and the earth was full of burning embers on all 
sides; and there rose a strong gale, which wafted the ashes all away. 


63. Subterranean, terrestrial and ethereal fires, began to issue forth in 
flames and flash on all sides; and the face of the whole universe flushed with a 
blaze, glistening like the glowing clouds of the evening sky. 


64. I entered amidst this burning sphere, as a flying moth falls into a flame; 
and was confined within its cave, as the roving bee is closed up in the calyx of 
the shutting lotus, and was quite unscorched and unscathed by the burning 
flame. 


65. I then flew amidst the flames as freely as air, and flickered as the flash 
of fleet lightnings in the cloud; and sometimes hovered over the burning fire, 
as the light winged butterfly flies upon the lotus of the lands, (sthala padma). 


CHAPTER CXLI. 
Description of the Termination of a Kalpa-period. 


Argument: — Continuation of the subject of fire and flame, and hot winds 
and fiery clouds at the final Dooms-day Dissolution. 


The Sage continued: — Though repeatedly burning amidst those fires, yet I 
was neither consumed nor felt the least pain therein; and though falling from 
one fire into another; yet I thought all this as a dream in my dreaming. (i.e., 
one dream in another). 


2. The fires flew aloft, and filled the vault of heaven with flames; and I was 
flying as a fire-brand amidst and all about it. (So the sinless soul soars in the 
highest empyrean of heaven). 


3. As I was wandering with my spiritual light and unwearied soul amidst 
this universal conflagration, there arose on a sudden a tremendous hurricane 
(raised by the rarefied air on all sides). 


4. It howled and growled aloud like the roaring of clouds on high; and blew 
fiercely all along, bearing down and carrying away everything before it. 


5. The whirling and howling tornado, raged with redoubled force in the 
forest; lifting aloft large tracts of woods in the form of clouds, and intermixed 
with rolling firebrands, resembling the revolving suns above. 


6. Flames of fire flashed above, like the evening clouds of heaven, and 
blazed like hundreds of fiery pools on high; and the earth with the habitation 
of men, giants and gods, burned as burning mountains on all sides. 


7. The burnt, unburnt and half-burnt devils and demons, were roving 
together throughout the heated air, and grappling each other in the ethereal 
streams. 


8. The gods and goddesses, were falling down as flames of fire; and the 
abode of the celestials, were melted down in showers of fire. 


9. Flashes of fire were flickering as lightnings, from the burning vault of 
heaven; and clouds of dark smoke hid the face of the vertical sky in darkness. 


10. The faces of the earth and sky and of all sides of heaven, were wrapt in 
a flaming veil like that of the evening cloud; and the whole universe with its 
seven spheres, appeared as a massive mountain of flaming fire. 


11. On one side the sparks of flaming fire, were flashing over the head; and 
on another a huge mountainous mist of smoke hid the hemisphere from sight. 
In the midst there appeared a mountainous body of fire as that of Hara, — the 
god of destruction, dancing amidst the destructive winds of the Rudras 
blowing on all sides. 


CHAPTER CXLII. 
Ascertainment of Karma or Acts of Men. 


Argument: — Here God is ascertained as the Cause of the visionary world; 
and Refutation of the Theory of Karma or Human Deeds and Destiny. 


The Sage resumed and said: — Continuing thus in the vagaries of my false 
imagination, I was led to many such painful sights, until they raised in me the 
feelings of woe and sorrow, and my curiosity gave way to weariness. 


2. I then thought in my mind that it is a mere dream in the mind of another 
person, which I have come to see from my seat within his breast; therefore, I 
must refrain from such sights, and restrain my sorrow for them in vain. 


3. The Huntsman asked: — It was for the investigation of the nature of 
dream, that you had entered into the bosom of another person; say then what 
have you come to know about it, and how are your doubts removed (with 
respect to its false phantasms). 


4. How came you to see the ocean in the breast, which never exists therein, 
and how did you see the conflagration in the heart and the tornado in the 
bowels, which are never to be found in any of those places. 


5. You said you saw the earth and sky, and the rivers and mountains and 
many other things in the mind; but how can these and the world itself, be in 
any manner situated therein. 


6. The sage replied: — All these things and the world also are mere non- 
entities, as there was no pre-existent material cause for the production of the 
world, before its coming to existence; therefore, neither the term creation nor 
its sense, is in any way applicable to this world or it is seen by us. (It is 
therefore, but the mere phantasm of an everlasting dream). 


7. Hence the world creation and its meaning, proceed from ignorance of the 
supreme soul, which is immutable in its nature; and it is ignorance of this 
truth, (/it., true knowledge), that produces the fallacy, (Jit, the false 
knowledge) of creation. (Therefore, the world, (i.e., the idea of the world), is 
ever present in the Divine mind). 


8. Therefore I say, O thou fortunate one, that after you come to your 
knowledge in this respect, (i.e., of the nature of God), and your ignorance of 
His supremely pure nature is removed: — 


9. You will no more believe like myself, the false impression of your 
consciousness (of the existence of the world); but must come to know that, 
this causeless and uncreated world, is only the expanded reflexion of your 
own mind. 


10. Where is the body and the heart, and where are these elements of water, 
etc.; what is this dream and what are these conceptions and perceptions, and 
what is life or death or anything else? (All which are nothing in reality). 


11. There is but one transpicuous Intellect everywhere, before which the 
subtle ether is opalescent, and the biggest mountain is but a mite. 


12. It is of its own nature that this intellectual vacuity, reflects on 
something in its thought; and sees the same as its aeriform body; and this it is 
what is called the world. 


13. As it is our intellect alone, which reflects itself in various forms in our 
dream; and as there is nothing besides it that then presents itself to our view, 
so this world is no other than the aerial form of the intellect only. 


14. This universe is a quiet vacuity without any stir or shadow of anything 
in it; and it is the dimness of the purblind eye of the intellect, that presents 
these false shapes to sight, as blind men see black spots in the clear sky. 


15. To my sight the world is neither an entity nor a non-entity, nor is it a 
mere void or the shadow or reflexion of anything; but the formless infinity of 
the vacuous intellect only; (or the infinite vacuity of the formless intellect 
only). 


16. As it is in the state of our sleep, that the pure intellect sees itself in the 
various forms of its dream, without any cause whatsoever; so doth it view 
everything in its own vacuum in waking also; without the external objects of 


sight or its act of seeing them. 


17. It is something that is unspeakable and without its beginning and end; it 
is apparent with its own conceptions which are one with it and make no 
duality in its nature. (Lit., whose nature is free from unity or duality, or as 
Sadi says: — azchunin O chunan, from this and that and so and such). 


18. As there is but one endless duration, embracing the periods both of 
creation as well as annihilation; and as the tree comprehends all its parts, 
blossoms and fruit under it; so is Brahma the Soul of all. (These are but parts 
of one stupendous whole. — Pope). 


19. As the great edifice of one, appears as an empty space to another; so as 
one’s sight of a castle in a mirage, appears as nothing to another; so this 
visible world of waking people, is the dream of sleeping persons, and rising 
on the ground of their imagination. 


20. It is as the transpicuous vacuity of the intellect, exhibits itself from time 
to time in itself; that we see the things in our dream, as we behold them when 
we are awake; and so also we see the sights in our waking state, as we behold 
them in our dreams in sleep. 


21. As the fragrance of flowers, lies hid in the invisible air; so the world 
lies concealed in the invisible intellect, which sees through every pore of it. 


22. It is by shutting out your thoughts of all and everything from your 
mind, that thou mayst be quite pure in thyself; and it is then only that thy 
infinite soul has its everlasting peace and rest, when it is freed from all cares, 
both within and without itself. 


23. The Huntsman said: — Tell me Sir, how can men get rid of their 
thoughts and cares of life, when they are invariably accompanied by the acts 
and reminiscences of their past lives. Tell me also what kind of men are 
subject to the tendencies of their past conduct, and who are they that are 
released from them. 


24. The Sage replied: — Those souls that are full of intelligence and have 
their spiritual bodies, are never subject to renewed births nor to the 
consequences of their past actions; and such were the bodies of Brahma, and 
Kapila and others, that became manifest of themselves (suam-bhdvah), and 
such were the supernatural bodies of the gods and divine incarnations. 


25. Their bodies were not of this world, nor were they subject to its 
dualistic illusory imaginations; but they were forms of pure intelligence and 
of a subtle and spiritual nature. 


26. In the beginning of creation, there was no primordial act of anybody, to 
fashion his form or frame of mind; but there existed the sole and self-existent 
Brahma only, who manifested himself in the form of the world (which is 
therefore, a manifestation of the Deity himself, and is thence called tanmaya 
or full of the Divine essence). 


27. As the great Brahma and others, were the manifestations of the supreme 
Brahma in the beginning, so there have been many thousands more that were 
manifested from the same divine essence, which are known as_ pure 
intelligences, and superior orders of beings. (Such are the gods and angels and 
spirits of different denominations). 


28. But these persons who are deluded by their ignorance of truth, to think 
themselves other than or apart from Brahma, and as dull and unintellectual 
beings, and as a distinct duality from the nature of God: — 


29. They are seen to be born again the next time, in consequence of their 
past actions, and accompanied with the results of those acts, whereby they are 
confined in their unintellectual bodies, in order to lead their unspiritual lives, 
quite forgetful of their divine nature, and subjected to the false belief of their 
materiality. 


30. But such as preserve the purity of their divine character, by thinking 
themselves as inseparable from the Divine soul, are known here as 
uncontaminated by their former acts, as the persons of the divine Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva or the holy trinity. 


31. All those that know the true nature of the soul, remain with its purity in 
the spirit of God; but such as understand it in the light of the living spirit, live 
in themselves as detached from the Divine soul. 


32. Whenever one knows himself as a mere living being, he is then 
certainly accompanied by his ignorance or avidyd; and the soul takes the name 
of the animal spirit or life, which is conversant only with the world wherein it 
is situated. 


33. But as he comes to know in course of time, the true and divine nature of 
his soul, he is then reinstated in his real state and becomes one with the 


supreme soul of all. 


34. As the fluidity of water exhibits itself in the form of whirlpools in some 
waters; so the divine intellect shows the in-existent world as existent, to those 
understandings which are ignorant of the nature of the supreme soul. (It is the 
nature of the omniscient mind, to picture in itself, the appearances of things 
that are not in actual existence). 


35. The world is the reflexion of omniscience, and not the representation of 
our dreaming or waking states; therefore, it can have no action or property of 
itself, when it is nothing in reality. 


36. In fact neither the knowledge of the world nor ignorance of it, or its 
action or motion or any of its properties, is anything in reality; all these are the 
results of our thought, that represents the unreal as real one unto us. 


37. In truth Brahma being the very creation or the great cosmos itself, is 
verily the soul of all beings; it is in vain therefore, to suppose our prior acts as 
cause of our births. That God is the creator of the universe, is a mere 
assumption made from his omnipotence (which is supposed to make 
everything out of nothing; but as ex nihilo nihil fit, God is himself diffused 
throughout all nature). 


38. It is impossible for anybody to have the bindings of his prior acts upon 
him, at his first creation in the world; it was only afterwards through his 
ignorance that he fabricated to himself a fate or causality of his actions for his 
fruitions in afterlives. (7.e., in his subsequent and succeeding births or 
transmigrations in the world). 


39. Say whether the vortex of sea has any body or action of its own; it is 
but the whirling water, as Brahma himself is apparent in the form of this 
seeming world. 


40. As the persons appearing in our dream have no prior acts for their 
appearance; so were the living beings in their first formation, endued with 
pure understanding only (for want of their prior acts to actuate them at first). 


41. It is a mere supposition, that they had their causal acts at first creation; 
and that all living beings have been roving ever since (in repeated births), 
being fast bound by the chain of their prior acts. (Man was pure in his 
creation, but since his first act of transgression or original sin, and then his 
actual sins, have subjected him to the miserable doom of undergoing repeated 


births). 


42. But this creation is no act of creation, but verily the manifestations of 
Brahma himself; and such being the case (that the world is the self-same 
Brahma), say what can acts mean, whence they proceed and where they lie. 


43. It is only the ignorance of the supreme soul, which binds us to the 
bondage of acts; but its fetters fall off from the believer of Brahma by his 
knowledge of truth. (Those who rely on their acts of faith, are subjected to 
them; but the believer in One is released from their bonds). 


44. Know the outward acts of faith, to proceed from ignorance of the 
universe; but as the wise man advances in his knowledge, he extricates 
himself from the bondage of all religions and ceremonial acts and 
observances. 


45. Whereas the external acts of faith are entirely devoid of any 
substantiality or meritoriousness in them, it is no way difficult to get rid of 
them at once; it is solely our spiritual bond which is our chief concern, beside 
which there is no bond whatsoever. 


46. So long there is the dread of the dreadful illusion of this world, as long 
as you do not attain to your wisdom; and so long do you exhibit your wisdom, 
that you do not fall into the vertiginous eddy of worldly affairs. Therefore, try 
always, ye men of pure hearts and soul, to acquire your wisdom and learning; 
because there is no other way of your flying from the fears of the world, save 
by means of your right understanding. 


CHAPTER CXLIII. 
Ascertainment of Nirvana or Ultimate Extinction. 


Argument: — Praise of wisdom and Intellectual knowledge, and arguments 
in support of the Intellectuality of the world. 


The Sage continued: — The wise man shines in the assembly of the 
learned, as the sun illumines the assemblage of lotuses, in his investigation of 
the duties of religion and ceremonial acts, leading to the welfare of men in 
both worlds. 


2. The heavenly felicity which is attained by the learned and wise by means 
of their spiritual knowledge, is as an ocean of bliss; before which the 
prosperity of god, Indra even, appears to dwindle away as rotten straws amidst 
the billows. 


3. I find no such felicity or prosperity, in the three regions of this earth or 
heaven above or in the pdtdla below, which is greater or comparable with the 
blissfulness of learning and wisdom. 


4. The learned have as clear a sight of the true state of all things, as the 
moon-light gives a clear view of the sphere of stars in the cloudless sky. 


5. The visible world, soon vanishes from sight, and turns to the invisible 
Brahma, by the sapience of the wise; as a rosary of cord, appearing at first as a 
snake, is soon found to be a line upon its inspection. 


6. That Brahma, — the god is ever situated in his Brahma-hood or 
godhead, is a truth evident by itself; and that it is his nature that gives rise to 
the terms creation, destruction, body and others. (Gloss: — that the words 
creation, efc., appertain to his very nature, and are not distinct from him). 


7. He to whom the existence of the world is nil and naught, has no care or 


concern for acts and duties, which are no more than blank letters to him. 


8. It is possible to believe in the production of the material world, from the 
prior existence of its material cause; but in want of such there can be no 
world, nor can there be a cause of it, when it is itself null and void. 


9. It is only the reflection of Brahma, that takes the names of the earth and 
all other things; wherefore, it is not necessary for these mere reflexions to 
have any cause at all. (The substance of God, being the cause of the shadow). 


10. As the men seen in a dream, have no real cause except the imagination 
of the dreamer; such are the persons seen in our waking dreams, but mere 
reflexions of our imaginations, and not the production of their parents. 


11. As there is not the causality of the prior acts, for the appearance of 
persons in human forms in our dream; so neither is there any actual cause for 
people seen in waking dream, to assume the garb of humanity upon them. 


12. Both prior acts as well as desires, are equally false in their causality, of 
framing living beings in different shapes in their repeated births, just as they 
are no causes of producing the persons seen in our dreams. 


13. Men appear as dreams and their impressions, in the course of their 
births and deaths; and they are conscious of this state or that as they think 
themselves either as the one or the other. (i.e., we seem to be or not, as we 
think ourselves to be). 


14. People appear to be as they think of their being, from their 
consciousness of themselves; and they seem to be in the same state in their 
dream, as they appear in the waking state, both in their intents and actions. 
(The dreamer and the dreamt do not differ from their waking states). 


15. The desires and sensations of the dreaming man, are alike those of the 
waking, and differing only in the dimness of the former, from the distinctness 
of the latter. Thus, a dreaming man is sensible of deriving the same 
satisfaction, in obtaining the object of his wish as the waking man; though the 
one is of a concealed and the other of an overt nature. (Therefore, there is no 
difference between the states). 


16. Whenever our pure consciousness of things, shines forth of its own 
nature in either of its two states of clearness or faintness; it is then the 
reflexion of the one that takes the appellation of waking, and the other is 


known as the dreaming state. 


17. As long as this consciousness continues to glare in any body, since his 
first creation until his final emancipation, he is said to be a living being, under 
his repeated births and deaths. 


18. The import of the words waking and dreaming, is not at all different 
from that of consciousness; whose irrepressible reflexion constitutes the 
essence of both states, as light is the essentiality of luminaries. 


19. As heat is the gist of fire, and motion the marrow of the sufflated air or 
wind; or as the fluidity of water is the pith of the billows, and coolness the 
quiddity of breeze (so is consciousness the quintessence of both our waking 
and dreaming states). 


20. The whole universe is an unruffled chasm, and an unchanging unreality; 
and this seeming reality of the world, is even united with its negative sense of 
nihility. 


21. Brahma in its exoteric sense, is both the production as well as the 
destruction of the world, and equally alike its visible form and its notion also; 
but being viewed in its esoteric light, it is only of the nature of the pure 
Intellect, and the One alone, that is forever calm and quiet and undecaying in 
itself. 


22. Whatever thought of causality or effect, passes in the mind of Brahma 
at any time, the same comes to take place immediately, as men construct their 
houses as they please in cities. 


23. The whole creation abides in the mind of God, as the city you dream of 
is in your thought; the cause and effect herein, being the same in one case as 
in the other. 


24. The causality and effectuality are both contained in the womb of the 
dense Intellect; and these are exerted in the same manner in the act of creation 
of the world, as in that of the construction of thy imaginary castle. 


25. The Divine Intellect employs its will, in the causation of its intended 
creation; as you form the plan for the construction of your projected edifice: 
Thus, the causality and its effect are combined together in the one and same 
mind. 


26. The divine mind develops itself in its own form of the sky, and the 
world that is forever situated therein, is then called the creation and lying in 
the expanse of that sky. (Gloss. — The Srutis deny the existence of the outer 
and visible world). 


27. The light which the sun of our consciousness, cast upon the imaginary 
city in the mind; is of its own nature what is signified by the terms causality 
and its effect. (Z.e., Our consciousness is the cause of our knowledge of the 
world, — the false creation of our imagination). 


28. The forms in which the mind displayed itself at first, the same continue 
to exist ever since in the same state; and these are invariably designated by the 
terms of time, space and the rest. 


29. Whatever names are borne by the things, which are exhibited in the 
vacuity of the Intellect; they are ever after viewed as realities under the 
designations of some as causes and others as their effect; (as the cow is the 
cause of the production of milk, and the pot is the cause of its reception, and 
so forth). 


30. The creation which was miraculously displayed in its ideal form in the 
Intellect, consisted at first of mere ideas, which received the name of the 
(material) world afterwards. (So the sruti: — whatever is thought of in the 
mind at first, receives a name (or a word) for its designation afterwards). 


31. This triple world is of a vacuous form, and is situated in the vacuity of 
the intellect; just as the clear air contains its insufflation inbred in it. (The 
inherence of vibration inborn in it). 


32. As the vapours and clouds covering the face of the sky, give the 
appearance of blueness to it; so the dizziness of ignorance, misrepresents the 
clear intellect in the form of the gross world. 


33. But on receiving the true reflexion of the spirit in the intellect, by 
means of intense meditation, the notion of the creation turns to that of non- 
creation; as the false notion of the snake in the rope, is changed to that of the 
rope upon its revision. 


34. The dead find the future world, as what they used to see in their dream; 
but that world as well as this, are equally as formless as the vacuum of the 
Intellect. (Both this world and the next, are situated in the Divine-Mind, and 
are of the same form as that). 


35. The Huntsman said: — Tell me Sir, why are men regenerated in new 
bodies; for their sufferings and enjoyments in future births; and tell me also 
what are the principal and accompanying causes of our reproduction in this 
world. 


36. If it is on account of the pious or impious acts, which are done in our 
present destructible bodies, that we are destined to their retributions 
afterwards; then say why our indestructible souls, should be brought to feel 
their results in other bodies, which seems to be very absurd to me. 


37. The sage replied: — The words piety and impiety, our desires and acts, 
are words of the same import, and significant of their causality in framing the 
living soul according to their own stamp; but these are mere suppositions, and 
neither true causes of the schesis of our souls, nor of the modes of our lives. 


38. It is the mind which is situated in the vacuous intellect, and is possessed 
of the power of intellection that imagines in itself the various states of things 
(and the happiness and miseries of life), and gives names to them accordingly. 
(So says the sruti: — The sapient seeing the different form and states of 
things, coin words to designate them and their various modes also). 


39. The conscious soul comes to know by means of its intellection, its own 
body in its vacuous self; and after death it sees the same to exist as in its 
dream or imagination. (i.e., in its ideal form). 


40. The knowledge of the dead in regard to the next world, is likewise in 
the manner of a dream; and though this dreaming state of the soul continues 
for a long duration, it bears no truth in its nature. 


41. If a new body is framed by another person (such as parents or the 
creator himself), for the re-entrance of deceased spirit into it, then can the new 
born body have any remembrance of the past, and how can this body be what 
the dead person had before, and as for his intellect, it is a mere vacuity, and 
cannot pass from one body into another. 


42. Therefore, no one that is dead is born again, or is to be reborn 
afterwards at any time; it is only an idea of the mind, that I was so and am 
reborn as such; and a vain wish in its vacuity, to be born again in some form 
or other. 


43. It is by nature and habitual mode of thinking, that men are impressed 
with belief of his regeneration, both by popular persuasion and scriptural 


evidence of a state of future retribution, which is altogether false and fanciful. 


44. The soul is an aerial and vacuous substance, giving rise to the phantoms 
of visibles, in the forms of shadowy dreams in its spacious vacuity; and 
always views its births and deaths in endless repetitions in this world. 


45. It views every particular object, in the illusive network, which is spread 
in its ample sphere; and seems to see and act and enjoy everything, without 
being in the actual enjoyment of anything. 


46. In this manner millions and millions of worlds, are constantly rising 
before its sight; which appear to be so many visible phenomena in its 
ignorance; but which when viewed in their proper light, prove to be the 
display of One all-pervading Brahma only. 


47. But none of them ever occupy any space, nor do any one of them ever 
exist anywhere in reality; but there is that one Brahma that spreads undivided 
through all, and knows all these to be an undivided whole, and yet every one 
of them forming a world of itself. (The Lord is full and perfect in each and all 
of these). 


48. Now, all beings in these worlds are connected with one another in a 
common link (of the universal soul of all); they appear as realities to the 
erroneous sight of people, but being viewed in their true light, they proved to 
be self-same with the unborn One. 


49. That undecaying One which is known as true reality, to the knower of 
the knowable; (i.e., to him who knows the truth), and what is understood as 
unreal by the enlightened sage, is believed to be true by the ignorant. (This is 
the contrariety between both). 


50. The belief that all things everywhere are realities, because they are all 
but reflexions of the self-same One; is enough to reconcile these opposite 
parties, and to settle in one common faith of universal catholicism, (of One, to 


pan). 


51. Or in order to ascertain, whether the world as one views it is real or 
unreal, let one consult his own consciousness about it, and rely on its verdict, 
with regard to its reality or otherwise; (because nothing can upset the 
undeniable conviction of consciousness). 


52. Who can doubt the evidence of consciousness, or confute its dictates of 


this kind or that; or with regard to the difference or identity of things, or their 
unity or duality. 


53. The knowledge of the knowable God; in as much as it is known to us is 
right, and establishes the identity of the knowable One with his knowledge; 
but the position that the known or visible world, is identic with the unknown 
and invisible god, is false and mistaken knowledge. (i.e., God is seen in his 
works, but the works are not the God). 


54. Such being the meaning (of this mystery), the knowable One is not 
distinct from knowledge of Him; but being seated in our finite understanding, 
is quite unknown to and apart from the ignorant, that have no knowledge of 
the knowable One. 


55. The Knowable One is known to us in proportion to our knowledge of 
him; but not so to those that are ignorant of Him; as our knowledge increases, 
so the knowable soul spreads of itself over our souls. 


56. Hence the unreal worlds, that appear of themselves as real ones before 
the eyes of the ignorant, are naught and nothing to my sight. 


57. Being rightly understood, all things are but forms of the one intellect, 
and equally void as itself, and this appears in a thousand shapes to the 
understanding of gross instincts. 


58. As the one intellectual soul assumes many forms to itself as it exhibits 
in its dreams, and engrosses them all again into one, or the single form of its 
unity in its sound sleep; so doth the Divine soul appear in one or more forms 
to our intellects also. 


59. Thus our consciousness of God, though one and same, yet it appears in 
various forms according to the various apprehensions of men; and are either 
vacuous or formal, as our dreams and the works of our imagination. 


60. The consciousness of the dreams that we have in the vacuum of our 
minds, is what take the name of the worlds; but the sound sleep of the mind or 
its unconsciousness of anything, is called its pralaya or anaesthesia: and this 
analogy applies equally to them. 


61. This substantial totality of existences, are mere perceptions of the mind 
only; and whatever appears in any manner in the thought in any manner at any 
time or place, the same seems to present itself in reality before us even then 


and there. 


62. It was the thought alone at first, that manifested itself in the forms of 
the primary elements of fire and water, and the earth and in the beginning of 
creation, all which rose in the mind in the manner of dreams and the phantoms 
of its imagination. 


63. Again, the inward impressions of these things, that are preserved in the 
vacuous space of our consciousness; the same unite together of themselves, 
and exhibit unto us this world, in the form as we view it in our presence. 


64. Our consciousness appears unto us, in both its transient as well as 
permanent states; while in reality it is no temporary thing, but continues with 
us even at the end of all transitory things, as our transient lives also. 


65. Our consciousness accompanies us forever, wheresoever we remain or 
go; conceive in yourself for instance as passing on either towards the east or 
west; you see many things and cities on your way; but can never lose your 
memory of the past, nor the consciousness of yourself as you proceed onward. 
(The knowledge which the mind has of its operations, is never effaced from 
it). 


66. Anything that the mind has seen or willed or is long practiced to do or 
think upon is never effaced from consciousness, unless it be from numbness 
of the Intellect. (Gloss. — So one is never at a loss to realize his wishes, 
unless he is remiss in his efforts to bring them to effect). 


67. You may rove wherever you please, either to the east or west, and you 
will find your consciousness to continue the same, and never changing with 
the change of your place. (So doth one’s consciousness accompany him even 
after his death). 


68. We have seen the man of steady consciousness, attain to the object or 
state of his wish, by his firm perseverance; while on the contrary the unsteady 
minded are sure to lose them both. (i.e., his wished-for object together with 
the consciousness of himself). 


69. The man of steady consciousness, is possessed of both states whether 
he goes to the north or south; but the one that is unsteady in himself and to his 
purpose also, is deprived of both (himself and his object). (Consciousness is 
joint knowledge of ourselves, in connections with others, so that the mind 
knows both what it is, as well as what it wills). 


70. The man of firm intent that thinks of his being both in heaven and earth, 
has them both by fixing his mind in one, while his body is placed in the other; 
as the man thinking of going both to the east and west, may do both by 
walking one way and thinking of the other. But the man of unsteady purpose 
is neither for this world or that, nor walks one way or the other (but stands in 
the middle). 


71. By steadfast belief in the One, we find the intellect alone pervading the 
whole vacuity of space; but this one appears as many and many thousands to 
the understanding of ignorant sceptics. 


72. Be the body destructible because of its materiality, or indestructible by 
reason of it being the reflexions of the divine intellect; yet it is after all but a 
mere appearance in the dream of the living soul, whether in this or in the 
future world. (The indestructible intellect, cannot be the destructible body, 
because the destruction of this would involve the other to destruction also). 


73. That the souls of men do not die with their bodies, is evident from the 
instances of the ghosts and spirits of the barbarians, that are invoked by 
wizards, and made to relate the incidents of their past lives. 


74. Men in the country of barbarians that have long been dead and burnt 
down to ashes, are known to reappear before people, and delivering their 
errands, to have disappeared with their living souls. 


75. If it is impossible for departed souls to reappear like the living as the 
Charvakas say; then let me ask them, why do they not reckon their absent 
friends as dead also, and unable to return. (This argument maintains the 
doctrine of spirituality, of the capability of the reappearance of departed 
spirits from the analogy of the return of absent people to their homes; as 
Butler proves the rising of the dead at the Resurrection, upon the analogy of 
our waking from sleep). 


76. If the property of action be true of the living, why should it not be 
equally true of the dead also; upon the analogy of our conception of the idea 
of the action of the one as well as of the other. 


77. The doctrine of the visionary dream of the world, being the established 
and irrefutable truth of Aryan Sdstras; it is quite compatible and conformable 
with the tenet of eternal ideas maintained in Indian philosophy. 


78. These worlds are equally as true as well as false to view, as the sight of 


the appearances in the disc of the moon, which appears as realities to the eyes 
of beholders, without having any substantiality in them. (The lunar spots are 
considered as mere marks, — kalankas, though to all appearance they seem as 
habitable parts, — chandra-loka). 


79. The subjective world is real, in having all its objects as parts of the true 
Entity; and the subjective mind is a reality, in its being composed of pure 
ideas only. The Intellect is true as reflexion only, and so they are all true 
without having any reality of themselves. 


80. All these are immutable and quiet, and lie quiescent in the vacuity of 
the Divine Intellect; they are irremovable and unconspicuous of themselves, 
and lie immanent in the Divine soul. 


81. It is the steady consciousness, that is conscious of whatever is fixed 
upon at any time or place; and represents all things whether real or unreal, that 
is inbred or inherent in it. 


82. Let our bodies rise or fall, and our destinies overtake us as they will; let 
happiness or misery befall on us as they are decreed, they cannot affect the 
serenity of the indifferent soul. 


83. Hence, it is of no matter unto us, whether these are realities or 
otherwise, or whether it may be so and so or not; avoid your desire for 
anything, and be wise and at rest after all your wanderings. 


CHAPTER CXLIV. 
Investigation into the nature & Vicissitudes of 
Things. 


Argument: — The Intellect manifested in the World, which is but a 
manifestation of the Divine mind and its Omnipotence. 


The Sage continued: — The visible world is being a something in nothing, 
an entity based upon non-entity, (i.e., a substance based upon the intellect), 
resembles our consciousness of things seen in our dream only. And as all 
things are eternally situated in the Divine Mind, there can be no meaning in 
our being bound to or liberated from them. 


2. These worlds that appear to rove before us, are seen as the mites flying 
about in the solar rays (or as the bright circlets seeming to swim before our 
closed eyes); they are but evanescent phantoms in the air, and appearing as 
stable bodies in the minds of the ignorant. 


3. Whatever is seen to be placed before us in any form or state, is soon 
found to change its mode and manner before us; so likewise, is the changeful 
state of all things herein, that are continually rotating like the waters in a 
whirlpool. 


4. The earth, air, water, efc., are the materials that combine to form frail 
bodies, that are doomed to decay and dissolve in a short time; and yet they are 
computed by the ignorant to last for ages, — as Yugas and kalpas. 
(Everything is changing and nothing lasting). 


5. The world is a dream, and the totality of existence a mere nihility; and 
yet the notion of entity that we have of this nullity, is no other than a reflexion 
of the one Eternal Intellect. 


6. Like this solar world of ours, there are hundreds and thousand others to 
be seen in the skies; nor is it incredible that others have the like notions of 
other peoples. 


7. We see the seas and lakes, teeming with living beings of various kinds, 
and find the pools and bogs full of frogs everywhere; but none of them know 
anything about the other reservoirs, nor of their inhabitants neither beside 
those of their own. 


8. As a hundred men sleeping in one and the same room; see as many air- 
built castles differing from another in their dream; so there appear different 
worlds in the airy intellects of some, which are seen and unknown to others. 


9. As many aerial cities are seen, in the dreams of many men, sleeping 
together in the same room; so do these aerial worlds appear in the empty 
sphere of our minds, and are said to be, in being, and not being, in the same 
time. (i.e., being but a dream which is no-being or nothing). 


10. The sky is a miracle of the mind, and a phenomenon of itself; it is 
visible without its form, and appears as limited without its limitation, and as 
created without its creation. (vacuity being increate). 


11. The vacuum bearing the nature of the vacuous mind, is vainly styled the 
firm firmament; it presents to view the forms of fleeting objects in it, as the 
understanding represents its ideas and passing thoughts to our knowledge. 


12. The remembrance of a thing, is the cause of its dream by night, as the 
desire of something causes its conception in the mind; and as _ the 
apprehension of one’s death, proceeds from his seeing in the instances of 
others. 


13. In the beginning of creation, the world appears as an image in the mind; 
which is no other than a flash or reflexion of the Divine Intellect, and to which 
no other name than a réchauffé of the Divine Intellect, can be properly 
assigned. 


14. The saying that Brahma shines as the very world, means to say that, he 
did not shine anew in the form of the world, but has this form eternally 
subsisting in his omniscience. 


15. It is said that the cause is (identic with) the effect, because the common 
cause of all, is specialized in its form of the effect. (i.e., the one becomes as 


many). The action which was confined in the cause at first (as vegetation in 
the seed), becomes evolved in the germ of creation afterwards. 


16. When such things (or conditions) occur in the mind in dreams, as have 
not been seen or known before, they are called sanskdras or pristine 
impressions in the mind (as our inward-passions and feelings), and not the 
external objects of sense, which are not inbred in the mind. 


17. These mental impressions or reminiscences, are perceptible to us in our 
dreaming and not in the waking state; and though they are unseen in our 
waking; yet they are not lost unto us so long as we retain those impressions in 
the mind. They naturally appear in the soul in dreaming, as the visibles appear 
to sight in the waking state. 


18. Thus the vedantist comes to know the inexistence of the outer world, 
and by knowing the knowable One, they come to attain the consummation of 
their object (which is the attainment of their final emancipation or moksha). 


19. The impressions of the waking state, which occur in the state of 
dreaming, are the newly made imprints of the waking hours on the memory; 
and these make the sleeping hours seem as waking to the dreaming soul. 


20. These recent ideas fluctuate in the mind, as by the breath of the wind, 
and they occur and recur of themselves, without the agency of pristine 
impressions. 


21. There is one sole Intellect only, possessed of its many multitudes of 
airy dreams; and being dispossessed of them at last, it remains solely by and 
in itself. 


22. The consciousness that we have of the dreams, ranging at large in the 
empty sphere of our Intellect, is verily what is denominated the world by us; 
and the want of this consciousness in our sound sleep, is what is termed the 
extinction of world by ourselves. This analogy applies also to the nature of the 
self-existed One. 


23. There exists only the infinite sphere of one eternal Intellect, and there 
appears an infinity of shapes, perpetually rising and setting in its open in the 
manner of dreams. These are born of its own nature and are called the world, 
and bear the same intellectual form with itself. 


24. Thus the atomic particle of the Intellect, contains the form of the whole 


cosmos within its bosom; which is an exact ectype of its archetype, as the 
shadow under a mirror, is the true representation of the prototype. 


25. The cavity of the Intellect contains the consciousness which is diffused 
in it like the dilution of an atom; and extends throughout without beginning 
and end, and this is called the cosmos. 


26. Hence, as far as the vacuity of the Intellect extends to all infinity, there 
is the appearance of the wide world connected with it, as immanent in and 
identic with itself at all times. (The intimate connection of the subjective mind 
and objective world together). 


27. The intellect is self-same with the world, and therefore, all minds and 
intellectual beings as myself and thyself, are worlds or microcosm also; and it 
is for this reason that the great macrocosm of the world, is said to be 
comprised in the corpuscle of the mind. 


28. Therefore, I who am a minute soul, am of the form of the whole world 
also, (being its container in the mind); hence I abide everywhere likewise, 
even in the midst of an atom also. 


29. Being in the form of the minutiae of the intellect, I am also as great as 
the universal soul, and as expanded as the open air all around; I also see all 
the three worlds about one, wherever I abide or move. (All things are present 
in the mind, at all places and times). 


30. Iam an atom of the intellectual soul, and am joined with the intellectual 
soul of the universe; it is my sight of the supreme spirit in my meditation, that 
I am lost in it as a drop of water is lost in the ocean. 


31. Having entered into the Divine spirit, and feeling its influence in me, I 
am filled with its cognition; and behold the three worlds within me, as the 
seed lies hid in the pericarp or in the seed vessel, (to be developed in its future 
foliage). 


32. I see the triple world expanding within myself (according to our 
reminiscence of the same which is engraven in the mind), beside which there 
is no outer world on the outside of anybody. (The world lies in the conception 
of mind only, and the exterior one is but a reflexion of the same). 


33. Whenever the world appears in any form, whether of a gross or subtle 
nature, as in the states of our waking or dreaming; both these forms of the 


interior or exterior worlds, are to be known as the reflexion of the ideal one 
imprinted in the intellect. 


34. When the living soul indulges itself in the sight of the world, in the 
state of its dreaming; it is to be known as a reflexion of the expanded particle 
of the intellect, which the sleeping soul delights to dote upon. 


35. The Huntsman rejoined: — If the visible world is causeless or without 
its maker, then how could it come into existence, and if it be a caused or 
created exterior world, how could we have any knowledge of it in the sleeping 
and dreaming of the soul. 


36. The sage replied: — All this is without a cause, and the world 
proceeded at first without any causality whatever. (The Muni means to say 
that there cannot be any independent or instrumental cause of creation save 
the emanation of One oneself). 


37. It is verily impossible for gross and perishable bodies and transient 
beings, to come to being without a cause; but that which is a facsimile or 
shadow only of the antitype and original model of the eternal mind, cannot 
possibly have any cause at all. 


38. It is Brahma himself that thus shines refulgent, by nature of his 
intellectual effulgence; hence the world’s creation and destruction are utterly 
inapplicable to what is without its beginning and end. 


39. Thus the uncaused creation, abides in the substance of the great God, 
and shines forth with divine glory to all infinity. It is to gross minds only, 
which are prepossessed with the grosser ideas of materiality, that it appears in 
the form of a gross material body. 


40. What numberless varieties do there appear in the unvaried Brahma, and 
what un-numbered diversities of shapes and forms are seen in the formless 
One, that is ever unchanged and imperishable. 


41. Brahma is formless in his person (which is of a spiritual form); yet he 
exhibits himself in many forms, in his being the mind (or mirror of all ideal 
forms); where he represents his spiritual self or soul, in all the various forms 
of moving and immovable bodies. 


42. He makes the gods, sages and seers in his likeness, and directs them to 
their different degrees and duties also; he stablishes the laws and prohibitions 


of conduct, and appoints the acts and observances at all times and places. 


43. All existences and privations, productions and destructions, of moving 
or unmoving bodies, whether great or small ones, are subject to his decree, 
and can never transgress any of his general laws. 


44. Ever since the general decree, nothing takes place without its proper 
special cause; as you can never expect to exude oil from sand (save from oily 
seeds). 


45. The destined decree of providence, is the leader of all events in the 
world; it is as one part of the body of Brahma, by which he represses the other 
part of himself; (e., his will); as we restrain the action of one hand by the 
other. (One over-ruling fate governs even Jove himself). 


46. This unavoidable destiny overtakes us, against our prudence and will, 
like the sudden fall of a fruit on a flying crow, (#T&dteta) and drives us along 
with its course, as the tide or eddy bears down the waters with it. 


47. The preordination of certain effects from certain causes, is what is 
called destiny; without which there result all disorder and disturbance, and in 
want of which the great Brahma even cannot abide. It is therefore, the 
imperishable soul of all existence. 


48. Thus then, this destiny is the cause of all, and although it is unseen and 
unknown, yet it acts on all as it is destined for them ever since their very 
production. (This is no more than the unchangeable law of nature). 


49. The uncausing Brahma that causes nothing, is believed by the ignorant 
as the causal agent of creation; which they mistake as the production of its 
maker by error of their judgment. 


50. The wise man, however, seeing the sudden appearance of world before 
him, like the rotation of a wheel, considers its causes as such and such or this 
and that, as they have been determined by their preordained destiny. 


51. So all existent bodies have their special causes, in their primordial 
destiny, which determines their subsequent lots in endless succession. Hence 
the occurrences, of our waking state, resembling the visions in our dream, are 
never without their antecedent causes. 


52. Thus, when I dreamt the erroneous dream of the destruction of the 


world, caused by concussion of the elements and waters I had its cause inbred 
in me, in my reminiscence of the great deluge I had heard of in traditional 
narration. 


53. In this manner we see the reflexions of almighty power in all things that 
come under own reflection (or observation), just as we see the crystals and 
shell-fishes shining with their intrinsical brightness. May this Omnipotent 
power that is ever-living soul of souls, and known to us in our imperfect 
notion of him, be glorified for ever and ever. 


CHAPTER CXLV. 
Description of the Waking, Dreaming and Sleeping 
States. 


Argument: — The three Humours of Human body Composing the three 
states of its earthly existence. 


The Sage continued: — The living soul (or man), perceives the dream of 
the outer world, by means of the external organs of sense; and that of the inner 
world by the internal senses; but the quickness of both the internal and 
external senses, gives the sensations of both these worlds to the soul. 


2. When the outer senses are busily employed with outward objects, then 
the perceptions of mental objects and inner functions become faint and fainter 
by degrees. 


3. When the external senses are all directed to the inside, and the inner 
senses are concentrated in the mind; then the object of thought and the idea of 
the world, however minute they had been before, assume gradually a more 
expanded form, and present their extended appearances to the soul. (Brooding 
upon a thought, dilates it the more). 


4. In this manner, the world which is nothing in reality, being once thought 
upon as something, however small in its idea, dilates itself to an enormous 
size in the mind, which cast at last its reflexion on the external organs of sense 
also, and make it appear so big and vast to sight. 


5. When the eyes and senses of a living person, are occupied with outer 
objects, then the soul beholds the intellect, the form of the exterior world only, 
(so the external senses carry their impressions to the mind also). 


6. The intellectual and aeriform soul, is composed of the congeries of all 


outward sensations; namely of the ears or hearing, touch or feeling, seeing and 
smelling, and taste as also of the four internal sensations of will or volition. 


7. Therefore, the living soul is always present at every place, accompanied 
with all the senses in its intellect, hence the airy intellect is to be ever 
unobstructed, because it always knows and sees everywhere. 


8. When the phlegmatic humour or fluid of the body, fills the veins and 
arteries of the living person; the soul is then lulled to sleep and to see false 
visions in its dream. 


9. It seems to swim in a sea of milk, and to soar in the moonlight sky; it 
thinks it sees a limpid lake about it, filled with full-blown lotuses and their 
blooming buds. 


10. It sees in itself the flowery gardens of the vernal season, and mantled in 
vest of flowers, vying with the bespangled sky, and resounding with the 
warbling of birds, and the buzz of humming humble bees. 


11. It sees all mirth and festivity afoot in its mansion, and the merry dance 
of sportive damsels afloat in its compound; and views its court-yard filled with 
provisions of food and drink (to its heart’s content). 


12. It beholds profluent streams like adolescent maidens, running sportfully 
to join the distant sea; girt with the swimming flowers and smiling with their 
flashy foams; and darting about their fickle glances, in flitting motion of the 
shrimps, fluttering on the surface of the water. 


13. It views edifices, turrets, rising as high as the summits of the Himalayan 
mountains, and the tops of ice bergs (in the frigid climes); and having their 
white washed walls, appearing as if they were varnished with moon-beams. 


14. It sees the landscape covered by the dews of the dewy season, or as hid 
under the mists of winter, and shrouded by the showering clouds of the rainy 
weather, and views the ground below overgrown with herbaceous plants, and 
the muddy marshes grown over with blue lotuses. 


15. The woodlands were seen to be overspread with flowers, and resorted 
to by droves of deer and the weary traveller; that halted under the cooling 
umbrage of the thickening foliage of the forest, and were soothed by soft 
breezes of the sylvan spot. 


16. The flowery arbour had all its alleys and arcades, bestrewn over with 
the flaring farina of flowers; and the crimson dusts of Kunda, Kadamba and 
Mandara blossoms, were blushing and mantling the scenery all around. 


17. The lakes were attired in azure with blue lotuses, and the ground wore 
the flowing floral garment of flowers; the woodlands were clear of clouds, and 
the firmament was clear and cold under the autumnal sky. 


18. The mountain range was crowned with rows of Kunda, Kadamba and 
Kadali or plantain trees, which waved their leafy fans on their exalted heads, 
which appeared to nod at the dancing of the leaflets. 


19. The tender creepers were shaking with negligence, with the unblown 
buds and blossoms upon them; appeared as young damsels dancing 
gracefully, with strings of pearls on their slender persons. 


20. It sees the royal hall and the regal synod, shining as brightly as the 
blooming lotus-bed in the lake; and he sees also the fanning white chouries 
and waving over them, like the feathered tribe, flapping their wings over the 
floral lake (or lotus beds). 


21. It sees also the running rills softly gliding in playful mood, with curling 
creepers and flowers wreathed with their currents; and murmuring along with 
mixed music of birds on the spray beside them. 


22. The dhard, — terra or earth, was filled and flooded, by dhdra or 
torrents of water falling from the adharas or cataracts, of dharddharas or 
mountains; and all the sides of heaven were obscured by the showers of rain 
and snows, falling all about its vault. 


23. When the internal channels of the body are filled with the fluid of bile 
(pitta), the soul remains with its internal vigor as an atom in its cell, and then 
sees the dreams of the following nature in itself. 


24. It sees flames of fire about it, and red kinsuka flowers upon its withered 
trees and blasted by the winds; it sees also the forms of red lotus flowers, 
burning as flames of fire before it. 


25. The inner nerves and veins became as dry of the gastric juice, as when 
the limpid streams turn to dry sand banks; and there appear flames of wild 
fire, and dark smoke flying over the darkened face of nature. 


26. There appear fires to be blazing around, and the disk of the sun seems 
to dart its burning rays; wild fires are seen in forests, the withered and the 
dried ponds emit a poisonous gas, instead of their limpid waters. 


27. The seas are seen with their boiling waters, and turning to beds of hot 
mire and mud; the horizon is filled with sultry winds, and the forests with 
flying ashes, while the deserts appeared quite desolate all about. 


28. The moving sands spreading about, and flying like a flight of storks in 
the air; the landscape appearing otherwise than before, and the former verdure 
of the trees, are no more coming to sight. 


29. It sees the fearful wayfarer, covered over by the burning sand of the 
parching desert; and looking wistfully on the distant tree by the way side, 
spreading its cooling ambrosial shade over the parched ground. 


30. It sees the earth burning as a flaming furnace with all its lands and 
places hid under the ashes, and a dark cloud of dust covering the face of the 
sky on all sides. 


31. The world appears in a flame on all sides, with all its planetary bodies, 
cities and seas, together with the hills and forests and the open air, all which 
seem to be burning in a blaze. 


32. It sees the empty clouds of autumn, spring and hot seasons, that serve to 
favour the fires instead of quenching them; and beholds the lands below 
covered with grass and leafy creepers, which entrap them as vestures of 
clouds. 


33. It sees the ground glittering as gold on all sides, and the waters of the 
lakes and rivers, and the snowy mountains even all tepid and hot. 


34. When the channels of the body are dried up, for want of the gastric 
juice, they are filled with wind and flatulence; and the soul retaining its 
vigour, sees various dreams of the following description. 


35. The understanding being disturbed by the wind, sees the earth and the 
habitations of men and the forests, and sees in dream, quite different from 
what they appeared before. 


36. The soul beholds itself as flying in the air, with the hills and hilly lands 
all about it; and hears a rumbling noise as that of the whirling of the wheels of 


a chariot. 


37. It seems to be riding about on horseback, or upon a camel or eagle or 
on the back of a cloud, or riding in a chariot drawn by ganders or swans. 


38. It sees the earth, sky and cities and forests, all appearing before it; and 
trembling as in fear like bubbles in the water. 


39. It finds itself as fallen in a blind ditch, or in some great danger, or as 
mounting in the air, upon a tree or hill. 


40. When the conduits of the body are filled, with a combination of all the 
three humours of phlegm, bile and flatulence; then the soul is led by the windy 
humour to see several dreams of the following nature. 


41. It sees rainfalls flowing down the mountains, and hailstones hurling 
down its sides to its terror; it hears the bursting of the hills and edifices, and 
sees the trees to be moving about. 


42. Woods and forests, appear to gird the distant horizon; which is over 
cast by huge clouds, and traversed by big elephants and lions. 


43. The palm and tdmala trees, appear to be burning around; and the 
hollow caves and caverns, to resound with the harsh noise of the flashing fire 
and falling trees. 


44. The mountain craigs seeming to be clashing and crashing against one 
another, and the caverns resounding to their hoarse and harsh crackling. 


45. The mountain tops also seem to clash against each other, and emit a 
harsh and hideous noise about them; and the streams running amidst them, 
appear as wearing necklaces with the loosened creepers and bushes which 
they bore away. 


46. Fragments of rocks are seen, to be borne away by the mountain streams 
to the ocean; and the torn bushes which they carried down, seemed to spread 
as far as the utmost pole. 


47. Craggy hills seemed to crash each other with their denticulated edges, 
and crashed and split themselves with their harsh and hideous sounds. 


48. The forest leaves with creepers were scattered all around by the strong 


wind, and the broken stones of the mountain made their bed over the moss 
below. 


49. The tall tala trees fell to the ground with marmara sound, like the wars 
of the Gods and Titans of yore; and all birds flew with a harsh scream, like the 
crying of men at the last day of desolation of the world. 


50. All woods, stones and earth mixed together as one mass, like jarikrita 
jiva in dream. 


51. Silence reigned there like worm underneath the earth, and frog 
underneath a stone, boy within the belly, and the seed within the fruit. 


52. Like boiled rice and solidified liquid in the bowel, and the sapling 
within the wall of a pillar. 


53. The vital air ceased to blow, and the all things are blamed, as if they are 
encased within the hollow of the earth. 


54. Deep darkness reigned there, and susupti appeared like deep dark well 
within the cavern of a mountain. 


55. As heavy food is digested by the digestive organ of the body, and 
afterward by a separate juice a new energy comes within, so the vital air 
which once disappeared, makes its appearance again. 


56. As after digestion certain kind of juice appears within the body in the 
shape of vitality, so stone begins to fall therein. 


57. As fire increases more fire, a little adds little more; so the combination 
of triple humours, composes the inward and outward essence of the body. 


58. Thus the living soul being confined within the bonds of the body, and 
led by force of the triple humours, (phlegm, etc.); sees (by means of its 
internal senses), the dreams of the absent world, as it beholds the visions of 
the visible phenomena, with its external organs of sense. 


59. It is according to the more or less excitement of the senses, by the 
greater or less irritation of the humours, that the mind is liable to view its 
internal vision, in a greater or less degree; but the action of the humours being 
equable, the tenor of the mind runs in an even course. 


60. The living soul being beset by irritated humours (from the effects of 
intoxication, mantras or poison, and the like), looks abroad over the wide 
world, and sees the earth and sky and the mountains to be turning round; and 
flames of fire issuing from burning piles. 


61. It finds itself rising to and moving about the skies, the rising moon and 
ranges of mountains; sees forests of trees and hills, and floods of water 
washing the face of heaven. 


62. It thinks itself to be diving on and floating on the waters, or rambling in 
heavenly abodes, or in forests and hilly places, and finds itself to be floating in 
the sky, upon the backs of hoary clouds. 


63. It sees rows of palms and other trees ranged in the sky, and sees the 
false sights of hell punishments, as the sawing and crushing of sinful bodies. 


64. It fancies itself to be hurled down by a turning wheel, and rising 
instantly to the sky again; it sees the air full of people, and thinks itself as 
diving in the waters upon the land. 


65. It sees the business of the daytime, carried on everywhere at night, the 
sun shining then as in the day time; and a thick darkness overspreading the 
face of the day. 


66. The mountainous regions are seen in the skies, and the land is seen to 
be full of holes and ditches; rows of edifices are seen in the air, and amity is 
found to be combined with enmity; (friends turning to foes and vice versa). 


67. Relatives are thought as strangers, and wicked people are taken for 
friends; ditches and dells are viewed as level land, and flats and planes appear 
as caves and caverns. 


68. There appear hoary mountains of milky whiteness and crystal gems, 
and resonant with the melody of birds; and limpid lakes are seen to glide 
below, with their water as sweet as butter. 


69. Forests of various trees appear to sight, and houses adorned with 
females, appearing as lotuses fraught with bees. 


70. The living soul thought it lies hid within, and closed in itself; yet 
perceives all these sights without, as if it were awake to them. (Thus, the 
derangement of the humours, causes these errors of sensation of perceiving 


what is not present to the senses). 


71. In this manner it is the work of vitiated humours, to represent many 
such sights of external objects, in the forms of dream to the minds of people. 


72. It is usual with men of disordered humours, to see many extraordinary 
sights and fearful appearances, both within and without them. (ie., in their 
dreaming and outward sight also). 


73. When the internal organs are equable in their action, then the course of 
nature and the conduct of people, appear in the usual state. 


74. Then the situations of cities and countries, and the positions of woods 
and hills, are seen in the same calm, clear and unperturbed state, as they are 
known to exist, agreeably to the natural order of things; such as cool and clear 
streams, shady forests, and countries and paths traversed by passengers. 


75. Days and nights decorated with the pleasant beams of the sun and 
moon, and the rays of the starry array; and all other appearances, however 
unreal in their nature, appear as wonders to the sight and other senses. 


76. The perception of phenomenals is as innate in the mind, as vacillation is 
inherent in the wind; and viewing the unreal as real, and the intrinsical or 
what is derived from within it, as separate and extrinsic or derived from 
without, is the essential property of its nature. 


77. It is the calm and quiet spirit of Brahma, that gives rise to all things 
which are equally calm and quiet also; the world is mere vacuum, without 
having any reality in it. It is the vacuous mind that represents endless varieties 
of such forms in the sphere of its own vacuity, as the endless reflexions of its 
vacuous person. 


CHAPTER CXLVI. 
Disquisition of Sound Sleep. 


Argument: — Relation of sleep after dream, and followed by dream 
likewise, concluding with proof of the unity of God. 


The Huntsman said: — Tell me, O great Sage, what did you do and see 
afterwards, from your seat in the erroneous spirit of that person. 


2. The sage replied: — Hear me tell you next, what I did and saw 
afterwards, by my union with and my situation in the spirit of that infatuated 
person. 


3. As I resided in the dark cave of his heart, in the confusion of the last 
doomsday; there arose methought a hurricane, which blew away the 
mountains as straws, on the day of the final desolation of the world. 


4. It was soon followed by outpourings of rain water from the mountain 
tops; which bore away the woods and hills in the torrent. 


5. As I dwelt in that cavity and in union with the vitality of the individual, I 
perceived even in that state of my spiritual minuteness, the falling rains and 
hailstones from the mountain tops. 


6. I was then folded in the chyle of that person, and fell into a state of 
sound sleep, and felt a deep darkness enveloping me all over. 


7. Having laid down in my sleep for some time, I was gradually raised from 
my sleepy state; as the closed lotus of the night, unfolds its petals in the 
morning. 


8. Then as a man lying in darkness, comes to see some circular disks 
appearing to his sight; so I saw some flimsy dreams flying about and hovering 


upon me. 


9. Being released from the chain of sleep, I fell to a chain of dreams; and 
saw a hundred shapes of things, arising in my spirit, as the shapes of 
unnumbered waves and billows, rise in the bosom of the sea. 


10. Very many forms of visible things, appeared in the cell of my 
consciousness; as a great many flying things are seen to be volitant in the still 
and motionless air. 


11. As heat is inherent in fire, and coldness is innate in water, and as 
fluidity is characteristic of liquids, and pungency is immanent in pepper, efc.; 
so is the world inborn in Brahma. 


12. The nature of the Intellect being uniform and self-same in itself; the 
phenomenal world is engrained in it, as the dream of a new born child, 
presents itself to the sight of a sleeping man. (Sight is here applied to the 
mind’s eye). 


13. The Huntsman rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how is it possible for the 
Intellect to have the sight of anything in its state of sound sleep, since dreams 
never occur in the mind except in the state of slight and light sleep. 


14. Again, in the state of sound sleep both of yourself, as also of the person 
in whose heart you dwelt; how could the sight of the creation appear to you 
(or has the term sound sleep any other sense than the state of utter nescience?) 
(Sound sleep is the state of utter insensibility or anaesthesia, — gloss). 


15. The sage replied: — Know that creation is expressed by the words, viz., 
jdyati is born, bhdti appeareth, and kachati shineth; and are applied 
indiscriminately to all material things, as pots and pictures, (U¢ We) as well as 
to the world also; all these words are used to express a duality (or something 
different as proceeding from Unity), by men whose brains are heated with 
dualism, or the notion of a duality (as different from the nature of the Unity or 
the only One). 


16. Know that the word, jdta, or born means only being, (sattwa), and its 
synonyms are prddurbhdava, — manifestation, which is derived from the root 
bhu, to be. 


17. Now the meaning of Bhu is being, which expresses the sense of being 
born also, and the sarga, meaning production or creation, it is same with 


being also. 


18. With us learned men, there is nothing as jdydti or what is made or may 
be said to be born or destroyed; but all is one calm and quiet unborn being 
only. (An eternal ideal entity). 


19. The whole and soul of this entity, is the one Brahma alone, (the only 
Ens to On or the Om); and the totality of existence, is the Cosmos, macrocosm 
or the world. Say then what hypostasis or unsubstantiality is there that can be 
positively affirmed or denied of it, which is of them alike. 


20. That which is called sakti or the active energy of God, resides literally 
in the Divine spirit, but not as a free or separate power of itself; because all 
power subsists in Omnipotence, which is self-same with Brahma, and not as 
an attribute or part of him. (Vedanta ignores the predicates of potentiality as 
predicable of Brahma, who is the very essence of Omnipotence). 


21. The properties of waking, sleep and dreaming, do not belong to the 
nature of God, according to the cognition of men learned in divine 
Knowledge; because God never sleeps nor dreams, nor does he wake in the 
manner of His creature. (No changing property appertaining to finite beings 
can ever be attributable to the Infinite, who is as He is). 


22. Neither sleep nor the airy visions of dreaming, nor also anything that 
we either know or have any notion of, can have any relation to the nature of 
the Inscrutable One; any more than the impossibility of our having any idea of 
the world before its creation. (So the Persian mystic Berun Zatash, — 
aztohmate chunan to chunin. His nature is beyond our comprehension and 
presumption of it as so and such). 


23. It is the living soul which sees the dream, and imagines the creation in 
itself; or else the pure intellect is quite unintelligible in its nature, and remains 
as clear as either in the beginning of creation. 


24. The Intellect is neither the observer nor enjoyer. (i.e., neither the active 
nor passive agent of creation); it is something as nothing, perfectly quiet and 
utterly unspeakable in its nature. 


25. In the beginning there was no cause of creation, or creative agent of the 
world; it is only an ideal of the Divine Mind, and exists for ever in the same 
state, as a vision in the dream or an airy castle of imagination. 


26. It is thus, that the individual Intelligence, is apprehended as a duality by 
the unwise, but never by the intelligent; because ignorant men like silly 
infants are afraid of the tiger or snake that is painted upon their own person; 
but the intelligent knowing them too well to be marked upon their own bodies, 
never suspect them as anything otherwise than their own person. 


27. The One invariable and translucent soul, which is without its beginning, 
middle and end, appears as varying and various to the unreflecting dualist and 
polytheist; but the whole appearing so changeful and conspicuous to sight, is 
all a perfect calm and quiet and serene prospect in itself. 


CHAPTER CXLVII. 
The Phenomenon and Perspection of Dreams. 


Argument: — The rise of dream from sound sleep; and the vision of friends 
and relations in Dreaming. 


The Sage continued: — Hear me now, O strong armed archer, how I awoke 
from my sound sleep, and saw the sight of the world in my dream; just as a 
man rising on the surface from the depth of the sea, surveys the heavens 
above him. 


2. I saw the heavens, as hewn out of the ethereal vacuum; and I beheld the 
terrestrials, as sculptured out of the earth; but found them all, to be fashioned 
out of the Divine Mind; or framed in that manner, by my visual organs or 
ocular deception only. 


3. The world appeared, as the early or long sprung blossom of the arbour of 
the eternal mind; or as the ceaseless waves of the vast ocean, or as phantoms 
of my deluded eye sight. 


4. It seemed to appear from the bosom of the sky above, or to have 
proceeded from all sides of heaven; it seemed moreover, as a masonry carved 
out of the mountains of all quarters of the firmament, and also as a prodigy 
rising out of the earth or Tartarus. 


5. It seemed also to have sprung out of the heart, as any of its feelings or 
affections; and to have filled all the space of vacuity, as the all-pervading 
clouds of heaven; methought it likewise as the produce of a large forest, or 
like seeds or grains growing out of the earth. 


6. As pictures of houses with apartments, are painted upon the planes of 
level plates; so the figures of living beings, are drawn upon the smooth 
flatness of the Intellect, together with all the members and organs of their 


bodies. 


7. These worlds appear to have sprung in some unknown part of Infinity, 
and to have presented themselves to our view, like flying herds of distant 
regions coming to our sight; or as presents are brought to the presence of 
prince from different parts of lands, or as the retributions and rewards of one’s 
good or bad deeds in this life, meet him in the next and successive 
transmigration. 


8. The world is but a blossom of the great arbour of Brahma, or a little 
billow of vast ocean of Eternity; it is a sculpture on the colossal pillar of the 
Intellect, without being carved out or cast upon it. (It is the macrocosm 
moulded in the mind of God). 


9. The firmament is the ample field, filled with an infinity of worlds, 
appearing as our earthly abodes in the empty city of air; the mind wanders at 
random all over it as an infuriate elephant, with an airy empty life, as fickle 
and fleeting as a breath of air. 


10. The edifice of the world appears to be built without its foundation, and 
is unsupported by walls; and the sky appearing so bright and variegated, is 
without any colour or taint of its own; it is the magical power of the great 
magician, that has displayed these wonders and spread a curtain of delusion 
over the ignorant and infatuated world. (Instead of knowledge, man has rather 
eaten the fruit of the tree of ignorance). 


11. Though the creation seems so exuberant, at all places and in all times; 
yet it is quite quiescent, and unbounded by any limitation of space and time; 
and though it appears as multitudinous yet it is the single unity; and though 
seemingly multifarious, yet is all but one invariable uniformity. 


12. The instance of the fairy land is exactly alike to that of this world, in 
respect of the unreality of both; and it is the same error which occurs to us in 
our dream, that possesses us also even in our waking state of dreaming. 
(Equality of day and night dreams). 


13. It is the reflexion of the mind only, that represents the absent past, as 
well as the future which is yet to be, as already present before it; whether they 
relate to aught of time or place, or substance or action or anything relating to 
its creation or its destruction. 


14. There are numberless beings contained under every species of animals, 


which contain others ad infinitum in their ovaries, bearing animalcules like 
seeds of pomegranate fruits. 


15. The rivers, forests and mountains, are seen to be beset by clouds of the 
sky, and studded with the gemming stars of heaven; and the sea is heard to 
resound with the loud larum of battle drums, raised by the warring winds with 
the conflicting currents. 


16. I then beheld there a visible sphere before me, amidst which I saw the 
village of my prior dream, and recognized the spot of my former residence 
therein. 


17. I saw there all my former friends and relations, at the very spot and of 
the same age as I had seen them before; I saw my wife and my very children 
seated in the very same house. 


18. Seeing my fellow villagers and my former village scenes, my heart 
wished to meet them as violently, as the sea-waves swell to meet the shore. 


19. I then began to embrace all my relatives, and felt happy at my joining 
with them; and being enrapt by my desire of seeing more and more, I utterly 
lost all my remembrance of the past. 


20. As a mirror receives the reflexion of whatever is present before it, so 
the mirror of the mind is wholly occupied with the objects of its future 
desires, and becomes unmindful of the past. 


21. It is the vacuity of the Intellect, that has the knowledge of everything; 
nor is there any other principle of understanding beside the intellect, which 
ever subsists by itself. 


22. He who has not lost his pure understanding, and his remembrance of 
himself; is never misled by the goblin of dualism or doubt, to think of a 
duality. 


23. He whose understanding is awakened by his constant inquiry into truth 
and divine knowledge, and by his study of good Sdstras and attendance on 
divine sages, does not forget his enlightenment any more (nor relapses to his 
former ignorance). 


24. He who is imperfect in his divine knowledge, and whose mind is bound 
down by worldly desires; is liable to lose his good understanding, as it were 


by the influence of an unfavourable planet or inauspicious star. 


25. Know thou, O huntsman! that thy understanding also, which is not yet 
cultivated by association with the wise, is liable to fall into error of duality, 
and involve thee thereby to repeated difficulties. 


26. The Huntsman answered: — It is all very true, O Sage, that 
notwithstanding all thy lectures, my understanding does not find its rest in the 
knowledge of only true One. 


27. My understanding is still hanging in doubt, as to whether it is so or not; 
and though I rely in my conception of the truth as you have declared, yet my 
mind finds no rest in it. 


28. Ah! that though I fix my faith on the doctrine you have preached, yet I 
cannot rest secure in it, so long as my ignorance reigns supreme in me. 


29. Unless the understanding is enlightened in the company of wise men, 
by attending the doctrine of the best Sdstras, and due examination of their 
precepts, there can be no end of the errors of the world, nor any rest for the 
weary soul, wandering continually in the maze of errors. 


CHAPTER CXLVIII. 
Investigation into the Nature of Dreams. 


Argument: — Truth and untruth of Dreams. 


The Huntsman said: — If the sight of the world is no more than a vision in 
dream, then tell me, O great sage, where lies its truth or falsehood, which is a 
matter of great doubt and difficulty to me. 


2. The Sage replied: — That dream is true and comes actually to take place, 
which rises in our consciousness under the conditions of proper place and 
time, and right actions and things. (These are the morning dreams relating to 
pious acts and sacred things in some adjacent place). 


3. A dream that is caused by use of some gem or drug or by effect of some 
mantra or amulet, comes to pass in actu, whether it is favourable or not to the 
dreamer. 


4. When the earnest desire of a man, presents itself in the shape of a dream 
before his mental sight, it comes to occur by accident by law of chance. 


5. Whatever we believe with certainty in our consciousness, the same is 
sure as fate, we are sure to see and become the same (by the natural tendency 
and constitution of our minds). 


6. Certainty removes the uncertainty, if any one reaches there, the other 
falls down absolutely. 


7. No object is ever situated, either in the inside or outside of anybody; it is 
the consciousness alone, that assumes to itself the various forms of worldly 
things, and remains in the same state as it knows itself to be. 


8. The certainty arrived at by evidence of the Sdstras, that the phenomenals 


are aS appearances in a dream, makes it to be believed as so indeed; but a 
disbelief, in this belief makes one a sceptic, who wanders about in his doubts 
forever. (Without coming to a settled belief). 


9. If one gains his object by any other means, notwithstanding his belief in 
the visionariness of the world; that gain is to be reckoned as a visionary one 
only. 


10. Whatever is ascertained as true in the world, by the strong 
consciousness of anybody in his waking state; the same comes to be known as 
otherwise or (untrue), in course of time and change of place either sooner or 
later. 


11. In the beginning, the world existed in Divine Intellect, and was 
represented in its subtle and incompressible form; It had its essence in the 
mind of God, and then extended its tenuous substance to any length ad 
libitum. 


12. Know that beside the true and immutable entity of the intellect of 
Brahma alone, all others are both real and unreal, and lasting and transient 
also. (They are real as reflexion of the Divine Mind, and unreal and transitory 
in their phenomenal aspects.) 


13. Whereas Brahma is the only ens and soul of all, there can be no other 
that may be styled as such; say therefore, what else is there, that may be called 
a reality or non reality either. 


14. Whether therefore, a dream be true or false at any time, it cannot be 
deemed as the one or the other, by either the ignorant or enlightened part of 
mankind. 


15. The phenomenal world appears before us, by delusion of our senses and 
misconception of our consciousness; the visible worlds commonly passed 
under the name of illusion (mdyd), hath naught of reality or certainty in it. 


16. It is the Divine Intellect that flashes forth in the mind, with the glare of 
the glaring world; just as fluidity is seen to be thrilling and flowing still, in all 
bodies of waters and liquids. 


17. As one sees a dream at first, and falls fast asleep afterwards; so doth 
everybody behold the phenomenals in his waking state, and then falls 
naturally into a deep and sound sleep. (This refers to the alternate creation and 


annihilation of the world). 


18. Know then, O great sage, that the waking state is analogous to that of 
dreaming; and know the dreaming state to be as that of waking, and that both 
these states are but the two phases of the one and same Brahma (as the liquid 
and condensed states of ghee or butter are both the same). 


19. The Divine Intellect is a vacuous and incomprehensible entity, and the 
spacious universe is its reflexion only; the three states of waking, dreaming 
and sleeping, are the triple hypostases of the same being (or Divine 
Existence). 


20. There is no law regarding the efficacy of dreams, say how can you 
determine any rule for ascertaining the results of various dreams. 


21. As long as the mind dwells on the appearance of dreams (either in sleep 
or waking), so long it is troubled with its vagaries; therefore, the sage must 
wipe off their impressions from his consciousness. 


Note: The mind involved in ignorance, is said to be waking, and the 
uncontrouled mind is styled as dreaming; the mind subdued by weariness is 
said to be asleep, and when brought under subjection by any effort, is called 
samddhi or meditation, lastly its liberation from ignorance, is known as its 
state of mukti or emancipation. 


22. It is the humour of the mind that gives rise to dreams, like pulsation in 
air causing the current wind; there is no other cause of dreams nor any laws 
for governing them; except the sound sleep (or insouciance), when these 
appearances entirely subside or vanish away. 


23. It is the manner of the learned, to impute the cause of the impressions in 
our consciousness, to external appearances of this thing or that, (or ghata 
patadi, etc.); but relying on the doctrine of the causelessness of external 
objects (or the objective), they prove to be no other than mere imaginations of 
the subjective mind (or noumenal only). 


24. In this therefore, there is no other law with respect to this, than the 
appearances of things whatever they be, are generally granted as such by the 
common sense of mankind, (vydvahdrikam). 


25. Thus, there being no law in dreaming, there is sometimes some truth in 
some dreams, and at others, there is no truth in any of them at all; and in want 


of any constancy, it is only a fortuitous occurrence. 


26. Whatever appears subjectively to one’s self, either from his own nature 
or by means of artificial appliances; and whatever one is habituated to think of 
anything in himself, he sees the same in the very form, both in his dreaming 
as well as waking states. 


27. The appearances of things, both in the sleeping and waking states of 
men, are the mere reflexions of their minds; and they remain the same whether 
when one is waking or lying in the visionary city of his dreams. 


28. It is not enough to call the waking alone as waking, because the dream 
also appears as waking to the waking soul that never sleeps. (The soul is ever 
wakeful). 


29. So also there is nothing as dreaming, and may be called by that name; it 
is only a mode of thinking in the Divine Mind, which sees sleeping and 
waking in the same light. 


30. Or it may be that there does not exist, either of the two states of waking 
or dreaming, because the ever-living soul of a dead person, continues to 
behold the visibles; even after its separation from the body, and resurrection 
after death. 


31. The soul remains the same, and never becomes otherwise than what it 
is, in any state whatsoever; just as the endless duration never changes with the 
course of time, and the ocean continues alike under its rolling waves, and the 
airy space remains unchanged above the changing clouds. 


32. So the creation is inseparable from the supreme soul, whether it exists 
or becomes extinct; and as the perforations and marks in a stone are never 
distinct from it; so are the states of waking and sleeping coincident with the 
soul Divine. 


33. Waking, sleeping, dreaming and sound sleep, are the four forms of 
bodies of the formless and bodiless Brahma; who though devoid of all forms, 
is still of the form of whole creation, cosmos and the mundane soul. 


34. The supreme soul, that pervades and encompasses all space is visible to 
us in only form of infinite space or sky; the endless vacuity therefore, being 
only the body of supreme Intellect, it is no way different from it. 


35. The air and wind, the fire and water, together with the earth and clouds 
on high, are reckoned as the causes of all creation, and subsist in their ideal 
shapes in the mind of Brahma alone. 


36. The Lord is devoid of all appellations and attributes, and remains united 
with his body of the Intellect, containing the knowledge of all things within 
itself; and the phenomenal is never separate from the noumenal. 


CHAPTER CXLIX. 
Investigation into the original cause. 


Argument: — Conversation of the two sages, and relation of Human 
Miseries. 


The Huntsman said: — Tell me, O sage! What then became of the world 
that you saw in your dream; relate in full all its accounts until its final 
extinction (or nirvdna). 


2. The sage replied: — Hear me then tell thee, O honest fellow, what then 
passed in the heart of the person wherein I had entered, and listen to the 
wondrous tale with proper attention. 


3. As I remained there in that forgetful state of my transformation, I saw 
the course of time gliding upon me, with its train of months, seasons and 
years, passing imperceptibly by me. 


4. I passed there full fifteen years in my domestic life, and happy with 
enjoyment of my conjugal bliss. 


5. It happened there once upon a time, that a learned sage, came as a guest 
to my house, and I received the venerable and austere devotee with honour 
within my doors. 


6. Being pleased with my honourable reception of him, he took his meal 
and he rested himself at ease, when I made him the following inquiry 
regarding the weal and woe of mankind. 


7. Sir, said I, you are possessed of vast understanding, and know well the 
course of the world; and are therefore known neither to fret at adversity, nor 
delight in prosperity. 


8. All weal and woe proceed from the acts of men, engaged in busy life in 
the world; so as the husbandman reaps good or bad crops in autumn, 
according to the manner of his cultivation of the field; (such is the common 
belief of men). 


9. But then tell me, whether all the inhabitants of a place, are equally faulty 
in their actions at the one and same time; that they are brought to suffer and 
fall under some severe calamity or general doom all at once. 


10. We see alternate famine and drought, portents and catastrophes 
repeatedly overtaking a large portion of mankind at the same time; say then is 
it owing to the wickedness of the people at the one and very time. 


11. Hearing the words of mine, he stared at me, and looked as if he was 
taken by surprise, and seemed to be confounded in his mind; and then he 
uttered these words of equal reverence and ambrosial sweetness. 


12. The sagely guest said: — O well spoken! these words of yours bespeak 
thy highly enlightened mind; and that you have well understood the cause of 
the phenomenal, be it a real or unreal one, tell me; how you came to know it. 


13. (Then seeing me sitting silent before him, he added); Remember the 
universal soul only, and think naught what thou art and where thou sittest; 
ponder well in thyself, what am I and from whence, and what is the 
phenomenals, whether it is anything substantial or ideal of the mind only. 


14. All this is the display of dream and how is it that you do not know it as 
yet? I am a visionary being to you, as you are the phantom of a dream before 
me. 


15. The world you see, is a formless and a nameless nothing, and mere 
formation of your imagination; it glares with the glare of the glassy Intellect, 
and is a glaring falsehood in itself. 


16. The true and unfictitious forms of the Intellect is, as you must know; 
that it is omnipresent, and therefore of any form whatsoever, you think or take 
it to be anywhere. 


17. Now in assigning a causality to things, you will find that the Intellect is 
the cause of all; and in ascribing one cause to anything, you have the 
uncaused and uncausing Intellect for everything. 


18. It is the universal soul that spreads through all, and in whom all living 
beings reside, that is known as virajdtma or common soul of all; and the same 
viewed as residing in us, is known as sutrdtmd or individual souls linked 
together in a series (composed of all souls). 


19. There will be other living beings in future, with the virajan soul 
pervading in all of them, and causing their weal or woe according to their 
desires. (Lit., causing the affluence and want of men according to their 
respective acts). 


20. The soul is disturbed by derangement of the humours of the body and 
then the limbs and members of the bodies of men, become perturbed likewise. 


21. Drought, famine and destruction, may come upon mankind or subside 
of themselves; because: — 


22. It is possible, O good soul! that there are many persons living together, 
who are equally guilty of some crime at the same time; who wait on their 
simultaneous punishment, falling as the fire of heaven on a forest at the same 
time. 


23. The mind that relies on the efficacy of acts, comes to feel the effects of 
its actions; but the soul that is free from such expectation, is never involved in 
its acts, nor exposed to its result. 


24. Whatever one imagines to himself, in any form at any place or time; the 
same occurs to him in the same proportion as he expected it; whether that 
object be with or without its cause. (i.e., actual or not). 


25. The visionary appearances in dreams, are in no way accompanied with 
their immediate or accessory causes, as all actual existences are; therefore, 
this visionary world is the appearance of the everlasting Intellect of 
Intelligence, which is Brahma itself. 


26. The world appearing as an erroneous dream, is a causeless unreality 
only; but considering it as the appearance of Brahma, it has both its cause and 
reality. (Hence, it is called sadasaddtmaka, i.e., both a reality and unreality 
also). 


27. The casual occurrence of dreams, deludes our consciousness of them; 
and so the fortuitous appearance of the world, is equally delusive of our 
apprehension of it. Its extension is a delusion, as the expansion of a dream. 


28. Everything appears to be caused or uncaused, or as casual or causal as 
we take it to be (hence while we deem our dreams as causeless delusions, we 
are apt to believe the equally visionary world, as a caused and sober reality). 


29. It is a deception of the understanding to take the visionary world, as the 
product of a real causality. It is natural to the waking state to take it for a 
reality, what appears as quite calm and unreal in our sleep and dreams. 


30. Now hear me tell you, O great minded Sage, that the one satya, — Ens 
or Brahma, is the sole cause of existences; or else what other thing is it that is 
the cause of all nature and this all-pervading vacuum. 


31. Say what can be the cause of the solidity of the earth, and the rarity of 
air; what is the cause of our universal ignorance, and what is the cause of the 
self-born Brahma. 


32. What may be the cause of creation, and what is the origin of the winds, 
and fire and water; and what is the source of our apprehensions of things than 
mere vacuum or the vacuous intellect. 


33. Tell me what can be the cause, of the regeneration of departed souls, 
into the mass of material bodies? It is in this manner that the course of 
creation is going on in this manner from the beginning (without any 
assignable cause). 


34. Thus are all things seen to be going on, and recurring in this world, like 
the rotations of wheels and spheres in air; from our constant habit of thinking 
and seeing them as such. 


35. Thus, it is the great Brahma himself, who in the form of Brahma or 
creator, spreads and moves throughout the world; and receives afterwards as 
many different names, as the different phases and forms of that he displays in 
nature, such as the earth, air, etc. 


36. All creations move about like the fluctuations of winds, in the spacious 
firmament of the Divine Mind; which conceives of itself various forms of 
things in its own imagination. 


37. Whatever it imagines in any form or shape, the same receives the very 
form as a decree of fate; and because these forms are the very images or ideas 
of the Divine Mind, they are deemed to form the very body of the Deity. 


38. In whatever likeness was anything designed at first by the Divine 
Intellect; it bears the same form and figure of it to this day, (and so will it 
continue to bear for evermore). 


39. But as the Divine Mind is all powerful and omniscient, it is able to alter 
them and make others anew, by its great efforts again. (i.e., God can unmake 
what he has made, and make others again). 


40. Whenever anything is supposed to have a cause, it is thought also to be 
subject to the will of that cause; and wherever there is no supposition of a 
cause, there is no apprehension nor capability of its alteration also. (i.e., The 
world is both as changeable as well as unchangeable, according as it is 
believed to be made by or self-same with its Maker). 


41. Like vibration in air, the world existed as first in the ideal of the Divine 
Mind; and as it was an unsubstantiality before, so it continues ever still. 


42. They who amass for themselves, the merits or demerits of their pious or 
impious deeds; reap accordingly the good or bad rewards or results thereof in 
this life. There are others who are crushed under a thousand calamities, falling 
upon them like showers of hailstones or the thunderbolts of heaven. 


CHAPTER CL. 
Transcendental Admonitions. 


Argument: — Conversation of the impossibility of the departed soul, to 
reenter into the former body. 


The house keeping Sage then said as follows: — It was by this kind of 
reasoning, that my sagely guest expostulated with me, and made me 
acquainted with whatever was worth knowing. 


2. I then restrained my guest, to remain longer with me by entreaties; and 
he consented to abide at mine, which resembled the abode of a dead (ignorant) 
person. (Those that are dead to reason, are called dead people). 


3. The sage that spake to me those edifying words, which were as bright 
and cooling as moonlight; behold him to be the venerable personage, that is 
now sitting beside you. 


4. He said without my request the following speech, for removal of my 
ignorance; as if the sacrificial god rose out of fire, being pleased with my 
sacrifice. 


5. Hearing these words of the sage, the huntsman was confounded with 
wonder; and could not know the sage that expounded the theory of dreaming, 
now sitting confest before me. 


6. The Huntsman said: O! it is a great wonder, and inconceivable in my 
mind, that the sage that expounded the nature of dreams, is now manifest 
before me. 


7. I wonder at this, O sage! that the sagely guest whom you saw in your 
dream, and who explained the cause of dreams to you, should now be seen in 
this waking state. 


8. Say how could this visionary sage seen in your airy dream, come to 
appear in a solid body, and sit sedate at this place, like the fancied ghost of 
boys. 


9. Please to explain to me this wonderful narration of yours, in due order; 
as to who he is and whence and wherefore he comes in this questionable form. 


10. The Sage replied: — Hear me patently, O fortunate man, to relate to 
you about this wonderful narrative. I will tell this briefly to you, but you must 
not be hasty about it. 


11. This sage that now sits by thee, had told me then for my acquaintance 
of him; that he was a learned man, and has come hither now with his tale too 
long to relate. 


12. He said these words, saying, that he remembered his former nature, 
which was as bright and fair as the clear sky, at the end of the foggy season 
(of the month of mdgh). 


13. O! I remember also that I became a sage afterwards, with an expanded 
mind; my heart was swollen with joy, and remained bathed (amazed) at my 
wondrous change. 


14. I was glad at that state of my life, from my desire of the enjoyments of 
the world; but was deceived like a weary passenger, pursuing a mirage with 
eager expectation of water. 


15. Alack! that the phantoms of the phenomenal world, should so allure 
even the wise; as the tempting fiends of hell, deceive mankind only to deceive 
them. 


16. Alas! and I wonder at it, that I was misled by my ignorance, that I was 
misled by my erroneous knowledge of the world, to this state of life, which is 
utterly devoid of every good. 


17. Or whatever I am, I find myself to be full of errors only, and there is no 
truth whatever in me; and yet it is the error of errors and the greatest blunder, 
that we should be so beguiled and betrayed by unrealities. 


18. Neither am I nor this or that any entity at all; and yet it is a wonder, that 
all these false appearances, should appear as realities. 


19. What then must I do at present to break my bondage to these falsities; I 
see the germ of error lying inside myself, and this tear off and cast away from 
me. 


20. Be there the primeval ignorance, prevalent all over the world; she can 
do us no harm, that is a mere negation herself; It is now that I must try to get 
rid of my error, of deeming the unreal as real. 


21. That this sage is my preceptor and I am his pupil, is all a mistake; 
because I am in and the very Brahma, and the person sitting here by me, is as 
the man in the moon or in the cloud. 


22. Then thought I of speaking to that great sage of enlightened 
understanding; and so thinking, I addressed him saying: — 


23. O great Sage! I will now go to my own body (from out of the body of 
this person), in order to see what I may be doing there. 


24. Hearing this, that great sage said smilingly to me, Ah! where are those 
bodies of you two; that are blown away afar in their ashes. 


25. You may go there yourself if you please, and see the matter yourself; 
and by seeing their present state, you will know everything relating to them. 


26. Being thus advised by him, I thought on entering my former body. 


27. I told him, do you remain here, O Sage, until I come back to this place, 
after seeing my former body; so saying I became a breath of air, and fled from 
my abode. 


28. Then mounting on the car of wind, I wandered through the air, and was 
wafted to a hundred ways like the odour of a flower, carried rapidly all about 
by the odoriferous breezes for a long time. 


29. Roving long in this manner, I sought to enter that body, by the passage 
of its lungs; but finding neither that or any other passage, I kept floating in the 
air. 


30. Then with deep felt sorrow, I returned to my place, and became tied 
again to that stake of the world, by my returning affections to it. 


31. Here I saw that venerable sage sitting before me, and asked him 


intensely in the following manner in my house in this place. 


32. Tell me Sir, said I, for thou knowest all the past and future; and 
knowest what all this is, by means of thy all-seeing sight. 


33. How was it that the person in whose body I had entered, as also my 
own body likewise, could neither of them be found anywhere. 


34. I then wandered throughout the vast expanse of the sphere of this earth, 
and searched amidst all fixed and living bodies herein, but could not find that 
opening of the throat from which I had come out. 


35. Being thus addressed by me, that high-minded muni or sage then said 
unto me; — it is not possible for thee with thy bright and brilliant eyes to find 
it out unaided by my advice. 


36. If you should search after it with the light of thy Yoga meditation, it is 
then possible for thee to find it out as fully, as one sees a lotus placed in his 
palm. 


37. Now therefore, if you wish to listen to my words, then attend to my 
advice, and I will tell thee all about it. 


38. Know then that as it is the sunlight that expands the lotus blossoms in 
the lake, so it is the enlightening beams of Brahma only that develops the 
lotus of understanding, and that you can know nothing of yourself. 


39. Know then that as you sat once in your devotion, you dreamt in your 
reverie, of entering into the heart of another person, and were confirmed in 
your consciousness of that belief. 


40. The heart wherein you thought to have entered, you believed to have 
seen the three worlds therein; and the great sphere of heaven and earth 
contained in its bosom. 


41. In this manner as you absorbed in your reverie, and thought yourself to 
reside in the body of another person; you happened to fall asleep, and your 
hermitage in the forest suddenly caught fire and was burnt down. 


42. The burning hut sent forth clouds of smoke to the sky, and the blazing 
cinders, flew to the orbs of the sun and moon. 


43. The flying ashes covered the sky, as with a grey cloud or ash coloured 
blanket; and the blue vault of heaven was spread over as with a canopy. 


44. Wild animals issuing out of their caves and caverns, sent forth horrid 
yells and growling abroad; and the bursting sparks filled the horizon. 


45. The tall palm and other trees, caught the flame and appeared as trees of 
fire; and the flying and falling fires, cracked as the clattering cloud. 


46. The flames ascending far above in the air, appeared as fixed lightnings 
in the sky; and the firmament assumed a face as that of molten gold. 


47. The fiery sparks flying afar to the starry frame, doubled the number of 
stars in heaven; and the flashing fires in the bosom of the sky, delighted the 
eyes of damsels (as at the sight of fireworks). 


48. The blowing and booming fires, rebellowing in the hollow sky; startled 
the sleeping foresters in the woods, who rushed out of their caves and caverns, 
and wandered about in the forest. 


49. The wild beasts and birds being half-burnt in their caves and nests, lay 
and fell dead on the ground; the lakes and river waters boiled with heat, and 
the foresters were suffocated by the fumes. 


50. The young chauri bulls, were parched in the flames; and the stink of the 
burning fat and flesh of wild beasts, filled the air with a nasty stench. 


51. This all-devouring wild fire, raging as a conflagration or diluvian fire, 
hath wholly consumed and swallowed up your hermitage, as a serpent devours 
its prey. 


52. The Huntsman asked: — Tell me Sir, what was the real cause of this 
fire; and why the Brahman lads that dwelt in their pupilage there, were burnt 
down also. 


53. The Sage replied: — It is the vibration or effort of the volitive or 
designing mind, that is the true cause or incentive of the production or 
demolition of the desired object; and so its quiescence is the cause of the 
absence of the three worlds. 


54. As a sudden fear or passion is the cause of palpitation of the heart, so 
an effort or desire of the mind is the mobile force (or primum mobile) for the 


causation of the three worlds. 


55. It is the pulsation of the Divine Mind, that is the cause of the imaginary 
city of the world; as also of the increase of population and of rains and 
draughts. 


56. The will in the Divine Mind, is the source of the creative mind of 
Brahma, which in its turn gives rise to the minds of the first patriarchs, who 
transmit it to others in endless progression, all of which proceed from the first 
quiet and calm intellect, through the medium of vacuum. 


57. The learned know well, that the effulgence of the pure and vacuous 
Intellect, shines in the vacuum of their intellects; but the ignorant think it as it 
appears to them, which is not the reality (which it is not in reality). 


CHAPTER CLI. 
View of Inexistence. 


Argument: — The world is a vision, and to be known only by conception, 
perception and meditation. 


The other Sage rejoined: — Afterwards the whole village together with all 
its dwellings and trees, were all burnt down to ashes like the dried straws. 


2. All things being thus burnt away, the two bodies of you two, that had 
been sleeping there, were also scorched and burnt, as a large piece of stone, is 
heated and split by fire. 


3. Then the fire set after satiating itself with devouring the whole forest, as 
the sea sat below in its basin, after its waters were sucked up by the sage 
Agastya. 


4. After the fire was quenched and the ashes of the burnt cinders had 
become cold; they were blown away by gusts of wind, as they bear away the 
heaps of flowers. 


5. Then nothing was known, as to where the hermit’s hut and the two 
bodies were borne away; and where was that visionary city, which was seen 
as vividly as in waking, and was populous with numbers of people. 


6. In this manner, the two bodies having disappeared, their existence 
remains in the conscious soul, as the memory of externals remains in the 
mind, at the insensibility of the body in the state of dreaming. 


7. Hence, where is that passage of the lungs, and where is that Virajian soul 
anymore? They are burnt away together with the vigour and vitality of the 
dead body. 


8. It is on account of this, O sage, that you could not find out those two 
bodies; and wandered about in this endless world of dreams, as if you were in 
your waking state. 


9. Therefore, know this mortal state, as a mere dream appearing as waking, 
and that all of us are but day dreams, and seeing one another as we see the 
visionary beings in our dreams. 


10. You are a visionary man to me, and so am I also to you; and this 
intellectual sphere, wherein the soul is situated within itself. 


11. You have been ere while a visionary being in your life, until you 
thought yourself to be a waking man in your domestic life. 


12. I have thus related to you the whole matter, as it has occurred to you; 
and which you well know by your conception, perception and meditation of 
them. 


13. Know at last, that it is the firm conviction of our consciousness, which 
shines forever as the glitter of gold in the vacuum of our minds; and the 
intellectual soul catches the colour of our deeds, be they fair or foul or a 
commixture of both, in its state of a regenerated spirit. 


CHAPTER CLII. 
The sage’s Discourse at Night. 


Argument: — Refutation of the Reality of Dreams, and the reason of the 
Preceptorship of the Hunter. 


The Sage resumed: — Saying so the sage held his silence, and lay himself 
in his bed at night; and I was as bewildered in my mind, as if blown away by 
the winds. 


2. Breaking then my silence after a long time, I spoke to that sage and said: 
— Sir, in my opinion, such dreams appear to have some truth and reality in 
them. 


3. The other muni replied: — If you can believe in the truth of your waking 
dreams, you may then rely on the reality of your sleeping dreams likewise; but 
should your day dreams prove to be false, what faith can you then place on 
your night dreams (which are as fleet as air). 


4. The whole creation from its very beginning, is no more than a dream; 
and it appears to be comprised of the earth etc., yet it is devoid of everything. 


5. Know the waking dream of this creation is more subtle, than our recent 
dreams by night; and O lotus eyed preceptor of the huntsman, you will shortly 
hear all this from me. 


6. You think that the object you see now, in your waking state in the day 
time, the same appear to you in the form of dream in your sleep; so the dream 
of the present creation, is derived from a previous creation, which existed 
from before as an archetype of this, in the vacuum of the Divine Mind. 


7. Again, seeing the falsity of your waking dream of this creation, how do 
you say that you entertain doubts regarding the untruth of sleeping dreams, 


and knowing well that the house in your dream is not yours, how do you want 
to dote upon it anymore? 


8. In this manner, O sage, when you perceive the falsity of your waking 
dream of this world; how can you be doubtful of its unreality anymore? 


9. As the sage was arguing in this manner, I interrupted him by another 
question; and asked him to tell me, how he came to be the preceptor of the 
huntsman. 


10. The other Sage replied: — Hear me relate to you this incident also; I 
will be short in its narration, for know, O learned sage, I can dilate it likewise 
to any length. 


11. I have been living here, as a holy hermit for a long time; and solely 
employed in the performance of my religious austerities; and after hearing my 
speech, I think you too will like to remain in this place. 


12. Seeing me situated in this place, I hope you will not forsake me here 
alone; as I verily desire to live in your company herein. 


13. But then I will tell you Sir, that it will come to pass in the course of 
some years hence, and there will occur a direful famine in this place, and all 
its people will be wholly swept away. 


14. Then there will occur a warfare between the raging border chiefs, when 
this village will be destroyed, and all the houses will be thinned of their 
occupants. 


15. Then let us remain in this place, free from all troubles, and in perfect 
security and peace, and live free from all worldly desires, by our knowledge 
of the knowable. 


16. Here let us reside under the shelter of some shady trees; and perform 
the routine of our religious functions, as the sun and moon perform their 
revolutions in the solitary sky. 


17. There will then grow in this desert land and deserted place, many kinds 
of trees and plants, covering the whole surface of this lonely place. 


18. The land will be adorned by fruit trees, with many a singing bird sitting 
upon them; and the waters will be filled with lotus beds, with the humming 


bees and chakoras chirping amidst them. There shall we find happy groves 
like the heavenly garden of paradise for our repose. 


CHAPTER CLIII. 
One soul is the cause of all. 


Argument: — Arrival of the Huntsman, and the sage’s preceptorship of 
him. 


The other Sage said: — When both of us shall dwell together in that forest, 
and remain in the practice of our austerities; there will appear upon that spot, 
a certain huntsman, weary with his fatigue in pursuing after a deer. 


2. You will then reclaim and enlighten him, by means of your meritorious 
remonstrance; and he then will commence and continue to practice his 
austerities, from his aversion to the world. 


3. Then continuing in his austere devotion, he will be desirous of gaining 
spiritual knowledge, and make inquiries into the phenomena of dreaming. 


4. You Sir, will then instruct him fully in divine knowledge, and he will be 
versed in it by your lectures on the nature of dreams. 


5. In this manner, you will become his religious instructor, and it is for this 
reason that I have accosted you with the epithet or title of the huntsman’s guru 
or religious guide. 


6. Now Sir, I have related to you already regarding our errors of this world; 
and what I and you are at present, and what we shall turn to be afterwards. 


7. Being thus spoken to by him, and learning all these things from him, I 
became filled with wonder, and was he more amazed as I remonstrated with 
him on these matters. 


8. Thus we passed the night in mutual conversation, and after we got up in 
the morning, I honoured the sage with due respect, and he was pleased with 


me. 


9. Afterwards, we continued to live together in the same homely hut of the 
same village, with our steady minds and our friendship daily increasing. 


10. In this manner, time glided on peacefully upon us, and the revolutions 
of his days and nights, and returns of months, seasons and years; and I have 
been sitting here unmoved under all the vicissitudes of time and fortune. 


11. I long not for a long life, nor desire to die ere the destined day; I live as 
well as I may, without any care or anxiety about this or that. 


12. I then looked upon the visible sphere, and began to cogitate in my 
mind; as to what and how and whence it was, and what can be the cause of it. 


13. What are these multitudes of things, and is the cause of all these; it is 
all but the phenomena of a dream, appearing in the vacuity of the Intellect. 


14. The earth and heaven, the air and the sky, the hills and rivers, and all 
the sides of firmament; are all but pictures of the Divine mind, represented in 
empty air. 


15. It is the moonlight of the Intellect, which spreads its beams all round 
the ample space of vacuum; and it is this which shines as the world, which is 
an ineffaceable facsimile or cartography of the supreme Intellect in the air. 


16. Neither is this earth nor sky, nor are these hills and dales really in 
existence; nor am I anything at all; it is only the reflexion of the supreme 
Mind in empty air. 


17. What may be the cause of aggregation of solid bodies, when there is no 
material cause for the causation of material bodies in the beginning. 


18. The conception of matter and material bodies, is a fallacy only; but 
what can be the cause of this error, but delusion of the sight and mind. 


19. The person in the pith of whose heart, I remained in the manner of his 
consciousness, was burnt down to ashes together with myself. 


20. Therefore, this vacuum which is without its beginning and end, is full 
with the reflexion of the Divine Intellect; and there is no efficient or 
instrumental or material cause of creation, except its being a shadow of the 


substance of the Divine Mind. 


21. All these pots and pictures, these prints and paints before us, are but the 
prints of the Divine Mind; nor can you ever get anything, without its mould 
therein. 


22. But the Intellect too has no brightness of it, except its pure lucidity; for 
how can a mere void as vacuum have any light, except its transparency. 


23. The Intellect is the pure Intelligence, of the extended entity of Brahma; 
which shows in itself the panorama of the universe, what else are the visibles, 
and where is their view besides. 


24. There is but one Omnipresent soul, who is uncaused and uncausing, and 
without its beginning, middle and end; He is the essence of the three worlds 
and their contents. He is something as the universal intelligence, and shows all 
and everything in itself, (and reflects them in all partial intelligences 
according to their capacities). 


CHAPTER CLIV. 
Relation of Past Events. 


Argument: — The living liberation of the sage, by means of his habitual 
meditation. 


The Sage continued: — Having thus considered the vanity of the visibles, I 
remained free from my anxious cares about the world; and became 
passionless and fearless, and extinct in nirvdna, from insensibility of my 
egoism. 


2. I became supportless and unsupporting, and remained without my 
dependence upon anybody; I was quite calm with my self-composure, and my 
soul was elevated and rested in heaven. 


3. I did as my duty called, and did nothing of my own accord; and remained 
as void and blank as vacuum, which is devoid of all action and motion. 


4. The earth and heaven, the sky and air, the mountains and rivers, and all 
that lies on all sides and the sides themselves, are not but shadow in the air, 
and all living bodies are no more than the embodied (died) Intellect or 
Intellectual bodies. 


5. I am quiet and composed, and manage myself as well as I can; I am quite 
happy in myself; having no injunction nor prohibition to obey, nor to act an 
inner or outer part. (.e., not having a double part to play, nor any duplicity in 
the heart). 


6. Thus, I resided here in my even temper, and the same tenor of my mind 
and actions; and it is by mere chance, that you have come to meet me here. 


7. Thus I have fully explained to thee about the nature of dream and my 
personal self; together with that of the phenomenal world and thyself. 


8. Hence thou hast well understood, what is this visible world that lies 
before thee; as also what these beings and these people are, and what Brahma 
is after all. 


9. Now knowing these things, O thou huntsman, to be mere false, you must 
now have your peace of mind, with the conviction that, all this is the 
representation of the Intellect in empty air. Yea, it is this that is dimly seen in 
these, and naught besides. 


10. The Huntsman rejoined: — If so it be, then both me and thee and the 
gods even, you say to be nullity; and that all of these are but the phantoms of a 
dream, and that all men are no men, and all existence as non-existence, 
(sadasat). 


11. The Sage replied: — It is verily so, and all and every one of us is 
situated as the spectre of a dream to one another, and as phasma in the 
cosmorama of the world. 


12. These spectres appear in forms, according to one’s conception of them; 
and the only One appears as many, like the rays of light. All these radiations 
cannot be wholly true or untrue, nor a mixture of both of them. 


13. The visionary city of the world that appears in our waking state, is but a 
waking dream or an apparition of our minds, and appears as the prospect of a 
distant city before us, that we never saw before. 


14. I have fully explained all this to you already, and you have been 
enlightened in the subject to no end; now you have grown wise and well 
known all and everything; do therefore, as you may like best for you. 


15. Though thus awakened and enlightened by me, your reprobate mind is 
not yet turned to reason, nor found its rest either in transcendental wisdom, or 
in the transcendent state of the most-high. 


16. Without assuetude, you cannot concentrate your vagrant mind into your 
heart; nor can you without the practice of constant reflexion attain the acme of 
wisdom. 


17. It is impossible to attain the summit of perfection, without your habitual 
observance of wisdom; as it is incapable for a block of wood to contain any 
water in it, unless it is scooped out in the form of a wooden vessel. 


18. Habitual reliance in sapience and constant attendance to the precepts of 
the Sdstras and preceptors, tend to the removal of the mind’s suspense 
between unity and duality, (i.e., between God and the world), and set the mind 
to its ultimate bliss of nirvana, — anaesthesia in quietism. 


19. Insensibility of one’s worth and state and inertness to all worldly 
affections, refraining from the evils of bad associations, and abstaining from 
all earthly desires and cravings of the heart — 


20. These joined with one’s deliverance from the fetters of dualities, and 
enfranchisement from all pleasurable and painful associations, are the surest 
means that lead the learned to the state of unalterable bliss, — nirvana, 
(which is ever attendant on the Deity). 


CHAPTER CLV. 
Relation of Future Fortune. 


Argument: — The sage relates the elevation of the Huntsman to heaven by 
means of his austere devotion. 


The God Agni said: — Upon hearing all this, the huntsman was lost in 
wonder, and remained as dumfoundered as a figure in painting in the very 
forest. 


2. He could not pause to fix his mind in the supreme being, and appeared to 
be out of his senses and wits, as if he was hurled into a sea. 


3. He seemed to be riding on the wheel of his reverie, which pushed him 
onward with the velocity of a bicycle; or appeared to be caught by an 
alligator, which bore him with rapidity, up and down the current of his 
meditation. 


4. He was drowned in doubt, to think whether this was the state of his 
nirvana or delirium; wherein he could not find his rest, but was tossed 
headlong like a headstrong youth in his foolhardiness. 


5. He thought the visibles, to be the work of his ignorance; but he came to 
think upon his second thought, this delusion of the world, to be the production 
(display) of Providence. 


6. Let me see, said he, the extent of the visibles from the beginning; and 
this I will do from a distance, by means of the spiritual body, which I have 
gained by means of devotion. 


7. I will remove myself to a region, which is beyond the limit of the 
existent and inexistent worlds; and rest myself quiet at a spot, which is above 
the ethereal space. (i.e., in heaven). 


8. Having thus determined in himself, he became as dull as a dunce, and set 
his mind to the practice of his Yoga devotion, as it was dictated to him by the 
sage, saying that no act could be fruitful without its constant practice. 


9. He then left his habit of huntsmanship and applied himself to the 
observance of austerities, in company with the sages and seers. 


10. He remained long at the same spot, and in the society of the sagely 
seers; and continued in the practice of his sacred austerities, for very many 
years and seasons. 


11. Remaining long in the discharge of his austere duties, and suffering all 
along the severities of his rigorous penance; he asked once his sagely guide, 
as to when he shall obtain his rest and respite from these toils, to which the 
muni responded unto him in the following manner. 


12. The muni said: — The little knowledge that I have imparted unto thee, 
is a spark fire and able to consume a forest of withered wood; though it has 
not yet burnt down the impression of this rotten world from your mind. 


13. Without assuetude you cannot have your beatitude in knowledge; and 
with it, it is possible to attain it in course of a long time. (i.e., No knowledge is 
efficacious without its long practice, hence a novice in Yoga is no Yogi or 
adept in it). 


14. Such will verily be your case, if you will rely in my assurance of this to 
you, and wear my words as a jewel about your ears, knowing them to be 
oracular in this world. 


15. You praise the unknown spirit of God, in your ignorance of his nature; 
and your mind is hanging in suspense between your knowledge and ignorance 
of (divine nature). 


16. You are led of your own accord to inquire into the nature and extent of 
the cosmos, which is but a phantom of delusion. (The world being but a 
delusion, it is in vain to investigate about it). 


17. You will be thus employed for ages, in your arduous understanding of 
making this research, until Brahma, — the creative power will appear before 
you, being pleased at your investigation into his works. 


18. You will then ask the favour of thy favouring god, to release you from 


your ponderous doubt of the reality or delusiveness of the world, saying: — 


19. Lord! I see the cosmorama of the phenomenal world, is spread out 
everywhere as a delusion before our sight; but I want to see a spot, which 
exhibits the true mirror of the Divine mind, and which is free from the 
blemish of the visibles. 


20. The mirror of the vacuous mind, though as minute as an atom, 
represents yet the reflexion of this vast universe in some part or other within 
it. (.e., The minute atom of the mind, is the reflector of vast universe). 


21. It is therefore to be known, how far this boundless world extends to our 
woe only; and how far does the sphere of the ethereal sky stretch beyond it. 


22. It is for this that I ask your good grace, to make me acquainted with the 
infinite space of the universe; accept my prayer, O thou lord of gods, and 
readily grant this my request. 


23. Strengthen and immortalize this body of mine, and make it mount upon 
the regions of sky, with the velocity of the bird of heaven; (Garuda or 
Phoenix). 


24. Make my body increase to the length of a league each moment; until it 
encircles the world in the manner of its outer and surrounding sky. 


25. Let this pre-eminent boon be granted to me, O great and glorious God, 
that I may reach beyond the bounds of the circumambient sky, which 
surrounds the sphere of the visible world. 


26. Being thus besought by thee, O righteous man, the Lord will say unto 
thee, “Be it so as though desirest,” and then he will disappear as a vision from 
thy sight, and vanish into the air, with his attendant gods along with him. 


27. After the departure of Deispater with his accompanying deities, to their 
divine abodes in heaven; thy thin and lean body emaciated by thy austerities, 
will assume a brightness as that of the brilliant moon. 


28. Then bowing down to me and getting my leave, thy brightsome body 
will mount to the sky in an instant, in order to see the object of thy desire, 
which is settled in thy mind. 


29. It will rise high into the air as a second moon, and higher still as the 


luminous sun itself; and blaze above as brightly as a burning fire, in defiance 
of the brightness of the luminaries. 


30. Then it will fly upwards in the empty sky, with the force of the strong 
winged phoenix; and run forward with the rapidity of a running current, in 
order to reach at the bounding belt of the world. 


31. Having gone beyond the limit of the world, thy body will increase in its 
bulk and extent; and become as swollen as the diluvian ocean, that covered 
the face of the whole universe. 


32. There thou wilt find thy body, growing bigger and bigger still; and 
filling like a big cloud the empty space of air, which is devoid of all created 
things. 


33. This is the great vacuum of the Divine spirit, filled with the chaotic 
confusion of elements, flying about as whirlwinds; and the unbounded ocean 
of the infinite Mind, swelling with the waves of its perpetual thought. 


34. You will find within this deep and dark vacuity, numberless worlds and 
created bodies, hurling headlong in endless succession; just as you perceive in 
your consciousness, a continued series of cities and other objects appearing in 
your dream. 


35. As the torn leaves of trees, are seen to be tossed about in the air by the 
raging tempest; so you will see multitudes of worlds, hurled to and fro in the 
immensity of the Divine Mind. 


36. As the passing world presents a faint and unsubstantial appearance to 
one looking down at it on the top of a high citadel; so do these worlds appear 
as mere shades and shadows when viewed in their spiritual light from above. 


37. As the people of this world view the black spots attached to the disk of 
the moon, which are never observed by the inhabitants of that luminary; so are 
these worlds supposed to subsist in the Divine spirit, but they are in reality no 
other than the fleeting ideas of the infinite Mind. 


38. You will thus continue to worlds after worlds, moving in the midst of 
successive spheres and skies; and thus pass a long time viewing the creation 
stretching to no end. 


39. After viewing the multitudes of worlds, thronging in the heavens like 


the leaves of trees; you will be tired to see no end of them in the endless abyss 
of Infinity. 


40. You will then be vexed in yourself, at this result of your devotion, as 
also at the distention of your body, and stretch of your observations all over 
the immensity of space. 


41. Of what good is this big body, which I bear as a ponderous burthen 
upon me; and in comparison with which millions of mountain ranges, as the 
great Meru, etc., dwindle away into lightsome straws. 


42. This boundless body of mine, that fills the whole space of the sky; 
answers no purpose whatever, that I can possibly think of. 


43. This ponderous body of mine, that measures the whole space of the 
visible world; is quite in the darkness, — ignorance, without its spiritual 
knowledge, which is the true light of the soul. 


44. I must therefore, cast off this prolated body of mine, which is of no use 
to me, in the acquisition of knowledge or in keeping company with wise and 
holy men. 


45. Of what good is this big and bulky body of mine, to scan the 
unknowable infinity of the endless and supportless Brahma, whose essence 
contains and supports the whole of this universe, and is hard to be ascertained. 


46. Thinking so in yourself, you will shrivel your bloated body, by exhaling 
your breath, (as you had expanded it by your inhalation of it), and then shun 
your frame as a bird cast off the outer crust of a fruit after suction of its juicy 


sap. 


47. After casting off the mortal clod and coil of your body, thy soul will 
rest in empty air accompanied with its respirative breath of life, which is more 
tenuous than the subtle ether (over which it floats). 


48. Thy big body will then fall down on earth, as when the great mount of 
Meru fell on the ground, being cleft of its wings by ire of Indra; and will crush 
all earthly beings, and smash the mountains to dust underneath it. 


49. Then will the dry and starved goddess Kali, with her hungry host of 
Matris and furies, devour thy prostrate body, and restore the earth to its purity, 
by clearing it of its nuisance. 


50. Now you heard me fully relate unto your future fate, go therefore, to 
yonder forest of palm trees, and remain there in practising your austerities as 
well as you may like. 


51. The Huntsman rejoined: — O Sir, how great are the woes that are 
awaiting upon me, and which I am destined to undergo in my vain pursuit 
after knowledge (of the infinite nature and works of God). 


52. Pray tell me Sir, if you have anything to say, for my averting the great 
calamity that you have predicted; and tell me also, if there be no expedient to 
avoid the destined evil. 


53. The Sage replied: — There is no body nor any power whatever, that is 
ever able to prevent the eventualities of fate; and all attempts to avert them, 
are thrown on one’s back. 


54. As there is no human power to the left on the right, or fix the feet on the 
head; so there is no possibility to alter the decree of fate. 


55. The knowledge of the science of astrology, serves only to acquaint us 
with the events of our fate; but there is nothing in it, that can help us to 
counteract the shafts of adverse fortune. 


56. Therefore, those men are blest, who with their knowledge of sovran 
predestination are still employed in their present duties; and who after the 
death and burning of their bodies, rest in the eternal repose of Brahma in their 
consciousness. 


CHAPTER CLVI. 
Expostulation of Sindhu by his Minister. 


Argument: — The aerial spirit of the Huntsman is reborn on Earth as prince 
Sindhu, who kills Vidtratha, and is remonstrated by his Minister. 


The Huntsman said: — Tell me Sir, what will then become of my soul in 
its aerial position, and of my body in its situation on earth. 


2. The Sage replied: — Hear me attentively to tell you, about what is to 
become of your lost body on earth, as also of your living soul sustained in the 
air. 


3. The body being subducted from thy whole self, thy soul will assume an 
aerial form, and will remain in empty air, united with its vital breath. 


4. In that airy particle of your soul, you will find the surface of the earth, 
situated in the recess of your mind; and you will behold it as clearly, as you 
view the world in your dream. 


5. Then, from the inward desire of your heart, you will see in the amplitude 
of your mind, that you have become the sovereign lord of this wide extended 
globe. 


6. The will of this idea rises of itself in your mind, that you have become a 
king by name and in the person of Sindhu, who is so highly honoured by men. 


7. After eight years of thy birth, thy other will depart from this mortal 
world, and leave to thee this extensive earth, reaching to its utmost boundaries 
of the four seas. 


8. You will find in the border of your realm, a certain lord of the land by 
name of Vidtiratha, who will rise as thy enemy, and whom it will be difficult 


for thee to quell. 


9. You will then reflect in yourself, of your past and peaceful reign of a full 
century; and think of the pleasures you have so long enjoyed in company with 
your consort and attendants. 


10. Woe unto me, that this lord of the bordering land, has now risen against 
me in my old age; and has put me to the trouble of waging a formidable 
warfare against him. 


11. As thou shalt be thinking in this wise, there will occur the great war 
between thee and that lord of the land; in which all your quadruple 
armaments, will be greatly worsted and thinned. 


12. In that great war, thou wilt succeed to slay that Vidtratha, by striking 
him with thy sword, and keeping thy stand on thy war-car. 


13. You will then become the sole lord of this earth, to its utmost of the 
four oceans; and become to be dreaded and honoured by all, like the regents 
of all the sides of heaven. 


14. Having thus become the sovereign monarch of the earth, and reigning 
over it and the name of the mighty Sindhu, thou wilt pass thy time in 
conversation with the learned pandits and ministers of thy court. 


15. The minister will say, — It is a mighty wondrous deed, O lord, that 
thou hast achieved, by slaying the invincible Vidtratha in thy single combat. 


16. Then thou wilt say, — tell me, O good man, how this Vidtiratha waxed 
so very rich, and possessed his forces as numerous as the waves of ocean; and 
what cause impelled him to rise against me. 


17. The Minister will reply: — This lord has Lila as his lady, who had won 
the favour of the fair goddess Saraswati; who is the supportress of the world, 
by her extreme devotion to her. (Saraswati is the goddess of wisdom and 
handmaid of God. — See Sir Wm. Jones’ prayer). 


18. The benign goddess took this lady for her foster-daughter, and enabled 
her to achieve all her actions, and even obtain her liberation with ease. 
(Wisdom facilitates all human act). 


19. It is by favour of this goddess, that this lady is able to annihilate thee at 


a single nod or word of hers; wherefore, it is no difficult task to her to destroy 
thee all at once. 


20. Sindhu then will answer him saying: — If what thou sayest is true, it is 
wondrous indeed, how then could the invincible Vidtratha come to be slain 
by me in warfare. 


21. And why, he being so highly favoured by the goddess, could not get the 
better of me in this combat (by slaying me with his hand). 


22. The Minister will reply: — Because he always prayed the goddess with 
earnestness of his heart, to give him liberation from the cares and troubles of 
this world. 


23. Now then, O lord, this goddess that knows the hearts of all men, and 
confers to all the objects of their desire, gave thee the victory thou didst seek, 
and conferred on him the liberation he sought by thy hands. 


24. Sindhu then, will respond to it; saying: — If it is so, then I must ask, 
why the goddess did not confer the blessing of liberation on me also, that have 
been so earnestly devoted to her at all times. 


25. The Minister will then say in his reply: — This goddess resides as 
intelligence in the minds of all men, and as conscience also in the hearts of all 
individual beings, and is known by the title of Saraswati to all. 


26. Whatever object is constantly desired by any one, and earnestly asked 
of her at all times; she is ever ready to confer the same to him, as it is felt in 
the heart of everyone. 


27. You lord never prayed for your liberation, at the shrine of this goddess; 
but craved for your victory over your enemies, which she has accordingly 
deigned to confer unto you. 


28. Sindhu will then respond to it and say: — why is it that prince did not 
pray the goddess of pure wisdom for his obtaining a kingdom like me; and 
how was it that I slighted to pray her for my final liberation as he did? 


29. And why is it that the goddess knowing the desire of my heart for 
liberation, left me only to desire it without attempting to seek after the same? 
(i.e., Why does the goddess give us the knowledge of what is good, without 
enabling us to exist and persist after its attainment)? 


30. To this the minister will reply saying: — The propensity of doing evil 
(or slaughter), being inherent in your nature (from your past profession of 
huntsmanship), you neglected to stoop down to the goddess, and pray unto her 
for your liberation. 


31. It is well known since the creation of the world, that the intrinsic gist 
forms the nature of man; and this truth being evident to all from their boyhood 
to age, there is no body to ignore or repudiate it at any time. 


32. The purity or impurity of the inner heart, to which one is habituated by 
his long practice or custom, continues to predominate over all his qualities 
and actions to the very last, and there is no power to contravene it in any 
manner. 


CHAPTER CLVII. 
The Ultimate Extinction or Nirvana of Sindhu. 


Argument: — Description of the nature of Sindhu, his resignation of the 
kingdom, his discrimination and final liberation. 


Then Sindhu will say: — Tell me Sir, what kind of a vile-person and how 
ignorant I had been before, whereby I still retain the evil propensities of my 
past life, and am doomed to be reborn in this earth, (the vale of misery). 


2. The minister will say in his reply: — “Hear me attentively, O king, for a 
while; and I will tell you this secret, which you require me to relate, and will 
surely remove your ignorance.” 


3. There is a self-existent and undecaying Being from all eternity, which is 
without its beginning or end, which is designated the great Brahma, and 
passes herein under the little of I and thou, and of this and that, etc. 


4. I am that self-same Brahma, by the consciousness of my self-cogitation, 
(ego cogito ergo sum). This becomes the living principal with the power of 
intellection, (vivo qui intellego, I live because I think). This power does not 
forsake its personality; (but retains its persona of, I am that I am). 


5. Know this Intellect to be a spiritual or supernatural substance, having a 
form rarer and more transparent than that of the subtle ether; it is this which is 
the only being in existence, nor is there anything which is of a material 
substance. (This passage maintains the immateriality of the world). 


6. This formless takes the form of the mind, by its being combined, with 
volition and its views of this and the next world, (i.e., its worldly enjoyments 
and future bliss), in its state of life and death, and of waking and sleep. (That 
is the mind is sensible of these passing and alternate phenomena). 


7. The mind, though formless, stretches itself into the form of the 
phenomenal world; just as the formless air dilates itself, in the form of force 
or oscillation in all material bodies. 


8. The world is identic with the mind, as the seeming and visible sky is the 
same with empty vacuity; so the corporeal is alike the incorporeal, and there is 
no difference whatever, between the material and mental worlds. 


9. This network or least of worlds resides in the mind, in their immanent 
impressions in it, and the outer world is in reality. And that the cosmos 
consists of ideas in the formless mind, its formal appearance has no real 
substance in it. (The immaterial ideas of the mind are real, and not the 
material objects or the sober reality of the subjective only). 


10. There arose at first the pure (satya) personality of the impersonal and 
universal spirit of God (Brahma), in the person of the creative power known 
under the title of Brahma. This personal god assumed to himself the 
appellation of ego from his will of creation, and the undivided spirit, was 
divided into many impure personalities, (rdjasa and tdmasa), from its desire 
of becoming many, (aham bahu syam-sim multa and plurimda). 


11. The Sindhu will say: — Tell me Sir, what you mean by rdjasa and 
tamasa bodies (or impure personalities); and how and whence are these 
appellations at first in primo to the supreme being, — parapada, — the 
Indefinite One. 


12. The monitor will reply saying: — As all embodied beings herein, are 
possessed of members and limbs of their bodies; so the bodiless spirit is 
comprised of an infinite variety of minor spiritual forms under it, which are 
known as the good or bad spirits. 


13. The self-same spirit then designates all these several parts of itself by 
various appellations, and the incorporeal spirit assumes to itself, an endless 
variety of material and terraqueous natures and names. (That changed through 
all, yet in all the same; known by this or that or one or other nature and name). 


14. Thus the universal spirit continues to exhibit in itself, all the various 
forms of this visionary world at its own will; and gives a distinct name and 
nature to each and every one of these representations of itself. 


15. When the Divine spirit, deigned to covert itself into the personality of 
Brahma, and in those of me or thee and other individualities; it became altered 


from its state of original holiness and purity to those impurity and foulness, 
known as rdjasi and tamasi. (When God breathed his spirit into the nostrils of 
Adam, it lost its purity and sanctity by contamination of flesh). 


16. The unalterable pure nature of the holy spirit of God, being thus 
transformed to unholiness, it passed into different states of impurity in the 
living souls of beings. (The same living soul passing different degrees of 
purity and impurity). 


17. The spirit of God being blown at first as the living soul (in an animal 
body); the soul that comes to perceive its incarceration in flesh and its doom 
to suffering, is said to be of the pure nature of sdttiki. 


18. Those who while they are living in the world, are possessed of 
politeness and good qualities; they are said to be merely of a good nature 
Kevala sattiki. 


19. Those who being born in repeated regenerations are destined to the 
enjoyments of life, and to their final liberation at last, are designated as the 


wera Teta, 


20. Those again who being born in this nether world, are inclined to the 
practice of their manly virtues only; such souls are famed as the merely rdjasi, 
(shining), and are few in their number. 


21. Those souls which have been undergoing their repeated regenerations, 
ever since the beginning of creation; and are continually roving in the bodies 
of inferior beings, are said by the wise, to belong to the species of the most 
impure, tdmasa tdamasi; though it is possible from them to attain their 
salvation at last. 


22. Those which have been wandering in many births, in the forms of vile 
animals, and until they attain their salvation at the end; such souls are 
designated as merely vile Kevala tamasi by the wise, who are versed in the 
science of psychology. 


23. In this manner have these philosophers classed the emanated soul of 
beings into many grades and species; among which, O my respected Sir, your 
soul is reckoned among the vilest of the vile tamasa tamasi. 


24. I know you to have passed through many births of which you know 
nothing; and these have been as various as they were fraught with the 


variegated scenes of life. 


25. You have in vain passed all your lives in doing nothing that is useful; 
and more particularly your late aeronautic life, with that gigantic body of 
yours. 


26. Being thus born with the vile species of thy soul, it is difficult for thee 
to obtain thy liberation from the prison house of this world. 


27. Sindhu will then say in his response: — Tell me Sir, how can I divest 
myself of this inborn vile nature of my soul; that I may learn to abide by thy 
counsel, and try to purify my soul and rectify the conduct of my life. 


28. There is nothing in all these three worlds, which is hard to be acquired 
by means of earnest endeavour and intense application. 


29. As a fault or failure of the previous day, is corrected by its rectifications 
today; so can you purify your pristine impure soul by your pious acts of the 
present day. 


30. Whoever earns for anything and labours hard to earn it, is sure to gain it 
in the end, wherein the remiss are sure to meet with failure. 


31. Whatever a man is intent upon doing, and tries to effect at all times; and 
whatsoever one desires with earnestness, and is constantly devoted to the 
same pursuit, he is to succeed in it, and have his object without fail. 


32. The Sage related: — The king being thus remonstrated by his minister, 
was resolved to resign the burthen of his state, and to renounce his realm and 
royalty even at that very moment. 


33. He wished to retire to some far distant forest, and prayed his ministers 
to support his realm; but he declined to take the charge, though the state was 
free from all its enemies; (i.e., though it was a peaceful realm). 


34. He then remained in the company of wise men, and was enlightened by 
their discourses; as the sesame seeds became odorous by being placed amidst 
a heap of flowers. 


35. Then from his inquiries into the mysteries of his life and birth, and into 
the causes of his confinement in this world, he obtained the knowledge of his 
liberation from it. 


36. It was thus by means of his continued inquiries into truth, and his 
continual association with the wise and good, that the soul of Sindhu attained 
a holy sanctity in comparison with which, the prosperity of Brahma even, is as 
a straw or the dried leaf of a withered tree, which the winds of the sky toss 
about to and fro. 


CHAPTER CLVIII. 
Fall of the Huge Body of the Hunter. 


Argument: — The aerial body of the Hunter, and its downfall from the high 
heaven. 


The Sage resumed and said: — I have thus related these future events, as if 
they were past accounts unto thee; do now, O huntsman what thou wishest 
and thinkest best for thyself. 


2. Agni the god of fire said: — Hearing these words of the sage, the 
huntsman remained aghast in wonder for a while; and then rising with the 
sage, went to bathe themselves to the nearest pool. 


3. In this manner they continued together, to conduct their religious 
austerities and discussions at the same spot; and remained in terms of 
disinterested friendship with one another. 


4. After some time the muni met with his final extinction, — nirvdna, and 
by casting off his mortal body, obtained his last repose in the state of 
transcendent tranquility. 


5. In course of time and the lapse of ages, it pleased the god Brahma to give 
him a call, in order to confer upon him the object of his desire. 


6. The huntsman, being unable to resist the impulse of his longing, begged 
to obtain the very same boon of his god which the sage had predicted to him. 


7. Be it so, said the god, and he repaired to his favourite abode; and the 
huntsman flew aloft into the open air, in order to enjoy the fruition of his 
austere devotion. 


8. He flew with incredible velocity, to the extensive vacuous space, which 


lies beyond the spheres of worlds; and it was in course of an incalculable 
duration, that the ever-expanding bulk of his body, filled the regions of the 
upper sky, as a mountainous range is stretched along and across this lower 
world. 


9. He fled with the force and swiftness of the great Garuda, (the eagle of 
Jove), up and down and to all sides of heaven; until the huge bulk of his body, 
occupied the whole area of the open air, in the process of an indefinite period 
of time. 


10. Thus increasing in his size with the course of time, and infatuated in the 
maze of his delusion, began to grow uneasy in himself. 


11. From the great anxiety of his mind, he suppressed the respiration of his 
breath; until he breathed out his last breath of life in the air, and his body 
dropped down as a carcass in the nether earth. 


12. His mind accompanied with his vital breath, fled through the air into the 
body of Sindhu, who became the ruler of the whole earth, and the great 
antagonist of Vidtratha. 


13. His great body resembling a hundred mountainous ranges, became a 
huge mass of carcass; which fell down with the hideous clattering of thunders, 
as one earth falling upon another. 


14. At a certain time, it shines as a Kesandraka, at others it appears as a 
covering of the huge range of buildings in sky. 


15. I have already related to thee, O learned Sir, how this huge carcass had 
fallen from above, and filled the surface of the globe of this earth. 


16. The globe of the earth, where upon this huge carcass had fallen, 
resembled in every way this earth of ours, which appears unto us as a city in 
our dream. 


17. The dry and big bellied goddess chandi, then devoured this carcass, 
filling her bowels with its flesh, and stuffing her entrails with its red-hot blood. 


18. The earth is called medini or fleshy from the flesh of this corpse, which 
overspreads its surface with its prodigious bulky frame. 


19. It was this huge fleshy body, which was reduced to the substance of the 


earth in time; and had the name of the earth given to it from the dust of this 
body. 


20. This fleshy earth gave rise to forests and habitable parts; and the fossil 
bones rose high in the forms of mountains from underneath the ground, which 
grew everything useful to men. 


CHAPTER CLVIX. 
Wandering of Vipaschit. 


Argument: — The god of fire, after directing Vipaschit to wander over the 
world according to his desire, disappeared from his sight. 


The god of Fire added: — Go now, O sapient Vipaschit, to your wished for 
abodes, and with the steadiness of your mind, conduct with propriety 
everywhere on earth. 


2. Indra the lord of the assemblage of creatures, has been performing his 
hundred-fold sacrifices in his celestial abode; and there I am invited to attend 
by an invocation of him. 


3. Bhasa said: — Saying so, the lord Agni disappeared from that place; and 
passed through the transparent ether like the electric fire of lightning. 


4. I was then led by my predestination to roam about in the air; and direct 
my mind into the investigation of my allotted acts, and the termination of my 
ignorance. 


5. I beheld again an innumerable host of heavenly bodies, roving about in 
the air; holding their positions at different stations of the firmament, and 
containing inhabitants of different natures and customs. 


6. Some of these were of one and same form, resembling floating umbrellas 
in the sky; and attracting the hearts of men, by their shining appearance and 
slow motion. (The great velocity of heavenly bodies, appear to be slow when 
they are seen by the naked eyes of men from this distant earth). 


7. Some of them are of earthy substance, but shining and moving onward 
like mountains in motion. 


8. Some were of woody appearance, and others of stony substance; but they 
are all lightsome bodies, and all moving onward in their uninterrupted course. 


9. I beheld also some figures like carved statues of stone, standing in the 
open space of my mind, and talking together all their live-long days. 


10. In this manner, I beheld for a long while, many such figures like images 
in my dream, and was quite bewildered in my utter ignorance of them. 


11. I then intended to perform my austere devotion, in order to obtain my 
liberation; when the god Indra appeared unto me and said: — “no Vipaschit, 
you are doomed to become a stag again, and not entitled to your liberation 


” 


now. 


12. You are propelled by your previous predilection to prefer the pleasures 
of heaven; therefore, I must direct you to dwell in my paradise, and wander 
there amidst my gardens of mandara trees. 


13. Being thus bid by him, I rejoined and said to him: — I am weary, O 
lord, with the troubles of the world, and want to get my release from them; 
ordain therefore, my immediate emancipation from them. 


14. The god listened to my prayer and said: — emancipation attends on the 
pure soul, which is purged from all its desires; and this had been already 
expounded to you by the god of fire, (in his narrative of the sage and hunter); 
ask therefore, some other boon, said he, and I begged him to tell me of my 
next and future state. 


15. Indra replied and said: — I find you to be fated to be changed to the 
state of a deer hereafter, from the fond desire of your heart, to wander about 
and feed freely in the fields. 


16. By becoming a deer, you will have to enter the holy assembly (of 
Dasaratha); where another deer like you, has obtained his liberation before, by 
listening to the spiritual instructions formerly delivered there by me. 


17. Therefore, be born as a deer in some forest on earth with your pensive 
soul; and you will then come to recollect your past life from its relation by 
Vasishtha, (in the court of king Dasaratha). 


18. You will learn there, that all this existence is but the delusion of a 
dream, and the creation of imagination; and the account of your future life 


depicted in its true colour. 


19. After being released from the body of the deer, you shall regain your 
human form, and perceive the rays of holy light shining in your inward spirit. 


20. This light will then dispel the long prevailing gloom of ignorance from 
your mind, and then you shall attain your nirvana supineness, as the calm and 
breathless wind. 


21. After the god had said so, I had the presentiment of being a deer in this 
forest, and entirely forgot my human nature, under my firm conviction of 
having become a beast. 


22. I have been ever since residing in the recess of these woods, under the 
impression of my being changed to a stag; and feeding ever since upon the 
grass and herbs growing on the mountain top. 


23. Here I saw once a body of troopers coming to a hunting excursion; and 
being then affrighted at the sight, I betook myself to flight. 


24. They then laid hold of me, and took me to their place; where they kept 
me for some days for their pleasure, and at last brought me hither before 
Rama. 


25. I have thus related to you all the incidents of my life; and the magical 
scenes of the world, too full of marvelous events. 


26. It is the production of our ignorance, which pervades over all things, 
and branches out into innumerable forms in everything that presents itself to 
our view; and there is nothing whatever to dispel this darkness, except by the 
light of spiritual knowledge. 


27. Valmiki relates: — Then as Vipaschit had held his silence after 
speaking in this manner; he was accosted by the well minded Rama with the 
following words. 


28. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, how a person without any desire of his own, 
sees the object of another’s desire in himself; and could the deer thought of by 
yourself, come to the sight of others in Indra’s Paradise? 


29. Vipaschit replied: — Let me tell you that the earth where upon the huge 
carcass had fallen, was once before trodden upon by Indra, with the pride of 


his performance of a hundred sacrifices. 


30. There strutting along in his haughty strides, he met the anchorite 
Durvasas sitting still in his meditative mood; and believing him to be a dead 
body lying on his way, he knocked it down with his feet. 


31. At this, the angry anchorite threatened the proud god with saying: — O 
Indra! as you have dashed me with your feet by thinking me a lifeless corpse, 
so will a huge carcass shortly fall upon this ground and slash it to pieces and 
reduce it to dust. 


32. And as you have spurned me as a dead body, so art thou accursed to be 
crushed under the falling carcass on earth. 


33. He transformed into a deer, as he was king of kings before, and 
remained in his appearance according to his ideas. 


34. In truth, neither is the actual world a reality, nor the imaginary one an 
unreality; it is in fact the one and same thing, whether we conceive it as the 
one or other; (i.e., either as the real or unreal). 


35. Listen now, O Rama, to another reason, which appertains to this 
subject, and clearly settles the point in question. (That God being Almighty 
and all in all, it makes no difference whatever, whether the world is viewed as 
his creation or as a pantheon). 


36. He in whom all things reside, and from whom everything proceeds; 
who is all in all; and who is everywhere in all must be the One that you may 
call all, and beside whom there is none at all. 


37. It is equally possible to him, to bring forth whatever he wills to 
produce; as also not to produce, whatever he does not wish to bring to 
existence. 


38. Whatever is desired in earnest by anybody, must eventually come to 
pass to him in reality (as the desired doership of Vipaschit); and this is as true 
as the instance of light, being ever accompanied by its shade. 


39. If it is impossible for the desire and its act, which are opposite in their 
nature, to meet together in fact; then it would be impossible for the 
omnifarious God to be all things both in being and not being; therefore, the 
objects of our desire and thought, are equally present with us as the real ones. 


40. There is a reality (or entity of God) attached to every form of existence, 
and there is nothing which of itself is either an entity or nullity also. 


41. O the great magic or illusion, which is overspread everywhere, and 
pervades over all nature in every form and at all times; and binds all beings in 
inextricable delusion. 


42. The nature of the great God comprises the community of spirits in his 
spirit, and combines in itself all laws whether permissive or prohibitive acting 
in concert and eternal harmony. 


43. It is his infinite power that has displayed the ignorance or Illusion, 
which spreads over all the three worlds from time with or without its 
beginning; and it is our delusion only, which depicts all things in their various 
forms to our view. 


44. Or how could the creation that was once destroyed by the great deluge, 
come to resuscitate again; unless it were a réchauffé of the reminiscence of 
the past one, else the elementary bodies of air, fire and earth, could not 
possibly be produced from nothing. 


45. Therefore, the world is no other than a manifestation of the divine 
nature; and this is the verdict of the Sdstras, and the conviction of mankind 
from the very beginning of creation. 


46. Things which admit of no sufficient proof for their material existence, 
are easily proved to exist, by their being considered under the light of the 
understanding. 


47. Things of a subtle nature, which are imperceptible by the senses, are 
known in their essence by the understanding of the learned; hence the essence 
of Brahma is pure understanding, of which we are quite ignorant owing to our 
ignorance of the Intellect. 


48. The world is obvious to us from its figure, as the air is evident by its 
vibration; hence, nobody is born or dies herein, (save that it appears to or 
disappears from our sight). 


49. That I am living and the other is dead, are conceptions of our mind; 
hence death being but the total disappearance of the visible world from our 
view, it must be as pleasing to us as our sound sleep itself. 


50. If it be the recognition of the visibles, which is called the life or 
revivification of man; then there are no such things in the world, as are 
commonly termed the life and death of beings. 


51. At a time, the intellect appears a duality, and at other an unity, both are 
nothing but intellect. 


52. It is the Intellection of the Divine Intellect, that infuses its intelligence 
into all minds; hence what is life without the intellect and the faculty of 
intellection. 


53. The intellect being free from pain, there is no cause of complaint in any 
intellectual being; since the word world and all that it means to express, are 
but manifestations of vacuous intellect. 


54. It is wrong to say, that the intellect is one thing and the body another; 
since the unity is the soul of all and pervades all multiformity; and as the 
waves and whirlpools are seen in the waters, so are all these bodies known to 
abide in the Supreme being. 


55. The universal pervasion of divine essence, as that of the subtle air, is 
the cause of causes and the sole cause of all; hence the world is a subtle 
substance also, being but a reflexion of the Divine Intellect. 


56. It is wonderful, how this subtle world appears as a solid body to us; it is 
only our conception of it as such that makes it appear so unto us; but 
conception is no substance at all, therefore, the world has no substantiality in 
it. 


57. It is the demon of error that reigns over us in its aerial form, deludes us 
to take the shadowy world for the substance; while in fact this creation of 
error is as nil and void, as the vacuous creation of the intellect. (i.e., The 
sensible world is as void and null as the ideal one). 


58. Hence this nether world below and the ethereal worlds above, are as 
void as the hyperphysical world of the Divine Intellect; and all these being but 
reflexions of the Divine mind, are exhibited in various ways. 


59. The Intellect being a subtle entity, there is nothing as a solid substance 
anywhere; the phenomenals are all unsubstantial rarities, though they appear 
to us solidified realities. 


60. The knowledge of the true verity and that of the unreality, are so 
blended together; that we must remain in mute silence like a block of wood or 
stone, to pronounce anything in the affirmative or negative about either. 


61. The visible whole is the infinite Brahma, and this universe displays the 
majesty of the great God; and all these bodies are the various forms, 
exhibiting the infinite attributes of the deity. 


62. In this manner, is the substance of the Divine Intellect displayed in 
itself; and it is the vacuous spirit of God, that manifests this unsubstantial 
world in its own vacuity. 


63. The number of living beings, since the beginning of creation, is 
unlimited in every place; and of these there are many, that exist either in their 
corporeal or incorporeal forms. 


64. There are other siddha and spiritual beings, abiding with their subtle 
natures and tenuous forms in the supreme Being; they live in groups in all 
elements, but never come to see one another of their own kind. 


65. The exuberance of the visible world, being purely of aerial and vacuous 
form; they are never seen in their true and intellectual light, except when they 
appear to us in their aerial shapes in our dreams. 


66. The world being well known, remains as it does in our inward 
conception of it, in the form of a hazy mist appearing to our sight at the end of 
night. (i.e., dark and obscure). 


67. It is a dark and indistinct maze, with nothing distinguishable in it when 
seen from a distance; it becomes clearer at a nearer view, and by keeping 
yourself afar you lose sight of it altogether. 


68. As the particles of water fly off, and fall again into the sea; so do the 
atoms of intellect in all living beings, continually rise and subside, in the vast 
ocean of the Divine Mind. (So doth everything proceed from and recede into 
the Divine Spirit). 


69. This grandeur of creation is as the crowding throng of our dreams, 
which ere before lay slumbering; in the hollow space of the Divine Mind, 
therefore, know these effusions of the divine Intellect, as calm and quiet as the 
unruffled spirit of God (that ever reposes in its calm felicity). 


70. I have seen the infinite glories of creation, and have felt the various 
results of my deeds to no end; I have wandered in all quarters of the globe for 
ages; but I found no rest from the toils and troubles of the delusive world, 
except in the knowledge of my vanities of the world. 


CHAPTER CLX. 
Description of Heaven and Hell. 


Argument: — The Breaking and Rejoining of the Court and the dissolution 
of the Ignorance of Bhdsa and his Liberation in Life. 


Valmiki related: — As Vipaschit was going on saying these things, the sun 
wishing to put an end to his speech, proceed with his rapid strides to enlighten 
another world. 


2. Loud trumpets gave the alarum of the departing day, and filled the air on 
all sides with their swelling sound; and all the quarters of heaven seemed to 
re-echo in their joy, the fanfare of victory. 


3. The king Dasaratha gave Vipaschit, many gifts in money, maidservants 
and houses; and bestowed on him many rich and royal presents worthy of 
kings, and then rose from his seat. 


4. The king, Rama and Vasishtha, having taken leave of the assembly, and 
saluted one another in their proper order, retired to their respective abodes. 


5. Then having bathed and refreshed themselves, they passed the night in 
ease and repose; then resorted to the assembly in the morning, and were 
seated in their respective seats. 


6. The sage Vasishtha then resumed the subject of the last discourse; and 
spoke his sweet words with such complacence of his countenance, as if the 
comely moon was shedding her ambrosial beams, from her bright and cooling 
face. 


7. Let me tell you, O king, that Vipaschit has not been able with all his 
endeavours, to ascertain the true nature of Ignorance; nor is it an error of the 
mind which makes the unreal appear as real. 


8. The nature of Ignorance, as long as it is unknown, appears to be eternal 
and endless; but being understood, it proves to be as null and nothing, as the 
limpid water in a mirage. 


9. You have already heard, O wise monarch, the narration of Bhasa the 
minister of Vipaschit; and shall now hear of his liberation in his living state. 


10. It is likely that he will come to be acquainted with truth from some 
other source or discourse, and then he will be liberated in his life time; by 
being freed from his ignorance. 


11. And because this ignorance or Avidyd, is ever accompanied with 
Intellect of the Lord himself, it is for this very reason, that the unreality is 
erroneous by taken for the reality itself. 


12. If this ignorance, — avidyd, — nescience, be an attribute of God, then 
it is no other than the very God; and the unknown or the mysterious nature, is 
not otherwise than the inscrutable nature of God. 


13. This ignorance is infinity (in the infinity of created things), and is 
productive of endless shoots like the sprouts of spring, some of which are 
insipid and others sapid, some are luscious, while others are mellow and 
inebriating. 


14. Some growing as thorny plants, all hollow within and hollow without, 
while others are straight and herbaceous as the succulent reeds or sugar cane. 


15. Some of them are unfruitful and unprofitable, and others are attractive 
of the heart by their untimely blossoming, which is predicative of evil only 
and no desirable good. (Early blossoms are ominous). 


16. Avidyd or Nescience, has no form nor shape, save that of its shapeless 
bulk, which fills all worlds; it is a long and broad mass of darkness, and 
infested by demons and devils (that take in the dark and at night). 


17. Like false light and phantasms in the open air, and like the linked and 
twisted motes of light curling about in the sky; do all these visibles appear to 
our view in the clear firmament, and are in reality but fallacies of our vision. 


18. The variegated views which are stretched all about the empty air, 
without any connecting chain or link between them; are as the many coloured 
rainbows of heaven, which are described by the falling rains and melt into the 


empty air. 


19. The world resembles a rainy river, with all its orbs appearing as the 
countless waves of water, with the dirty and foaming froths floating over it; 
and the fearful eddies and whirlpools, resembling the revolving planetary 
bodies. 


20. The world is a vast and dreary desert, ever exhibiting the waters of 
mirage on its surface; while in reality but a body of dust, and filled with the 
ashes of dead bodies. 


21. As a man wandering in the fairyland of his dream, finds no terminus of 
his journey; so have I been roving forever in the land of my waking dream, 
without finding any end to my travelling. 


22. The web of desires that I have been fondly weaving so long, proved at 
last to be fragile and frail; hence men of firm minds learn betimes, to abandon 
their desires for the whole range of visible objects. 


23. All those objects (ideas) that are contained in the empty space of the 
Intellect, are as precious germs safely stored in the casket of the mind; and 
appear by our misconception of them, as visible objects placed in the open 
space of air. 


24. Those worlds are as the celestial cities of the Siddhas, which are 
situated in the air and are quite invisible to us; but these that appear to our 
view, are non-entities, and mere phantoms of our fancy. 


25. The heavenly abodes of the Siddhas or godly souls, are feigned as 
teeming in gold, precious gems and rubies, with rivers yielding pearls and 
fields of diamonds; they abound with victuals and eatables, and rivers running 
with limpid and drinkable waters. 


26. They are said to abound in honey and wines, in milk and curds, in 
butter and clarified butter also; there are streams of sweet beverage, and 
celestial nymphs in groups. 


27. There fruits and flowers grow in the gardens at all seasons, and 
heavenly damsels sport in the bowers at all times; and all sorts of gains and 
enjoyments, readily attends on the immediate desire of everybody. 


28. There a hundred suns are shining, on one side, and a thousand moons 


on another; and some inhabitants are dressed in gold and purple, while others 
are quaffing their fill of ambrosial draughts. 


29. There is a spontaneous darkness in one place, and full sunshine in 
another, and an everlasting joy in some place; and the Siddhas or perfected 
spirits are continually wafted as by a breeze, from one of these to another, 
with their light and ponderous bodies. 


30. Some meet with their birth and death at each moment, while there are 
others that live to enjoy their everlasting joys of heaven. 


31. There are magnificent palaces and great dignities of all sorts; it is 
fraught with the delights of all seasons, and filled with whatever is desirable to 
mind, and delectable to the spirit. 


32. But these desirable blessings, attending upon the pious deeds of 
virtuous; find no place in the quiet minds of the righteous (which fixed divine 
felicity alone). 


33. There is nothing that is desirable to the soul, which is devoted to the 
contemplation of Brahma only; say therefore, O ye unholy, of what good are 
all these blessings, if they do not lead to divine felicity. 


34. If in the beginning there was no creation at all, owing to its want of a 
creator; say then what is this world, of what it is composed, and how came it 
to existence. 


35. If the world is not the act of causality and nothing in reality, then how 
does it appear to be existent? It is the everlasting will of God, that manifests 
itself in the manner in the Divine Mind; just as we see the display of our rising 
thought and wishes in our mind. 


36. It is even so, O ye simpletons, that you, or I, or he, come to see our 
imaginary castles in the air; by the stretch of our imagination, or the liveliness 
or flight of our fancy. 


37. He who has the single object of divine felicity, for his sole pursuit in 
life; comes to attain the same supreme bliss, after he forsakes his mortal body. 


38. But whoso pursues after the two-fold objects of heaven and heavenly 
bliss, by means of his religious rites and sacrifices in this life; acquires both of 
them afterwards, as the unity of purpose secures one only to one. 


39. The Siddhas reign in the said manner, according to the thoughts in their 
minds; while the unholy are doomed to the torments of hell, owing to the 
sinful thoughts of their minds. 


40. Whatever one thinks upon, he feels the same in himself, as long as he 
possesses his mortal body; and after he loses his material body, he feels it in 
his mind, which is but a part of the body. 


41. When a living person quits one body for another, he carries with him 
the same mind into the other that he had in the prior one, and sees the same 
things in its thoughts, which he was accustomed to look upon before. 


42. A good conscience has all goodly prospects before it, as a vitiated soul 
meets with ghastly aspects on all sides; the airy mind sees only such aerial 
shapes in its vacuity. 


43. Pure souls only come to enjoy the sights of these siddha cities in the air, 
but impure spirits are subjected to suffer their torments in hell. 


44. There is a continual rotation of the unwieldy stones of grinding mills, 
for crushing the vicious souls; and the hurling of wicked into blind wells or 
dark pits, out of which they can rise no more. 


45. There some bodies are cast amidst the frozen snows, where they are 
petrified to stones; and many are thrown into the burning coals of devils, or 
led amidst the burning sands of trackless deserts. 


46. The clouds dropped down living fire, and the skies poured forth fiery 
showers; and red-hot bolts and arrows darted down from heaven. 


47. Stones and disks and swords, were floating on the running stream of the 
sky; and falling like fragments of clouds upon the breasts of the accurst, and 
breaking them as with the strokes of felling axes. 


48. The hot iron sleets and brimstones, falling with a hissing sound; and 
weapons were hurled from engines, with a loud tremendous noise. 


49. Missiles and bolts and discs, together with pikes and clubs, and swords 
and shafts were falling in showers; and traps and tackles and malls and 
mallets were striking in hundred. 


50. There the hot and burning sands, buried the passengers under the 


ground; and there burning meteors were falling like torches; while large 
ravens were devouring the dead bodies around. 


51. Blazing piles also ingulfed the dead, from which they could never get 
out; while darts and spears and bolts and arrows, were piercing the other 
bodies all about. 


52. Hunger and dismay and excruciating pains, tormented by turns, the 
bodies of dead apostates; while others were hurled down from high hills and 
heights, on rough and hard stones below. 


53. Some were weltering in blood, and rolling in pools of dirt, rotten flesh 
and disgusting pus; and others were crushed under stones and weapons, and 
beneath the feet of horses and elephants. 


54. Hungry vultures and owls, were picking up and tearing the dead bodies, 
out of caves and places; and their limbs and members, were mangled and 
scattered all over the ground. 


55. It is thus, that men are prepossessed with these thoughts of the 
punishment of their guilt, from the sacred writings; and thereby come to suffer 
the same, both in their bodies and minds, from their inward impressions of 
them. 


56. Whatever form or figure, ever appears in the vacuum of the Intellect; or 
whatsoever is dreamt or thought of at any time; the same holds fast the 
imagination, and presents itself before the mirror of the mind of its own 
accord. 


CHAPTER CLXI. 
Explanation of Nirvana. 


Argument: — Manifestations of the self-existent Intellect. Its light guiding 
to Divine knowledge, and ignorance thereof leading to darkness. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, whether these various events incidental to the 
lives of the hermit and hunter, were owing to any cause, or of their own 
spontaneity. (i.e., whether they were the effects of any cause, or of their 
spontaneous occurrence as mere dreams and phantasies). 


2. Vasishtha replied: — These occurrences are as the appearance of eddies, 
in the vast ocean of the unknown soul (or mind); and are known to be in their 
continual rotation in the vortex of the soul, of their own accord and in their 
airy forms. 


3. As the oscillating particles of air, are ever in motion in the air; so the 
current of thoughts is continually in action, in the vast vacuity of intellect (or 
mind). 


4. Whatever issues from its source in any shape, retains its original form 
unless it is converted to and restrained in any other form; so the aerial 
thoughts of the vacuous mind are always aerial, unless they are drawn in 
painting or exhibited in another form. (Just so a clod of earth is always the 
earth, till it is moulded to the form of a pot or any other thing). 


5. It is the vacuous essence of the Divine Intellect, that inheres in every 
form that is exhibited by and derived from it; so it is the substance of the 
body, that permits throughout all its members and limbs; as it is the woody 
substance of the tree, that is diffused through all the leaves and branches, that 
shoot forth from it. (Gloss. — The difference consists in the permanence of 
the permeating principle, and the temporiety of the pervaded growth). 


6. Brahma appears to remain permanent in some existences, as in the four 
elemental forms of earth, etc.; while he seems to be transcient and evanescent 
in others, as in the frail bodies of mortal bodies, all of which abide in their 
aerial state in the vacuous spirit. 


7. All these various objects therefore, being but reflections of the Intellect 
impressed upon the soul; it is impossible for us to determine which of these is 
substantial or unsubstantial or real or unreal. 


8. All these are altogether unknowable except that we know them as 
reflexions in the inanity of the Intellect; say ye therefore, that are wholly 
ignorant of all what you think this visible world to be, whether a reality or 
unreality. 


9. Whatever you behold anywhere in the universe, is but an exhibition in 
the vacuum of the Divine Intellect; and what avails it to you that know the 
truth, whether you believe it as such or not. Rely therefore, in your belief of it 
as it is. 


10. These forms of reflexions rise of themselves in the Divine Mind, as the 
waves and billows exhibit themselves on the surface of the sea; they are the 
spontaneous offspring of the Divine Spirit, and are of themselves both their 
causes as well as effects (or self-caused effects). 


11. It is the display of the transcendent vacuum of the Divine Mind, that 
passed under the appellations of its will or volition, or its imagination and 
creation, or the creation of its imagination; hence this world is to be 
understood under any one of these senses, and not of its being composed of 
earth and water. 


12. It is this appearance of the Divine Mind, that appears in this manner 
and nothing besides; it is the Divine itself that resides in the Divinity, and 
passes under the title of Avidyd or Ignorance, from our ignorance of its nature. 


13. There is no material grossness in the integrity of the Divine Intellect; 
which is purely vacuous and immaterial; and composes the whole universe, 
this is transcendental knowledge, and its perfection is liberation. 


14. It is the reflexion of the vacuous Intellect, which spreads over the whole 
universe; it is rare and uncompressed, and ever calm and quiet, and passes by 
the name of the world. 


15. The meditative man whose eye-sight is fixed in his musing, whose body 
is emaciated in devotion, and whose mind is abstracted from the concrete, and 
is absorbed in intellection, is only capable of seeing the Intellectual world. 


16. Whatever the vacuous essence of the intellect, exhibits in any form at 
any place; the same appears to be present there of its own nature. 


17. The unthinking man and unreasonable soul, sees only erroneous sights 
in the midst of skies; as one who is dim-sighted and purblind by birth, does 
not cease from seeing the double moon in the sky. 


18. Whatever is seen anywhere, is no other than the unpolluted Brahma 
himself; and the vacuous sphere of the Intellect being forever clear and 
transparent, is never sullied by any foulness (of gross matter). 


19. The intellect, without forsaking its pure form of self-consciousness, 
exhibits varieties of gross objects in the form of dreams within itself. So also 
is our consciousness of the world, in the manner of our dreams. 


20. By comparing the dicta of the Sdstras with one another, and weighing 
them well with acute judgement, one will find his rest in himself; but the man 
of shallow understanding will not find it so. 


21. The ignorance which floats upon the sea of your understanding, does 
not contaminate my mind, in the manner of dirt polluting a pure and clear 
stream. 


22. As there is neither the earth nor any earthly thing, to be met with in our 
sleep, though we are conscious of them in our dream; so also the phenomenal 
world has no real existence, though we are conscious of it in our waking. 


23. As the clearness of the Intellect, like sunlight or flaming fire, shows us 
many things in our sleeping dreams, so doth its light exhibit the visibles to our 
view in our waking dreams also by day. 


24. There is no difference between the two states of dreaming and waking, 
they are both of the same nature, and the difference lies in the modes of our 
apprehension of them. 


25. The waking man never apprehends his waking state to be a dream; but 
the dead man that rises again to life in the next world, thinks his past life to 
have been but a state of dreaming. 


26. The shortness and length of time, occupied by the two states of 
dreaming and waking, is generally considered to constitute the difference 
between them; but during the time of their presence, they are both considered 
alike the other. (i.e., the dreaming man thinks himself as waking). 


27. The sleeping and waking dreams, bearing alike the same quality of 
presenting false objects to view, are necessarily of the same nature; and there 
is no difference whatever in their outward features, as there is neither elder 
and younger of two twin brothers. (Dreaming and waking are twin brothers, 
like sleep and death neither of which is more or less). 


28. Whatever is the waking dream, just so is the waking in dream also; 
neither of which leaves anything, — being, behind the two states of waking 
and dreaming. (They present many things when present, but leave nothing 
lasting in their absence or when they are past and gone). 


29. As we know the inconstancy of hundreds of dreams, all along the 
length of our lifetime; so the unredeemed and unenlightened soul, sees 
hundreds of waking states (in its repeated transmigrations in life, i.e., in this 
living world). 


30. As the living mortals may well recollect the very many sleeping 
dreams, they have seen throughout their lives; so the immortalized souls of 
Siddhas well remember, the number of waking dreams which they had seen, 
in their past transmigrations in different bodies. 


31. Thus, our waking is equipollent with our dreaming, and our dreams are 
equivalent with waking, in their correlation with one another in like quality, 
and our perception of both alike. 


32. As the word worlds and phenomenal, are significant of the one and 
same meaning; so the terms dreaming and waking are homonymous, and 
interchangeable to one another, — mutatis mutandis. 


33. As the fairy-land in a dream, is as clear as the open space of the 
Intellect; so is this world an inane void and blank, and without the grossness 
of avidyd which ignorance imputes to it. (Ignorance views the fair ideal world 
as a foul material one). 


34. The world is a vacuous substance, and represented as a gross stuff by 
ignorance; so I am as free as air and any airy thing in the world, and it is my 
imagination only, that binds me to my grossness. 


35. Therefore, do not confine your free and unconfined nature, in the 
bondage of gross matter; and never change the pure vacuum of your person to 
a material stuff, nor disfigure your formless and intellectual self in a gross and 
finite form. 


36. There can be no bondage nor liberation, of aught whatever in this 
visible world of our ignorance or avidyd; because all things herein are mere 
reflexions of the formless void of the Divine Intellect. 


37. Here there is no display of ignorance, nor any misconceptions of ours 
of anything; there is neither any bondage nor release of aught whatever, and 
nothing that is either existent or inexistent, (since all are but reflexions of 
Divine Intellect). 


38. There is nescience, nor knowing of anything here by us; because it is 
the uncreated Intellect alone, that manifests itself in this manner; it reflects all 
forms in itself, as if they are all its dreams or creations. 


39. As a man passing from one place to another, has his mind kept in 
abeyance in the interim; so should we keep our minds quiet and still betwixt 
our sight of the visibles and our dreams. (In action of the mind is reckoned as 
nirvana). 


40. As one has his body and mind, quite quiet and calm in his sleep at 
night; and in the respite of his sights and thoughts, in the states of his waking 
and dreaming; this very state of insensibility is called nirvana of the Yogi. 


41. Know our knowledge of the difference of objects (as the one is 
immaterial and the other material), is equally untrue as that of our waking and 
dreaming states; because it is impossible for us to conceive any other thing as 
matter, to consist in the immaterial Intellect. 


42. Our knowledge of identity and diversity, proceed however from the 
same vacuous intellect; which combines the unity and duality also, in 
unbroken union or harmony in itself. 


43. Knowing all as parts of undivided whole, all these are the same 
whatever they appear to be; hence the visible however diversified they may 
appear, are all one and the same principle. 


44. Hence, the ethereal sphere of Brahma, contains all in itself; and who as 
an aerial point concentrates all in it; and the creation is the unity of Brahma, 


together with all its varieties. 


45. Knowing all things as full of God, you must however reject them all (as 
mere reflexions of the Deity); and rest yourself at last in the vacuous Intellect, 
as the great rock of your refuge. 


46. Now, O fortunate Rama, remain to act in conformity with the rules of 
your order, and laws of society and the statues of your position and dignity; 
continue to go on, eat and drink and rest in your usual course, rely in your 
desired object, and ever recline in the glorious and holy lord of your intellect, 
and the supreme God of all. 


CHAPTER CLXII. 
Annihilation of Ignorance. 


Argument: — Here Duality is reduced to the unity of Brahma; and good 
counsels given for subversion of ignorance. 


Vasishtha continued: — All objects being convertible to the conceptions of 
the vacuous intellect, the whole universe is supposed to have its seat in the 
hollow mind; and therefore, both the outward sights of things, as also the 
inward thoughts of their forms, are all but ideal images in the empty mind. 


2. The world being but a dream, and of the form of an ideal city in the 
mind, has nothing substantial in it; and is therefore, a quiet vacuity in itself, 
without having anything of any kind, or any diversity whatsoever contained 
therein. 


3. It is the uniform display of the Intellect, appearing as multiform unto us; 
and this variety though unsubjective to the soul, is looked upon by it within 
itself, as we view the fairy-land of our dream, rising from ourselves. (Query: 
— whether our dreams are subjective or objective to us?) 


4. In the beginning, this world appeared as the aerial castle of a dream in 
the vacuum of the Intellect; it was a mere reflexion of the Divine Mind, and 
though it was of the form of a false shadow, remained as substantive to the 
supreme spirit. 


5. The knowing theosophist well knows this mystery, which is mysterious 
to the unknowing ignorant; because the word creation bears the sense of both 
the reality as well as unreality in it. 


6. The knowing spiritualist as well as the unknowing agnostic, both 
acknowledge the reality of creation; but they can neither understand how it 
exists, nor communicate to one another their right conception of it. 


7. They both know the meaning, of the word creation in their minds; the 
one having the sense of its sedateness ever wakeful in their minds (from their 
spiritual view of it); and the other having the sense of its unsteadiness always 
waking in them (from their sight of the changeful scenes of the outer world); 
so they resemble the sober and drunken men, that view the world in its steady 
and shaking states. 


8. As the liquid waters in a river, rise incessantly in restless waves; so the 
rolling worlds, push forward into being, in the vast expanse of the Divine 
Mind. 


9. These creations which are not of the nature of the intellect, have yet their 
sites in the Intellect, like the thoughts that rise and fall in it; and these though 
they are invisible in their nature, appear as visible things, like the fair objects 
and fairy cities in our dream. 


10. It is spreading shadow of the divine Intellect, which pass under the 
name of the world; and this formless in itself, appears as having a form, like 
the shadow of anything else. 


11. It is a gross error, to take the unsubstantial shadow for a substantial 
body; as it is a gross error to suppose the empty shadow of a ghost as an 
embodied being. 


12. The world is as unreal as an imaginary city, and as false as a string of 
rain drops; why then do you rely in an unreality, which is palpable from the 
testimonies of both the ignorant and knowing men. 


13. The words then that are used to express this thing and that, are mere 
empty sounds, as those emitted by a splitting block of wood or a bamboo; or 
those heard in the dashing of waves or blowing of winds; it is the current air 
which conveys the empty sound into the open vacuum of the sky, but they are 
all unreal and meaningless, and bear but a conventional sense, with which it 
has no connection whatsoever. 


14. It is light of the lord that reflects itself in his creation, and the reflexion 
of his fiat that reverberates through the whole; while in reality there is neither 
any sound nor substance, that is to be heard or seen in the universe (except the 
voice and the sight of the Lord). 


15. Whatever shines or exists herein, is the transcendent reality of the Lord; 
otherwise, there is nothing that could appear at first without its cause, (all 


being but parts of the one undivided whole, — to pan). 


16. Therefore, from (thy knowledge of) the distinctions of words and 
things; know the one as all in all, and remain as quiet and calm as the 
indefinite and infinite void itself. 


17. Forsake the fickleness of thy mind, by means of the calm repose of thy 
soul; the purity of thy understanding, and by an even tenor of thy disposition; 
because an inconstant soul is troublesome in life. 


18. It is one’s self that is a friend or enemy to himself, and if one will not 
try to guard and save himself by his own self, there is no other to do so for 
him. (He who is no friend to himself, is his own enemy himself). 


19. Get over the ocean of the world while you are young, and make your 
good understanding the ferry boat, to bear your body safely to the other shore. 


20. Do what is good for you today, and why defer till tomorrow; you can 
do nothing in old-age, when your body becomes a burden to yourself. 


21. Know yourself as old-age, (if it is fraught with learning); and account 
decrepitude as death itself in your lifetime. Youth is verily the life of the 
living, provided it is fraught with learning. 


22. Having obtained thy life in this living world, which is as transient as the 
fleeting lightning; you must try to derive the essence from this dirty earth, by 
availing yourself of the benefit of good Sdstras and the company of the wise. 


23. Woe to the ignorant! that will not seek their salvation in life; that are 
sinking in the pits of mud and mire; and never striving to lift themselves 
above them. 


24. As the ignorant rustic is afraid at the sight of the earthen images of 
ghosts, and bends down to them; which those that are acquainted with the 
meaning of the word ghost never do. 


25. So those that see God in an idol or in his visible creation, are misled to 
think it their god and adore it as such; but those that know the true meaning of 
the term, never pay their adoration to any visible object. 


26. As things in motion come to rest afterwards, and the visible disappear 
from the sight of the learned, who are acquainted with their true meaning. 


(The world recedes, and the light of God opens to their view). 


27. As the sights in a dream, seeming to be true in the state of dreaming, 
disperse at last upon waking, and upon the knowledge of their unreal nature. 


28. So doth this world, which is conceived as something existing in the 
vacuum of the understanding; melts at last into empty air and nothing, upon 
our knowledge of its intellectual nature. 


29. This living world is as a wilderness, burning with the conflagration of 
various evils attendant on life; and here we are exposed as weak antelopes, 
living upon our precarious sustenances; and here we are governed by our 
ungovernable minds and restless passions and senses of our bodies; all these 
require to be subdued in order to obtain our liberation from repeated births 
and deaths. 


CHAPTER CLXIII. 
Means and Manner of Governing the senses and 
Sensible organs. 


Argument: — Government of the senses and fixedness of the Mind, and the 
study of Yoga Sdstra. 


Rama rejoined: — I know Sir, all knowledge to be in vain and useless, 
without proper government of ourselves and senses; tell me therefore, how 
these may be kept under control, in order to give us the true knowledge of 
things unbiased by the senses. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Addictedness to enjoyments and display of 
manhood, and devotedness to the acquisition of the means of life or wealth; 
are preventives of self-controul and liberation of one’s self, as blindness is an 
obstruction to one’s sight of a light. 


3. Then listen to this least advice of mine as the shortest and best means, 
for the government of yourself and your senses; and this is sure to lead one to 
his successfulness, by his own endeavour and with no toil or trouble. 


4. Know the intellect as the man that mans you, and its power of 
intellection which makes you a living man; and whatever the living soul 
thinks of within itself, it verily becomes the very same; (but the ignorant man 
becomes effeminate). 


5. Let the strength of your consciousness, ply the pointed goad of your 
acute good sense; and you will doubtless subdue your ungovernable 
elephantine mind, and come off victorious shortly at last. 


6. The mind is the captain of the army of your bodily and mental senses; 
subdue therefore, this leading mind, and you will conquer the whole host of 


your senses. Just so does a man walking on boots, tread over the thorns lying 
by his way. 


7. [In order therefore, to subdue your mind], you must settle your self- 
consciousness in your consciousness of the omnipresent vacuum of the Divine 
soul, and rest yourself quiet in the recess of your heart; and then your mind 
will sit quiet of itself, as the snows of winter settle down of themselves in 
autumn. 


8. Thus, by stopping the action of your consciousness, you will also shut up 
your mind, and put a stop to the operation of all its faculties; as you can never 
been able to do by means of all your devotion and austerities, your 
pilgrimages, your knowledge and sacrifice, and all other ceremonies and acts 
and duties. 


9. Whatever comes to occur in the consciousness, the same must be forgot 
or buried in the consciousness of the great God alone; and so the forgetfulness 
of all enjoyments and their objects, amounts to our victory over them. (The 
way to overcome the pleasures of life, is to bury their remembrance in 
oblivion). 


10. We must try by all means, to shut out the objects of sense from our 
consciousness; and this state of our unconsciousness of them, is tantamount to 
the state of godliness or heavenly bliss. 


11. Again, the contentment which arises from our acting in conformity with 
the rules of our order, is another cause of preserving the steadiness of the 
mind; therefore, remain firm in the practice of your particular duties, and seek 
no happiness besides. 


12. He who relinquishes his inclination, towards the attainment of what is 
unlawful for him; and remains content with earning his lawful gains, is verily 
said to be a man of subdued appetites, and one who has governed. 


13. He who is pleased with his inward and conscious gratification, and is 
not grieved at the unpleasant things all about him, is said to have well 
governed and benumbed his mind. 


14. By suspension of the action of consciousness, the mind too comes to 
forget and forsake its activity, and the sensations also being relaxed from their 
restlessness, pursue their discrimination and judgement. 


15. The discriminative and judging soul, becomes ennobled and 
magnanimous, and keeps its command over the feelings and senses; and is not 
impelled by the waves of its desires, to be tossed about on the surface of the 
wide ocean of this world. 


16. The man of well governed senses comes, by his association with the 
wise, and his constant study of religious works, to know all things in the 
world in their true light. 


17. All worldly errors are dispelled by the light of truth; or else one must 
fall into the pit of misery, by his mistake of falsehood for truth; as the ignorant 
traveller is ingulfed in the dreary sands, by his mistake of the mirage for 
water. 


18. Knowing this world as the unknowable intellect itself, that is the 
knowledge of the material world as the immaterial mind of God; is the true 
light in which the cosmos is viewed by the wise, who have neither the fear of 
their falling into the snare of error, nor require their release from it. 


19. As the dried up waters of a river, are seen no more to glide even 
slightly in their course; so the formless phenomenals of the world, never 
appear in the sight of the wise, nor leave their slightest vestiges behind in their 
mind. 


20. The knowledge of the world as an infinite void, and freed from the 
erroneous individualities of myself and thyself; leads to the knowledge of a 
supreme-self, which is apart from all, and the only ego that fills the whole. 


21. All this conception of our subjective egoism and the objective world, 
are but errors of our brain proceeding from ignorance; they are all situated in 
the void of Intellect, and are void of themselves; and all bodies are but empty 
shadows in air, and as quiet as quietus or nullity itself. 


22. This world appears as a shadow of the Intellect, in the vacuity of the 
very Intellect; it is a void amidst the void of the Intellect, which is certainly a 
void itself. 


23. Nobody can deny its similitude, to the shadowy sight in a dream; it is 
an unreal notion, and as unsubstantial as all notions can be, and as the notion 
of a void is void itself. 


24. This dream is no other than our consciousness of it, and the airy realms 


that it presents to our view for the time; so doth the Intellect show us the sight 
of the world, without any action or passion or instrumentality of itself. 


25. So I am of the substance of the very Intellect, which is without its 
activity, passivity and instrumentality; and the world being unassignable to 
any causality or instrumentality, subsists only in our simple conception of it. 


26. As the conception of one’s death in a dream, is no reality at all; and the 
sight of water in the mirage, is a visual deception only, (so the sight of the 
world appearing to view, is no real existence or entity at all). 


27. The vacuous intellect reflects its thoughts at first, in the clear mirror of 
its vacuity (or concavity); which is a mere hap-hazard of chance, and has no 
firm base or support, (nor any form or figure of itself). 


28. The world appears as fixed and firm, without its foundation anywhere; 
and seems to be shining brightly, with its darksome opacity; know then this 
fixity and this brightness of it, to be the diuturnity and glory of the eternal and 
glorious God. 


29. The vivacity of living beings, displays the spirit of the ever-living God; 
the air is his vacuity, and the running waters, show the vortiginous current of 
the eternal soul. 


30. As every member of the body is constituent part of the whole frame; so 
all the various parts of animated and inanimate nature, constitute the entirety 
of the one cosmical deity. (These are but parts of one undivided whole, whose 
body nature is and God the soul. — Pope). 


31. As the crystal mirror shows the shade of everything in itself, so doth the 
transparency of Divine soul, exhibit the reflexions of all things in it; the silent 
soul is as quiet as the mute crystal, but shows the varying scenes of nature, as 
interminably as a clear mirror reflects everything. 


32. There is no beginning or end of the supreme being, (nor of his acts and 
attributes, which are displayed in nature); it is the intermediate of the two that 
is dimly seen by us, the rest is all enveloped in ignorance, though there is no 
ignorance in the Omniscient. 


33. The living soul wakes from its sleeping dream, to fall back to its 
waking dream again; and thus, it continues for ever in its dreaming whether 
waking or sleeping which are both alike to it. 


34. The soul finds its rest only, while it remains in the fourth state of its 
sound sleep; or else it passes all along from dreaming to dreaming, in both its 
state of sleeping and waking, which continually haunt after it, unless it is 
drowned in its susupti or sound sleep of hynotism, the only resort of the wise. 


35. But waking and sleeping and dreaming and sound sleep, are all alike to 
the enlightened soul; which is equally indifferent in all states, and whether it is 
asleep or awake, is never infested by dreams nor set beside itself. 


36. The knowledge of unity or duality, and that of Ego and tu or the 
subjective and objective; never disturbs the enlightened; who views the whole 
as an empty void, and is alike insensible of all as well as null. 


37. The distinction of unity and duality, made in the meaningless speech of 
the unwise, is laughed at by the enlightened and wise, as the aged and 
intelligent men laugh to scorn, at the pranks and prattlings of young lads. 


38. The controversy of unity and duality, is of spontaneous growth in the 
heart like an indigenious plant; which without its pruning will not put forth its 
blossoms, to perfume the atmosphere of the understanding. 


39. The discussion of unity and duality, is as benificial to man as his best 
friend; in sweeping away the dirt and dross of ignorance from their minds, as 
they drive away the dust from within the doors of their houses. 


40. Then the minds of men are settled in the Divine Mind, when there 
ensues a mutual communion between themselves, and a communication and 
participation of their reciprocal joys and felicity with one another. 


41. These men being always joined together in their fellowship, and serving 
one another with the mutual delight and obligingness of their hearts; attain to 
that state of the enlightenment of their understandings, whereby they are 
admitted into their communion with the Most High. 


42. It is possible for a man to be benefited, even by his careful preservation 
of a trifle, (at some time or other); but it is never possible for anybody, to 
attain the most recondite knowledge of God, without his diligent inquiry into 
the same. 


43. Whatever highest position one may enjoy in this material world, is to be 
recognised by all as nothing, provided that one does not remain aloof from all 
kind of vices. 


44. What is that happiness which is gained by the possession of a kingdom, 
which at last is no better than mere botheration of the mind; while the mind 
that has gained its peace and tranquility in truth and Divine knowledge, spurns 
at the state of gods and kings as mere straws to him. 


45. The sleepy as well as the wakeful, are alike apt to see the visibles, and 
are rapt with the sight; but the saints that are calm and quiet and at rest with 
themselves, are averse to sight-seeing, and see the only one in themselves. 


46. Without painstaking, and your continued practice of contemplation, you 
cannot succeed to attain this state of infinite felicity; for know, this state of 
transcendent bliss, is the fruit of intense devotion only. 


47. Thus have I said at length, to impress in you the necessity of intense 
devotion; but to what good is all this, say the evil-minded to me, and thus 
slight and take no heed of all that I have been so long delivering unto you. 


48. It must be by means of steady attention to these lectures, and by long 
and repeated practice of devotion; as also by hearing these sermons and 
discoursing upon them that the ignorant can come to the right light of truth. 


49. He who having once read this spiritual work, slights it afterwards as 
already perused by him; and turns to the study of unspiritual books, is a vile 
wretch that collects the burnt ashes after the fire is extinguished. (Irreligious 
works are the ashes of the fiery religious ones). 


50. This excellent work is to be read always, like the recital of the vedas, 
which are embodied herein; and this is calculated to reward the labor of the 
student, by its being constantly read with reverence, and rightly explained 
with diligence. 


51. The student will learn from this Sdstra all that he expects to find in the 
vedas; because it embodies both the practical as well as spiritual doctrines of 
the sacred scriptures, and a knowledge of both of them, is available by proper 
perusal of this work. 


52. By learning this book, one may have a knowledge of the doctrines of 
the vedanta, tarka and siddhanta Sdstras, because this is the only work, that 
treats of the tenets of all schools. (Here, the word drishti is homonymous with 
darsana, which is rendered as a school of philosophy by Colebrooke). 


53. It is from my sympathy for you all, that I propound these doctrines to 


you; and by way of imposture, that I impose these lessons on your credulity. 
You are best judges of my discourse and can well detect, whether there is 
anything as deception in my prolusions. 


54. The knowledge that you may derive, by weighing well the instructions 
given in this great work; will serve you as salt, in order to season and relish 
the teachings of other Sdstras, that are at best but sundry dishes before it. 


55. The materialist who is conversant with the visibles, disparages this 
book for its occult teachings of spiritualism; but don’t you be the killer of 
your souls as to neglect your eternal salvation, in order to revisit this material 
world, and to be busied with your temporal affairs. 


56. Biased minds cling to the dogmas of exploded systems, and ignoble 
men drink the foul water of tanks, dug by their ancestors; you are reasoning 
men yourselves, therefore, do not remain forever fast bound to your 
ignorance. 


CHAPTER CLXIV. 
Unity of the Divinity and the Mundane World. 


Argument: — Intromission of the Living soul and all bodies, that is the 
subjective and objective into the Divine Essence. 


Vasishtha continued: — The atoms of living souls in the world, are as the 
particles of rays in the orb of the sun, (or as the sparks of fire in a furnace); 
and as all these parts taken collectively, make the one undivided whole; so 
there is no division of the unity of the Deity, throughout the whole creation. 


2. By attaining the transcendental knowledge of all being the One, and the 
One as all, everything loses its shape and form before us, and there remains 
nothing whatever as a distinct being or duality. 


3. The true believer or knower of truth, sees the self-same object in all 
states and forms of things; and this is the transcendent and translucent Brahma 
only, and nothing else whatsoever at any time. 


4. He is the same, that is known to the ignorant, as their objects of sense; 
but we do not recognize either ourselves or others, or the sensible objects of 
the ignorant as such. 


5. The belief of the ignorant man in the reality of himself, thyself and all 
others, does not affect the knower of truth, as the delusion of mirage never 
overtakes the man on Mount Meru; (where the deceptive sands of the deserts 
are wanting). 


6. As the man intent upon one object, has no consciousness of any other 
thing in his mind; so one enrapt at the sight of God alone, is conscious of 
nothing besides. 


7. There neither is nor was nor shall ever be, any such thing as the material 


world at any time; the world in esse is the image of Brahma himself, and 
abides in his spirit. 


8. The world is the splendour of the chrystalline vacuum of the Divine 
Intellect, and subsists in the vacuity of the supreme soul itself; it is in this light 
that the universe is seen in the dhydna Yoga or abstruse contemplation of the 
Yogi. 


9. As there is nothing in an empty dream or in the aerial castle of 
imagination except the clear atmosphere of the Intellect; so there is no essence 
or substance nor form or figure of this world, that we view in our present 
waking state. 


10. At first there was no creation of any kind, nor this world which appears 
to us (in its material form); it exists in its aerial form in the Divine Mind from 
all eternity; and there being no primary or secondary cause of it, how is it 
possible to call it a material thing of its own spontaneous growth. 


11. Therefore, there is nothing that sprang itself out of nothing at first, nor 
was there ever a creator called Brahma or other by the ignorant, in the 
beginning; there is nothing but an infinite void from eternity to eternity, which 
is filled by the self-born or increate spirit, whose intellect exhibits this 
creation, contained for ever and ever in its vacuity. 


CHAPTER CLXV. 
On the Similarity of Waking and Dreaming. 


Argument: — The steadiness of the Intellect in waking and Dreaming, 
which are alike to one another. 


Vasishtha continued: — In the state of waking dream, the dream passes 
under the name of waking; and in the state of dreaming wakefulness, this 
waking goes by the name of sleeping. 


Note. — Each of the three states of waking, dreaming and sound sleep, 
admit of three conditions, namely, waking wakefulness, waking dream, and 
the waking sound sleep; again, dreaming watchfulness, dreaming dream, and 
dreaming sleep; and lastly, the sleepy waking, the sleepy dream, and the 
sleepy sound sleep. (See the scholium of Sureshvara for instances of every 
kind). 


2. The dream terminates into waking, and the waking man rises from his 
dreaming, and falls back into it again; so one awakened from his dream like 
waking, falls afterwards to his waking dreams. 


3. The dream of the waking dreamer, is to be called a dream also, as the 
waking dream of this world; and so the waking (or consciousness) of the 
sleeping waker, is to be styled his waking state. 


4. Therefore, that wakefulness (or consciousness) of one, remains in his 
dreaming state, is to be called his waking likewise, and not his dreaming; so 
also the waking dream (of the existence of the world), and the imaginations of 
airy castles while one is waking, is to be designated his dreaming and never as 
his waking. 


5. Whatever lasts for a short while, as a temporary delusion or flight of 
imagination, passes under the name of a dream, even in one’s waking state; 


and so the short watchfulness of consciousness in the state of dreaming, is 
known as dreaming and never as waking. 


6. Therefore, there is no difference whatever, between the two states of 
waking and dreaming, beside the absence of one of these two in the other. 
(i.e., the absence of shortness in waking, and that of durability in the dream). 
Again, they are both unreal, owing to their blending with one another. (i.e., 
dreaming blended with the view of the phenomenals in waking; and the 
wakeful consciousness blending with dreaming). 


7. The waking dream of the world, vanishes under its unconsciousness in 
death; and the consciousness of dreaming is lost, under the knowledge of its 
being an airy nothing. (The world recedes as heaven opens to view. — Pope). 


8. The dying person that does not come to perceive the vanity of the 
visionary world at his death-bed, can have no sight of the state of his waking 
(or resurrection), in the next or future world. 


9. Whoever believing himself as alive, among the varying scenes of this 
vacuous world, lives content with them; he can never come to the sight of the 
visions, which await upon him. 


10. As the intellect displays its wonders, in the exhibitions of the various 
scenes of worlds, to the sight of one in his dream; so doth this universe appear 
before the minds of men, at the time of their waking. 


11. These creations which are so conspicuous to sight, are at best but 
nothing in their transcendental light and all the forms of things, are as the 
empty shadows of them appearing in our dreams. 


12. As the world with all its varieties of visible objects, appear in its inane 
and shadowy form in the dream; so it is seen in its vacuous and intellectual 
form only, in our waking state (although it seems to be tangible body). 


13. It is the nature of the vacuous Intellect, to show the form of the world in 
its own firmament; so doth this earth appear unto us, amidst the spacious 
atmosphere, like the orbs of light in the skies. 


14. It is the wondrous display of the Intellect, that shines before us under 
the name of universe; and these wonders are as inborn and innumerable in 
itself, as the watery and earthly particles, are connate with, and diffused 
throughout nature. 


15. What thing is there in it, which you can mistake for a reality in this 
unreal world; that is situated as a vacuous body in the infinite womb of 
vacuity. 


16. The words, recipient, receipt and reception, or the percipient, perceived 
and perception, (i.e., the subject, object and attribute), are all meaningless 
with regard to this vacuous world; and whether it is a reality or unreality, we 
have no perception of it. (Because the presence of everything is lost, at the 
absence of its properties, which are adscititious only). 


17. Whether it is so or not, or be it anything otherwise, (as others may have 
it); yet why should mistake it for anything at all, in whatever light you take it, 
it will amount to your mistake of an empty ball for a fruit. (so says the 
vedinta: — Wigsel Caeacdd UTS TM WAM Us ST AAA 
GPASCACAT HaeCAraATHTAS FET 1). 


CHAPTER CLXVI. 
On the Attributes of the Divine Spirit: In the form 
of a Dialogue. 


Argument: — Definition of supreme soul and its synonyms and its simile to 
a blue stone. 


Vasishtha continued: — The true sense of the word, soul or self, is to be 
understood from the title which is applied to it; and this title of the soul is 
borne out by the simile, of the solid and transparent blue stone. 


2. It is from the beginning of creation, that the vacuous soul is thus diffused 
in itself; and the reflexion which it casts in its own vacuity, the same passes 
under the name of this world or creation. 


3. There runs no river in it, nor there rises nor sinks any rock in the same; it 
is the mere vacuum subsisting in its infinite void, wherein the intellect reflects 
itself without any action or bidding or fiat of it. 


4. This reflexion of the Divine Intellect, was without its utterance of, 
“word,” and quite without its, “will,” or, “thought.” It was also without the 
appliance of any subsequent material (as matter), and this is the true sense of 
the word, soul or self. 


5. The soul itself is the whole world, which has no other expression for it; 
and being devoid of a name, it is expressible by no other name though they 
give many names to it. 


6. Its name being nameless, whatever appellation they put to it, is not 
opposite but inappropriate to it; what is the good therefore, of giving it a name 
or no name at all. 


7. Its namelessness or giving it a misnomer or improper expression, is all 
the same; since all what is visible, is no other than a display of the wondrous 
fabric of the Divine Mind. 


8. Whatever shines in any manner, in the empty space of the Divine mind 
at any time; the same shines forth even then and in that manner, as the rays of 
that Intellect (emanating therefrom, and concentrating into all other minds). 


9. It is denominated by one as soul, by another as, asat, and by some as 
nothing; all these are the mystery of intellect only, but in fact, all are the 
attributes of soul. 


10. The word itself conveys the meaning of self, — soul. It is without 
beginning and end, and no language can express it; in fact, it is an undivided 
whole. 


11. Now listen to a long narrative which hangs on this subject, and which 
will serve to gladden your hearts and ears, by removing the duality from your 
sight, and by enlightening your understanding (with knowledge of the unity). 


12. Know that there is a very large crystal stone, extending itself to 
thousands of leagues in space; and stretching like the solid cerulean fabric of 
the firmament, or as the blue sky all around us. 


13. It is all of a piece without any joining of parts in it, and is as dense and 
compact as the hard adamant; it is thick, big and bulky in its size, but at the 
same time as clear and far as the face of the sky. 


14. It continues from countless times, and endures to endless duration; and 
with its comely and pellucid body, it appears as the clear firmament, or the 
blank vacuum on high. 


15. No one ever knows its nature or genus, from his having never seen 
anything of the same kind, nor does anybody know from when and where, it 
hath come to existence. (All know it is, but none knows how and whence it 
is). 


16. It does not contain anything substantial, as the material elements within 
itself; and yet it is as dense and solidified in itself as a crystalline, and 
indissoluble as an adamant. 


17. Yet it is composed of innumerable streaks and strokes, which are 


embodied in itself; and these resemble the veins and fibres on lotus leaves, 
and the marks of conches, etc., in Hari’s feet. 


18. These marks are named as air, water, earth, fire and vacuum, though 
there are no such things to be found therein; except that the stone was 
possessed living soul, which it imparted to its marks. 


19. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how that stone of yours, could have life 
or sensibility in it; the stone is an insensible thing, and could not give names 
to the marks on its body. 


20. Vasishtha replied: — That immense and luminous stone, is neither a 
sentient nor an inert body; nobody knows its nature and state, and there is no 
other like it. 


21. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, who ever saw those marks, which are 
imprinted in the bosom of that stone; and how could anyone ever break that 
stone, in order to see its contents and its marks. 


22. Vasishtha replied: — It is hard to break this hard stone, nor has 
anybody been ever able to break it; by cause of its extending over infinite 
space, and encompassing all bodies within its bosom. (So says the sruti: — 
There is nothing but is encompassed by it, — the all-pervading soul). 


23. It is full of numberless spots in its spacious cavity; and these consist of 
the marks of mountains and trees, and of countries, towns and cities. 


24. There are also small and large dots in it, with any form or figure of 
them; but serve to represent the forms of men, and gods and demi-gods in 
them, as an outline shows the images of things. 


25. There is a long line drawn in it in the form of a circle, which represents 
the great circle of the visible sky or horizon; and this contains the two central 
points, signifying the sun and moon. 


26. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, who ever saw those marks of such forms; 
and how it is possible for anybody, to look into the cell of a solid or hollow 
ball. 


27. Vasishtha replied: — It is I, O Rama, that beheld those marks of 
different forms in that impenetrable block; and it is possible for you to look 
into it, if you will but like to do so. 


28. Rama said: — How could you Sir, look into those marks inside that 
solid stone, which you say, is as stiff as adamant, and incapable of being 
broken or perforated by any means. 


29. Vasishtha replied: — It was by means of my being seated, in the very 
heart of that stone; that I came to see those marks, as also to penetrate into 
their meanings. 


30. Who else is able to penetrate into that rigid stone beside myself, who 
have been able by my penetration, to pry and pierce into the mysteries of 
those hidden marks. 


31. Tell me Sir, what is that stone and what are you yourself; explain to me 
where you are and what you are speaking, and what are those things that you 
have seen and known to mean. 


32. Vasishtha replied: — It is the supreme soul, which is the sole entity and 
sober reality; and this is represented by figure of speech, as the great stone, of 
which I have been speaking to you. 


33. We are all situated in the cavity of this supreme spirit, and the three 
worlds form the flesh of this Great being, who is devoid of all substantiality. 


34. Know the spacious firmament to be a part of this solid rock, and the 
ever-flying winds as fragment of its body; the fleeting time and evanescent 
sounds together with all our varying actions and desires, and the imaginations 
of our minds, to be but the fugacious particles of its substance. 


35. The earth, air, water and fire, and the vacuum and understanding also, 
together with our egoism and sensibilities, are the portions and sections of its 
totality. 


36. We are all but bits and parcels of the great rock of the supreme soul, 
and everything whatever there is in existence, proceeds from that source, and 
we know of no other cause or causality whatsoever. 


37. This large stone is the great rock of Divine Intellect, and there is 
nothing whatever, which is beside and beyond its intelligence. Say then, if 
there be any such thing and what it bears. 


38. All things are but mere notions of them, as those of a pot or cot, a 
picture and all others; they appear in us as our dreams, and rise before us as 


the waves of water, (which are no other but water). 


39. It is all the substance of Brahma and the essence of the great Intellect, 
which fills and pervades the whole; know therefore, all these as one, with the 
substantiality of the Supreme spirit, and all as quiet and calm as itself. 


40. Thus, all this plenum is situated in the bosom of the great rock of the 
intellect; which is without its beginning, middle and end, and without any hole 
therein, or doorway thereto. Therefore, it is the Supreme soul only which 
contemplates in itself, and produces (as the object of its thought), this ideal 
creation of the universe (or the one converted into many), and which passes 
under the title of the visible or phenomenal world. 


CHAPTER CLXVII. 
Absence of the three fold states of Waking, 
dreaming and sleep. 


Argument: — Refutation of the four-fold Appellations of the World, and 
the three-fold states of the Living soul. 


Vasishtha continued: — The four titles, namely, the self-styled, the 
misnamed, the nameless, and the otherwise named, under which the world 
passes in their different senses; are all meaningless to the spiritualist; (who 
view the world in its spiritual light, and as self-same with the Supreme spirit, 
as it is related in the preceding chapter). 


2. These different words do not disturb the mind of the spiritualist, whose 
soul is at rest in the Supreme spirit, and who pays no regard to the use of 
words, (or terminology of theology). 


3. All these visibles rise from the Intellect only, and bear no names of their 
own; they are of the nature of pure vacuum, and appear unto us in their simple 
vacuous forms (as phantoms in the air). 


4. This is the soul, and this its title (that is giving a name to a nameless 
spiritual thing), is an erroneous conceit or coinage of the brain. The spirit 
admits of no expressions; therefore, take heed of no word, but mind its 
meaning. 


5. Whatever appears to be moving or staying or doing any action, is as 
calm and clear as the void air, and devoid of action as the Divine soul. 


6. All things, however sounding, are as silent as the still stone said before; 
and though they seem to be ever moving, they are ever as quiet as the void of 
the sky, and as still as the quiescent stone. 


7. Though all things appear to be acting in their various ways, yet they are 
as motionless as the unmoving vacuum; and though the world appears to be 
formed of the five elements, yet it is but a void and devoid of its quintessence. 


8. The world with its fulness of things, is but a congeries of your 
conceptions; it is full with the all-pervasive and pellucid Intellect, which 
shows the visions of great cities, like the vacant sights in our dream, (or as a 
dumb and shadowy show, without any sound or substance in it). 


9. It is full of action and motion, without any activity or mobility in it, like 
the passing city of our imagination; it is the air-built castle of our error, and as 
the fairy land in our dream. 


10. It is a false conception or notion of the mind, and as the fading shadow 
of a fairy; it is creation of our fancies, but altogether unsubstantial in its 
substantiality. 


11. Rama rejoined: — I ween this world as a waking dream, and 
reproduction of our remembrance of it; because it is reminiscence of the past 
only, that presents the absent to our view, and brings the outer objects to our 
knowledge. (Hence remembrance is the cause of resolving everything to our 
knowledge of them). 


12. Vasishtha replied: — No Rama, it is the reflexion which the glassy 
mirror of the Intellect, casts before us at any time, the same appears to us even 
then in its vacuous form; and there is no idea or thought of anything, that lays 
a firm hold on the mind, or has its foundation there. (Refutation of innate 
conceptions and prior reminiscence). 


13. Therefore, the phenomenon always belongs to the noumenon of the 
Supreme spirit; and the fluctuating phenomenals ever abide in it, as the 
undulating waves play in the calm waters of the sea. 


14. The uncaused world, exists of itself in the Supreme soul; and becomes 
extinct of itself, in the vacuity of the universal soul. 


15. The world is viewed in the same light by everyone, as it is reflected in 
himself, hence the ignorant are always in fault in having a wrong view of it; 
but not so the wise, who know it as nothing. 


16. Again, the lord god Brahma himself, has exhibited the lucid nature of 
his being, according to the four states or conditions, which are natural to the 


soul. 


17. These are the three states of waking, dreaming and sleep, together with 
a fourth called, — the turiya, or the state of sound sleep, and these names are 
applied to the soul by the Supreme soul itself. 


18. But in reality, none of these quadruple states belongs either to the 
Divine or the living soul, which is always tranquil, and which is of the nature 
of an indefinite void. 


19. Or it may be said in respect to the soul, that it is either always wakeful, 
or in its ever-dreaming state; or in a state of continuous rest and sleep. (The 
Divine soul never sleeps. — Sir W. Jones. The ever-wakeful eyes of Jove. — 
Homer). 


20. Or it is ever in its fourth state of turya, which is beyond all these triple 
states; but whether it is in this or that or what state, we know nothing of, being 
ourselves always in a state of disquiet and continued agitation. 


21. We know nothing of the inanity of the vacuous soul, as to whether it is 
as the chasm in the foam or froth, or whether it is as the air in a bubble or 
spray; or whether it is as the gap amidst waves of the sea or what it is at all. 


22. As a thing is known to be in its imagination, so it is impressed also in 
our conception of the same; and as anything appears either as real or unreal in 
the dream, we retain the like idea of it in our waking also. 


23. All this is the display of our consciousness, and whatever reflexion it 
exhibits unto us it is but an empty shadow in the hollow of the vacant mind, 
which resides in the vacuity of the vacuous intellect, that pervades the infinite 
vacuum of the soul. 


24. Consciousness is the pith and marrow of vacuous Intellect, and retains 
this form (of its quiddity) at all times; it neither rises nor sets, and this world 
is inherent in it. (i.e., it is subjective and derived from within). 


25. The creations on the beginning, and the dark nights of dissolution, are 
but parts of its body, and resemble its nails and hairs. (i.e., The light which 
was the first work of creation, likened the whiteness of its nails, and the 
darkness of the universal deluge, equalled the blackness of its hairs). 


26. Its appearance and disappearance, that is its clearness and dimness; are 


no other than as the breathing air of the great Intellect. (i.e., The exhaling and 
inhaling breaths of the Intellect, are causes of its expansion and contraction). 


27. Therefore, what means the waking, sleeping or dreaming of the soul, 
and what signifies the term sound sleep or the turiya of the soul (which is ever 
awake)? So the word volition and nolition are meaningless when applied to 
the soul, which is always composed and indifferent. (These attributes belong 
to the mind only). 


28. It is the inward consciousness, that exhibits its inner concepts as 
outward objects; how then is there a duality or anything objective, and what 
means this remembrance of extraneous matter. 


29. Therefore, all these that appear to our sight, are without their base or 
foundation; they are the reflexion of our consciousness in open air, which is 
wholly devoid of any material object. 


30. Though the external world is said to be a reality, it is because of its 
being a concept of the divine mind, out of which it has risen to view; and 
reminiscence is said to be its cause also, by reason of our remembrance of the 
first creation, which continue all along with us. 


31. But there is no outward object at all, owing to the absence of material 
elements; and the want of the five principles of matter, before and at the time 
of first creation. 


32. As there are no horns of hares, and no trees growing in the air, and as 
there is no son of a barren woman, nor a dark moon shining in the sky. 


33. So this visible world, and these personalities of ourselves; which are 
mere misrepresentations of our ignorance, are things invisible and inexistent 
in themselves, and are seen and known by ignorant only. 


34. To them, the world appears as an erroneous body, and our personalities 
and abstractions of persons; but there is nothing as fictile or abstract to the 
spiritualist, who view them all in one undivided whole, — the Divine spirit or 
soul. 


35. It is consciousness, the pith and marrow of the soul, that exposes all 
these concepts of it to light; and the manner in which it displays them to the 
imagination, so do they make their appearance to our sight. 


36. Whenever our misconception portrays its concept in a material form, or 
gives a name and form to an airy nothing; we come to see the same form in 
our imagination, in the empty void of our mind. 


37. The great Intellect has the appearance of the sky for itself, which in the 
ordinary use of language, is expressed by the word matter, as consisting of the 
four elements, and the endless void which is devoid of them. 


38. The unchanging and undecaying intellect, bears to itself the form of air 
only; which it conceives by mistake as the stable earth; just as imaginary men 
believe the air-built castle to a reality. 


39. The intellect being an incorporeal substance, has neither this form nor 
that nor of any kind at all; it has its pulsation and rest of itself, like the breath 
and stillness of winds in the air. 


40. As the intellect manifests itself in its own sphere in the two states of its 
volition and nolition, (or action or inaction); so the world seems to be in its 
states of motion and quiescence; which take place in the bosom of vacuum. 


41. As the sphere of the Intellect remains unchanged, at the rise and 
subsidence of its thought; so doth the sphere of air remain unvaried, with all 
the creation and its dissolution in its bosom. 


42. The world is always in the same unvaried state, whether you call it so 
or otherwise; and the seeming revolutions of bodies and succession of events, 
are well known to be nothing to the learned and wise, and not to others. 


43. Because the wise soul dwells in the hearts of all, which it views alike as 
its own self; but the ignorant soul is unconscious of its identity, from its sight 
of the outer world, and its knowledge of the difference of bodies from one 
another. 


44. What is there the interior or exterior of it, and that what is visible and 
invisible in it; all this is in the Lord whether active or quiescent, know all to 
be the om or on and rest quiet. 


45. There can be no reasoning, without an insight into the meanings of the 
significant terms and their significates; and it is consideration of both sides of 
the question that leads to our right judgment. Hence it is reasoning that leads 
us to truth, as the light guides us amidst the darkness of night. 


46. Therefore, drive off the multitudes of multifarious desires and doubts 
from your mind, by means of the clearness (light) of your understanding, 
(obtained by your habit of right reasoning), and also by your attention to the 
true interpretation of the Sdstras; and then rise and fly aloft to the higher 
region of light and truth, and attain the highest, best and most perfect state of 
Divine felicity and self-liberation. 


CHAPTER CLXVIII. 
Story of the Hewn statue or Carved Image. 


Argument: — The false and ignorant Attribution of creation, to the increate 
and self-manifest world. 


Vasishtha continued: — As the unconscious tree displays various forms in 
its branches; so doth the unconcerned spirit of God exhibit the airy semblance 
of creation in air. 


2. And as the ocean describes the whirlpools, insensibly upon its surface; 
so doth the spirit of God, exhibit this rotatory worlds unconcernedly, on the 
surface of its own vacuum, and as they are seen by all. 


3. The Lord gives also to the sensible part of his creation, their internal 
faculties of the mind, understanding and egoism, as also many other powers 
under different appellations. 


4. The phenomenal world is the production of the insensible Intellect, 
whose volitive faculties are as loose as the rolling eddies of rivers and seas. 


5. The mind and understanding and all mental faculties, proceed from the 
Divine Intellect; in the same manner as the whirlpools and eddies, and waves 
and surges rise on the surface of the sea. 


6. As a picture is nothing except its canvas, so the world which is no more 
than a painting, is drawn on the substratum of the intellect; and this is a 
vacuous substance, with the lustre of the world in it. 


7. What I have said before of the insensibility of the tree and sea, in the 
production of the branches and whirlpools by them; the same instance applies 
to Intellect also, which shows the creation rising in its vacuity, not by an act 
of its intention or will, but by ordinance of fate, which governs all things, (and 


rules over Jove himself). This is the doctrine of fatalism. 


8. And as a tree exhibits its various forms, receiving the several names of a 
plant, a shrub, a creeper, efc.; so doth the intellect display its many features, 
like its flowers, efc., and called by the different appellations of earth, air, 
water, etc. 


9. And as the branches and leaves of a tree, are not different from the tree 
itself; so the productions of the great Intellect, are no other than its very 
substance (or are essentially the same with itself). 


10. And as there are many things, made of the substance of a tree, bearing 
different names to themselves; so the productions of the Intellect, and the 
offspring of a living being, pass under several forms and appellations (of boy, 
girl, infant, adult and the like). 


11. The offshoots of the Intellect are all these creatures, which grow in and 
rise from the mind (of their own spontaniety); they appear to be the works of 
the mind as their cause, but are no better than the dreams (arising of 
themselves in the mind). 


12. Should you say, why these conceptions of creation rise in vain in the 
mind (if the creation is nothing in substance); I answer that they rise in the 
manner of dreams in the state of sleeping, which you cannot deny to enjoy. 
(The thoughts of creation, like those of imagination and the conception in our 
dreaming, are not unattended by a certain degree of delight, during the time of 
our enjoyment of them. — Gloss). 


13. As the tree displays various forms in the productions, and the 
imagination presents different shapes to our mental sights; so the intellect is 
employed in realizing many such creations in empty air. 


14. As the odours of flowers fly about invisible in the open air, and as 
pulsation abides inherent in the wind; so the intellectual powers, are intrinsic 
in the very nature of the soul. 


15. These creations likewise, are ingrained in the Divine spirit, as fragrance 
is inborn in flowers and vacuity is ingenite in the air; and as vacillation and 
velocity are innate in the winds. 


16. As the air, wind and the flower, are receptacle of inanity, oscillation and 
odours respectively; so the Intellect is container of creation, although it is 


literally but an empty vacuity. 


17. Vacuity is no other than vacuum itself, as fluidity is not separate from 
liquids; fragrance is as inseparable from flowers, as pulsation is never to be 
the disjoined from the wind. 


18. Heat is not disparate from fire, nor is coldness apart from snow; know 
thus the world to be no way different nor disengaged from the transparence of 
the vacuous Intellect. 


19. In the beginning, the Divine Intellect sees the creation appear in itself, 
as a dream rising in the mind; thus, the world having no extraneous cause, and 
being subjective to the Intellect (as derived from within itself); is no way a 
heterogeneous mass or different from the Divine mind. 


20. The instance of the dream is the best illustration of creation, and you 
can judge it well by the nature of the dream you dream every night; say what 
is there substantial in it, beside its being essential to the universal soul. 


21. The dream is not the effect of any impression in the mind, nor the result 
of remembrances stored in the memory; because it shows us many sights, 
unseen and unthought of before; say therefore, how these come to pass. 


22. If what is seen in a dream, comes to present itself at the time of our 
remembrance of the dream? 


23. Therefore, these revolving worlds are as the rotatory whirlpools (in the 
wide ocean of the infinite mind); they are the fortuitous appearances of 
chance, and whatever occurs in the mind, passes afterwards for its dreams. 


24. The creations being insensibly produced from the Divine Mind, like the 
waves and whirlpools in the ocean; receives its stability and continuity 
afterwards, in the manner of the continuation of the whirling waters and ever 
rolling billows. 


25. Whatever is born without its cause, is equal to the unborn; because the 
unborn are forever similar to those, which have no cause for their birth. 


26. As the precious gems growing insensibly of themselves, have their 
lustre inherent in them; and as this brilliance is no substance or anything real 
at all, so the appearance of the world has no substantiality of itself. 


27. Somehow or other, the world has its rise, like the wave or eddy in a 
river; and then it continues to go on as the continuous course of the stream. 


28. There are numberless worlds of intellectual forms, gliding in the vast 
vacuity of the Intellect; and passing as aerial dreams without any cause 
whatsoever. 


29. All these again become causes and productive of others, and they are all 
of vacuous forms, including even the great Brahma and the gods and angels 
(all of whom are aerial beings, and others of the same kind). 


30. All that is born in and produced from void, are null and void also; they 
grow in the void or air, and return also into vacuity. 


31. It is the vacuum that appears as the plenum, as in the instance of an 
empty dream seeming as something; the man that denies his own percipience 
of it, is no better than a boor or brute. 


32. The unreal appearing as real, is the fabrication of error and ignorance; 
but the spiritualist who knows the truth, views the world as the wondrous 
display of the Divine Mind and falsification. 


33. It is the longstanding and deep-rooted prejudice, that produces the 
erroneous conceptions of the creation and destruction of the world; it is 
wisdom to know it in its true light, and foolishness to take the wrong view of 
it. 


34. The light of the Divine spirit, being once seen in this causeless void of 
the visible world, it continues for ever before our sight; as the dream that we 
see in our vacant minds in sleep, remains ever afterwards in our remembrance. 


35. It happens that the intellect comes to present, the adventitious 
appearance of the world to our minds; in the same manner, as the sea shows 
its whirls and waves to our sight, of its own nature. 


36. Such is the nature of the Intellect also, that it shows itself in this manner 
(as the sea); and exhibits the revolving worlds, in its own ethereal essence 
only (of its own accord). 


37. Then the aerial Intellect, by a retrospective view in itself, invented 
certain worlds afterwards, significant of the mental and intellectual powers as 
well as of material elements and their properties. 


38. Rama said: — If it is so Sir, that all these powers are the spontaneous 
growth of chance, how can the mental power of memory be produced on a 
sudden, when it is well known to be the product of remembrance or former 
impressions in the mind. Please explain me this. 


39. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me Rama, and I will destroy your doubt, as 
the lion kills an elephant; and will establish the one invariable unity as the 
broad day light of the sun. 


40. There is an only universal soul, that is invisible amidst the vacuum of 
his Intellect; as the uncarved doll remains unseen, in the wood of every forest 
tree. (All things are contained in the Divine soul, as the future images in 
blocks of wood and stone. — Aristotle, Addison). 


41. We see the carpenter that carves out the puppet, from the wood of the 
tree, (and the mason who hues out the statue from the block of stone); but we 
know not the soul, which chisels out the figure of the world from the great 
bulk of Instinct. 


42. The statue does not appear in the rugged block, unless and until it is 
hewn out by the skill of carver, so the hidden world does not make its 
appearance in the Intellect, till it is brought to view by the ingenuity of the 
Mind, (the universal architect). 


43. The uncarved body of the world, (Corpus-mundi), does yet appear in its 
aeriform state; which is original and genuine form in the Divine Intellect, 
(until it is moulded in this its fictitious shape by creative mind). 


44. In the beginning of creation, the inventive Intellect forms of its natural 
originality, the concept of the future world; appearing as an airy dream in the 
sight of the soul, (and then the imaginative mind frames it according to its 
conceit in various forms). 


45. The vacuous Intellect conceives in its empty bosom, the airy ideal of 
the world; as if it were a toy or doll gliding of itself in itself. 


46. It conceives itself as the essential part of the great Brahma, and the seed 
of the mundane system; and then imagines itself as the source of life and the 
living soul, and the receptacle of egoism. 


47. It imagines itself as the understanding and the mind also; and to be the 
reservoir of space and time. It deems itself as the root of the knowledge of I, 


thou, he, and others, and as the quintessence of the quintuple elements. 


48. It sees in itself the congeries of the inward and outward senses, as also 
of the eight faculties of the mind; and both the spiritual as well as the 
elemental bodies contained in itself. 


49. It thinks itself as the great trinity, consisting of the three persons of 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva; and sees the sun, moon and stars all in itself. It 
considers itself as the whole creation and the interior and exterior part of 
everything. 


50. All these being the imaginary creations of the Intellect; there is nothing 
whatever beside itself; but it is quite transparent in its essence, there is no 
concrete matter in it; and neither remembrance of gross materials is ever 
attached to it, nor any duality whatsoever subsisting in the unity of its nature. 


51. The world is a causeless, uncaused and increate thing; and a nothing at 
all in reality; its creation is a dream, and its appearance, is as that of a delusive 
shadow in empty air. 


52. It appears as a phantom in vacuum, and as an intelligence in the 
Intellect; it is intelligible as it is, and that is in the sense of a nihility. 


53. What is the remembrance of a thing, any more than the dream of 
something, which is nothing in reality; and what is time of which we have no 
conception, except it be an imagination or devise of the mind in empty air. 


54. What is contained in the inside of the compact intellect, the very same 
appears on the outside of it; but in reality, there is no substantiality in the 
exterior object of sight, as there is naught in the interior object of thought; all 
which are but the glitterings of the Intellect. 


55. Whatever issues out of the bodiless and nameless something, which is 
forever quiescent and calm in its nature; are deemed as causeless and 
uncaused productions, appearing before the blinded sight. 


56. Know therefore, that this world is to be viewed in the same intellectual 
light; as you see the supreme Brahma himself; and know it to be the very 
aerial castle of your dream, as it is represented in the vacuous space of your 
mind in your sleeping state. 


57. There is no such thing as the visible or phenomenal world at any time; 


where can you find any dust on the watery surface of the sea; and how can 
you see anything visible, in the invisible spirit of Brahma. 


58. If the world should appear as anything at all to your sight, you must 
view it as the manifestation of God himself, in his unthinkable and 
incomprehensible nature. (Nature is the body of God). 


59. The world is full of the glory of God, from the fullness of Divine glory; 
nor is the one derived from the other; but a full representation of Divine 
splendour on the face of nature. 


60. Though I have been repeatedly giving these lectures, yet the deluded 
minds of men are far from receiving them; they believe the world of their 
dream as if it were in waking, and knowing even its unreality they will never 
get rid of their rooted prejudice. 


CHAPTER CLXIX. 
Description of the calm and tranquil Mind. 


Argument: — Character of the unexcited and self-liberated man and his 
happiness in Life. 


Vasishtha continued: — He who is neither delighted with his delights, nor 
dejected in his distress; who looks only within himself for his peace and 
solace, is verily called the liberated man in his life time. 


2. He is called the self-liberated man, whose mind is not moved from its 
steadiness in solid rock of intellectuality, towards the worldly enjoyments that 
are spread before him, (and which are ever attractive of unrestrained minds). 


3. That is called the liberated soul, which reclines in its intellectuality, and 
has its mind ever fixed in it; which delights in intellectual culture, and has 
repose therein. 


4. He is verily styled the liberated soul, who reposes in the supreme soul; 
whose mind does not slide from divine contemplation, nor takes any delight in 
visible objects all around. 


5. Rama said: — Sir, I ween the man that feels no pain in pain, nor derives 
any pleasure from what is pleasurable, and is entire insensible of both, to be a 
mere block, and devoid both his senses and sensibility. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — We call him the self-reposed, who rests in his 
vacuous intellect only; and whose soul derives a spontaneous delight from the 
purity of his understanding, such as it finds in nothing and nowhere besides. 


7. He is said to have his rest in the supreme soul, whose mind is cleansed of 
its doubts in all things; and who has obtained by means of his discrimination, 
the true and certain knowledge of everything. (So says the sruti: — No doubts 


disturb the mind of one, whose soul confides and has found its rest in God). 


8. He is said to rest and have his repose in God, who takes no delight in any 
earthly thing whatever; and though he is outwardly employed in discharging 
the duties of his life, yet his soul is fixed in his god. 


9. He is known to have his quiescence, whose activities are all without any 
aim or expectation; and he goes on and lives content, with whatever he gets 
and offers itself to his lot. 


10. He alone is happy and successful, in this world of woe and misery; who 
in his long restless, helpless and tedious journey in it, has found his repose in 
the supreme spirit, by means of his intellectual improvements. 


11. They who after running their long race, in the active course of worldly 
life; have come at last to set themselves at ease and quiet, at the latter end of 
their lives, are as men that appear to fall fast asleep, and enjoy their repose 
after the vexatious dreams of their busy days. 


12. They shine and pass as brightly, in the open sphere of their intellects, as 
the glorious sun rises in the sky, and runs his daily course without stopping 
anywhere. 


13. Good people seem to be sleepy in their minds, though they are seen to 
be wakeful and employed in business with their bodies; they remain as 
inactive as any inert body, though they are never dormant in their souls 
(which are ever awake to their eternal concerns). 


14. They who lie asleep on their beds, and are drowned in their reveries and 
dreams; are said and believed to be sleeping; though they are not insensible of 
the workings of their minds. 


15. When the tired traveller, halts after his long and wearisome journey, 
and ceases to utter a word owing to his hard breathing, such dumbness does 
not bespeak his dead silence or torpidity. 


16. The man of transcendent knowledge, and perfect peace and tranquility 
of his mind and soul; remains as blind to the splendours of day as the purblind 
owl, and as quiet as anybody in the darkness of night, when the whole 
creation sleeps in the gloom of ignorance and unconsciousness. 


17. That man is happy, who sleeps over the varied scenes of this visible 


world, and does not sights of woe, which it presents to view at the time of 
waking. (The gloss quotes a corresponding passage from the Bhagavad Gita). 


18. He who pays no regard to ceremonial rites, and remains sincere to the 
welfare of his soul; such a man is said to be self-satisfied, from his 
communion with himself, and is never, O Rama, deemed as dead himself. 


19. He who has passed over the miseries of this world, and got to the other 
side of it, (next world); remains supremely blest in himself, by his sense of 
heavenly bliss in his inward soul. 


20. He who is fatigued with his long and tiresome journey in this world, 
and is ever deluded by four senses and sensible objects; gets weary of and 
cloyed with his enjoyments in life, and meets with the spectres of despair at 
the end. 


21. Being overtaken by hoary old age, he is battered and shattered by the 
hoar-frost of diseases; and then like the old and worn-out antelope, he wishes 
in vain to traverse his native forests and plains. 


22. Forsaken by the supreme soul, the sole and faithful guide in our journey 
through life; we are exposed to the intricate maze of thorns and thickets, till 
the weary traveller is at a loss of the shady grove whereto take his rest. 


23. Here we are robbed of our passport and passage money, by the highway 
men of our sins and sensualities; till we are overcome by our weakness, and 
exposed to numberless dangers and difficulties on the way. 


24. He that is possessed of his soul by means of his spiritual knowledge, 
gets over the ocean of the world to the spiritual regions; where he rests calmly 
in the bedstead of his spirit, and without the bedding of his body. 


25. The man who moves about, without any aim or attempt of himself and 
without his dream and sound sleep; whose mind is ever wakeful and whose 
eyes are never closed in sleep, such a man sleeps softly in the lap of his soul. 


26. As a horse of real breed, sleeps in his standing as well as running; so 
the self-possessed person sleeps in himself, even though he is employed in the 
acts of life among mankind. 


27. How very sound and profound, is the trance or reverie of the 
philosophic mind, that it is not disturbed, even at the crackling of thunders or 


cracking of volcanoes. 


28. How exquisite is the ecstasy of the right discerner of truth, who sees all 
within himself, which the external observer with his open eyes, finds as lying 
afar without himself. 


29. The man who with his open eyes, sees the world disappear from his 
sight; is giddy with his ecstatic views, and not with ebriety liquor. (He sleeps 
calmly in the trance of ecstacy). 


30. Ah! how happily he sleeps in his reverie, whose soul is satiate and at 
rest, after it has swallowed the visible world in itself, and drank the ambrosial 
draught of self-satisfaction. 


31. How happily doth the self-possessed man sleep in his soliety, who is 
ever joyous without any joy or anything to enjoy; who is joyful in enjoying 
the everlasting felicity of unity, and who sees effulgent light of his inward 
spirit, without any mortal thing on the outside. 


32. Happy is the self-possessed soul, which is blind to the objects of 
common desire, and rejoices in the blaze of transcendent light in itself; which 
delights in subtle and spiritual joys, as much as others luxuriates in their solid 
food and gross enjoyments. 


33. Happily sleeps the spiritual man, with the inward peace of his mind; 
who shuts his eyes against the outer world, which abounds only in sights of 
woe, and restlessness of the giddy mob. 


34. The self-possessed rest in perfect peace of their minds, who bemean 
themselves as the meanest of the mean in their outer demeanour; but deem 
themselves as the greatest of the great in the greatness of their souls; they 
have their repose in the lap of the vast void of their selves. 


35. The spiritualist sleeps happily in the universal soul, with its body 
resting in its vast vacuity; which contains an infinity of worlds in every atom 
of it. 


36. The spiritualist rests perfectly blest in Supreme Spirit, which is full of 
ineffable light, and in which he sees the repeated creation and dissolution of 
the world, without being destroyed himself. 


37. Blest is the godly man, that seeing the world as a dream in his sleep, 


rests in the Spirit of his god, where he sees everything as clear as day light, 
and as bright as open sky. 


38. How blest is the psychist with his musings, who contemplates on the 
essences of all substances, and engrosses the entity of whole nature in 
himself; and whose comprehensive mind grasps the cosmos in itself, as the 
vacuity of the sky, comprehends the whole universe within its ample womb. 


39. How happily does the self-communing sage, sleep in his abstract 
contemplation of the clear and bright heavens in himself; and who views the 
whole universe in the light of the clear firmament, resounding with the sound 
of his own breathings or snoring. 


40. How happily doth the self-communist, rest in the depth of his inmost 
thoughts; who finds himself as null and void, as the infinite vacuum itself, and 
views the universe hovering as a dream, in a corner of that vacuity. 


41. How cheerfully does the self-musing sage, lie down in his humble 
bedstead, which he finds as a matting made of straws, swept before him by the 
tide of time, and the current contented circumstances. 


42. The sage, who by his diligent self-consultation, has come to know the 
true nature of himself, (i.e., of his soul); lives in his lifetime as in the state of 
dreaming, and deems as an aerial figure of his dream subsisting in empty air. 


43. The sage who by his diligent self-cogitation, has come to the 
knowledge of his own vacuousness; comes to the same knowledge of all 
nature at large, till at last he comes to reduce and assimilate himself to 
vacuity. 


44. The waking man falls to sleep, and the sleeping person rises to wake 
again, and in this manner they pass their time in endless turns; but the sound 
sleeper alone is ever wakeful to his true friend of spirituality (because sound 
sleep is one’s absorption in the quiet of Divine Spirit). 


45. He who having passed his days in this life, in company with his best 
friend of self-liberation Givan mukti) in his lifetime; comes to enjoy the sweet 
companionship of that friend (amurta-mukti), in his future life for a long 
period of time, he is verily entitled to his perpetual rest and everlasting bliss, 
in the list of the Divinity itself forever. 


CHAPTER CLXX. 
On The Conduct of the Sapient Man. 


Argument: — Our acts are our best friends and relatives; their virtues and 
the enjoyments of their fellowship. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, who is that friend with whom he lives, and what 
is the nature of this enjoyments, whether it is subjective or objective, that is 
whether derived from within oneself, or from external objects. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — Our own conduct alone is our only true friend, 
whether it is ingenite in our nature, or derived by our extrinsic training and 
education from others. (The two words svaprabdha and swaprdya in the text, 
are explained in the gloss as sahaja, — innate and abhyasta or learnt.) 


3. Our inborn good conduct is as infallibly and friendly to us, as the natural 
beneficence of our parents; and our extraneous good behaviour, is as 
overruling upon us, as the controul and restraints by a faithful wife in the 
intricate maze of life. 


4. A fearless course of life, and a well-earned livelihood, and a well- 
regulated mode of living; together with a dispassionate temper and coolness 
of mind, are replete with unrestricted and ambrosial sweets. 


5. An unblemished life acquired from early youth, is able to save a person 
from all dangers and difficulties in the world, and render him confidential for 
every trust, and a repository of all wealth and treasures. 


6. It is able to preserve men from all evils, as a father prevents his boys 
from daubing their bodies with dust and dirt; and hinder them from all acts of 
wickedness. 


7. Such a life gives a man the fervour of fire, and the sweet of flowers; it 


adds a clearness to his mind and countenance, as the sunlight brightens the 
face of the day. 


8. It supports a man as the father feeds and fondles his child, and protects 
him from every accident, as the father is ever ready to shield his children from 
all harm. 


9. As fire purifies the body of gold from alloy, and separates the gross that 
is to be rejected; so does it show the good qualities, from whatever is to be 
shunned and avoided. 


10. It gladdens the hearts of men with polite speech, which is policed from 
rusticity; and is a repository of all laudable pursuits, as a treasury is full of 
money-bags and precious gems. 


11. As the sun never shows darkness to view, so the good man never 
exposes his dark side to sight; as the loving wife shows only her affection to 
her beloved, so does he show his tenderness only to people. 


12. He speaks and behaves kindly with all men, and doth them good only; 
and his words are always sweet and cooling, and without interested or selfish 
view. 


13. He is the well-wisher of men, and is therefore, revered by them all; he 
speaks smilingly to all without any craving of his own, and bears the form of 
goodness only to all beings. 


14. Should he happen to meet an enemy in a contest, who is ready to strike 
the first blow on him; he tries to evade it by eluding his opponent by some 
artifice or sleight of art or skill. 


15. He is the patron of gentle and polite men, and protector of women and 
his family; and is as the nectarious physic to the souls, of all those that ailing 
under sickness and sick-heartedness. 


16. He is particularly a patron of learning, and patronizer of the learned; he 
is a servitor of venerable men, and a favourer of the eloquent and 
argumentative. He is a compeer and alter ego to his equals in births and 
breeding. 


17. He conciliates the favour of princes, noblemen and the liberal towards 
him; and in conducting all sacrifices, acts of charities, austerities of devotion 


and pilgrimages, by contribution of his honest means. 


18. He partakes of his good food and drink, in company with his friends 
and Brahmans; and joining with his wife and children, and all the dependents 
and inmates of his family, (i.e., he never eats alone), and he never keeps 
company, save with the good and great. 


19. He abstains from all enjoyments, deeming them as straws and causes of 
disease; and indulging himself in conversing upon good subjects, with his 
view to the edification and beatification of mankind. 


20. In this manner he passes his time in company with his friends and 
family; he is content with his own state, and glad at what fortune has provided 
for him, (i.e., his own lot and profession). 


21. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, in short, who are his wives and children 
and his friends also; what are their different forms, and what are the qualities 
and virtues they are respectively possessed of. 


22. Wasishtha replied: — Sacred ablutions and charities, religious 
austerities and meditation are his so many sons; that are all of great souls, and 
entirely devoted to him. 


23. His wife is named Chandra-lekha, who is like a digit of the moon in her 
appearance, and whose very sight delights the eyes; she is his constant 
companion, always loving to him and content in herself. 


24. She is the ravisher of his heart, and dispeller of the gloom of his mind, 
by reason of her loving kindness to him; she is the delight and delighter of his 
soul, and is ever a faithful helpmate unto him. 


25. He has another consort by name of Samata, (i.e., of the same mind) 
with herself; who is dear to his heart, and keeps at the door to his house, and 
pleases him by her very appearance. 


26. She fixes her mind always, at the mansions of virtue and patience; and 
runs before and guides the steps of her emburdened lord, to the abode of the 
blessed and felicitous. 


27. That strong man has another wife named Maitri or friendship, whom he 
bears along with Samata on his either shoulder; and who advises him how to 
quell the enemies of his king’s states (in royal service). 


28. She is his clever counsellor in all honourable acts, and gave proof of the 
veracity of her advices; by augmenting his wealth and rendering him 
honourable before all. 


29. Being thus employed in the discharge of his duties, in the circle of his 
friends, family and advisers, the sapient man is always pleased in himself, and 
never frets nor grumbles at any person or anything whatever. 


30. The wise man ever remains as he is, silent and sedate in his mind; he 
remains always as unmoved as a picture in painting; though he may be 
moving about in the ordinary affairs of life. 


31. He remains as dumb as a stone in fruitless discussions; and feigns 
himself as a deaf man in useless conversation. 


32. He continues as a dead body, in acts which are against the social usage; 
but in conversations regarding polity and good manners, he is as eloquent as 
the wise Brihaspati, and as fluent as the snake Vasuki (with its hundred 
tongues). 


33. When engaged in some righteous discourse, he exposes the fallacy of 
sophistical reasoners; and clears all doubts in a moment, by the versatility of 
his conversation on various subjects all at once. 


34. He is tolerant and magnanimous, bounteous and charitable; he is pliant 
and gentle, sweet in his speech and handsome in his look, and famed for his 
pious acts. 


35. Such is the character of enlightened men of their own nature, and no 
practice nor education can ever make any one as such; as the sun and moon 
and fire are bright by themselves, and there is none and nothing else, that can 
ever make them shine. 


CHAPTER CLXXI. 
Meditation of Pure Vacuum. 


Argument: — On the nihility of the Phenomenal, and substantiality of the 
Noumenal vacuum. 


Vasishtha resumed, and said: — It is the manifestation of our vacuous 
consciousness, that exhibits the phenomenal world unto us; whereas there is in 
reality no such thing as this world, or its appearance, or a vacuum in nature or 
a thing as consciousness in ourselves. 


2. Whatever is apparent before us, is the manifestation of the Intellect, and 
vainly styled the world; just as the open air called the sky, is no other than the 
air itself. (So the vacuum known as the world, is not otherwise than the very 
vacuum). 


3. As a man going from one place to another, sees a gap and blank 
between; and yet thinks of the place he has seen and left behind, so is the 
world a mere gap and thought of the mind. 


4. Before creation there was nothing, how then could this something appear 
from that nothing; the latter having no material cause, is no material or visible 
thing. (Ex nihilo nihil fit. So, the sruti: — sat eva asit, na kinchit idam agra 
asit). 


5. Then there was not an atom, — the origin of the world in existence; how 
then and from where, could this revolving world, have its rise and form? 


6. Therefore, this formal and visible world, could not have sprung from it, 
as no child could ever be born of a barren woman. Hence, there is nothing as 
the visible world, and the conception thereof must be entirely false, (as that of 
a ghost or goblin). 


7. Whatever then appears as visibly present before us, is only the blank 
vacuity of the Intellect; and this is the transcendental state, in which the 
supreme unity appears unto us (according to the doctrine of Srutis). 


8. As it is in depth of our sound sleep, there appears a fleeting dream before 
us; so it is with the supreme Intellect, which never forsakes the serene and 
unalterable tranquility of its divine nature. 


9. But exists of itself in itself, and in its calm and quiet state, ever before 
the appearance of creation; and manifests intellectual vacuity, in the form of 
the visible world, as it appears unto us. 


10. As the idle thoughts of the mind, present themselves as airy castles in 
our sleep; so doth the vacuum of the supreme Intellect, exhibit the appearance 
of the creation in its own empty space. 


11. As the empty air evolves itself, in the manner of whirlwinds in itself; so 
does the intellectual vacuum exhibit the phenomenal world, subsisting in its 
very self (in the noumenon). 


12. Hence the three worlds that appear so visibly to our view, are quite 
unintelligible and unexposed to our sight in their very nature; it is the 
Supreme Deity itself, that appears in this manner of its subsistence in its own 
vacuous substance. 


13. There is nothing as the formal earth, or anything whatever at any time; 
or be it anything either formal or formless, (i.e., whether as plastic nature or 
subtle air or spirit, or whatsoever you may choose to call it; it is the Great 
Deity alone, that manifests itself in this manner). 


14. As the formless mountain appearing in dream, disappears in air upon 
waking; and as the visible world in waking becomes invisible in sleep, so does 
the triple world appear and disappear by turns, in the transparent and tranquil 
intellect only. 


15. To the watchful and enlightened mind, the world appears as identic 
with God; but however intelligent we may be, can never know that we are all 
along sleeping in our waking. 


16. As the mind is unoccupied with any object, in the interim of one’s 
journey from one place to another; so the minds of all livings beings, are 
naturally unoccupied with any preconceived idea; and this blankness is the 


true state of the intellect. (This passage contradicts the doctrine of innate ideas 
in the mind). 


17. That unemployed state of mind, which one has in the interval of his 
journey from place to place, is what bears the name of transcendent void, 
wherein all existence is contained. (This passage is opposed to the preceding 
one. To say the intellect to be a perfect void and blank, and again the 
container of all, is quite contradictory). 


18. Now this void of the mind, and the vacuity of the world, are similar to 
one another as regards the similarity of their contents; as neither of them 
contains anything besides the principles of the five elements, either in their 
ideal or gross forms of elemental bodies, called as the real and unreal ones. 
(Sadasaddtmaka). 


19. The ideal or unreal ones, are the inward conceptions of the mind, and 
are called as manaskdras; while the real or gross forms of them, are styled the 
rupalokas or visible objects, and both of these are but different modes of 
divine essence. All of them are like the eddies and waves, rising on the 
surface of the infinite ocean of the Deity. 


20. Hence, there is no such thing as the objectivity of the world, except that 
it be of the nature of that vacancy of the mind, as a traveller has in the interim 
of his journey from one place to another. 


21. As the rising and setting of the passions and affections in the mind, are 
mere modes of it; so the being and not being of anything, and the presence 
and absence of the world, are mere modalities of the Divine Mind. 


22. The chasm that there is between one thought and another, is truly 
characteristic of the voidness of the Divine Mind, (which reposes forever, in 
its everlasting and tranquil intellectual felicity, sachchidananda); the visible 
world is but a wave in the ocean of Eternity, or as the mirage in a sandy 
desert. 


23. The Divine spirit never changes from its state of calm repose, and 
vacant mindedness, as that of a traveller in the interval of his journey from 
one place to another. Such is the state of this world which is ever calm and 
quiet. 


24. From the beginning, or since the time of the first creation of the world, 
nothing was made, that seems to be made; it is only a magic show that appears 


so palpably to sight. 


25. Alas! all this is nothing, that is so bright to sight; and yet it is something 
right, when viewed in the light of Brahma himself; and then it affords us fresh 
delight. 


26. Ah! where shall I go, and what can I get from this ungodly world, 
which is ever prone to unrighteousness; it is an unsubstantial sight, and passes 
for substantial, and yet nobody understands that it is Brahma the very god, 
that exhibits himself in this mode and manner. 


27. It is no production nor reflexion, neither the archetype nor its ectype; 
what then are these phenomenals, and how and from where? All these that 
appear to view, are of the vacuity of Brahma, who exhibits himself in this 
manner (in all shapes). 


28. As a gem shines itself of its own lustre, and not derived from without; 
so does the vacuous Intellect shine of its own splendour, shown forth in the 
creation, which is self-same with itself. 


29. It is in that calm and quiet vacuity, that this sun shines with all his 
glory; or rather a spot of that vacuum shines in the shape of the sun, which is 
but a modicum or molecule of it, and nothing beside. 


30. Though situated therein, yet neither does the sun nor the moon shine of 
itself; it is that God that illumes those luminaries, neither of whom can 
illumine that transcendent Being the supreme Lord unto us. 


31. It is his lustre, that enlightens this visible (the mundane) sphere; and it 
is he alone that is the enlightener of the sun, moon, and stars and fire as also 
of all other shining bodies, that shine with their borrowed light from him. 


32. Whether He is formless or fictile, bodiless or embodied, is the verbal 
disquisition of the ignorant only at all times; whereas it is well known to the 
learned, that any supposititious form of Him, is as unreal as the potentiality of 
a sky flower growing in empty air. (Here are dkds-latas, — sky-plants or 
orchids in air, but no dkds-pushpa or sky-flower, which must grow on the 
plant and not in the air.) 


33. As a ray of sunbeams, a particle of sand or sunstone, shine brightly in 
sunshine; but the sun and moon also do not shine even as conspicuously as 
those particles, before the great glory of their Maker. (The sun is a grain of 


sand, and the moon a molecule, before the glory of the Great God). 


34. The shining sun, moon, and stars being but offshoots, of the flaming 
gem of the vacuous Intellect of the Deity; say how can they be otherwise than 
flashes of the same gem, from which they are emitted. (The flash is not 
separate from the gem). 


35. The divine state or hypostasis being divested of intellectuality, and 
being devoid of its voidness also, becomes deprived of its essentiality, as also 
destitute of all quality; being thus drained of all its properties and attributes, it 
becomes full of the plenum and totally of all existences. 


36. The earth and all elemental bodies reside in it, in a manner as they are 
absent therein, and all living beings living by it, do not abide in the same. (All 
these opposites meet in its nature). 


37. All things combine therein in unity, and in their atomic forms, without 
forsaking their grossness without; while the Divine never forsakes its 
uniformity, without any mixture of duality in its pure entity of unity. 


38. Anything here is nothing, nor is anything a nothing altogether; 
therefore, it is too difficult to say, what thing it is and what not. (The nature of 
God is inscrutable). 


39. There is one thing which is infinite, and without any intersection, and is 
ever extended in everywhere; and this is the essence of the vacuous intellect, 
containing the germ and gist of the universe in itself. 


40. As the mind is vacant and still, in the interim of its passing from one 
thought to another; such is the nature and form of the world, (i.e., of a quiet 
void), although it appears so variegated to view. 


41. Though it appears to be multifarious, yet it is the uniform intellect only, 
which extends invariably over all vacuity; and sees as in its dream, the forms 
of the five elemental bodies hovering about it. 


42. As the intellect passes from its rest of sleep, to the sights in its dream; 
so it passes from the state of pralaya or the void of universal desolation to the 
commotion of creation. (The sleeping and waking of the soul causing the 
extinction and resuscitation of the world. — Manu). 


43. As sleep and dream recur to every soul, so the extinction and 


renovation of the world, occur to all alike; so also is waking akin to the turiya, 
or enlightened state of the soul; hence the world is no other than a 
phenomenon in the intellectual vacuum. (The words waking and 
enlightenment are synonymous terms). 


44. Thus the whole universe is no more, than a stage of waking, sleeping 
and dreaming and turiya scenes; such is the understanding of the learned on 
this subject; and we know nothing in what light, it is viewed by the ignorant. 


45. The Lord is inscrutable amidst the living brute and all inert creation; 
nor can we come to any conclusion, in respect to the nature of that Being, who 
is beyond the knowledge, of our mind and understanding. 


46. This much is knowable of Him, that he is of the pure Intellect, and that 
all things are full of Him; yet they are not of the form of that Reality, which 
manifests itself in the form of the universe. 


47. The words permeation and diffusion, of the Divine spirit in creation; are 
used by the learned only, for explanation of the Omnipresence of the Deity; 
else there is no scent, i.e., nothing of the import of the word pervasion (of 
Divine essence) in all nature. (Nature is the mere body; but God its soul is a 
bodiless Being). 


48. It is since the first creation of the world, that this great essence of the 
vacuous Intellect, is situated of itself, in the souls of great souled (or high- 
minded men). 


49. The all-pervading Intellect is ever situated, in the minds of the sages, 
whose souls are full with the presence of the One supreme spirit; and it is that 
Intellect, which conceived in itself the idea, which passes under the name of 
the world. 


50. The knowledge of the felicity of the world, like that of a dream upon 
waking, is attained with delight, but the want of this knowledge, as of some 
bad dream at the time of sleeping, makes us uneasy all the while. 


51. The silent saint that knows the truth, is always in the self-same state of 
tranquility, whether he be walking or sitting anywhere, or remain in the states 
of waking and sleeping. 


52. The wise man that remains indifferent to everything, and sits content 
even in his distress; and cares not whether he lives or dies, has nothing 


whatever either to gain or lose. 


53. The wise man, who is outwardly employed in worldly affairs, without 
taking anything to heart, and neither parts with nor craves anything; remains 
inactive in his active life. 


54. Utter indifference is characteristic of the wise man, just as heat and 
cold, are natural to fire and snow, and this habit of the mind, is not acquired 
by practice or education. 


55. He who is not by his nature, of this disposition of his mind, is ever 
ignorant of truth; and ignorance of this truth, is the sign of a character, that is 
inclined to base desires. 


56. The truly wise man, remains perfect and pithy in his own good nature; 
he is quite satiate with the sweet ambrosial draught, of his transcendent 
tranquility; he is sedate in his mind, and without his varying desires of this 
thing or that. 


CHAPTER CLXXII. 
Kstablishment of the Identity of the Deity And the 
World. 


Argument: — The world a Pantheon or full with the fullness of God; and 
our erroneous conception of its materiality. 


Vasishtha continued: — The world is devoid of any material element, as 
the earth and others; and I ween the first creator to be the Mind only, which is 
the fruitful tree of desires. 


2. The word mind derived from the act of minding, came to be used 
afterwards as a name for the thinking power, as it was from the whirling of 
waters, that is got the name of a whirlpool. 


3. It is by its connection with the Intellect, that it has its understanding and 
the other faculties; or else it would be as blank as the void of the air, which 
could have no dust were it not for the earth underlying it. 


4. The mind is neither the body nor heart, nor the senses nor desires nor 
even has it any of these; and though these are commonly attributed to it, yet in 
its true sense, it is devoid of all properties. 


5. How can reminiscence be the cause of reproduction of the world? The 
former creator or Brahma, being liberated or extinct with the extinction of that 
world, could not have retained his reminiscence of it; nor could the new 
creator of the new world, possibly have any remembrance of what he knew 
not all. (There have been many by gone Brahmas before). 


6. The holy and liberated souls, have neither their bodies nor reminiscences 
anymore; nor the passing currents of other rivers, return or whirl back, like the 
whirlpools of some. (So the sruti: — The liberated souls, return no more to 


mortality). 


7. Or if he have any body at all, owing to the reminiscence of his former 
state; it must be an unearthly and immaterial body, quite still and rarefied as in 
imaginary forms. (Such are the spiritual bodies of gods and angels). 


8. As our imagination presents to us, a visionary mountain to the mind’s 
eye; such is the air-drawn body of the all engrossing Virdj; presented unto us 
without any earthly form. (Virdj is Pantheon). 


9. There is therefore, no such thing as reminiscence, at any time 
whatsoever; it is merely built on popular belief, and not upon the reason of 
wise men. (Because the creator had no remembrance of a prior creation in his 
first formation of the world). 


10. Rama rejoined: — How do you say Sir, that rememberest everything, 
say that there was no previous remembrance in the first creator; who must 
have remembered the creation of a first Kalpa or learnt it, O inspired sage, by 
his inspiration also. (So says the sruti: — Brahma performed austerities and 
was inspired by the Lord, see Manu). 


11. Vasishtha replied: — The pre-existence of reminiscence is possible in 
the outward or visible world, which admits of cause and effect; but can it be 
where there is no such world, but a mere vacuum only. 


12. There is nothing visible here, from the highest heaven to the lowest pit; 
if it were so a nullity only, then what is its reminiscence and to what use is it. 


13. The remembrance of the prior world in its absence, is called its 
reminiscence; but when there never was nor is any visible world at all, how 
can you think of its reminiscence; even in fancy. 


14. The entire absence of the phenomenals at all times, makes it identic 
with the invisible Brahma himself; and this being the truth of it, say how can 
you fancy the reminiscence of anything. 


15. Therefore, the prime creator could have no remembrance of a prior 
existence; nor could he have any bodily form, being of a spiritual form of pure 
intelligence only. 


16. We should remember the past from our present state, that we are mortal 
beings undergoing repeated transmigrations, and not bring other persons and 


things to our remembrance, as others think it to mean. (We should remember 
ourselves only). 


17. Reminiscence means the retention of past things, in our remembrance 
or inward memory; but what can we remember, when there nothing was nor 
is, nor shall ever be anything. 


18. All this stupendous fabric, is the supreme Brahma itself; who remains 
as immovable as a mountain, and without its beginning, middle or end. What 
then is the reminiscence or presence of it? 


19. The Lord being the universal soul, is the soul or essence of all things; 
and shines like the lustre of the vacuous Intellect; outwardly he is quite calm, 
as I may say he is reposing in our remembrance. 


20. So the remembrance of the Lord, is as he is seen in the light of nature; 
hence the habitual meditation of the lord, corresponds with the contemplation 
of external nature. (Because apart from nature we have no idea of God, unless 
we think as the Lord of nature. This is called the natural religion, or the 
worship of God in nature, the ancient vedic religion). 


21. Whatever is known to us is nature, and the same is the object of our 
meditation. Hence the appearance of anything (in the mind), is called to be its 
remembrance. 


22. And as anything which is absent or inexistent, appears visible (by error) 
before our sight, like the false appearance of water in the mirage; such is the 
case with our misleading memory also (which is hence called a treacherous 
memory). 


23. Again, any prejudice which is rooted in the minds of men, and appears 
as right by long habit of thinking it as such; this also passes for memory also, 
(though it is a wrong impression in the mind). 


24. Any sudden accident or passing event, that strikes the mind for a 
moment; pass also under the name of memory; though it may or may not 
happen anymore. 


25. Any idea that rises of itself in the mind, becomes so impressed in it, by 
its being fostered for any length of time; that any other thing bearing 
resemblance thereto, passes for an object of our memory. 


26. Anything, whether obtained or not by any means, passes also for an 
object of memory; as the ventilation of wind by means of a fan. (It means a 
negative idea is ever accompanied with its affirmative one in thought and 
memory). 


27. Again, whatever occurs in the mind, by parts of the whole subject, is 
also called its memory, (how imperfect so ever it may be); just as any part of 
the body is called the body also. 


28. There are also many chimeras, rising of themselves before the mind, 
like magic shows appearing before our sight; and if the remembrance of these 
be called memory, then say what truth or reliance is there in it. 


29. Consider then how very imperfect and erroneous, this faculty of 
memory is to man; and as there is no visible creation at all, its memory 
therefore is altogether meaningless. 


30. Hence then, the world being but a display of the density or volume of 
the Divine Intellect; it is reflected at present as a visible object in the minds of 
the ignorant, who have given them the name of memory, which in reality is 
nothing at all. 


31. Icannot tell you about the means of liberation, nor do I know wherein it 
consists; yet however to clear the doubt of the inquirer, I will relate something 
about it at present. 


32. Until there is an end of the sight of the visibles, and an oblivion of the 
remembrance of past events; and a cessation of avidyd, ignorance and 
delusion, it is hard to be attained. (i.e., A slave to this world and errors, is 
never emancipated in this life, — jivan mukta). 


33. The ignorant have a belief, in whatever is quite unknown to us; since 
they can never conceive whatever is imperceptible to their senses. (i.e., whose 
minds never rise beyond sensible objects.) 


34. The enlightened are unacquainted with the gross errors, which lurk in 
the darkness of ignorant minds; as the ever-luminous sun, knows nothing of 
what passes in the gloom of night. 


35. Whatever likeness of anything, ever appears to be impressed in the 
mirror of the mind; the same being habitual to thought, as anything studied or 
stored in the mind, receives the name of reminiscence from its impression in 


the memory. 


36. But these glaring impressions in the imagination, being rubbed out of 
the mind like the colours of a painting, there remains no more any tinge of the 
mistaken world therein, as in the clear minds of the learned. 


37. The mirage shows the appearance of water in it, which is a mere 
delusion and never true; so is the dream that shows this creation to view, 
which is no more in reality than a false vision. 


38. It is the vacuous Intellect, which contains the creation in it; and shows 
its representation in ourselves; thus, the world appears in the void of the 
Intellect only, and not anything as fallen or detached from it. (It is a picture in 
the plate of the mind). 


39. The supreme soul shows this form in itself, and makes its unreality 
appear as a reality unto us; and though this form was manifested at the 
beginning, yet it is no more than the display of an unreality. (i.e., Being seen 
in God it is real, but without him it is unreal and nothing). 


40. Then say, whence and where is this world, with all its pleasant as well 
as unpleasant things; it is never anything of a plastic form, nor an appearance 
proceeding from reminiscence. 


41. The world having no cause, (either material or instrumental), in the 
beginning, appears as the very form of the supreme, it is to our woe only, that 
we view its visible form, or search in our memory (for a pristine pattern of it). 


42. Both of these views are wrong, and tend to our bondage in the world; 
but the view of its voidness in the vacuity of the Intellect, is the only means to 
our release and liberation from it. 


43. The view of the apparent world in its vacuous form, and as situated in 
the vacuity of the Intellect, and its identity with swarupa or self-same spirit of 
God, and as undetached in their essence from the divine essence (is the only 
means of our liberation herein). 


44. The view of the situation of the visible bodies, as those of the sun, 
moon, and mountains, efc., in the empty space of the Divine Intellect; like 
those of the invisible ones, as space, time, and other ideal objects therein, is 
the only means of our release from the bondage of this world. 


45. The view of the self-same spirit, situated or dwelling in the recess of 
the Intellect, and identic with its own notion of itself, and bearing resemblance 
to the nature of the dream, which proceeds from its essence, is the only means 
of our emancipation from our temporal bondage. 


46. How can any earthly or other elemental body, have its place in the spirit 
of God, which is not of the form of the earth or any other element; it shines of 
itself and in itself, in and as the quiet void of the Intellect itself. 


47. How and from where could the earth and other elements, proceed in the 
beginning as in the state of our dreaming; unless they were inherent in and 
coeval with the divine essence, as the many objects of our dream rise from our 
own nature. 


48. These effusions of the spirit, as named afterwards as the earth, efc., and 
deemed as material objects; but say, how could the spiritual emanations or 
mnemonic effluences, assume such corporal and tangible forms. 


49. The world is neither the production of our error, nor is it a 
representation of our delusion or as a magic show; nor is it the permeation of 
the spirit as pervading all nature, but it is the very essence of the self-same 
deity itself. 


50. It is the Divinity Brahma itself that shines in the form of this wondrous 
world; it is the self-same unity, which appears to manifest, and yet so very 
obscure as mysterious unto us. What is visible is only pure light, and that of 
the serene clearness of open air, which glows and grows dim by turns, by the 
vicissitudes of the light and shade of creation and destruction. (These as they 
change are but the varied God. — Thomson’s Seasons). 


CHAPTER CLXXIII. 
Brahma Gita Or a Lecture on Spirituality. 


Argument: — The attribution of all physical force to the Divine spirit, like 
the ascribing of all our bodily actions to the Mind. 


Rama rejoined: — If the nature of the Divine spirit is, as the notion which 
is Universally entertained of it; that it is common soul of all, and infinite in its 
pervasion, why then is it supposed to be the soul of the living body only, and 
called the Ego or a personal being? 


2. How does the Intellect become inert, as a block of wood or stone in the 
state of our sleep, and why is it said to exist or become extinct in the state of 
its numbness, (when it is said to be universal in its nature). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — It is by common usage and mode of speech, that 
the universal soul is said to reside as the ego or personal being in the body; as 
it is by common use of language only, to take the hands of the body as hands, 
and not to understand the feet as such. (So the embodied soul only is called 
the ego). 


4. As the leaf of a tree is considered only as a leaf or part of the tree, so the 
universal soul residing in the tree (as vegetable life), passes under the 
designation of a tree only. 


5. And as vacuity in the sky, is styled the sky also; so the universal soul 
dwelling in matter, is designated as that matter likewise. (And so the common 
vacuum indwelling a pot, passes under the name of the pot also). 


6. And as an aerial castle in a dream, appears as a tangible castle to the 
dreamer for the time; so the universal soul living in our sleep, dream, and 
waking, is thought to be sleeping, dreaming or being awake at that time. 


7. As stony trees or cliffs are seen to rise on mountains, and waves on the 
surface of waters; so the huge mountain also rises as a stony tree, from the 
bosom of the all-pervading spirit. 


8. As the living body gives growth, to dull and dead nails and hairs, so the 
living soul of the universe, grows the insensible stones and trees upon it. (So 
the spirit produces the matter, and the insensible rises from sensibles). 


9. As the conscious soul becomes unconscious, as a stone or block of wood 
in its sleep; so the universal soul becomes inert, before creation and after its 
dissolution. And again, as the sleeping soul, sees the train of dreams rising out 
of it, so the tranquil spirit of God, beholds the lustre of creation issuing out of 
It. 


10. And as the sensible and insensible soul of man, produces both sensible 
offspring and insensible excrements from its body; so the universal soul, 
produces both living beings and inert bodies from itself. 


11. The sensible as well as the insensible, are both embodied in the person 
of the universal soul; which is possessed of both the movables and 
immovables in itself, although it is formless in its substance. 


12. All these contraries in nature, disappear before the sight of the truly 
learned; as the false sights in dream, disappear from view of the awakened 
man, who knows the falsity of dreams. 


13. All this is the vacuity of the Intellect, where there is no sight, view nor 
its viewer; as a dreamer being awakened from his dreaming, neither sees his 
dream nor his dreaming sights anymore. 


14. Millions and millions of creations, are appearing in and disappearing 
from the vacuum of the Intellect, in the manner of recurring waves, and the 
revolving whirlpools in the sea. 


15. As the waters of the ocean show various shining forms in the rising 
waves; so the Intellect raises many creations, bearing different names in its 
own intellectuality. 


16. The world as it is, appears as the very Brahma to the truly learned, 
while to the ignorant mass of men, it appears as many and changing, for want 
of the precise knowledge of it. 


17. The wave that knows its nature, of calm and cool water only, thinks no 
more of its being a fluctuating wave, (so the man that knows himself as 
Brahma, thinks no longer of his frail and mortal state). 


18. The conception of the undulation of the divine spirit, from the 
fluctuating appearance of creation, is a mistaking of the calmness of the 
Divine nature; the fluctuation belongs to the powers residing in the Divinity. 


19. The vacuous Intellect never forsakes its tranquility; and the variety of 
knowledge that rises in it, like the varying train of dreams, is attributable to 
the mind, which they call Brahma or the great progenitor of all. 


20. Thus the prime lord of creatures, was the formless and undecaying 
mind; it was of intellectual form like an imaginary being, and supposed as the 
cause of all. 


21. Who says, “thou art nothing,” that saying is like the word gold, which 
has no form of itself, but whose purity is gold. 


22. The increate Brahma, being of an intellectual and vacuous form, and an 
imaginary body endued with volition, appeared as the prime Ego or a personal 
being, and containing the world in his person. 


23. It is the empty void of the Intellect, which displays these wonders that 
are known to constitute the continued bustle, of the alternate creation, 
sustentation, and destruction of the world. 


24. The clear and increate light, to which the intellect evolves itself of its 
own accord; and which bears resemblance to the evolution of airy dreams 
from the mind; is termed the first father of all. (Light was the first work of 
God, or coeternal with the Eternal spirit. Hail holy light Heaven’s first-born, 
or the Eternal coeternal beam. — Milton). 


25. As a wave assumes one form or other, and rolls on interminably over 
the vast expanse of the sea; so runs the heavenly mind, in the forms of the 
revolving creations and their dissolutions. 


26. The light of the intellectual vacuum, which passes under the name of 
Virdj; is of the same mind as Brahma, and stretches out the creation, like a 
castle or city of imagination. 


27. Virdj is the combined form of the triple states of waking, dreaming and 


sleep; the two first are analogous to the creation and supportance of the 
universe, and the last is similar to the utter darkness of dissolution. 


28. From the chaotic state of his dissolution, there sprang light and 
darkness (in the forms of days and nights), like dark and white hairs growing 
on his head; and the rotations of time resembling the joints of his body. 


29. His mouth represented the fire, his head the upper sky, and the air 
below his navel; his foot-stool was the earth, his eyes were the sun and moon, 
and the east and west were his two ears. In this manner did the Lord Virdj 
manifest himself, in the imagination of his mind. (Virdj represents the 
concrete universe). 


30. Thus did the expanded vacuous form of Virdj, represent the whole 
visible world in his ideal person; which was a figure of his own imagination, 
as any of the unsubstantial forms of our dream or fancy. 


31. Whatever is thought of in the vacuity of the Intellect, the same comes to 
be vividly exhibited therein; such is verily the form of this world, which we 
conceive in ourself. 


32. Virdj is verily an aeriform being in himself, and appears to be as wide 
extended as the vast extent of the universe; and is in his own nature, like a city 
or mountain, that we see in our dreams. 


33. Whatever one thinks himself to be, he conceives in him to have become 
the same, without his actually being as such, so an actor is seen to play his 
part in dream, from the concept of his acting on the stage. 


34. Whatever be the tenets of the Vedanta, Buddhism, Sankhya and 
Saugata systems of the philosophy; and whatsoever may be the doctrine of 
Tryaksha, Pashupati and other propounders of Agama Sdstras; they all agree 
in acknowledging Brahma, as the giver of the boons that they respectively 
desire; and all of them obtain the particular object of bliss from the same. 
Such is the glory of the great God, whose soul fills all bodies, and whose 
bounty supports them all. (/it., whose body comprehends the whole). 


NOTE. — The founder of Vedanta was Vyasa, of Buddhism — Buddha, of 
Sankhya — Kapila, of Saugata — Patanjali. Tryaksha, Pashupati and 
Bhairana were professors of Agama tantras. 


CHAPTER CLXXIV. 
The same or a Lecture on Nirvana. 


Argument: — Subsistence of Brahma after evanescence of the world, 
likened to the continuance of Intellection after disappearance of dreams upon 
waking. 


Vasishtha continued: — The Intellect alone glistened in the beginning, with 
its thought of creation, appearing as the vision of a dream before it. This was 
the representation of the three worlds, and a reflexion of the light of Brahma 
Himself. (The Divine spirit was the archetype, of which the world was an 
ectype or réchauffé). 


2. These creations were as the endless billows in the ocean of the Divine 
Mind, and rising from the fluidity of his omniscience; hence there is no 
difference between the creation and its absence, nor is there any woe in the 
one or bliss in the other. 


3. As the dream and sound sleep of the soul, do both of them appertain to 
its sleeping state; when the mind remains as vacant as empty air; so the visible 
and invisible creation, (i.e., its presence and absence), are both of them alike 
in the vacuity of the Intellect, (where they both resemble but an empty 
dream). 


4. This world appearing like a city seen in our dream, in our waking state; 
is not worthy of reliance of the wise, who are well acquainted with its nature 
of a visionary appearance. 


5. And as we find the falsity of the visionary city in the dream, upon our 
waking, so we come to find our mistake of the reality of the world at last. 


6. As upon waking, we come to find the falsity of all our efforts and 
desires; in the visionary city of our dream; so do we find at last, all our aims 


and attempts in our waking state in this world, to be equally false and fleeting. 


7. If anyone assigns any other cause, then why that one does not admit, 
what he said, is mere fancy. 


8. When guessing knowledge is no better than a dream of the world; so 
ocular authority is more strong than inocular one. 


9. It is better to judge the soul and other attribute by near example, than by 
the far off; otherwise, it is like a fall from the top of a hill in a dream. 


10. Perfect insensibility is entire inertness, and a changeless state of body 
and mind; while the nature of the world, and the state of things herein, are 
incessantly restless and changeful; therefore, it is incapable to conduct 
samadhi or intense meditation in either of these two states. 


11. Meditation in worldly life, must be too sensitive and variable; while its 
intensity or trance stupifies a man to a stone; but true liberation consists 
neither in the changeableness of mind, nor in its stone like insensibility. 


12. I think nothing is obtainable from the stone like apathetic trance, as 
there is nothing to be had from the drowsy stupor for anybody. (Hence both 
fickleness as well as mental torpor are repugnant to meditation and self- 
liberation). 


13. It is therefore by means of consummate knowledge only, that reasoning 
men can dispel their ignorance; and there is no chance of his being born again, 
who has secured his liberation in his life time. 


14. Inflexible abstraction is said to have no bounds, and it consists in sitting 
steadfast in profound meditation, without distraction or diversion, such a 
posture is said to be all illuminating, or eternal sunshine to the Yogi. 


15. It is called the endless hypnotism or absorption of the soul, and is the 
fourth or last state of contemplativeness. It is also styled as nirvana, self- 
extinction, or losing one’s self in his reveries; and this is what they designate 
moksha or liberation from all bonds and cares of the world. (This is the 
abstract Platonism of the ancients). 


16. It is the density or depth of pansophy, and the intensity of excogitation; 
and there being an entire absence of the retrospect of the phenomenals in it, it 
is known as the state of perfect transcendentalism or glory. 


17. It is not the stone-like inertness of some philosophers, (Gautama and 
Kanada), nor the hypnotism or sound sleep of others, (Hiranya garbas); it is 
neither the unoptativeness or want of option of the Patanjalas, nor is the 
inexistence or utter annihilation of the Buddhist. 


18. It is the knowledge of Brahma as the prime source of all, and nihility of 
the visible creation; it is knowing God as all and yet nothing that exists; and 
therefore, it is to know Him as He is, — in his all-pervading spirit. 


19. It is the consummate knowledge of all (as nothing), that gives us our 
positive rest of nirvana (in our nothingness); and in knowing that the world as 
it is, equal to its inexistence. 


20. That all this variety is no variety at all, nor all these any entity in 
reality; all apparent realities are mere unrealities, and it is the end of all our 
conceptions and inductions, that is the only reality. (i.e., God the first and last 
of all, — the Alpha and Omega). 


21. The entire nihility of the visible world, is the state of its nirvana or 
extinction; and the settled knowledge of this in any one, constitutes his 
supreme felicity. 


22. This state is attainable by one’s pure understanding, and his habit of 
constant reconsideration; joined with a knowledge of the Sdstras, and scrutiny 
into the right sense of significant words and their significates. 


23. This work is the best guide to liberation, by means of its constant study; 
or else it is attainable by no other means, save by enlightenment of the 


understanding. AMdaryfeaes | 


24. Neither pilgrimage nor charity, nor sacred ablutions or learning; nor 
meditation or Yoga contemplation, nor religious austerities nor sacrifice of 
any kind, (is liberation ever attainable by mankind, except by means of divine 
knowledge). 


25. The world is only a delusion, causing the unreal to appear as real; it is 
the empty vacuum only which presents the appearance of the world, which is 
as a dream in the vacancy of the Intellect. 


26. No religious austerity nor pilgrimage, is ever able to remove our error 
of the world; they can at the best procure for us the reward of heaven, but 
never secure unto us our liberation or final beatitude. 


27. Our error is extirpated only, by the light of the Sdstras and of our good 
understanding; but above all, it is spiritual knowledge alone, which is the best 
means to our liberation and final salvation. 


28. But it is the vivid light of the scriptures, which is sure to destroy our 
error of the world; as the sunshine serves to dispel the gloom of night. 


29. The light, clearness and shade, of creation, preservation and destruction 
respectively, appear by turns in the clear vacuous mirror of the Intellect; as the 
ventilation of breeze in air, and fluctuation of waves in water. 


30. As the rudiment of the future form, is contained in the heart or embryo 
of everything; and as the air contains in its incessant motion (saddgati) within 
itself; such is the existence of the world, inherent in the Divine Intellect, and 
so has it its evolution and dissolution therein, like the rise and fall of wind in 
empty air. 


CHAPTER CLXXV. 
Paramartha Gita or Lecture on Trancendentalism 
or the soliety. 


Argument: — The appearance of the world in our Ignorance, and its 
Disappearance before the light of true knowledge. 


Vasishtha continued: — The vacuity of the Intellect which presented the 
shadow of a dream at first, could not possibly assume the form of a causal and 
sensible body, (as that of Brahma), in order to be visible and form the visible 
world. For how is it possible for the intellectual vacuum, to have a bodily 
form at all. 


2. In the beginning of creation, O Rama, there was nothing except a 
shadow dream in the Intellect. And neither was there this creation nor the next 
world in visible existence. 


3. The world appeared only in the form, of an unsubstantial notion of it; 
and the vacuous intellect remained as quiet with its ideal world, as the mind 
rests quietly with the nightmare in its dream. 


4. Such is the essence of the Intellect, which is translucent and without its 
beginning and end; and though it is a clear void in itself, yet it bears the ideal 
model of the world in its mirror. 


5. So long as this is unknown, the world appears as a gross substance; but 
being known as contained in the Divine spirit, it becomes a spiritual substance 
also; because how is it possible for any gross matter, to attach itself to the 
transcendent vacuum, of which there is no beginning and end? 


6. This pure and abstract knowledge of the world, is as that of a city in 
dreaming; and such being the state of the world ere its creation, how can any 


earthly or other matter, be ever joined with the same? 


7. The light of the Divine soul, shining amidst the vacuity of the Intellect, is 
termed cosmos or the universe; consisting as it is supposed, of matter, mind 
and faculties. 


8. It is want of understanding only, which makes us suppose a thing, which 
is turning round like a whirlpool, and having the force of the wind in it as the 
stable earth, although it has no basis or stability of it. 


9. Afterwards, the same Divine spirit (iva), wishing to display its own 
glory (thought in its personality of Brahma), of the ideal forms of the earth 
and other things (in its imagination). 


10. Then the great minds of (Brahma), shone with a purer light of itself; 
and this is called his creation which is of an aerial form and no other. (Light 
being the first work of creation). 


11. That pure light, was nothing substantial of itself; but the brightness of 
the Intellect only, shining with the effulgence of the Divine spirit. (This was 
the psychic light of the soul in itself). 


12. This light is the body of the spirit, which shone as intellectual light in 
the void of the Intellect; and it presented the appearance of the world in it, in 
the manner of dreams floating before the empty mind. 


13. There being no other inference to be derived, nor any other cause to be 
possibly assigned (to the production of the world), or of its being produced of 
itself; it is certain that the divine spirit, sees itself in the form of creation, 
within the vacuum of its Intellect in the beginning. (As anything cannot come 
by itself or from nothing; the world must therefore be either a nothing or a 
form of something that is ever existent of itself). 


14. This body of the world, (corpus mundi), having no property of a 
tangible body, is never fragile in its nature; but it is as void as the emptiness 
of the Intellect, and as inane as the empty air. 


15. Its form is that of the supreme Being, which is without any form 
whatever; and identic with the Divine form, it comprehends all bodies in 
itself, and extends undivided as all in all in its ownself. 


16. This will be better understood in the instance of a dream, which rises of 


itself and shows itself in various forms; but as all these varieties are nothing 
but empty visions, so the diverse scenes and sights of the world, are no more 
than shows of the Divine spirit. 


17. The Divine soul of Brahma, assumed to itself the state of the living 
spirit; and without forsaking its transparent form, became of the form of mind 
(in the person of the great Brahma, — the creative Power). 


18. This power extends the universe in its aerial form in air; which appears 
to be changed from its unchangeable state of transparency, to that of a gross 
nature. (i.e., the visible and material world). 


19. The Mind is Brahma himself, who gives an external and visible form to 
the world, that was seated invisible in his heart; and is continually employed 
in the process of repeated creation and destruction of all. 


20. The immaterial mind of Brahma, evolved the world from its 
protoplasm, which was originally seated in his heart; and thence it appeared in 
a different form as a counterpart of the original, or as the formless 
representation of something in a dream. 


21. The God Brahma, though in himself dwelling with his formless mind, 
in his embodied form of the triple world, and of being diffused in endless 
forms of sensible and insensible beings therein. 


22. But there was neither the earth, nor any material form, nor even 
anything of a visible appearance therein; it was only his mind which exhibited 
itself, in the form of the formless and vacuous world. (The Divine hypostasis 
of the personified mind of Brahma, was only a mental and aerial form, and not 
a material one). 


23. Then the lord Brahma thought that, this mental form of his, was nothing 
in substance, as it did not appear to sight; it was the Intellect only, which 
shone in this manner within itself, and had no solidity or substantiality in it. 
(The Intellect is the omniscience of God, and the Mind is the intelligence of 
Brahma). 


24. This mental conception or abstract contemplation of the world, is 
inexpressible by words, and makes the meditator remain in mute 
astonishment; and causes him to continue as dumb in this ordinary conduct in 
life. (This is the state of platonic supineness or insouciance). 


25. The Intellect being infinite and unlimited, the mind is lost in infinity in 
its reflection; hence Brahma having long remained in his silence, became 
awakened to his knowledge at last. (Brahma, the Demiurgic Mind, having 
recovered itself from its wonder and bewilderment, becomes detached at last 
from the divine mind). 


26. After the insensible mind of Brahma, had come to its sense, it revolved 
in itself with its thoughts; as the liquid waters of the sea, turns in whirlpools 
by agitation. 


27. So the insensible air is put to ventilation by its internal motion, and so 
all living souls which are identic with the calm and quiet supreme soul, slide 
away like the gliding waters, from their main source. 


28. And as the winds and waves, which are identical with the calm air and 
still water, blow and flow in all directions of themselves, so the minds of 
living beings which are same with supreme Intellect, run in several ways in 
their own accord. 


29. Hence, the vacuous intellect of all living beings, is the same with the 
Divine intellect; and this, O most intelligent Rama, is otherwise known as the 
supreme soul also. 


30. The Divine soul appears unto us, to have its twinklings like the 
vacillation of air; its closing causes the close or end of the world, as its 
flashing exposes the creation to view. 


31. Its glancing causes the visibility of creation, and its winking makes it 
invisible or extinct to view, while the want of both these acts, (opening and 
closing of its sight), is tantamount to the formless void of the world. 


32. But the view of the opening and shutting of its sight, or the visibility 
and disappearance of the world in one unvaried light, makes the equality of 
existence and non-existence in the mind, and bespeaks the perfection of the 
soul. 


33. Seeing and not seeing, and their results of creation and extinction, make 
no difference in the Divine Intellect which is always the same. (The veda says 
Ikshati or glancing of God, and not his will or word is the cause of the world). 


34. Know therefore this world, to be as calm and quiet as the Divine soul; 
and that it is of the nature of the uncreated vacuum, which is ever the same 


and no decay. 


35. The sensuous and conscious intellect, exhibits itself as the insensible 
and unconscious vacuum; the very intellect shows itself in the form of the 
world, which is in a manner its body and residence. 


36. The Intellect is neither born or made, nor does it ever grow or decay; it 
is never visible nor perceptible, nor have we any notion of it; it displays its 
wonders in itself, without any extraneous substance in it. 


37. All that is called the phenomenal, is the brightness of the blazing gem 
of the great Intellect, and proceeding from the quarry of its vacuum; as the 
sunshine which illumines the world, issues from the orb of that luminary. 


38. It is Brahma himself that shines forth as the creation, just as our sleep 
exhibits the visionary world in its dream; so is all this creation as quiet as 
sleep, and yet full with the bustle of the slumbering world. 


39. Whatever is known in any manner in the mind, either as existent or 
inexistent in the world; the same is the reflexion of the Intellect, whether it be 
an entity or non-entity. 


40. Should the impossibility of existence, lead us to the supposition of 
some cause as of the primary atoms and the like; then what cause can there be 
assigned to the appearance of sights in our dream (and of fabrics without their 
foundation). 


41. If the origin of the world is not ascribed to Brahma, as the origination 
of dreams to the Intellect; then neither is there any truth in the existence of the 
one, or in the appearance of the other, which is never true. 


42. The minds of men are inclined towards the particular objects of their 
fancy; hence those that believe and delight in God, take him as the origin of 
all things that appear unto them. 


43. Whatever is in the minds of men, and to whatever their hearts are 
constantly devoted; they know the same as the only objects of their lives, and 
the very gist of their souls. 


44. He who delights in Brahma, becomes of the same mind in a moment; 
and so any one who is gratified in anything, is incorporated with the same in 
his mind. 


45. The man who has obtained his rest in God, has found the highest bliss 
in his mind; though he shows himself as otherwise in his outward conduct and 
social dealings. 


46. There is no reason for the supposition of unity or duality herein, when 
the whole existence is as I have propounded, and it is in vain to look at 
anything else. 


47. There is nothing as visible or invisible, or anything as formless or 
having a form herein; there is nothing as subject or object, nor aught of reality 
or unreality here, when the whole is the very Brahma himself. 


48. This world is without a beginning and end, and is known to the world 
as soul; but in fact, one Brahma rules over all without any fixed rule, like a 
path without a name. 


49. That which is conceived as the serene Brahma, is considered as the 
bright Brahma or Demiurgus also; just as what is known as the calm and clear 
firmament, the very same is said to be the empty void likewise. 


50. As the nebulae which seem to bedim the face of the sky, are something 
in appearance and nothing in substance; just so do our mental faculties appear 
to flutter in and obscure the clear atmosphere of the Intellect, and seem to be 
as dualities or otherwise than the serene intellectual principle. 


51. But the mental, bodily and all other perceptive and active powers of 
living beings, are the common properties of the intellectual soul; just as the 
very many gaps and hollows in various bodies, are in common with the 
vacuity of the one universal vacuum only. (i.e., All these are the aerial powers 
of psychic principle). 


52. As the quiet soul passing from its sleeping to the dreaming state, retains 
its identity and invariableness; so the divine soul passing into creation after its 
quiescence, remains the very unchanged unity as ever. 


53. Thus the supreme spirit reflects the shadow of its great Intellect, in the 
forms of creation and dream; hence neither is this creation nor the vision in 
dreaming, anything in its substance than a mere shadow (of the picture in the 
Divine Mind). 


54. It is the bright picture of the Divine Mind, that exhibits its form in the 
vacuity of the Great Intellect; and so the ideal appearance as the visible 


creation, like the fairy land in dream (and the airy castle of imagination). (The 
word chdya, — shadow, means both the glory of God, as also the darkness of 
illusion. — Gloss). 


55. From the impossibility of the appearance of the world, by any means as 
it is conjectured by different schools, and from its want of a prior cause; it 
must be that the intellect saw itself thus exhibited in its own vacuity. 


56. In the beginning of creation, the formless void of the Intellect, showed 
itself in this visible and intangible form; and represented itself as a picture of 
its mind or dream or its imagination. 


57. Like the dream, it was a blank and without any attribute; it is 
changeable but not frangible, and although it was the substance of intellectual 
voidness, yet it was vitiated with the stain of our misapprehension of it, called 
avidyd. (The world is purely of an intellectual form, and it is our ignorance 
which imputes a gross form to it). 


58. Like the dream, it seems to possess some properties in its appearance; 
but is wholly devoid of any in its substance; it is never different from the 
spiritual nature of the Lord, though it appears otherwise to our misconception 
of it. 


59. The phenomenal world likens a mountain seen in dream, and is 
inseparable from the soul wherein it resides; therefore, the visibles appearing 
in the vacuity of the Intellect, are more vacuous than the vacuum of the 
firmament. 


60. That which is the supreme soul; and devoid of all form; the very same 
and of the same nature is all this, that we call the visible world. 


61. Whatever conception we have in our dream, the same is the display of 
our intellect; so the cities and castles that we see in the dreams, are no real 
existences; but appearances presented unto us by the intellect. 


62. As the recognizance of our acquaintances in dream, and the 
remembrance of the impressions in our memory, are altogether unsubstantial, 
(owing to the absence of their prototypes in us); so the sight of the visibles 
and the perception of perceptibles, are quite unreal also, (because none of 
those things are present in us). 


63. Therefore, leaving these unrealities of our recognitions, perceptions and 


remembrances, which are so much relied upon by the ignorant; we should 
take them in the light of the direct manifestations of the Deity in those forms. 


64. As the waves of the sea, continue to roll incessantly on the surface of 
the waters; so innumerable worlds that are continually revolving, on the 
surface of the supreme soul, are of the same nature with itself. 


65. All laws and their anomalies, as well as all varieties and complexities 
unite in harmony in the Divine nature. (There, all discord is concord, and all 
partial evil is universal good). 


66. Therefore, that Brahma is all in all, and there is none and nothing 
besides; He alone is the soul of all, as all these live in Him. 


67. The roving mind thinks the world to be roving about with all its 
contents; but the steady minded take it to be quite sedate and quiet; hence it is 
impossible for the learned also, to settle their minds without the habitual 
sedateness of their attention. 


68. There is no other means, for suppressing the mind from the sight of the 
visibles; without the constant habit of attending to the lectures (of the 
preceptor) on this sacred Sdstra. 


69. Though it is difficult to repress the mind from its thoughts of this world, 
either in its states of living or death, (i.e., either in its waking or sleeping 
states); yet it is possible to do so by effacing its impressions at once, from the 
study of this spiritual Sdstra. 


70. The knowledge of the nihility of the visible body, and that of the mind 
also in want of the body; both in this world as well as in the next world, will 
always serve to preserve our peace and quietism; (and this is attainable by 
means of studying this Sdstra). 


71. The mind, body and the visibles, are all three of them suppressed under 
the sense of their nothingness; as the mind, its force and the moving clouds, 
do all disappear in absence of their cause, (i.e., motion). 


72. The cause of restlessness is ignorance only, which is altogether 
dispelled by the study of this Sdstra; and those whose minds are a little 
enlightened, have their composure from attending to the recital and preaching. 


73. The unintelligent will be able to understand the teachings of the former 


part from the latter; and he that understands the words and purports of these 
lectures, will never return disappointed (in his expectation of nirvdna or 
ultimate rest). 


74. Then know this Sdstra as the best means, to the dispersion of the error; 
and to the production of an universal indifference or insouciance everywhere. 


75. Therefore, try your best, to weigh well the precepts of this Sdstra; and 
whether you study one or both parts of this work, you will doubtless be freed 
from your misery thereby. 


76. Should this Sdstra prove unpalatable, owing to its being the 
composition of a holy sage; in that case the student may consult the sacred 
Srutis, for the perfection of his spiritual knowledge. 


77. Do not spend your time in false reasoning, nor offer your precious life 
to flames and ashes; but let your sapient understanding commit the visibles to 
the invisible soul. (i.e., view them in their spiritual light, and bury the gross 
phenomenal in utter oblivion and appear in the noumenal soul only). 


78. No one can buy a jot or moment of his lifetime, at the cost of all the 
gems in the world; and yet how many are there, who foolishly misspent their 
time in their worldly dream? 


79. Though we have a clear conception of the world, yet it is a false sight 
together with that of its beholder, — the living soul; it is as false as the dream 
of one’s own death in his sleep, and his hearing the wailing of his friend at his 
demise. 


CHAPTER CLXXVI. 
Brahma Gita. Account of Brahmanda or Mundane 
System. 


Argument: — The world resembling a dream and an atom of the Divine 
mind, and Brahma’s account of it. 


Rama rejoined: — There are innumerable worlds in the universe, many of 
which have gone before, many are in existence, and many as yet to be; how 
then is it Sir, that you persuade me to the belief of their nullity. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — you well know, Rama, the relation which the world 
bears to a dream, in that they both mean a passing scene; and this sense of it, 
can be denied by no one of this audience. 


3. The words which are spoken by the wise, who know their application 
and sense; are neither understood nor received in the hearts of common 
people, though they are in common use. 


4. When you will come to know the knowledge of One, then you will 
discern the three times clearly and behold them as present before you. 


5. As it is the intellect alone, that displays itself in the form of the world in 
our dream; so doth the Divine Intellect also, exhibit the worlds in itself, in the 
beginning of creation; and there is no other cause of their production. 


6. Hence, there are innumerable worlds revolving like atoms in the infinite 
space of air; and there is no one who can count their number, and descry their 
modes and natures. 


7. It was of old that my venerable sire, — the lotus-born Brahma, and all 
besmeared with the fragrant dust of that flower, has delivered a discourse on 


this subject, which I will now relate unto you. 


8. It was of old that my sire Brahma, told me about the number of worlds, 
and their respective situations in the heavens, whence they thus appear unto 
us. To this he said (as follows). 


9. Brahma said: — O sage, all this is Brahma, that is manifested as the 
world; it is infinite entity of the Deity in its abstract essence; but viewed in the 
concrete, the world is a nonentity. 


10. Attend to this narration of mine, which is as felicitous to the soul, as it 
is pleasant to the ear; it is called the narrative of the mundane egg, or of the 
mundane body or mass. 


11. There is in the infinite vacuum, a vacuous substance known as the 
vacuity of the Intellect, in the form of a minute atom only. (Such as the grain 
of the mind is, in the hollow cerebrum of the head). 


12. It saw as in a dream in itself, of its being as the living soul, resembling 
the oscillation of the wind in empty air. (The living principle or spirit, is a 
breath of air). 


13. The Lord thus became the living being, with forsaking its vacuous 
form; and thought itself to become the ego, in its aeriform form. 


14. He had then his egoism, and egoistic sense in himself; and this was the 
knowledge of himself as an unit, which is an act of delusion only. 


15. Then he thought himself, as changed to the conditions of the 
understanding, mind and ego, as in his dream; and was inclined of his own 
option, to impose mutability upon his immutable nature. 


16. He then saw in his mind as if in dream, the five senses attached to his 
body; these are as formless as the appearance of a mountain in dream, which 
the ignorant are apt to take as a solid body. (The five formless faculties of 
sense, are thought to be composed of the five organs of sense by the gross 
corporealist). 


17. Then he beheld in the atom of his intellect, that his mental body (or his 
mind), was comprised of the three worlds; in their aerial or abstract forms, 
apparent to view, but without their substance or solidity or any basis at all. 
(This is the mental form of Virdj, — cosmos). 


18. This stupendous form was composed of all beings, whether of the 
moving or unmoving kinds. 


19. He beheld all things comprised in himself, as they are seen in dream or 
reflected in a mirror; and the triple world appeared in his person, as the picture 
of a city newly printed on a plate. 


20. He saw the three worlds in his heart, as they are seen in a looking glass; 
together with all things contained therein, in their vivid colours of many 
kinds; (namely, — the view, viewer and the act of viewing; — the doer, deed 
and the action of doing; — the enjoyer, enjoying and the enjoyment). 


21. He observed minuter atoms subsisting within the minute atoms; and 
stupendous worlds also on high, clustering together in groups and rings. 


22. These being seen in ignorance of their natures; appear as gross material 
bodies; but viewed in the clear light of their essence, they prove to be the 
display of the divine mind only. 


23. Thus, the viewer who views the world in the light of Brahma, finds this 
view of it as a vision in this dream; and comes to know that there is no real 
viewer to view of it, nor any cause thereof nor any duality whatsoever. 


24. All these that appear all around us, are quite quiescent in their nature, 
and in the Divine spirit alone as their main substratum; they are all situated in 
the universal soul from eternity to eternity. 


25. Myriads of worlds that are situated in the Divine spirit, appear to be 
settled without the same; just as the waves of the sea, rise above its waters and 
scatter its salt spray in the air. 


CHAPTER CLXXVII. 
Brahma-Gita. Description of divine nature. 


Argument: — The fallacy of assigning a cause to the causeless world; 
which is likened to a dream of the Divine Mind. 


Rama rejoined: — If the world is without a cause, and proceeds of itself 
from the essence of Brahma, as our dreams, thoughts and imaginations, 
proceed of themselves from the nature of our minds. 


2. And if it be possible for anything to proceed from no cause, then tell me 
Sir, why we can never have anything without its proper causes. (Such as the 
production of paddy without its cultivation). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Rama, I am not speaking of common practice of 
men, for the production of anything by application of its proper causalities; 
but of the creation of the world, which is not in need of the atomic principle 
and material elements, as it is maintained by atomist. (Text). (Whatever 
invention is adopted by anyone, in order to produce a certain end, is never 
effected without the application of its proper means and appliances). 


4. In whatever light this visible world is imagined by anybody, he views it 
in the same light; while another sees it in a different manner, according to his 
own imagination of it. 


5. There are some who imagine it as the diffusion of the Divine soul, and 
think it as one with the nature of the Deity; while others think it as the living 
body of Virdj, with the insensible parts of it, resembling the hairs and nails 
growing upon his body. 


6. The meanings of the words causality and not causality do both of them 
belong to the deity; because the Lord being almighty, has the power to be 
either the one or other as he likes. 


7. If there be anything whatever, which is supposed to be beside Brahma in 
its essence; it is then reasonable to suppose him as the cause of the same, 
which could not otherwise come to existence. 


8. But when all things, that appear so different from one another, are all of 
them without their beginning or end or co-eternal with the Eternal One. Then 
say, which of these can be the cause of the other. (Hence, the world is one 
with the lord and has no cause of it). 


9. Here nothing comes to exist or desist at any time; but are all eternally 
existent in the self-existent One; as one and the same with his vacuous self. 


10. What is the cause of anything, and to what purpose should any be 
caused at any time; the Lord expects nothing from his creatures, and therefore, 
their creation is equal to their not being created at all. 


11. Here there is no vacuum or plenum, nor any entity nor non-entity 
either, nor any thing between them; as there is nothing predicable of the 
infinite vacuity of Brahma (as either this or that). 


12. Whatever is is, and what not may not be; but all is Brahma only, 
whether what is or is not. (i.e., what is past or gone or yet to be, i.e., all what 
is present, past or to be in future). 


13. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how the Divine spirit is not the cause of 
all, when it is believed to be the sole cause, by all who are ignorant of its 
quiescent nature (as you maintain). 


14. Vasishtha replied: — There is no one ignorant of God, since everyone 
has an innate conviction of the Divinity as the consciousness of himself; and 
whoso knows the vacuous entity of the Deity, knows also that this nature 
admits of no scrutiny or discussion. 


15. Those who have the knowledge of the unity of God, and his nature of 
quiescence and as full of intelligence; know also, his unknowable nature is 
beyond all scrutiny. 


16. Ignorance of God, abides in the knowledge of God (because one 
acknowledges the existence of God, when he says he is ignorant of his 
nature); and this is as our dreaming is included under the state of sleeping. 
(Gloss. — Philosophers dream many false ungodly theories of causation, 
while they are sleeping in the quiescent spirit of God.) 


17. It is for the instruction of the ignorant, concerning the omnipresence of 
God, that I say, He is the soul of all or as all in all; while in reality his holy 
spirit is perfectly pure and undecaying. 


18. All existences are thought either as caused or uncaused, according to 
the view that different understandings entertain respecting them. (But neither 
of these views, refutes the doctrine of the unity of the Deity. — Gloss.) 


19. Those that have the right conception of things, (as manifestations of the 
unity in different forms); have no cause to assign any cause to them whatever, 
(as the atomic principles or elements); therefore, the creation is without any 
cause whatever. 


20. Therefore, the assigning of a cause to this creation, either as matter, — 
prakriti or spirit, — purusha, by undermining one’s self-consciousness of 
Divine pervasion; is mere verbiage of sophists for their own confusion only. 


21. In absence of any other cause of creation, (save that of our 
consciousness of it), it is naught beside an appearance in our dream; and there 
is nothing as the gross material form or its visible appearance whatsoever. 


22. Say what cause can the ignorant assign, to their sight of the land in their 
dream, than to the nature of the Intellect, which exhibits such phenomena to 
minds. Say if there can be any other meaning of dreams. 


23. Those who are unacquainted with the nature of dreams, are deluded to 
believe them as realities; but those that are acquainted with their falsehood, 
are not misled to believe them or this world as real ones. 


24. It is the impudence of fools to broach any hypothesis of causality, either 
by their supposition, arrogance or in the heat of their debate, (as it is the case 
with all the different schools of philosophy). 


25. Is the heat of fire, the coldness of water, and the light of luminous 
bodies, and the natures of things their respective causes, as the ignorant 
suppose them to be? (Or is it the attribute of Brahma that is so manifested in 
these their several causes? The entity of Divine unity, is the prime sole cause 
of causes). 


26. There be hundreds of speculative theorists, that assign as many causes 
to creation without agreeing in any; let them but tell the cause of the aerial 
castle of their imagination. 


27. The virtues and vices of men are formless things, and are attended with 
their fruitions on the spiritual body in the next world; how can they be causes 
of our corporeal bodies in this world. (As it is maintained by Mimamsa 
philosophers). 


28. How can our finite and shapeless knowledge of things, be the cause of 
the incessant rise and fall, of endless, and minute bodies in the world, as it is 
maintained by vijndna vdda or gnostic school. (These assert the existence of 
things depends upon our knowledge or perception of them as such). 


29. It is nature, says the naturalist, which is the cause of all events but as 
nothing result from the nature of anything, without its combination with 
another; it is too indeterminate in its sense. 


30. Therefore, all things appear as causeless illusions to the ignorant, and 
their true cause to be a mystery to them; while they are known to the 
intelligent as the wondrous display of the Divine Intellect, that shows 
everything in itself. 


31. As one knowing the falsehood of dreams, is never sorry at his loss of 
anything in dream; so those that have the knowledge of truth in them, never 
feel any sorrow even at the possession or separation of their lives. 


32. In the beginning there was no production of the visible world, nor is it 
anything more than the vacuum of the intellect; in its own and true form it 
appears as a dream, and is no other than that in its essence. 


33. There is no other supposition, which is more apposite to it, than its 
resemblance to the dream; and our conception of the world, has the great 
Brahma only for its ground work. 


34. As fluidity, waves and whirlpools, are the inherent properties of pure 
water; such are the revolutions of worlds, but appearances on the surface of 
the Divine Mind, and have the Divine spirit of Brahma at their bottom. 


35. As velocity and ventilation, are inborn in the nature of pure air; the 
creation and preservation of the world, are ingrained and intrinsical in the 
nature of God. 


36. As infinity and vacuity are the inherent properties of the Great vacuum, 
so is the knowledge of all things existent and non-existent, and of creation and 
annihilation immanent in the Divine Mind. 


37. All things in existence and lying dormant in the Divine Mind, are yet 
perceptible to us, because we participate of the very same mind. 


38. This creation and its destruction also, both abide side by side in the 
dense intellect of the Divine Soul; as the thickening dreams and sound sleep, 
both reside together in the calm sleeping state of our soul. 


39. As a man passes from one dream to another, in the same dormant state 
of his soul; so doth the supreme soul see the succession of creations, taking 
place alternately in its own essence. 


40. The clear atmosphere of Divine Soul, which is devoid of earthy and 
other material substances; yet appears in their utter absence, to be possessed 
of them all, in the same manner as the human soul, sees many things in its 
dream, without having any of those things in itself. 


41. As the human mind sees at a thought the forms of a pot, or painting 
rising before it; so the all-seeing mind of God, sees at a glance of its thought, 
worlds upon worlds appearing at once in its presence. 


42. The all-seeing soul, sees all things as they are in itself; and finds them 
to be of the same intellectual nature with its own intellect; and as all things are 
equivalent to the words expressive of them. (As there is a mutual 
correspondence between the significant words and their significates). 


43. Of what use then are Sdstras, and of what good is the reasoning upon 
their verbiage, when our inappetency is the best way to felicity; and there 
being no creation without its cause, we have nothing to do with what appears 
but seemingly so. 


44. It being proved, that the want of want is our best bliss below; the 
sensation of want or desire, must be the source of perpetual misery to man; 
and though our desires are many, yet the feeling of it is one and the same, and 
betrays the prurient mind, as the various dreams by night, disclose the 
cupidinous nature of the soul. 


CHAPTER CLXXVIII. 
Brahma-Gita. Narrative of Aindava. 


Argument: — The formlessness of the world, for its formation from the 
formless mind. 


Rama rejoined: — The world is known to consist of two sorts of beings, 
namely the corporeal or solid substances and the incorporeal or subtle 
essences. 


2. They are styled the subtle ones, which do not strike against one another; 
and those again are said to be solid things, which push and dash against each 
other. 


3. Here we see always the dashing of one solid body against another; but 
know nothing of the movement of subtle bodies, or of their coming in contact 
with another. 


4. We know yet something, about the quick motion of our subtle senses to 
their respective objects, and without coming in contact with them, as we find 
in our perception of the distant orb of the moon (without touching it). 


5. I repudiate the theory of the half-enlightened, who maintain the material 
world to be the production of the will or imagination; nor can I believe that 
the immaterial intellect, can either produce or guide the material body. 


6. It is the will I ween, that the material breath of life, moves the living 
body to and fro; but tell me Sir, what is that power which propels, the living 
breath both in and out of the beings. 


7. Tell me Sir, how the intangible intellect moveth the tangible body; and 
carries it about, as a porter bears a load all about. 


8. Should the subtle intellect, be capable of moving the solid body at its 
will; then tell me Sir, why cannot a man move a mountain also by his own 
will? 


9. Vasishtha replied: — It is the opening and closing of the mouth of the 
aorta in the breast, that lets in and out the vital breath, through the passage of 
its hole and the lungs. 


10. As you see the bellows of ironsmiths about you, having a hollow inside 
them, so it is the hollow of the aorta, which lets in and out the vital air, by the 
breathing of the heart. 


11. Rama rejoined: — It is true that the ironsmith closes and expands the 
valves of the bellows; but tell me Sir, what power blows the wind pipe of the 
heart, and lets the air in and out of the inner lungs. 


12. How the single breath of inhalation becomes a centuple, (in order to 
pass into a hundred channels of the arteries), and how these hundreds combine 
again into one (in their exhalation); and why are some as sensible beings, and 
others as insensible as woods and stones. 


13. Tell me Sir, why the immovables have no oscillation at all; and why the 
moving bodies alone are possessed of their pulsation and mutation, (and why 
is the vegetable creation deprived of motion, when it is possessed of 
sensibility in common with the animal creation). 


14. Vasishtha replied: — There is an internal percipience, (inner man), 
which moves the interior cords of the body; just as the ironsmith plies his 
bellows in the sight of men. 


15. Rama rejoined: — Say Sir, how is it possible for the subtle and intactile 
soul, to move the vital airs and tangible entrails in the animal body. 


16. If it be possible for the imperceptible perceptive soul, to put in motion 
the intestinal and tactual entrails of the body; then it may be equally possible 
for the thirsty soul, to draw the distant water to it. (In order to quench its 
thirst, instead of going to the watery pool). 


17. If it be possible for the tangible and intangible, to come together in 
mutual contact at their will; then what is the use of the active and passive 
organs of action, (if the will alone be effective of any purpose). 


18. As the intangible powers of the soul or spirit, bear no connection 
whatever with the outward objects of the world; some think they can have no 
effect on the internal organs of the body (in putting them to action). So please 
explain it more fully to me. 


19. Tell me, how you Yogis perceive the outward corporeal things in your 
inner incorporeal souls; and how your formless souls, can have any command 
over or any contact with solid bodies. 


20. Vasishtha replied: — Hear me tell you for rooting out all your doubts, 
and these words will not only be pleasing to your ears, but give you a 
conception of the unity of all things. 


21. There is nothing here, at any time, what you call as a solid substance or 
tangible body, but all is a wide and extended vacuum of the rare and subtle 
spirit. 


22. This spirit is of the nature of the pure Intelligence, quite calm and 
intangible; and all material things as the earth, are as visionary as our dreams, 
and the creatures of imagination. 


23. There was nothing in the beginning, nor shall there be anything at the 
end; for want of a cause for its creation or dissolution; the present existence is 
an illusion, as any fleeting shape and shadow appearing before the dreaming 
mind. 


24. The earth and sky, the air and water, and the hills and rivers that appear 
to sight; are lost sight of by the abstracted Yogi; who by means of his 
abstraction, sees them in their ideal and intangible forms. 


25. The outer elements and their inner perceptions, the earth, the wood and 
stones; are all but empty ideas of the intellect, which is the only real 
substratum of the ideas, and there is no reality besides. 


26. Attend now to the narrative of Aindava, in elucidation of this doctrine; 
this will not fail to gratify your ears, though I have once before related this to 
you. (In the former narration, the world was identified with the mind, and here 
it is represented as identical with the Intellect itself). 


27. Attend yet to the present narration, which I am going to relate in answer 
to your question; and whereby you will come to know these hills and others, 
to be identic with your intellect. 


28. There lived once in days of yore, a certain Brahman in some part of the 
world, who was known under the name of Indu, and was famed for his 
religious austerities and observance of vedic ceremonies. 


29. He had ten sons by whom he was surrounded like the world by its ten 
sides (of the compass); who were men of great souls, of magnanimous spirits, 
and were revered by all good and great men. 


30. In course of time, the old father met with his demise, and departed from 
his ten sons as the eleventh Rudra, at the time of the dissolution of the world. 


31. His chaste wife followed his funeral (by concremation), for fear of the 
miseries of widowhood; just as the evening twilight follows like a faithful 
bride, the departing daylight with the evening star shining upon her forehead 
(in token of the vermeil spot on women’s forehead). 


32. The sons then performed the funeral ceremonies, and in sorrow for their 
deceased sire, they left their home and domestic duties and retired to the 
woods for holy devotion. 


33. They practiced the best method for the intensity of their attention, and 
which is best calculated to secure the consummation of their devotion; and 
was the constant reflection of their identity with Brahma, (in the formula we 
are the lords of all, about us). 


34. Thinking so in themselves, they sat in lotus like posture; and wishing to 
gain the knowledge of the unity of all things, they did what you shall be glad 
to learn from me. 


35. They thought they sustained in them the whole world, which is presided 
over by the lotus-born Brahma; and believed themselves to be transformed, to 
the form of the mundane God in an instant. 


36. Believing themselves as Brahma, they sat long with the thought of 
supporting the world; and remained all along with their closed eyes, as if they 
were mere figures in painting. 


37. With this belief they remained fixed and steady at the same spot, and 
many a month and year glided over their heads and motionless bodies. 


38. They were reduced to dry skeletons, parts of which were beaten and 
devoured by rapacious beasts; and some of their limbs were at once severed 


and disappeared from their main bodies, like parts of a shadow by the rising 
sun. 


39. Yet they continued to reflect that they were the God Brahma and his 
creation also, and the world with all its parts, were contained in themselves. 
(i.e., They considered themselves as Virdj, the form of macrocosm). 


40. At last, their ten bodiless minds, were thought to be converted to so 
many different worlds, in their abstract meditation of them. (i.e., Each of them 
viewed himself as a cosmos). 


41. Thus it was by the will of their intellects, that each of them became a 
whole world in himself; and remained so in a clear or abstract view of it, 
without being accompanied by its grosser part. 


42. It was in their own consciousness, that they saw the solid earth with all 
its hills, etc., in themselves; because all things have reference to the intellect, 
and are viewed intellectually only (or else they are nothing). 


43. What is this triple world, but its knowledge in our consciousness, 
without which we have no perception of it, and with which we have a clear 
conception of everything. So all things are of the vacuous nature of our 
consciousness, and not otherwise. 


44. As the wave is no other than the water of the sea, so there is nothing 
movable or immovable whatever, without our conscious knowledge of it. 


45. As the Aindavas remained in their vacuous forms of intellectual worlds 
in the open air; so are these blocks of wood and stone also, pure intellectual 
beings or concept in the sphere of our minds. 


46. As the volitions of the Aindavas, assumed the forms of the world, so 
did the will of lotus-born Brahma take the form of this universe. (So says the 
veda: — The divine will produced the world, just as the adage goes, the will is 
the mother of the act). 


47. Therefore, this world together with all these hills and trees; as also 
these great elements and all other bodies, appertain to the intellect only, which 
is thus spread out to infinity. 


48. The earth is the intellect, and so are its trees and mountains, and heaven 
and sky also the intellect only; there is nothing beside the intellect, which 


includes all things in itself, like the intellectual worlds of the Aindavas. 


49. The intellect like a potter, forms everything upon its own wheel; and 
produces this pottery of the world, from the mud of its own body, (out of its 
own intellectual substance). 


50. The sensible will being the cause of creation, and framer of the 
universe, could not have made anything, which is either insensible or 
imperfect in its nature, and neither the mineral mountains nor the vegetable 
production, are devoid of their sensations. 


51. Should the world be said to be the work of design, or of the 
reminiscence or former impression or of the Divine will; yet as these are but 
different powers of the Intellect, and are included under it; the world then 
proves to be the production of the intellect, under some one of its attributes as 
it is said before. (Hence there is no gross body as the product of intelligent 
Intellect). 


52. Therefore, there cannot be any gross substance in the Divine Intellect 
which blazes as a mine of bright gems, with the gemming light of 
consciousness in universal soul of God. 


53. Anything, however, mean or useless, is never apart from the Divine 
soul; and as it is the nature of solar light to shine on all objects, so doth the 
light of intellect, take everything in the light of the Great Brahma, which 
pervades alike on all. 


54. As the water flows indiscriminately upon the ground, and as the sea 
laves all its shores, with its boisterous waves; so doth the intellect ever 
delight, to shed its lustre over all objects of its own accord, and without any 
regard to its near or distant relation. 


55. As the great creator evolves the world, like the petals of his lotiform 
navel, in the first formative period of creation; so doth the divine intellect, 
unfold all the parts of the mundane system from its own penetralia, which are 
therefore not distinct from itself. 


56. The Lord is unborn and increate, and unconfined in his nature and 
purely vacuous in his essence; he is calm and quiescent, and is immanent in 
the interim of ens and nil; (i.e., of existence and non-existence). This world 
therefore, is no more than a reflexion of the intellectual or its ideal pattern in 
Divine Mind. 


57. Therefore, the ignorant man who declares the insensibility of inanimate 
objects, is laughed at by the wise, who are sensible of their sensibility in their 
own kinds. Hence the rocks and trees which are situated in this ideal world, 
are not wholly devoid of their sensations and feelings. 


58. The learned know these ideal worlds in the air, to be full with the 
Divine soul; and so they know this creation of Brahma’s will, to be but an airy 
utopia only, and without any substantiality in them. 


59. No sooner is this material world, viewed in its aerial and intellectual 
light, than the distresses of this delusive world betake themselves to flight, and 
its miseries disappear from sight. 


60. As long as this intellectual view of the world, does not light to the sight 
of a man, so long do the miseries of the world, beset him thicker and thicker 
and closer on every side. 


61. Men besotted by their continued folly, and remaining blind to their 
intellectual view of the world, can never have its respite from the troubles of 
the world, nor find their rest from the hardness of the times. 


62. There is no creation, nor the existence or inexistence of the world, or 
the birth or destruction of anyone here; there is no entity nor non-entity of 
anything (beside the essence of the One). There is the Divine soul only, that 
glows serenely bright with its own light in this manner; or there is no light 
whatever except the manifestation of the divine spirit. 


63. The cosmos resembles a creeper, with the multitude of its budding 
worlds; it has no beginning nor end, nor is it possible to find its root or top at 
any time, or to discover the boundless extent of its circumference. Like a 
crystal pillar, it bears innumerable statues in its bosoms, which are thickly 
studded together without having their initium or end. 


64. There is but one endless being, stretching his innumerable arms to the 
infinity of space; I am that vacuous soul embracing everything ad infinitum, 
and I find myself as that stupendous pillar, in my uncreated and all 
comprehensive soul, which is ever as quiescent and transparent and without 
any change in itself. 


CHAPTER CLXXIX. 
The Doctrine of Pantheism or the One as All. 


Argument: — The intellectuality and incorporality of the World, preclude 
the idea of its materiality. 


Vasishtha continued: — Now as the triple world is known to be a purely 
intellectual entity; there is no possibility of the existence of any material 
substance herein, as it is believed by the ignorant majority of mankind. 


2. How then can there be a tangible body, or any material substance at all; 
and all these that appear all around to our sight, is only an intactile extension 
of pure vacuity. 


3. It is the emptiness of our intellectuality, and contained in the vacuity of 
the Divine Intellect; it is all an extension of calm and quiet intelligence, 
subsisting in the serene intelligence of the supreme One. 


4. All this is but the quiescent consciousness, and as a dream that we are 
conscious of in our waking state; it is a pure spiritual extension, though 
appearing as a consolidated expanse of substantial forms. 


5. What are these living bodies and their limbs and members, what are 
these entrails of theirs, and these bony frames of them? Are they not but mere 
shadows of ghosts and spirits, appearing as visible and tangible to us. (Or very 
likely, they resemble the phantoms of our dreams, and the apparitions that we 
see in the dark. — Gloss). 


6. The hands, the head, and all the members of the body, are seats of 
consciousness or percipience; where it is seated imperceptible and intangible, 
in the form of the sensorium or sensuousness. 


7. The cosmos appears as a dream in the vacuum of the Divine Mind; and 


may be called both as caused and uncaused in its nature, owing to its repeated 
appearance and eternal inherence in the eternal Mind. 


8. It is true that nothing can come out from nothing, or without its cause; 
but what can be the cause of what is eternally destined or ordained in the 
eternal mind. (Predestination and Preordination being the uncaused cause of 
all events). 


9. It is possible for a thing to come to existence, without any assignable 
cause or causality of it; and such is the presence of everything that we think of 
in our minds, (and so also is the appearance of this world in its intellectual 
light). 


10. If it is possible for things, ever to appear in their various forms in our 
dreams, and even in the unconscious state of our sleep; why should it be 
impossible for them to appear also in the day dream of our waking hours, the 
mind being equally watchful in both states of its being. 


11. Things of various kinds, are present at all times, in the all- 
comprehensive mind of the universal soul; these are uncaused entities of the 
Divine Mind, and are called to be caused also, when they are brought to 
appearance. 


12. As each of the Aindavas, thought himself to have become a hundred in 
his imagination; so every one of these imaginary worlds, teemed with millions 
of beings, — the mere creatures of our fancy. 


13. So is everybody conscious of his being many, either consecutively or 
simultaneously at the same time; as we think of our multiformity in the 
different parts and members of our bodies. (Or as the king Vipaschit viewed 
himself, as dilated in the sun, moon and stars, so also one man thinks himself 
as many, in different states of his life). 


14. As the one universal body of waters, diverges itself into a thousand 
beds and basins, and branches into innumerable channels and creeks, and as 
one undivided duration, is divided into all the divisions of time and seasons, 
(so doth the one and uniform soul become multiform and many). (As the sruti 
says: — aham-bahu-syam). 


15. All compact bodies are but the airy phantoms of our dream, rising in 
the empty space of our consciousness; they are as formless and rarefied, as the 
hollow mountain in a dream, and giving us a void notion of it. 


16. As our consciousness consists of the mere notions and ideas of things, 
the world must therefore be considered, as a mere ideal existence; and it 
appears in the sights of it and observes in the same light; as the fleeting 
notions of things glide over the void of the intellect. (The mind is conversant 
only with the ideas and not with the substance of things). 


17. Our knowledge and nescience of things, resemble the dreaming and 
sleeping states of the soul; and the world is same as the intellect, like the 
identity of the air with its breeze. 


18. The noumenon and the phenomenon, are both the one and same state of 
the Intellect; being the subjectivity of its vacuous self, and the objectivity of 
its own intellections and reveries; Therefore, this world appears as a 
protracted dream, in the hollow cavity of the sleeping mind. 


19. The world is a non-entity, and the error of its entity, is caused by our 
ignorance of the nature of God from the very beginning of creation. In our 
dream of the world, we see many terrific aspects of ghosts and the like; but 
our knowledge of its non-entity, and of the vanity of worldliness, dispel all 
our fears and cares about it. 


20. As our single self-consciousness, sees many things in itself; so does it 
behold an endless variety of forms, appearing in the infinite vacuity of the 
Divine Mind. 


21. As the many lighted lamps in a room, combine to emit one great blaze 
of light; so the appearance of this multiform creation, displays the 
Omnipotence of one Almighty Power. 


22. The creation is as the bursting bubble, or foam and froth of the 
mantling ocean of omnipotence; it appears as a wood and wilderness in the 
clouded face of the firmament, but disappears in the clear vacuous atmosphere 
of the Divine Mind; and there is no speck nor spot of creation in the infinite 
ocean of the Supreme Intellect. 


CHAPTER CLXXX. 
Brahma Gita or the story on Austere Devotee. 


Argument: — Vasishtha’s elucidation of the story of Kunda-danta at the 
request of Rama. 


Rama rejoined: — I pray you Sir, to remove the shade of a doubt from my 
mind, as the sunshine dispels the darkness from before it; in order to bring to 
light whatever is dark and obscure in the world. 


2. I beheld once a self-governed ascetic, who came to the seminary, where I 
was sitting amidst the synod of the sages and learned men, and conversing on 
subjects of theology and divinity. 


3. He was a learned Brahman, and of a godly appearance; he came from the 
land of the Videhas or the Mithilas, and was practiced in religious austerities, 
and was as unbearable in the lustre of his person as the terrific seer Durvasas 
self. 


4. On entering the assembly, he made his obeisance to the illustrious 
persons; when we also saluted him in return and advanced his seat for him to 
sit down. 


5. The Brahman being well seated, I picked up many discourses with him 
from the Vedanta, Sankhya, and Siddhanta philosophy, and when his 
weariness was gone, I made this question to him, saying: — 


6. Sir, you seem to be tired with your long journey to this place, please tell 
me, O eloquent Sir, from where you have started here today. 


7. The Brahman replied: — so it is, O fortunate prince, I have taken great 
pains to come up to this place; and now hear me to tell you the reason, that 
brings me hither to you. 


8. There is a district here, known by the name of Vaideha, it is equally 
populous as well as prosperous in all respects; and is a resemblance of its 
semblance of the heavenly paradise. 


9. There I was born and educated, and held my residence at the same place; 
and named as Kundadanta, from the whiteness of my teeth, bearing 
resemblance to the buds of Kunda flowers. 


10. I resigned afterwards my worldly concerns, and betook myself to travel 
far and wide about this earth; and resorted to the asylums of holy sages and 
saints, and to the shrines of gods to rest from my fatigue. 


11. I retired next to a sacred mountain, where I sat silent for a long period, 
practicing my devotional austerities. 


12. There I found a desert, which was devoid of grassy pastures and woody 
trees; and where the light of the sun and the shade of night, reigned by turns, 
as it was the open sky on earth. 


13. There is in the midst of it a branching tree, with little of its verdant 
leaves and leaf-lets; and the luminous sun dispensed his gentle beams, from 
the upper sky and through cooling foliage. 


14. There hung suspended under one of its boughs, a man of a holy mien; 
who blazed as the resplendent sun pendent in the open air, by the cords of his 
wide extending beams and radiating rays. 


15. His feet were tied upwards by a clotted cord of munja grass, and his 
head hung downward towards the ground beneath; and this gave him the 
appearance of an offshoot of the banian tree rooted in the earth below. 


16. Having then after a while, approached to him at that place, I saw him to 
have his two folded palms affixed to his breast (as if he was intent upon the 
meditation of the lord, with the devoutness of his heart). 


17. Advancing nearer to the body of the Brahman, I found it to be alive by 
its respiration, and from its having the feeling of touch, and the perception of 
heat and cold, and that of the breeze and change of weather. 


18. Afterwards, I employed myself solely, in my attendance on that devout 
personage only; and underwent all the rigours of the sun and seasons, until I 
was received into his confidence. 


19. I then asked him saying; who art thou lord, that hast thus betaken 
thyself to this sort of painful devotion; say, O long sighted seer, what is the 
aim and object of this thy protracted state of self-mortification at the peril- 
expense of thy precious life. 


20. He then replied to my question saying: — Tell me first, O devotee, 
what is the object of thy devotion and those of all other persons, that are 
devoted to the particular objects of their pursuit. (So it is useless to inquire 
into the aim and object of another, when there is nobody without his particular 
end in view). 


21. This he said as introductory to his speech to me; but being pressed 
further by my importunate inquiries, he gave the following answer to my 
questions. 


22. I was born, said he, at Mathura where I grew up from childhood to 
youth in the house of my father; and acquired my knowledge of philology and 
the arts in course of this time. 


23. I then learnt this also, that princes are the receptacles of all pleasures 
and enjoyments, and that it is the early bloom of youth, that is capable of the 
fruitions of life. 


24. Since then I began to reflect on my being the possessor of the seven 
continents of the earth; and to foster the ardent expectation, of the gratification 
of all my desires of this life. 


25. It is for this purpose that I have come to this place, and have employed 
myself in this state of devotion, for attainment of objects of my desire. 


26. Therefore, O thou disinterested and self-offered friend of mine, do thou 
now return to thy own country and desired abode; and leave me to remain in 
this state, with my firm resolution for the accomplishment of my desired 
object. 


27. Being thus bid by him to depart from that place, listen you now to what 
I replied unto him; this you will wonder at its rehearsal, and the wise will be 
gladdened in their hearts to learn. 


28. I addressed him, saying: — O holy saint, let me remain here at thy 
service, and underneath this holy tree, until you obtain the desired boon of 
your devotion. 


29. On my saying so, the meek minded devotee, remained as cool and quiet 
as a block of stone, and with his closed eye lids, he persisted in his dormancy 
as a dead body, without any motion in his outer limbs. 


30. I too continued to stay before him, as quiet and quiescent as a block of 
wood, and endured without shrinking the rigours of the climate and seasons, 
for full six months at that spot. 


31. I saw at one time, effulgent as the blazing sun, descending from the 
solar orb, and then standing in presence of the devotee. 


32. As this deific personage was adored mentally by the ascetic, and by 
bodily prostration of myself; he uttered his words, in a tone as sweet as the 
exudation of ambrosial sweetness. 


33. He said: — O painstaking Brahman, that hast long been pendent on the 
projected bough of this branching banian tree, suspend thy severe austerities, 
and accept thy desired boon, which I am ready to confer on thee. 


34. Thou shalt as thou wishest, reign over the seven oceans and continents 
of this earth; and with this present body, thou shalt rule over it, for seven 
thousand years. 


35. In this manner did this secondary sun, give his blessing to the devout 
ascetic; and was prepared to plunge into the bosom of the ocean out of which 
he rose of himself. (The sun is usually said to rise from and set in the 
mountain top, but he is made to rise out of and sink in the sea, according to 
the Grecian mythology). 


36. The Deity having departed, I accosted the ascetic hanging below the 
branch, and said to him I witnessed today what I had heard from before, that 
the gods are ever propitious to their suppliants. 


37. Now, O Brahman, as you have gained the object of your desire, it is 
desirable that you should give up your austerity, and pursue the proper 
callings and the course of your life. 


38. He having assented to my proposal, I ascended on the tree and loosened 
his feet therefrom; as they let loose the feet of an elephant from the fetters tied 
to its prop and post. 


39. Having then bathed himself, he made his offerings with his pure hands 


for the remission of his sins; and then with the fruits which he was fortunate 
to pluck from the tree, he broke the fast of his long lent. 


40. It was by virtue of his meritorious devotion, that we obtained plenty of 
the delicious fruits of that holy tree; where upon we refreshed ourselves, and 
subsisted for three days. 


41. Thus, this Brahman being desirous of obtaining the sovereignity of the 
earth, consisting of the septuple continents girt by the seven oceans all around, 
made his painful maceration with his uplifted feet and downward head, until 
he obtained desired boon from the god of day, and refreshed himself for three 
days at the spot, till at last both of us set out on our journey towards the city of 
Mathura. 


CHAPTER CLXXXI. 
Brahma-Gita Continued. 


Argument: — The guest’s description of the sanctuary of the goddess 
Gauri. 


The guest Kunda-danta resumed his narration, and said: — We then betook 
ourselves to our homeward journey, and bent our course towards the holy city 
of Mathura, which was as fair and splendid as the solar and lunar mansions, 
and the celestial city of Amaravati of Indra. 


2. We reached at the rustic habitation of Raudha, and halted at the mango 
forest over an adjacent rock. Then we turned towards the city of Salisa, where 
we remained two days in the cheerfulness of our spirits. 


3. We passed our itinerant time, with that hilarity of our hearts, which ever 
attends on travelling through unknown places and scenes; and the succeeding 
season of our halting, was passed in our repose under the cooling shade of 
woodland arbours, and refreshing ourselves in the cooling brooks and breezes. 


4. The faded flowers which were thrown down in profusion, from the 
flowery creepers growing on the banks of rivers; the dashing of the waves, the 
humming of the bees, and the singing of birds, are delightsome to the souls of 
passing travellers. 


5. The thickening and cooling shades of beachening trees, the droves of 
deer and the flights of chirping birds; and the frozen ice and dew drops, 
hanging tremulously as pearls on the leaves of verdant trees, and at the ends 
of the blades of green grass (are refreshing to the soul of the weary 
passenger.) 


6. We passed many days through woods and forests, and over hills and 
dales, through caves and defiles, over marshes and dry lands, and in cities and 


villages; and also crossed over a great many rivers and channels and running 
waters. 


7. We passed our nights under the arbours of thick plantain forests; and 
being weary with walking over snow and dew, we laid ourselves on beds 
made of plantain leaves. 


8. On the third we came to a jungle full of gigantic woods and trees, which 
for want of human habitation, seemed to have divided the empire of heaven 
between themselves, (meaning that there was to be seen nothing, except the 
skies above and woods below). 


9. Here that devotee left the right path, and entered into another forest, with 
uttering these useless words to me (which were discursive and preventive of 
our returning to our respective habitations). 


10. He said: — Let us go to the sanctuary of Gauri here, which is the resort 
of many munis and sages from all quarters; and is the asylum to which my 
seven brothers, have repaired for attainment of their objects. 


11. We are eight brothers in all, and all of us have fostered great ambitions 
in various respects; we are all equally resolved to devote ourselves to rigorous 
austerities, for the success of our determined purposes. 


12. It is for that purpose that they have sought their shelter in this holy 
asylum, and with fixed determination practiced various acts of self- 
mortification, whereby they have been expurgated from their sins. 


13. Ere this, I accompanied my brothers to this place, and remained here 
with them for six months together; and now I find this same sanctuary of 
Gauri in the same state as I had seen it before. 


14. I see the piece of ground, overhung by the shady flower of trees; under 
the shade of which I see the young fauns to be reposing in this their peaceful 
retreat; I see also the leafy bowers with the sprays of birds thereon, listening 
to the recital of the Sdstras, conducted by the sages underneath. 


15. Let us therefore, go to the asylum of the sages, which resembles the 
seat of Brahma crowded by the Brahmans on all sides; here shall our bodies 
be purified of their sins, and our hearts will be sanctified by the holiness of the 
place. 


16. It is by sight of these holy men of superior understanding, that the 
minds of even the learned and saintlike persons, and even those of the 
knowers of truth are purified, (wherefore it must be sanctifying to us also). 


17. Upon his saying so, we both went together to that asylum of the 
recluses of sages and hermits; but to our great disappointment, we saw 
nothing but the appearance of a total desolation. 


18. There was not a tree nor plant, and neither a shrub nor creeper to be 
seen on the spot; nor was there any man or muni or a boy or child was met 
thereabouts; nor any altar or priest was there anywhere. 


19. It was only a vast desert, all void and devoid of bounds; an unlimited 
space of burning heat, and appeared as the blank expanse of the sky, had 
fallen down on the ground below. 


20. Ah woe to us! what is all this come to be! said we to one another; and 
saying so, we continued to rove about for a long while, until we chanced to 
espy an arbour at some distance. 


21. It presented a thickly shady and cooling aspect, resembling that of a 
dark and drizzling cloud in the sky; and there was observed an aged hermit, 
sitting in his meditation beneath it. 


22. We two sat upon the grassy spot, spread out in front of the eremite; and 
though we kept sitting there for a long time, yet we could find no respite in the 
abstracted meditation of the muni. 


23. Then feeling uneasy at my staying there for a long while, I broke my 
silence in impatience, and cried out in a loud voice, saying: — suspend, O 
sage, the life-long musings of your mind. 


24. My loud cry awakened the muni from the trance of his reverie, as the 
roaring of a raining cloud wakens the sleeping lion, rising straight with his 
yawning mouth (and stretched out limbs). 


25. He then said unto us: — who are ye pious persons, that are in this 
desert; say where is that sanctuary of Gauri gone, and who is it that has 
brought me hither. Tell me what means this change and what time is this. 


26. Upon his saying so, I replied to him saying, — you Sir, know all this 
and not we; say how is it that you being a sage and seer do not know yourself? 


27. Hearing this, the holy man betook himself to his meditation again, and 
there saw all the events that had occurred to himself and us also. 


28. He remained a moment in deep thought, and then coming to himself 
from his abstraction, he said unto us, — learn now about this marvelous event, 
and know it to be a delusion only by your good common sense. 


29. This young kadamba tree, that you are seeing in this desert, and that 
gives me a shelter underneath it, and is now flowering in kindness to me. 


30. It was for some reason or other, that the chaste goddess Gauri, dwelt for 
full ten years upon it, in the form of the goddess of speech, and underwent all 
the inclemencies of the seasons sitting there upon. 


31. It was by her that a goodly grove, and an extensive forest was stretched 
out at this place, which became therefore known by her name, and was 
decorated by the flora of all the seasons. 


32. It was a romantic spot to all grades of gods and men, who kept singing 
and sporting here in concert with the melody of tuneful and sportive birds; the 
air was filled with clouds of flowers, which brightened as myriads of moon in 
the sky; while the flying dust of full-blown lotuses, perfumed the air on all 
sides of the forest. 


33. The pollen of mandara and other flowers, perfumed the air around; and 
the opening bud and blooming blossoms brightened as moons; the flowering 
creepers sent forth their fragrance all about, and the whole courtyard of the 
forest, seemed to be strewn over with perfumery. 


34. Its bowers were the seats of the god of the vernal season and flora; and 
the orchestra of black-bees, sitting and singing in concert with their mates on 
the top of flowers; the flower beds were spread as the outstretched sheet of 
moon light, and as cradles for the swinging sports of siddha and celestial 
damsels. 


35. Here were brooks frequented by cranes and herons, and aquatic birds of 
various kinds; and there, spacious lawns on the ground, graced by cocks and 
peacocks, and land birds of various hues. 


36. The Gandharvas and Yakshas, Siddhas and the hosts of celestials, 
bowed down to this kadamba tree, and their coronets rubbed against the 
branch, which was sanctified by the touch of the feet of the goddess 


Saraswati, alias Gauri. And the flowers of the tree, resembling the stars of 
heaven, exhaled their fragrance all around. 


37. Gentle zephyrs were playing amidst the tender creeper, and diffusing a 
coldness throughout the secret bowers, even in the light and heat of the 
blazing sunshine; while the flying dust of the kadamba and other flowers, 
spread a yellow carpet all over the ground. 


38. The lotus and other aquatic flowers, were blooming in the brooks, 
frequented by storks and cranes and herons and other watery birds, that 
sported upon them; while the goddess regaled herself amidst the flowery 
groves, which displayed her wondrous powers in the variety of their flowers. 


39. It was in such a forest as this, that the goddess Gauri, the consort of the 
god Hara, resided at this spot for a long time, for some cause known to her 
godly mind; and then by changing her name and form to that of kadamba, — 
Saraswati, she waved as gracefully as a kadamba flower, on the crown of the 
head of her spoused partner, Hara or Siva. 


CHAPTER CLXXXII. 
Brahma Gita Continued. Sovereignty of the Seven 
Continents. 


Argument: — Meeting of the Kadamba Hermit with his brothers, their bane 
and blessing and final success. 


The old anchorite resumed, and said: — The goddess Gauri dwelt for a full 
decade of years, on this very Kadamba tree of her own accord; and then she 
left this arbour of her own will, in order to join her lord Hara on his left side. 


2. This young Kadamba tree, being verified by the ambrosial touch of the 
goddess, never becomes old, nor fades or withers; but ever remains as fresh as 
a child in the lap of her mother. 


3. After the goddess had left this place, that great garden was converted to a 
common bush, and was frequented only by woodmen, who earned their 
livelihood by woodcutting. 


4. As for myself, know me to be the king of the country of Malwa, and to 
have now become a refugee in this hermitage of holy ascetics, by abdication 
of my kingdom. 


5. On my resorting to this place, I was honoured here by the inhabitants of 
this holy asylum; and have taken any abode beneath this kadamba tree, where 
I have been in my meditative mood ever since that time. 


6. It was some time ago, that you Sir, had come here in company with 
seven brethren, and betaken yourselves to the practice of your religious 
austerities. 


7. So did you eight persons reside here as holy devotees since that time, 


and were respected by all the resident devotees of this place. 


8. It came to pass in process of time, that one of them removed from here to 
the Sri mountain; and then the second among them, went out to worship the 
lord Kartikeya in another place. 


9. The third has gone to Benares and the fourth to the Himalayas; and the 
remaining four remained at this place, and employed themselves to their 
rigorous austerities. 


10. It was the earnest desire of each and every one of them, to become the 
sovran lord of all the seven continents of the earth. 


11. At last they all succeeded to accomplish their objects of their self-same 
desire, by the grace and boon which obtained from the respective deity of 
their adoration, that was pleased with the austerity of his particular devotee. 


12. The brethren returned to their habitation, when you had been employed 
in your devotion; and after their enjoyment of the fruition of this earth in 
golden age, they have ascended to the empyrean of Brahma. 


13. O Sir, those brothers of yours, finding their respective gods propitious 
to them, and willing to confer blessings upon them, had made the following 
request of them, saying: — 


14. Ye gods! make our seven brothers, the lords of the seven continents of 
the earth; and let all our subjects be truthful and sincere, and attached to the 
occupations of their respective orders. 


15. The gods that were adored by them, gladly occupied their prayer; and 
having assented to their request, disappeared from them, and vanished in the 
open sky. 


16. They all went afterwards to their respective habitation, and met death 
except this one who is now here. 


17. I only have been sitting alone, devoutly intent upon meditation; and 
have remained as motionless as a stone, beneath this kadamba tree, which is 
sacred to the goddess of speech. 


18. Now as the seasons and years, have been rolling on upon my devoted 
head, I have lived to see this forest, to be broken and cut down by woodmen, 


living in the skirts of these woods. 


19. They have spared only this unfading kadamba tree, which they had 
made an object of their veneration, as the abode of the goddess of speech; and 
me also whom they believe to be absorbed in inflexible meditation. 


20. Now sirs, as you seem to have newly come to this place, and bear the 
appearance of aged ascetics; I have therefore related to you all that I have 
come to know by my cogitation only. 


21. Rise then, ye righteous men, and proceed to your native homes; where 
you will meet your brothers in the circle of their family and friends. 


22. You will find eight of your brothers, remaining in their abode; and 
resembling the eight high minded Vasus, sitting in the high heaven of 
Brahma. 


23. After that great devotee had said so far, I interrupted him saying: — I 
have a great doubt in this wondrous relation of yours, which you will be 
pleased to expound it to me. 


24. We know this earth to be composed of seven continents only, how then 
is it possible for eight brothers, to be the lord of them all, at the one and same 
time. 


25. The kadamba ascetic said: — It is not inconsistent what I have related 
to you, there are many such are seemingly incongruous, but become evident 
when they are explained. 


26. These eight brothers, having passed their periods of asceticism, will all 
of them become lords of the seven continents of the earth, in their domestic 
circles. (i.e., Each thinks himself as such). 


27. All these eight brothers, will remain in their respective houses on the 
surface of the earth; and will there become the lords of the septuple 
continents, in the manner as you shall now hear from me. 


28. Every one of these eight persons had each a wife at home, who were of 
unblemished character and persons withal; and resembled the eight stars or 
planets of heavens, in the brightness of their bodies. (They were equally 
chaste and fair and loving wives also). 


29. After these eight brothers have departed, to conduct their protracted 
devotion abroad; their love-lorn wives became disconsolate at their 
separation, which is altogether intolerable to faithful wives. 


30. They in their great sorrow of spirit, made painful austerities to the 
memory of the absent lords; and conducted a hundred Chandrayana vows and 
rites, to the satisfaction of the goddess Parvati. (The Olympian Juno, and the 
patroness of chastity). 


31. Invisibly the goddess appeared to them, and spake her words to them 
separately in their inner apartments; after each and every one of them had 
performed her daily devotion to the goddess. 


32. The goddess said: — O Child, that hast been long fading away by thy 
austerities, like the tender shoot under the scorching sun; now accept this 
boon to thy heart’s desire, both for thyself as also for thy husband. 


33. Hearing this voice of the goddess of heaven, the lady Chirantika, 
offered her handfuls of flowers to her, and began to address her prayer to the 
goddess, to her heart’s satisfaction. 


34. The reserved and close tongued damsel, uttered her words in a slow 
flattering voice flushed with joy; and addressed the heavenly goddess, as the 
peahen accosts the rising cloud. 


35. Chirantika said: — O goddess, as thou bearest eternal love to Siva, — 
the god of gods, such is the love I bear also to my husband, O make him 
immortal. 


36. The goddess replied: — Know, O goodly minded lady, that it is 
impossible to gain immortality, from the inflexible decree of destiny, ever 
since the creation of the world. No devotion, austerity nor charity can buy life, 
ask therefore, some other blessing. 


37. Chirantika said: — O goddess! if it be impossible to attain immortality, 
then ordain it thus far; that he being dead, his soul may not depart beyond the 
confines of this house of his. 


38. When the body of my husband, falls dead in this house; then confer me 
this boon, that his parted soul may never depart from this place. 


39. Be it so, O daughter, that your husband being gone to the other world, 


you may still continue to be his beloved wife, even after his demise. 


40. Saying so, the goddess Gauri held her silence in the midst of the air; as 
the sound of the clouds is stopped, after its betokening the welfare of the 
world. 


41. After disappearance of the goddess in air, the husbands of these ladies 
returned to them from all sides, and at the lapse of some time after they had 
received their desired blessings. 


42. Now was there a mutual interview of the wives with their husbands, 
and general meeting of the brothers with each other, and with their friends and 
relatives. 


43. Hear now a wonderful event, which happened to them at this time; and 
which presented itself as an obstacle, towards the achievement of their noble 


purpose. 


44. It was at the time when the brothers were employed in their devotion, 
that their parents had gone out with their wives in search of them, and were 
wandering about the hermitages of saints, with their sorrowful hearts. 


45. Unmindful of their personal pains and pleasures, for the sake of the 
welfare of their sons, they intended to see the village of Kalapa, which lay on 
their way. 


46. Passing by the village of munis or saints, they espied on their way a 
white man of short stature, with grey and erect hairs on his head, and his body 
bedaubed with ashes. 


47. Thinking him to be an ordinary old passenger, the parents forgot to do 
him due honour, and let the dust of the ground they trod upon, fly unwarily to 
his sacred person. This irritated the old passenger, who thus bespake to him in 
his ire. 


48. You great fool that are going on pilgrimage in company with thy wife 
and daughters-in-law; don’t you heed me the sage Durvasas, that you slight to 
do me due reverence. 


49. For this act of thy negligence, the boons so dearly earned by thy sons 
and daughters in law will go for nothing, and will be attained with their 
contrary effect. 


50. On hearing this malediction, the old parents and their daughters in law, 
were proceeding to do him reverence, when the ancient sage disappeared from 
their sight and vanished in air. 


51. At this the parents and their daughters, were greatly dismayed and 
disheartened; and returned disappointed to their home, with their melancholy 
countenances. 


52. Therefore I say, there was not the only inconsistency, in each of the 
brothers reigning over the seven continents all at once; but there were many 
other odds awaiting upon them as on all human wishes; and these occurring as 
thickly one after the other as the sores and ulcers growing on goitres. (Or 
pouches on the throat). 


53. There are as many oddities and vanities, always occurring in the 
wishes, and aerial castles of the vacuous mind; as the numberless portents and 
comets and meteors and unnatural sights, are seen to appear in the empty sky. 


CHAPTER CLXXXIII. 
Description of the seven continents. 


Argument: — Brahma’s relation of the contending sides of blessing and 
imprecation. 
Kunda-Danta rejoined: — I then asked the hermit of Gauri’s asylum, 


whose head was hoary with age, and whose hair resembled the dried blades of 
withered grass. 


2. There are but seven continents only, that composed this earth; how then 
could every one of the eight brothers, become the sole lord of earth at one and 
the same time. 


3. Again, how could a person, that had no egress from his house, conquer 
the seven continents abroad, or govern them himself (by sitting quietly at 
home). 


4. How could they that had the boon on one hand, and its contrary curse on 
the other, go in either way which are opposed to one another, as the cool 
shade of trees and the heat of sunshine? 


5. How can opposite qualities reside together at the same time, which is as 
impossible as the container and contained to become the same thing? (Here 
the blessing of the gods and the curse of the sage, must counteract one 
another, and neither of them could effect anything). 


6. The Hermit of the asylum returned: — Attend, O holy man, to my 
relation of the sequel of their tale; and you will come to see the sequence of 
their contrary fates. 


7. As for you two, you will reach to your home, after eight days from this 
place; and there meet with your relatives, with whom you will live happily for 


some time. 


8. These eight brothers also, having joined with their families at home, will 
breathe their last in course of time; and have their bodies burnt by their friends 
and relations. 


9. Then their conscious souls, will remain separately in air for a little while; 
and there continue in a state of torpidity, as in the insensibility of sleep. 


10. All this interval their acts will appear, in the vacuous space of their 
minds, for the sake of receiving their retributive justice; and also the blessing 
of gods and the curse of the sage, will wait on them at this time. 


11. The acts will appear in the shapes of the persons to whom they were 
done and the blessings and imprecation likewise will assume their particular 
forms, in order to make their appearance before them. 


12. The blessings will assume the forms of fair moon-bright bodies, having 
four arms on each, and holding a lotus bud, a club and other weapons in each 
of them. 


13. The curse will take the forms of Siva with his three eyes, and holding 
the lance and mace in his either hand; and having a dark terrific body, with a 
surly grim and frowning countenance. 


14. The Blessings will vauntingly say: — Avaunt thou accursed curse! it is 
now our time to work; as it is with the seasons to act their parts at their proper 
times. 


15. The curse will say in his turn: — Be afar from here; ye blessed 
blessings, and do not intrude upon my time; it will take effect as any one of 
the seasons, nor is there anybody capable of counteracting its wonted course. 


16. The blessings will rejoin and say: — Thou cured curse, art but a 
creature of an human sage; but we are messengers of the God of day; now as 
preference is given to the first born God of light, over a human being (who is 
the last work of God); it is proper that we should have our precedence here (in 
the present case). 


17. Upon the blessings saying so, the personified curse of the sage got 
enraged, and returned in reply saying, I am no less the creation of a God than 
you are, since we are born of the God Rudra by his consort Rudrani, — the 


Fury. 


18. Rudra is the greatest of gods, and the sage was born with a portion of 
Rudra’s prowess; saying so the accursed curse lifted up its head, as high as the 
exalted summit of a mountain. 


19. On seeing the haughty high-headedness of the personation of curse; the 
personified image of the boon smiled scornfully at him, and then made his 
reply in his speech of well weighed words. 


20. O thou miscreant curse, leave thy wickedness and think on the end of 
this affair; as also about what is to be done, after termination of all this 
altercation of ours. 


21. We must have recourse to the father of the gods, for his favourable 
decision of the case, is it not therefore better for us to do even now what must 
come to be finally determined by him. 


22. The curse on hearing these words of the personified boon replied: — 
well, I agree to what you say; because a fool even cannot decline to accept the 
reasonable proposal of a person. 


23. Then the curse agreed to resort to the abode of Brahma; in company 
with the divine Blessing; because the great-minded gods are always resorted 
to by the wise, for the dissipation of their doubts. 


24. They bended down before Brahma, and related all that had occurred 
between them; and the god on hearing the whole on both sides, replied to 
them in the following manner. 


25. Brahma said: — Hearken unto me, ye master of blessing and curse, and 
let him have the precedence of the other, that is possessed of intrinsic merit 
and essence. 


26. Upon hearing this from the mouth of the great god, they both entered in 
their turn into the heart of one another, in order to sound their understandings, 
and descry their respective parts. 


27. They then having searched into the eternal essentialities of one another, 
and having known their respective characters; came out in presence of the 
God, and besought him by turns. 


28. The curse said: — I am overcome, O Lord of creatures, by this my 
adversary, in my having no internal merit in myself, and finding the curses of 
my foe, to be as sound and solid as the hard stony rock and the strong 
thunderbolt. 


29. But both ourselves and the blessings, being always but intellectual 
beings, we have no material body whatever to boast of at any time. 


30. The Blessing replied: — The intellectual blessing, which its giver (the 
god in the sun), has given to its askers the Brahmans, is here present before 
you; and this is entrusted to my charge (to be delivered unto them). 


31. The body of every one is the evolution of one’s intelligence, and it is 
this body which enjoys the consequence of the curse or blessing that is passed 
on one according to his knowledge of it; whether it is in his eating or drinking 
or in his feeling of the same, in all his wandering at all times and places. (i.e., 
The consciousness of one’s merits and demerits, accompanies him 
everywhere, and makes him enjoy or suffer their results accordingly). 


32. The blessing received from its donor, is strengthened in the mind of the 
donee in time; and this acting forcibly within one’s self, overcomes at last the 
power or effect of the curse. (i.e., Firm good will, turns away the evil ones). 


33. The donor’s bestowal of a blessing, to his supplicants for it; becomes 
strong and effectual only, when it is deeply rooted and duly fostered in one’s 
self. (i.e., A good given us by others, is of no good, unless we cultivate it well 
ourselves). 


34. It is by means of the continued culture of our conscious goodness, and 
by the constant habit of thinking of our desert, that these become perfected in 
one’s self, and convert their possessor to their form. (It is the habitual mode of 
the mind’s thought, that makes the future man, be it a holy or accursed one). 


35. The pure and contrite conscience alone, consummates one’s 
consciousness in time; but the impure conscience of the evil minded, never 
finds its peace and tranquility. Hence the Brahmans’ thoughts of the blessing, 
had taken the possession of their minds, and not that of the curse, because the 
earlier one, has the priority over the latter, though it be that of a minute only, 
(as the law of primogeniture, supersedes the claim of youngsters to state); and 
there is no rule; — 


36. Nor force of pride to counteract this law. (Hence, the blessing of the 


god, being prior to the curse of the sage, must have its precedence over the 
latter). 


37. But where both sides are of equal force, there both of them have their 
joint effect upon the same thing; so the curse and blessing being conjoined 
together, must remain as the commingling of milk with water. 


38. The equal force of the blessing and curse, must produce a double or 
divided effect on the mind of man; as a person dreaming of the fairy city in his 
sleep, thinks himself as turned to one of its citizens, (without losing the idea 
of his own personality; so a man has a different idea of himself, in different 
states of his life). 


39. Now pardon me, O Lord for my repetition of the same truths before 
thee that I have learnt from thee, and permit me now to take leave of thee, and 
depart to my place. 


40. Upon his saying so, the curse felt ashamed in itself, and fled away from 
the presence of the god; as the ghosts and goblins fly away from the air, at the 
dispersion of darkness from the sky. 


41. Then the other blessing, (which was given by the goddess Gauri to the 
ladies of these brothers), concerning the restriction of their departed ghosts, to 
the confines of their house, came forward and presented itself before Brahma 
in lieu of the curse, and began to plead his case, as a substitute does for his 
constituent. 


42. He said: — I know not, O Lord of gods, how human souls can fly over 
the seven continents of the earth, after their separation from their dead bodies 
(Deign to explain this therefore unto me.) 


43. I am the same blessing of the goddess, that promised unto them their 
dominion over the seven continents in their own house; and also their 
conquest of the whole earth within its confines. 


44. Now tell me, O Lord of gods, how am I to restrain their spirits to the 
narrow limits of their own abodes; and at the same time confer the domain of 
the septuple earth, to each and every one of them (as it is destined to them by 
the blessing of the God of day.) 


45. Brahma responded: — Hear me, O thou blessing of conferring the 
realms of the seven continents on each of them; and thou the boon of 


detaining their departed spirits within the confines of these mansions; that 
both of you are successful in executing your respective purposes on them. 


46. Now do you retire from this place with full assurance in yourselves, 
that the delivered ghosts of these brothers; will never quit nor ever depart 
from their present abodes after their demise; but continue to reside there 
forever more; with the belief of their being the Lords of the seven regions of 
this earth. (It is the firm belief of the mind of the possession of anything, that 
makes it the true possessor thereof, much more than its actual enjoyment of 
the same). 


47. Their souls will remain at proper distances from each other, after the 
loss and extinction of their frail bodies; and will deem themselves as lords of 
the seven regions of earth, though dwelling in the empty air of their own 
abodes. 


48. How could there be the eight regions and seven continents of the earth, 
when to all appearance the surface of the earth, presents but a flat level 
everywhere. 


49. Tell us Lord! where are these different divisions of the earth situated, 
and in what part of their petty abode; and is it not as impossible for the small 
place of their house to contain this wide earth in it, as it is for the little cell of 
a lotus bud to hide an elephant in its pericarp. 


50. Brahma replied: — It being quite evident to you as to ourselves also, 
that the universe is composed of an infinite vacuity only; it is not impossible 
for its being contained within the hollow of the human heart, as in the minute 
particle of the vacuous mind, which contains all things in it in the manner of 
its dreams. 


51. If it were possible for the minute granule of their vacuous minds, to 
contain the figures of their houses and their domestic circles within itself, why 
should it be thought impossible for them, to compress the greater and lesser 
circle of this earth also, within their ample space. 


52. After the demise of a person, the world exhibits itself in the same form 
as it is, in the minute atom of his mind; and this is but a vacuous mass of the 
visible and material world, in its invisible and imaginary figure. 


53. It is in this invisible particle of the mind, that the world is seen in its 
abstract form, within the precincts of the body and abode of everybody; and 


this earth appears to be drawn in it as in a map, with all its seven-fold 
continents and the contents thereof. 


54. Whatever is manifest in the mind, is a mere mental conception and 
inborn in the mind, and there is no such thing as an extraneous or material 
world in reality. It is the vacant mind that presents these vagaries of the world 
and all other visibles before its vision, as the vacuous firmament shows the 
variety of atmospherical appearances to our sight. 


55. The personified benediction, having learnt this abstract truth, from the 
mouth of the divine Brahma, who had conferred this boon to the Brahmanical 
brothers, abandoned his erroneous conception of the material world, and 
repaired to the abode of the deceased brethren, that had been released from the 
mistake of their mortal bodies. 


56. The personated blessing bowed down to the bounteous Brahma, and 
departing from his presence with speed, entered into the parlour of the eight 
brother kings, in his eight-fold spiritual personality, (called the ashta siddhi). 


57. They beheld the brothers there in their respective residences, each 
sitting as the Lord of the earth with its septuple continents, and all of them 
employed in the performance of their sacrifices and enjoyment of their 
blessings, like the eight Lordly Manus for the whole period of a day of 
Brahma. 


58. They were all friendly to each other, though unacquainted with the 
respective provinces of one another; each of them was employed in his 
concern with the world, without clashing with the authority of another over it. 


59. One of them who was handsome in the bloom of his youth; held his 
happy reign over the great city of Ujjain, which was situated in the precincts 
of his own house, or rather in the environs of his own mind. 


60. Another one of them had his domain over the country of Scythia (sdka), 
where he settled himself for his conquest of the Nagas (saccae); he cruises as 
a corsair in the wide outlandish seas, for his victory on every side. 


61. Another reigns secure in his capital of Kusadwipa, and confers perfect 
security to his subjects from all alarm; and like a hero who has quelled his 
enemies, he rests in peace on the bosom of his beloved, after all his conquest. 


62. Some one of them indulges himself to sport, in company with the 


celestial Nymphs of Vidyadhara; in skimming over the waters of the lakes on 
mountain tops, and in the gushing water falls on their side. 


63. Another one is engaged these eight days in conducting his horse 
sacrifice in his royal abode at Krauncha dwipa, which he has greatly 
aggrandised with his accumulated gold, from the other continents. 


64. Another one is employed in waging a battle in the Salmali continents, 
where his war elephants have assembled, and have been uprooting the 
boundary mountain from their bases with robust tusks. 


65. The Monarch of the Gomedha continent, who had been the eighth and 
last of the Brahman brothers, was smitten with love for the princess of the 
Pushkara dwipa; upon which he mustered a large armament for ravishing her 
in warfare. 


66. The monarch of the Pushkara continent, who was also the master of the 
Mountainous regions of Lokaloka; set out with his deputy to inspect the land 
of the gold mines. 


67. Thus, every one of these brothers, thought himself to be the Lord of his 
respective province, as his imagination portrayed unto him in the region of his 
mind. 


68. The Blessings then, having relinquished their several forms and 
personalities, became united and one with the consciousness of the Brahmans, 
and felt and saw whatever passed in them, as if they were passing in 
themselves likewise. (The divine blessing on them being no other than the 
approbation of their conscience). 


69. So these brothers became and found in themselves, what they had long 
been longing after, in their respective lordship over the seven regions of the 
earth, which they continued to enjoy ever since to their heart’s content. 


70. It was in this manner, that these men of enlarged understandings, 
obtained what they sought in their minds, by means of their austere devotion 
and firm devotedness to their purpose. So it is with the learned that they find 
everything beside them, whatever they are intent upon in their minds, by 
means of their acting upon the same principle, and using the proper means 
conducing to that end. 


CHAPTER CLXXXIV. 
A Lecture on the all Comprehensiveness of the soul. 


Argument: — Nature of the unenlightened soul, to represent unnumbered 
worlds within itself. 


Kunda-danta said: — I then asked the devotee sitting beneath the kadamba 
tree, to tell me how the seven large continents of the globe, could be contained 
within the narrow limits of the abodes of each of these brothers (which is next 
to an impossibility). 


2. The kadamba devotee replied: — The essence of the intellect though so 
very vacuous in itself, is notwithstanding the most capacious and ubiquious of 
anything in existence; and is present in its own nature with everything, 
wherever it is known to exist. 


3. The soul sees itself in the form of the triple world, and everything 
besides in its different nature and figure, without changing itself to any one of 
them. (i.e., The soul remains unchanged in all the changeful scenes of nature). 


4. Kunda-danta rejoined: — But how do you attribute the quality of variety 
or multiplicity, to the purely simple and immutable nature of the Supreme 
soul, as you see them appertaining to the intrinsic character of everything else 
in nature. (Or as Pope says: — That changed through all, yet in all the same; 
great in the earth, as in the ethereal frame). 


5. The kadamba devotee replied: — The sphere of the intellectual vacuum, 
is all quiet and serene, and there is nothing as any variety or multiformity in it; 
the changes that are apparent in its face, are no more, than the waves and 
eddies, whirling on the surface of the changeless main. 


6. It is in the immensity of intellectual vacuity, that infinite creations seem 
to be continually purling about, as the rising waves are seen to be whirling in 


the sea; and it is in its fathomless depth that they appear to sink, like the 
waters subsiding in the hollow of the deep. 


7. The substantial forms of things, that rise in the unsubstantial essence of 
the intellect, are as the various forms of substances, seen in the dreaming state 
of the soul, and all which are utterly forgotten in its state of sound sleep, — 
susupti. 


8. As a Hill seen in dream is no hill at all, and as things appearing to be in 
motion in dreaming, are found afterwards to be perfectly motionless; so are all 
things in nature but mere unrealities, and though as real from the real nature 
of soul itself. (ie., It is the intellect that fashions everything in its own 
manner, and its imagination gives a form to an airy nothing). 


9. The intellect is an immaterial substance, and neither creates nor 
perceives anything material by itself; but conceives everything as it is 
manifested to it in its idea in the beginning. (i.e., The ideas of things are 
inborn in the mind). 


10. As the intellect sees a great variety of objects in its dream, which it 
takes for realities for the time; so its belief in the reality of its ideas, causes it 
to conceive them as real entities. 


11. The vacuous intellect, which glitters of itself in its own state of 
transparence; comes to find the world shinning in the same light within itself. 
(i.e., The world is subjective with the intellect, and not a part from our 
intellectual light of the same). 


12. As we have the consciousness of heat in the fire, even when it is seen in 
a dream; so we are conscious of the presence of everything in our minds, even 
in the absence of the thing itself from us. (It was thus that the Brahman 
brothers were conscious of their lordship, even in their want of the realms 
themselves). 


13. And as we have the idea of the solidity of a pillar, from our dream of it 
in sleep; so have we the idea of the great variety of things in existence; 
although there is no diversity or difference in the nature of the One unvaried 
unity that pervades the whole. (And that shows its unchangeable self, as many 
and changed through all, — Aham-bahusyam). 


14. In the beginning, all substances were as pure and simple, as the essence 
of their maker by and after which they were made; and they still continue to 


be in the same state of their ideal purity, as they were originally made out of 
that airy entity and unity. 


15. As the tree is diversified in the various forms of its roots and fruits, and 
its leaves, flowers and the trunk; so is the Supreme unity varied in all and 
everywhere in his self-same and undivided essence. 


16. It is in the fathomless ocean of the Supreme essence, that the immensity 
of creation is subsisting like the waters of the deep; and it is in the boundless 
space of that transcendent vacuum, that the infinity of the worlds have been 
rolling on, in their original vacuous and apparently visible forms. 


17. The transcendental and comprehensible, i.e., the immaterial soul and 
the material world, are but commutual terms as the tree and arbour, and their 
difference lies in the intelligibleness of the one and unintelligibility of the 
other; but true intelligence leads us to the unconceivable One, while our 
ignorance of the same, deludes us to the knowledge of many, and tends to our 
distress only. (True happiness in our reliance on the unknown One only). 


18. The mundane and supermundane is surely the One and same thing, 
according to the deduction of spiritual philosophy; and the knowledge of this 
sublime truth, is sure to lead one to his ultimate liberation. 


19. The world is the product of the will of God, and the will is a power or 
faculty appertaining to the personality of the Deity; and the same being 
transmuted to the form of the world, it is proved that the world is the formal 
part of the Supreme soul. (Whose body nature is, and God the soul). 


20. He whom no words can define, and yet who defines the senses of 
words; who is subject to no law or prohibition, or to any state or condition of 
being, but appoints them for all sorts of beings, is indeed the only Lord of all. 


21. He that is ever silent but speaks through all, who is inactive as a rock 
but acts in all; who is always existent and appears as inexistent, is the 
Supreme Lord of all. 


22. That subtle essence that constitutes the solidity of all gross bodies, and 
remains undecayed in all frail bodies, is the pure Brahma himself; He has no 
volition or nolition of creation or destruction, and there is no possession or 
want of the property of anything. 


23. It is the one and invariable soul, that rests always in its state of rest and 


sleep, and perceives the succession of creation and destruction of the world, in 
its alternate states of dream and sound sleep, which present themselves as two 
pictures before its sight. 


24. It is also in the substratum of the intellect, that unnumbered worlds 
seem to rise and set in succession; they appear as passing pictures before the 
mind, without being rooted or painted therein. 


25. As the mixing of one thing with another, produces a different effect in 
the mixture; so doth the union of the mind with the organs of sense, cause a 
variety of impressions to be imprinted in the intellect. (So the commixture of 
curd and sugar creates a different flavour in the condiment. — Gloss). 


26. All things have their existence in the essence of the intellect only, 
without which nothing is knowable to anybody; hence there is nothing anew 
in nature, except its being but a representation of the original idea in the mind, 
(and this is evident from the identity and similarity of the ectypes with its 
antitypes. — Gloss). 


27. Hence our consciousness of the identity of things with the essence of 
our intellect, proves them to be as immaterial and immovable as their fixed 
ideas in the mind. 


28. Thus the world which is so visible and perceptible to us, is nothing but 
a mere nullity in reality; and whatever appears as existing herein, together 
with the great gods and angels, are no more than the false visions in our dream 
and fancy. 


29. We see the various fluctuations and phenomena, rising in the waters of 
the vast ocean of the intellect; and appearing in the forms of our joy and grief, 
and those of moving and unmoving bodies in creation. 


30. O that the nature and course of the world, should so obscure the bright 
mirror of the intellect; as to hide it under the dirt of our passions, and cover it 
under the clouds and snows of our ignorance. 


31. As spectres and dissolving views appear in the air, before the sight of 
the dim-sighted; so doth this shadow of the world appear as substance, to the 
view of the unspiritual myopist. 


32. Whatever we imagine, the same we find, and seem to enjoy for the 
time; and as we are delighted with the view of our imaginary city, so do we 


indulge ourselves in the sight of this air-drawn utopia of the world. 


33. As we seem to enjoy our ecstasy, in the fairy land of our fancy; so we 
are betaken by the delusion of this unreal world, under the belief of its reality. 


34. There is one eternal destiny, which ever runs apace in its wonted 
course; and destines all beings to continue in their allotted careers as ever 
before. 


35. It is destiny that produces the moving bodies from living beings, and 
the motionless ones from the unmoving; it is that predestination which has 
destined the downward course of water and fluids, and the upward motion of 
the flames of fire. 


36. It is that blind impulse, that impels the members of the body to their 
respective actions; and makes the luminous bodies to emit their light; it causes 
the winds to wind about in their continuous course, and makes the mountains 
to stand unmoved in their proper places. 


37. It makes the luminaries of heaven, to roll on in their regular 
revolutions, and causes the rains and dews of the sky, to pour down in their 
stated seasons; and it is this eternal destiny that directs the courses of years, 
ages and cycles, and the whole curricle of time to run its wonted course. 


38. It is the divine ordinance, that has ordained the limits of the earth and 
the distant ocean and seas, and has fixed the position of the hills and rocks in 
them; it has allotted the natures and powers of all things, and prescribed the 
laws of rights and duties for all and everyone. 


39. Kunda-danta rejoined: — The reminiscence of the scenes of past life, 
occurs in the present state of existence, in the forms of our imagination and of 
desire for the same; and these inward thoughts become the gist and marrow to 
frame our lives in their fashion; but tell me Sir, how could the first created 
beings in the beginning of creation have any reminiscence, whereupon their 
lives and natures were moulded? 


40. The devotee replied: — All these that offer themselves to our view, are 
quite unprecedented and without their original patterns in the mind, and 
resemble the sight of our own death that we happen to see in a dream. It is the 
omniscience of Brahma, that caused the first creation, and not his memory of 
the past as it is with us and other created beings. 


41. It is the nature of our intellect, to represent the imaginary city of the 
world in its empty vacuity; it is neither a positive reality, nor a negative 
unreality either; being now apparent and now lost to sight by itself. 


42. It is the clearness of the intellect, which represents the imaginary world 
in the manner of a dream; but the pure vacuous intellect, neither sees nor 
bears the remembrance of the world in itself. (It is the sight of a thing, that 
leaves its traces in the mind afterwards; but when there is no sight of a thing, 
there can be no remembrance of it). 


43. The wise that are devoid of joy and grief, and remain unchanged in 
prosperity and adversity; are men of right integrity and equanimity in their 
nature, and move on as equably as the wheel of fortune leads them onward. 


44. As the intellect retains in it, the remembrance of what it has seen in its 
dream; so does it bear in itself the false impression of this triple world to its 
end. 


45. It is only the reflexion of our consciousness, which passes under the 
name of the world; now knowing the nature of your consciousness as mere 
vacuousness, you will blot out the impression of the world also. 


46. That which is all and everything, and from which all have issued and in 
which they exist; know that All as all which fills all space, wherein all things 
are situated. 


47. I have thus fully explained to you, how you may come to know this 
creation as its creator, — the Great Brahma Himself; and have also 
expounded to you the means, whereby you may get rid of your impression of 
the phenomenal world. 


48. Now rise ye Brahmans and repair to your abodes, as the bees resort to 
their cells and calyxes of lotuses at the dusk of the day; go and perform your 
evening services, while I remain here in my pensive meditation, and absorbed 
in my spiritual ecstasy forever. 


CHAPTER CLXXXV. 
Admonition to and clairvoyance of Kunda-danta. 


Argument: — The return of the interlocutors to the abodes; Demise of the 
brothers and enlightenment of Kunda-danta. 


Kunda-danta rejoined: — The old sage having said so far, closed his eyes 
in meditation; and he became as motionless as a statue or picture, without any 
action of his breath and mind. 


2. And we prayed him with great fondness and endearment, yet he uttered 
not a word unto us; because he seemed to be so rapt in his abstraction, as to 
have become utterly insensible of the outer world. 


3. We then departed, from that place, with our broken hearts and dejected 
countenances; and were received after a few days journey, by our gladsome 
friends at home. 


4. We lived there in joyous festivity, as long as the seven brothers were 
living; and passed our time in narrations of our past adventures, and relations 
of the old accounts of bygone times. 


5. In course of time the eight brothers disappeared (perished) one by one, 
like the seven oceans at the end of the world, in the vast ocean of eternity; and 
were released like many of my friends also, from their worldly cares. 


6. After some time, the only friend that I had, sunk also like the setting sun 
in darkness; and I was left alone to bewail their loss in sorrow and misery at 
their separation. 


7. I then repaired in the sorrow of my heart, to the devotee under the 
Kadamba tree; in order to derive the benefit of his advice, to dissipate my 
dolor. 


8. There I waited on him for three months, until he was released from his 
meditation, when upon my humble request of him, he deigned to answer me 
as follows. 


9. The devotee replied: — I cannot pass a moment, without my 
employment in meditation; and must without any loss of time, resort to my 
wonted devotion again. 


10. As for you, you cannot derive the benefit of my transcendent advice to 
you; unless you engage yourself to practice my precepts with all diligence. 


11. Now I tell you to repair to the city of Ayodhya, (Oudh), where the king 
Dasaratha reigns, and remains with his son Rama, (and other children and 
members of his royal family). 


12. Do you now go to this Rama, who has been attending on the lectures of 
the sage Vasishtha, the preceptor and priest of the royal family, and delivered 
before the princes assembled in the imperial court. 


13. You will there hear the holy sermon, on the means of attaining our final 
emancipation; and will thereby obtain your best bliss in the divine state like 
that of mine. 


14. Saying so, he was absorbed in the cooling ocean of his meditation; after 
which I directed my course to this way, and arrived at last before Rama and 
this princely assembly. 


15. Here am I, and all these are the incidents of my life, as I have related 
herein, regarding all what I have heard and seen, as also all that has passed on 
me. 


16. Rama said: — The eloquent Kunda-danta that made this speech to me, 
has been ever since sitting by my side in this assembly. 


17. This very Brahmin bearing the name of Kunda-danta, that has sat here 
all along by me; has heard the whole of the sermon, which has been delivered 
by the sage, on the means of obtaining our liberation. 


18. Now ask this Kunda-danta, that is sitting here by me at present, whether 
he has well understood the context of this lecture, and whether his doubts are 
wholly dissipated or not. 


19. Vasishtha said: — Upon Rama saying so to me, I looked upon Kunda- 
danta, and made him the following interrogatory, saying: — 


20. Tell me, Oh you goodly Brahman Kunda-danta, what you have learnt 
and understood, by your long attendance upon and hearing of my lecture, 
calculated to confer liberation on men. 


21. Kunda-danta replied: — Sir, your lecture has wholly removed the 
doubts of my mind, and I find myself now as perfect master of myself, by my 
victory over all selfish passions, and by my knowledge of the knowable One. 


22. I have known the immaculate One that is to be known, and seen the 
undecaying One that is worth our seeing; I have obtained all that is worth our 
obtaining, and I have found my repose in the state of transcendent felicity. 


23. I have known this plenum, to be the condensation of that transcendental 
essence; and that this world is no other than a manifestation of this self-same 
soul. 


24. The universal soul being also the soul of every individual, is likewise 
the soul inherent in all forms of things; it is only the self-existent soul, that 
becomes apparent in all existences and all places. 


25. It is possible for the human mind, which is minuter than the molecule 
of a mustard seed, to contain the whole world in itself; though it is naught but 
a mere zero, before the clear sight of the intelligent. 


26. It is possible also for a little room, to contain the seven continents of the 
earth (in its map or picture); though the room itself is no more than a mere 
empty space. 


27. Whatever object is perceptible to us at any time or place, is only the 
concrete form of the divine spirit; which is quite apart from everything in the 
discrete. 


CHAPTER CLXXXVI. 
Demonstration of all nature (and thing) as Brahma 
himself. 


Argument: — Elucidation of the sacred text that, “all is Brahma;” and the 
equality of curse. 


Valmiki said: — After Kunda-danta had finished his saying in the said 
manner, the venerable Vasishtha delivered his edifying speech on spiritual 
knowledge and said: — 


2. Whereas the elevated soul of this person, has found his rest in the 
paradise of spiritual philosophy; he will see the world like a globe in his hand, 
and glowing with the glory of the great God. 


3. The phenomenal world is a false conception, it is verily the increate 
Brahma himself shining in this manner; this erroneous conception is the very 
Brahma, that is one and ever calm and undecaying. 


4. Whatever thing appears anywhere, in any state, form or dimension; it is 
the very Deity, showing himself in that condition of his being, form and mode 
of extension. 


5. This unborn or self-existent Deity, is ever auspicious, calm and quiet; he 
is undecaying, unperishing and immutable, and extends through all extent, as 
the extensive and endless space. 


6. Whatever state of things he proposes in his all-knowing intellect, the 
same is disposed by him in a thousand ways, like the branching out of a plant 
in the rains. 


7. The great mundane egg, is situated as a particle in the bosom of the great 


intellect of God; and this world of ours is a particle also, being comprised in a 
grain of our brains. 


8. Know therefore, my good friend, thy intellectual sphere to be boundless, 
and without its beginning or end; and being absorbed in the meditation of thy 
personal extinction, do thou remain as quiet as thou art sitting, relying in thy 
unperturbed and imperishable soul. 


9. Wherever there is anything in any state or condition in any part of the 
world, there you will find the presence of the divine spirit in its form of 
vacuity; and this without changing its nature of calm serenity, assumes to 
itself whatever form or figure it likes, (or rather evolves them from within 
itself at its free will). 


10. The spirit is itself both the view and its viewer; it is equally the mind 
and the body, and the subjective and objective alike; It is something and yet 
nothing at all, being the great Brahma or universal soul, that includes and 
extends throughout the whole. 


11. The phenomenal is not to be supposed as a duality of, or any other than 
the self-same Brahma; but it is to be known as one and the same with the 
divine self, as the visible sky and its vacuity. 


12. The visible is the invisible Brahma, and the transcendent One is 
manifest in this apparent whole (because the noumenon shows the 
phenomenon, as this exhibits the other); therefore, it is neither quiescent nor 
in motion, and the formal is altogether formless. 


13. Like dreams appearing to the understanding, do these visions present 
themselves to the view; the forms are all formless conceptions of the mind, 
and more intangible ideas of the brain. 


14. As conscious beings come to be unconscious of themselves, in their 
dormant state of sleep; so have all these living and intelligent beings, become 
unconscious and ignorant of themselves and their souls, and turned to torpid 
trees that are lost to their sensibility. 


15. But the intellect is capable to return to its sensibility, from its state of 
vegetable torpidity in time; as the dormant soul turns to see its dreams in 
sleep, and then to behold the vivid outer world after its wakening. 


16. Until the living soul is liberated from its charm of self-delusion, it is 


subjected to view its guileful reveries of elemental bodies, appearing as a 
chain of airy dreams, before the mind’s eye in sleep. 


17. The mind gathers the dross of dullness about it, as the soul draws the 
sheath of sleep upon itself; this dullness or dimness of apprehension is not 
intrinsic in the mind, but an extraneous schesis contracted by it from without. 


18. The intellect moulds the form of one, who is conversant with material 
and insensible things, into a motionless and torpid body; and it is the same 
intellect, which shapes the forms of others, that are conscious of their 
intellectual natures, into the bodies of rational and moving being. (The dull 
soul is degraded to the state of immovable things and rooted trees, but 
intelligent souls, are elevated to the rank of moving men and other locomotive 
animals). 


19. But all these moving and unmoving beings, are but different 
modifications and aspects of the same intellect; as the nails and other parts of 
the human body, are but the multifarious modalities of the same person. 


20. The order and nature of things has invariably continued the same, as 
they have been ordained by the Divine will ever since its first formation of the 
world; and because the creation is a transcript of its original mould in the 
Divine mind; it is as ideal as any working of imagination or a vision in 
dreaming, both in its states of being and not being. 


21. But the intangible and quiescent Brahma, is ever calm and quiet in his 
nature; he is never permeated with the nature of things, nor is he assimilated 
with the order of nature. 


22. He appears as the beginning and end of creation, or as the cause of its 
production and dissolution; but these are the mere dreams of the Divine 
intellect, which is always in its state of profound sleep and rest. 


23. The world is ever existent in his spiritual nature, and without any 
beginning or end of himself; the beginning and end of creation, bear no 
relation with his self-existent and eternal nature. 


24. There is no reality in the nature of the visible creation, or in its 
existence or dissolution; all these are no other than representations shown in 
the spirit of God, like figures described in a picture. 


25. As a legion drawn in painting, does not differ from its model in the 


mind of the painter; so these tangible objects of creation, with all other 
endless varieties, are not different from their prototype in the mind of God. 


26. Notwithstanding the want of any difference, between the noumenal and 
phenomenal worlds; yet the mind is prone to view the variance of its 
subjectivity and objectivity, as it is apt to differentiate its own doings and 
dreams, in the states of its sleep and ignorance. It is the profound sleep and 
insouciance of the soul, that cause its liberation from the view, as its 
sensibility serves to bind it the more to the bondage of the visibles. 


27. It is the reflexion of the invisible soul, that exhibits the visible to view, 
just as the subtle sunbeam, displays a thousand solid bodies glaring in sight; 
and shows the different phases of creation and dissolution as in its visions in 
dreaming. 


28. The dreaming state of the sleeping intellect is called its ideality, and the 
waking state of the self-conscious soul is termed its vitality, as in the instances 
of men and gods and other intellectual beings. 


29. After passing from these, and knowing the unreality of both these 
imaginative and speculative states, the soul falls into its state of profound 
sleep or trance, which is believed as the state of liberation by those that are 
desirous of their emancipation. 


30. Rama said: — Tell me, O venerable Sir, in what proportion doth the 
intellect abide in men, gods and demons respectively; how the soul reflects 
itself during the dormancy of the intellect in sleep, and in what manner does it 
contain the world within its bosom. 


31. Vasishtha replied: — Know the intellect to abide alike in gods and 
demons, as well as in all men and women; it dwells also in imps and goblins, 
and in all beasts and birds, reptiles and insects, including the vegetables and 
all immovable things (within its ample sphere). 


32. Its dimension is boundless and also as minute as an atom; and it 
stretches to the highest heaven, including thousands of worlds within itself. 


33. The capacity that we have of knowing the regions beyond the solar 
sphere, and even of penetrating into the darkness of polar circles; is all the 
quality of our intellect, which extends all over the boundless space, and is 
perfectly pellucid in its form and nature. 


34. So very great is the extent of the intellect, that it comprehends the 
whole universe in itself; and it is this act of his comprehension of the whole, 
that is called the mundane creation, which originates from it. 


35. The intellect spreads all around like the current of a river, which glides 
all along over the ground both high and low, leaving some parts of it quite 
dry, and filling others with its waters. So doth the intellect supply some bodies 
with intelligence, while it forsakes others and leaves them in ignorance. 


36. It is intelligence which constitutes the living soul of the body, which is 
otherwise said to be lifeless and insensible; it resides in all bodies like the air 
in empty pots, and becomes vivid in some and imperceptible in others as it 
likes. 


37. It is its knowledge of the soul, (Ze., the intellectual belief in its 
spiritual), that removes the error of its corporeity; while the ignorance of its 
spiritual nature, tends the more to foster the sense of its corporeality, like 
one’s erroneous conception of water in the mirage. 


38. The mind is as minute as the minutest ray of sunbeams; and this is 
verily the living soul, which contains the whole world within it. 


39. All this phenomenal world is the phenomenon of the mind, as it is 
displayed in its visionary dreams; and the same being the display of the living 
soul, there is no difference at all between the noumenal and the phenomenal. 


40. The intellect alone is assimilated into all these substances, which have 
substantiality of their own; whatever is seen without it, is like its visionary 
dream, or as the forms of jewelleries made of the substance of gold. (i.e., The 
intellect is the intrinsic essence of all external substances). 


41. As the same water of the one universal ocean, appears different in 
different places; and in its multifarious forms of waves and billows; so doth 
the divine intellect exhibit the various forms of visibles in itself. (i.e., Nothing 
is without or different from the divine essence). 


42. As the fluid body of waters, rolls on incessantly in sundry shapes within 
the basin of the great deep; so do these multitudes of visible things, which are 
inherent in and identic with the divine intellect, glide on forever in its 
fathomless bosom. 


43. All these worlds are situated as statues, or they are engraved as 


sculptures in the aerial column of the divine intellect; and are alike immovable 
and without any motion of theirs through all eternity. 


44. We see the situation of the world, in the vacuous space of our 
consciousness; as we see the appearances of things in our airy dreams. We 
find moreover everything transfixed in its own sphere and place, and 
continuing in its own state, without any change of its position or any alteration 
in its nature. (The invariable course of nature, is not the fortuitous production 
of blind chance). 


45. The exact conformity of everything in this world, with its conception in 
the mind of man, with respect to their invariable equality in form and 
property, proves their identity with one another, or the relation of one being 
the container of the other. (i.e., The mind is either same with or container of 
the world). 


46. There is no difference between the phenomenal and noumenal worlds, 
as there is none between those in our dream and imagination. They are in fact, 
the one and same thing, as the identity of the waters, contained in tanks, rivers 
and seas, and between the curse and blessing of gods. 


47. Rama said: — Tell me Sir, whether a curse or blessing, is the effect of 
any prior cause or the causation of subsequent consequences; and whether it is 
possible for any effect to take place without its adequate causality. (Here is a 
long legend of the transformation of Nundi and Nahusha given in illustration 
of this passage in the commentary). 


48. Vasishtha replied: — It is the manifestation of the clear firmament of 
the divine intellect in itself, that is styled as the world; just as the appearance 
and motion of waters in the great deep, is termed the ocean and its current. 


49. The revolution of the eternal thoughts of the divine mind, resembles the 
rolling waves of the deep; and these are termed by sages, as the will or 
volitions of the ever-willful mind of God. 


50. The clear minded soul comes in course of time, to regard this 
manifestation of the divine will, in its true spiritual light; by means of its 
habitual meditation and reasoning, as well as by cause of its natural good 
disposition and evenness of mind. 


51. The wise man possessed of consummate wisdom and learning, becomes 
acquainted with the true knowledge of things; his understanding becomes 


wholly intellectual, and sees all things in their abstract and spiritual light; and 
is freed from the false view of duality (or materiality). 


52. The philosophic intellect, which is unclouded by prejudice, is the true 
form of the Great Brahma himself; who shines perspicuous in our 
consciousness, and has no other body besides. 


53. The enlightened soul sees this whole plenitude of creation, as the 
display of the Divine Will alone; and as the exhibition of the tranquil and 
transparent soul of the Divinity, and naught otherwise. 


54. This manifestation of the Divine Will, in the boundless space of the 
universe; likens to the aerial castle of our imagination, or the city of palaces 
seen in our dream. 


55. This all-productive will, is self-same with the Divine Soul; and 
produces whatever it likes to do any place or time. (Lit., Whatever it wills, the 
same takes place even then and there). 


56. As a boy thinks of his flinging stones, at the aerial castle of his 
imagination; so the Divine will is at liberty to scatter, myriads of globular 
balls, in the open and empty space of boundless vacuity. 


57. Thus, everything being the manifestation of the Divine will, in all these 
three worlds; there is nothing as a blessing or curse, (i.e., good or evil) herein, 
which is distinct from the Divine Soul. 


58. As we can see in our fancy, the gushing out of oil from a sandy desert; 
sO can we imagine the coming out of the creation, from the simple will of the 
Divine Soul. 


59. The unenlightened understanding, being never freed from its 
knowledge of particulars and their mutual differences. It is impossible for it to 
generalize good and evil, under the head of universal good. (“All partial evil 
is but universal good.” — Pope). 


60. Whatever is willed in the beginning, by the omniscience of God; the 
same remains unaltered at all times, unless it is altered by the same omniscient 
will. 


61. The contraries of unity and duality, dwell together in the same manner 
in the formless person of Brahma; as the different members of an embodied 


being, remain side by side in the same person. (The knowledge of all 
contrarieties, blends together in omniscience. — Gloss). 


62. Rama said: — Why some ascetics of limited knowledge, are so very apt 
to confer their blessings, as also to pour their imprecations on others; and 
whether they are attended with their good or bad results or not. 


63. Vasishtha replied: — Whatever is disposed in the beginning, by the 
Divine will which subsists in Brahma; the very same comes to pass 
afterwards, and nothing otherwise. (Lit., there is no other principle besides). 


64. Brahma the Lord of creation, knew the Supreme Soul in himself, and 
thereby he became the agent of the Divine will; therefore, there is no 
difference between them, (i.e., betwixt Brahma and Brahma); as there is none 
between the water and its fluidity. 


65. Whatsoever the Lord of creatures, — Brahma, proposes to do at first as 
inspired in him by the Divine will; the same takes place immediately, and the 
very same is styled this world. 


66. It has no support nor receptacle for itself, but appears as vacuous 
bubble in the great vacuity itself; and resembles the chain of pearls, fleeting 
before the eyes of purblind men in the open sky. 


67. He willed the productions of creatures, and institution of the qualities of 
justice, charity and religious austerities; He stablished the Vedas and Sdstras, 
and the five system of philosophical doctrines. (Namely; the four Vedas and 
the Smritis, forming the five branches of sacred knowledge, and the five 
branches of profane learning, — consisting of the Sankhya Yoga, Patanjala, 
Pasupata, and Vaishnava systems. — Gloss). 


68. It is also ordained by the same Brahma, that whatever the devotees- 
learned in the Vedas, pronounce in their calmness or dispute, the same takes 
place immediately (from their knowledge of the Divine will). 


69. It is he that has formed the chasm of vacuum in the inactive intellect of 
Brahma, and filled it with the fleeting winds and heating fire; together with the 
liquid water and solid earth. 


70. It is the nature of this intellectual principle, to think of everything in 
itself; and to conceive the presence of the same within it, whether it be a 
thought of thee or me or of anything beside, (either in general or particular). 


71. Whatever the vacuous intellect thinks in itself, the same it sees present 
before it; as our actual selves come to see, the unreal sights of things in our 
dreams. 


72. As we see the unreal flight of stones, as realities in our imagination; so 
we see the false appearance of the world, as true by the will of God, and the 
contrivance of Brahma. 


73. Whatever is thought of by the pure intellect, must be likewise of a 
purely intellectual nature also; and there is nothing that can do it otherwise (or 
convert it to grossness), as they defile the pure metal with some base alloy. 


74. We are apt to have the same conceptions of things in our consciousness, 
as we are accustomed to consider them, and not of what we are little practiced 
to think upon; hence we conceive all that we see in our dreams to be true, 
from our like conceptions of them in our waking state. (It is thus that we 
conceive this purely ideal world as a gross body, from our habit of thinking so 
at all times). 


75. It is by uniting one’s intellectuality, with the universal and divine 
intellect, and by the union of the subjective and objective and _ their 
perceptibility in one’s self, by means of the triputi Yoga, that we can see the 
world in its true light. 


76. One universal and vacuous intellect, being all pervading and 
omnipresent, is the all-seeing subject and all seen objects by itself; hence 
whatever is seen or known to be anywhere, is the very verity of the intellect 
and no other. 


77. As oscillation is inherent in air, and fluidity is immanent in water; so is 
amplitude intrinsical in Brahma, and the plentitude is innate in the Divine 
mind. 


78. Even I am Brahma also in his self-manifest form of Virdj, which 
embodies the whole world as its body; hence there is no difference of the 
world from Brahma, as there is none between air and vacuity. 


79. As the drops of water as a cataract, assume many forms and run their 
several ways; so the endless works of nature take their various forms and 
courses, at different places and times. 


80. All beings devoid of their senses and understanding, issue as waters of 


the waterfall, from the cascade of the divine mind; and remain forever in their 
uniform courses, with the consciousness of their existence in Brahma. 


81. But such as come forth from it, with the possession of their senses and 
intellects in their bodies, deviate in different ways like the liquid waters, in 
pursuit of their many worldly enjoyments. 


82. They are then insensibly led, by their want of good sense, to regard this 
world as theirs; (i.e., the sphere of their actions, pret); being ignorant of its 
identity with the uncreated spirit of God. 


83. As we see the existence and distribution of other bodies in us, and the 
inertness of stones in our bodies; so the Lord perceives the creation and 
annihilation of the world, and its inertia in himself. 


84. As in our state of sleep we have both our sound sleep and our dreams 
also; so doth the divine soul perceive the creation as well as its annihilation, in 
its state of perfect rest and tranquility. 


85. The divine soul perceives in its state of tranquility, the two phases of 
creation and destruction, succeeding one another as its day and night; just as 
we see our sleep and dreams recurring unto us like darkness and light. 


86. As a man sees in his mind, both the dream of moving bodies as well as 
immovable rocks in his sleep; so does the Lord perceive the ideas, both of the 
stable and unstable in his intellectual tranquility. (Ze., It is possible for the 
intellect to conceive the ideas of gross bodies also). 


87. As a man of absent mind, has no heed of the dust flying on any part of 
his body; so the divine spirit is not polluted, by his entertaining the ideas of 
gross bodies within itself. 


88. As the air and water and stones, are possessed of the consciousness of 
their airy, watery and solid bodies, so are we conscious of our material, 
intellectual and spiritual bodies likewise. 


89. As the mind that is freed from seeing the objects of sight, and liberated 
from entertaining all their thoughts and desires also, flows along like a stream 
of limpid waters; so doth the current of the divine spirit glide on eternally, 
with the waves and eddies of creation and dissolution, perpetually rolling on 
and whirling therein. 


CHAPTER CLXXXVII. 
Of the Living Creation. 


Argument: — Description of nature and destiny, and of creation and its 
teeming with vitality. 


Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how can one paramount destiny, guide the 
fates of these endless chains and varieties of beings; and how can one uniform 
nature, be the predominant feature of all these various kinds of beings. 


2. Say why is the sun so very shining among the myriads of gods, and 
cause is it that lengthens and shortens, the durations of days and nights (in 
summer and winter). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Whatever the Lord has ordained at first of himself, 
(i.e., of his own will and wisdom); the same appearing as the fortuitous 
formation of chance, is called the very system of the universe. 


4. All that is manifested in any manner by omnipotence, is and continues as 
real in the same manner; because what is made of the pith of divine will and 
intelligence, can never be unreal; nor is it possible for the manifest and 
obvious to be evanescent. 


5. All that is situated or appears to us in any manner, being composed of 
the divine intellect, must continue to remain forever in the same manner; this 
appearance of creation and its disappearance in its dissolution, are both 
attributed to the unseen power of its destiny. 


6. To say this one is such and that is otherwise, is to attribute them to the 
manifestation of Brahma as so and so; and these formations of theirs, together 
with their ultimate dissolution, are called the acts of their destiny. 


7. The three states of waking, sleeping and dreaming, appearing to the 


nature of the soul, are no way separated from it; as the fluidity and motion of 
water, are not otherwise than properties of the same limpid liquid. 


8. As vacuity is the property of air, and warmth of the sunshine, and as 
odour is the quality of camphor; so the states of waking, sleeping and 
dreaming, appertain to the very nature of the soul, and are inseparable from it. 


9. Creation and dissolution follow one another, in the one and same current 
of the Divine Intellect; which in its vacuous form, subsists in the vacuous 
spirit of Brahma. 


10. What is believed as creation, is but a momentary flash of the Divine 
Intellect; and that which is thought to be a Kalpa period, is but a transient 
glare of the same. (A Kalpa age is but a fleeting moment in the eternal 
duration of Brahma). 


11. The sky and space and the things and actions, that come to our 
knowledge at any time; are as mere dreams occurring unto us, by a flash of the 
glaring nature of the Divine Intellect. 


12. The sights of things and the eternal thoughts, and whatever occurs at 
any time or place; are all presented unto us by our minds, from their formless 
shapes or ideas in the vacuous intellect of God. (The mind derives the formal 
images, from their ideals subsisting in the Divine Intellect). 


13. Whatever is thus manifested by the mind or designed by it at any time, 
the same is termed its destiny, which is devoid of any form like the formless 
air. 


14. The uniform state of things for a whole Kalpa age, measuring but a 
moment of Brahma; is what is expressed by the word nature, by natural 
philosophers that know all nature. 


15. The one soul, — consciousness or universal intelligence (of God), is 
diversified into a hundred varieties of living beings; and every portion of this 
general intelligence, retains the same intellection like its original, without 
forsaking its nature (Note: As the one element of fire, diversifies itself into 
many forms of sparks, without losing its properties of heat and burning). 


16. The intelligences that appertain to and manifest themselves, in the 
supreme intelligence of God, do some of them imagine to assume to 
themselves some embodied forms, in utter ignorance of their intellectual 


natures. 


17. The earth, air, water and fire and vacuum, are severally the receptacles 
of many properties; but it is the vacuous intellect which is the great repository 
of these, that appear as dreams hovering all about it. 


18. This place contains the vast receptacle, for the reception of all tangible 
and solid bodies; and this spacious earth with all the population on its surface, 
is seated in the midst of it. 


19. It has a place for the vast body of waters, or the great ocean in it; and 
affords a seat to the sun, — the source of light; it has a space for the course of 
the winds, and a vacuum containing all the worlds in it. 


20. It is the reservoir of the five elements, which are the quintuple 
principles of our knowledge; and it being thus the container of the 
quintessence of Brahma, what is seen or anything else before it. 


21. The learned call this intelligence as the intellect and omniscience; it is 
omniform, uniformed and all-pervading, and is perceived by all owing to its 
greatness and its great magnitude. 


22. Brahma the son or offspring of Brahma; is the self-same Brahma 
himself; who by expanding his intelligence, has expanded the vacuum under 
the name of firmament; and as an awning of silk in cloth. (In fact, nothing was 
made by the father but by the son). 


23. When delusion rules over the intellect of Brahma and over the subtle 
and gross matters; then how is it possible for other things, that are but parts of 
them, to stand good in law? 


24. It is simply by his will (and without any external appliance), that this 
god Brahma stretched the network of the universe, as a spider weaves its web 
out of itself; it revolves like a disc or wheel in the air, and whirls like a 
whirlpool in the hollow depth of the intellect, appearing as it were a sensible 
sphere in the heavens. 


25. These spheres present some bodies of great brightness, and others of a 
lesser light; which there are some scarcely visible to us, and all appearing as 
figures in a painting. 


26. All created objects appear in this manner and those that are not created 


never appear to view; but they all appear as visions in a dream, to the sight of 
the learned. 


27. The intellect is the self-same soul, and the Lord of All, and the seeming 
visibles are all really invisible; they are all evanescent for their want of lasting 
bodies; and neither are they visible by themselves, nor are they ever 
perceptible to or seen by us. 


28. The vacuous intellect, sees these as its dreams in the great vacuity of 
the intellect, and this world being no other than a phenomenon of the vacuous 
intellect, can have no other form than that of mere vacuum. 


29. Whatever is manifested by the intellect in any manner, the same is 
called its form and body; and the countenance of that manifested form for a 
certain period, is termed its nature or destiny. 


30. The first manifestation of the divine intellect, in the form of vacuum 
and as the vehicle of sound; became afterwards the source of the world, which 
sprouted forth like a seed, in the great granary of vacuity. (The conveying of 
sound and the containing of worlds are the nature of vacuum). 


31. But the account given of the genesis of the world, and of the creation of 
things one after the other, are mere fabrication of sages for instruction of the 
ignorant, and has no basis on truth. (Because no reason can be assigned for the 
Lord’s production of the material world). 


32. There is nothing that is ever produced of nothing, nor reduced to 
nothingness at any time; all this is as quiet and calm as the bosom of a rock, 
and ever as real as it is unreal. (The world is real in the ideal, but an utter 
unreality in its materiality). 


33. As there existed no separate body before, so there can be no end of it 
also; all things exist as inseparable infinitesimal with the spirit of God, and 
can therefore, neither rise nor set in it where they are always present. 


34. The vacuous world existing in vacuum of the divine spirit, is a pure 
vacuity or blank only; how is it possible then to rise or set in it, or go beyond 
it to rise or set elsewhere. 


35. What is the world, but a ray of the ever-shining gem of divine intellect; 
before whose omniscience, everything shines forever in its own light and 
nature. 


36. The Divine spirit though unknown to all, makes itself somewhat 
conceivable to us in our consciousness of it, and in our thinkableness of it, and 
by means of our reasoning and reflection. 


37. We can get some knowledge of it by our reason, as we can draw 
inferences of future events by means of our reasoning; this knowledge is rarer 
than that of the subtle element of air, and fainter than our prescience into the 
future of all things. 


38. Then this transcendental essence of the divine spirit, being about to 
reflect in itself, becomes the thinking principle called the intellect, which is 
somewhat intelligible to us. 


39. Having then the firm conviction of its consciousness in itself, it takes 
the name of the living soul, which is known by the title of Anima, meaning 
the supreme spirit or soul. 


40. This living soul embodied in itself, the nameless avidyd or ignorance, 
which shrouded the atmosphere of its intellect, and superceded the title of the 
pure intelligence. (The living soul jivdtmd is involved in ignorance mdyd, of 
its original state of Chidddta or the intelligent soul). 


41. It is then employed in the thoughts, of its bodily conduct and worldly 
carrier only; and being forgetful of its spiritual nature, is engaged in the 
discharge of his temporal functions. 


42. Being thus forgetful of its nature of vacuum, which possesses the 
property of conveying the sound, it becomes prepossessed with the error of 
taking the future material bodies for real, in lieu of the reality of the intellect. 


43. It gets next the motion of its egoism, with the idea of time, in its 
spiritual body; and then these two run together, in quest of the material 
elements, which are the seeds for the growth of the forth coming world. 


44. Then the thinking power of the living soul, begets the sense of 
consciousness within itself; and produces therein the conviction of the unreal 
world, as a positive reality. 


45. After this the thinking principle or the mind, bursts out like a seed into 
a hundred sprouts of its wishes; and then by reflecting on its egoism, thinks as 
a living being at the very moment. 


46. Thus the pure spirit passing under the name of living soul, is entangled 
in the maze of its erroneous and unreal reality, has been rolling like a heaving 
wave in the depth of the universal spirit. (All living souls of animate beings, 
are as bursting bubbles in the ocean of the eternal spirit). 


47. The mind by constantly reflecting at first on the vacuous nature of the 
living soul; is stultified at last to think it as solidified into the nature of animal 
life or the vital air or breath of life. 


48. This being became the source of articulate sounds or words, which 
were expressive of certain meanings, and significant of things, that were to be 
created afterwards; and were to be embodied in the wording of the Vedas. 
(The Lord spake and all things came out at his bidding, which were afterwards 
stated in the Book of Genesis). 


49. From him was to issue forth the would be world, by virtue of the words 
which he spake to denote the things he meant; the words that he invented were 
fraught with their meanings, and productive of the things which they 
expressed. 


50. The intellect being employed in this manner (in the thoughts of 
creation), takes upon it the title of a living being; which being garbed in 
significant words, was productive of all existent entities. (The volitive 
principle of the divine intellect, takes the name of the living soul or Brahma 
the creative agent). 


51. It was this self-existent entity that produced the fourteen spheres, which 
fill the whole space of vacuity; and which give rise to so many worlds that 
subsist therein. 


52. But before this being had the power of his speech, and of the use of his 
limbs and body, it remained to reflect only on the significations of words, 
having had his mind alone the only active part of himself. (So the mind alone 
of a living body, is the only active part of it in its embryonic state, before its 
attainment of the functions of all its other parts and members). 


53. As the air devolopes a seed to a plant, by exhaling on its outer coat, so 
doth the intellect develop the bodily functions of living beings, by working in 
its internal parts. (i.e., The mind actuates the action of the body). 


54. And as the oscillating intellect or mind, happens to come across the 
idea of light; it beholds the same appearing to view; as it is conveyed before it 


by its significant sound; (i.e., as meant by the word). 


55. Light is only our intellection or notion of it, and nothing without it; as 
feeling is our consciousness of it, and not the perception derived by means of 
the touch of anything. (This is theory of Berkeley). 


56. So is sound but our consciousness of it, and a subjective conception of 
our mind; as vacuum is a conception of the vacuous mind, and as the 
receptacle of sound caused by itself. 


57. As in this state of sound it is known to be the product of air in its own 
vacuity, so everything else is the product of our consciousness, and there 
nothing as a duality beside it. 


58. So the properties of odour and flavour, are as well as the substances of 
sound and air; and these unrealities seem as real ones, like the dreams that are 
seen and thought of in our minds. 


59. Heat which is the seed or seat of the arbor of light, and evolves itself in 
the radiance and other luminous bodies; are the forms of the same intellect, 
that shows itself in all things. 


60. So is flavour a mere quality of empty air, is thought of as a reality in 
every article of our food and drink; and is a mere name without its substance. 


61. All other things, which were hereafter to be designated by different 
names as fragrance, efc., are but so many forms of the thoughts and desires 
existing in the mind of this living being or Brahma. 


62. This being had in his mind the seed of all forms and dimensions, from 
which was to proceed this terrestrial globe, that was to become afterwards the 
support of all creatures. 


63. All things yet unborn, appeared as already born in this divine mind, 
which was filled with the models of all future existences of every kind; and all 
these formless beings had their forms afterwards, as it thought and willed 
them to be; (i.e., The ideal became the real at last). 


64. These forms appeared to view as by an act of chance, and the organs 
whereby they came to be seen, were afterwards called by name of eyes, or the 
visual organs of sight. 


65. The organs which gave the perception of sounds, were named the ears; 
and those which bore the feeling of touch to the mind, were called the organs 
of feeling or cdh. 


66. The organ of perceiving the flavours, was styled the tongue or organ of 
taste; and that which received the perception of smell, were termed the nose or 
organ of scent. 


67. The living soul being subjected to its corporeal body, has no perception 
of the distinctions of time and place by means of its bodily organs, which are 
so imperfect and soulless on the whole. (i.e., He is not thoroughly diffused all 
over the body, but has its seat in the mind also, which perceives the abstract 
ideas of time and space and all other abstract natures of things). 


68. In this manner are all things but imageries of the soul, and ideals of the 
intellect, and wholly confined in the soul; they neither appear nor set on the 
outside of it, but are set as silent engravings in the stony and stiff bosom of the 
same. 


CHAPTER CLXXXVIII. 
Description of the living soul. 


Argument: — The Living soul is identified with Brahma or the universal 
soul; its birth is but a fiction of speech; and the erroneous conception of its 
animal soul and body, is fully exposed herein. 


Vasishtha continued: — The fiction of the first rise of the living soul; from 
the calm and quiet spirit of God as said before, is merely fictitious and not a 
true one; but was meant to elucidate the nature of the animate soul, as the 
same with and not distinct from the Supreme soul. 


2. In this manner the fiction (of the living soul) means that, this being a part 
of the supreme soul is verily the same with it. (As the air in the pot or cot, is 
the same as universal air or vacuum). It is when the subjective soul is 
employed with the thoughts of the objective, that it is termed the living God 
or spirit. (Hence the quiescent and creative souls, are but the states or 
hypostases of the same soul). 


3. The inclination of the self-intelligent or subjective soul, towards 
thinkable objects of thought, garbs it under a great many fictitious names or 
epithets, which you shall now hear me, O Rama, relate to you in all their 
varieties. 


4. It is called the living soul or jiva, from its power of living and thinking; 
and from its addictedness towards the thinkables, it is termed the thinking 
principle and the intellect. 


5. It is termed intelligence for its intellection of this thing as that, as well as 
for its knowledge of what is what; and it is called the mind from its mending, 
willing and imagining of many things. (The three powers of the mind are here 
reckoned, as retention, volition and imagination). 


6. The reliance in self that, “I am,” is what is called egoism; and the 
principle of percipience called the mind by the vulgar, is when freed from 
everything, styled the intellect by the wise and those acquainted with the 
Sdstras. 


7. It is called the aggregate of the octuple principles or totality of existence, 
when it is combined with all its wishes of creation; and then named as subtle 
nature, before its production of the substantial world. 


8. Being absent from or imperceptible to our perception, it is called the 
hidden nature; and in this manner many other fictitious names are given to it 
by way of fiction or fabrication of our imagination. (The word avidyd here 
meant as absent, is elsewhere explained as unknown and as ignorance and 
illusion also). 


9. All these fictitious appellations that I have told thee here, are mere 
inventions of our fancy, for the one formless and changeless eternal being. 


10. In this manner are all these three worlds, but the fairy lands of our 
dream and the castles of our imagination; they appear as objects made for our 
enjoyment and bliss, but are in reality an intactible vacuity. 


11. So must you know, O best of embodied beings, that this body of yours 
is of a spiritual or intangible nature; it is the intellectual body formed of the 
vacuous intellect, which is rarer than the rarified air. 


12. It never rises nor sets, (i.e., it is neither born nor dies), in this world, but 
continue with our consciousness of ourselves, until our final liberation from 
the sense of our personalities. This mental body or mind of ours, is the 
recipient of the fourteen worlds and all created objects. 


13. It is in the extensive regions of our minds, that millions of worlds 
continue to be created and dissolved in the course of time; and an unnumbered 
train of created beings, are growing and falling as fruits in it in the long run of 
time. (The mind and time, contain all things). 


14. This intellectual body beholds the world, both inside and outside of it; 
as the looking glass reflects and refracts, the outward and its inward images 
both in as well as out of it; and as the open air reflects and shows us the upper 
skies. 


15. The mind must bear these images in its mirror, until its final dissolution 


with all things at the end of the world; when all minds and bodies and all the 
world and their contents, are to be incorporated in the great vacuum of the 
Divine Mind. 


16. The compactness of the Divine Mind, which comprehends all images or 
ideas in itself, imparts them partly in all individual minds, which are but parts 
of itself, and which are made to think likewise. (This passage maintains the 
innate ideas derived immediately from God). 


17. This spiritual body that was employed in viewing the inborn world in 
itself; is turned as the form of the Great Brahma by some, and as that of the 
God Virdj by others. 


18. Some call him the sandtana or sempiternal, and others give him the 
name of Narayana or floating on the surface of the waters. Some style him as 
{sha and by his name as Prajapati, — the Lord of creatures (Patriarch). 


19. This being chanced to have, his five organs of sense on a sudden, and 
these were seated in the several parts of his body, where they still retain their 
seats as before. 


20. Then his delusion of the phenomenal, seemed to extend too far and 
wide, without any appearance of reality therein, all being a vast waste and 
void. (The noumenal only is the true reality). 


21. It was all the appearance of that eternal and transcendental Brahma, and 
not of the unreal phenomenal which is never real; it is the very Brahma, which 
is without its beginning and end, and appearing in a light quite unintelligible 
to us. (Being imperceptible in his person, his reality is hid under the garb of 
unreality). 


22. Our inquiry into the spiritual form of the deity, leads us to take the 
delusive world as such; just as the longing of the ardent lover after his loved 
one, leads him to the view of its bloated phantom in his dream. (i.e., in our 
search after the spiritual, we are misled to take the corporeal as such). 


23. As we have the blank and formless notion of a pot, presented in the real 
shape of the pot in our minds; so have we the notions of our bodies and the 
world also, represented as realities in dreams and imagination. 


24. As the dreamed objects of our vacuous minds, seem to be real ones for 
the time in our sleep; so all these aerial objects in nature, appear as solid 


substances in the delusion of our dreams by daylight. 


25. This spiritual and formless body (of the deity), comes to be gradually 
perceived in us and by itself also; as we come to see the aerial forms 
presenting themselves unto us in our dream. 


26. It is then embodied in a gross body, composed of flesh and bones, and 
all its members, and its covering of the skin and hairs; and in this state it 
thinks (of its carnal appetites and enjoyments). 


27. It then reflects on its birth and acts in that body, and upon the duration 
and end of that body also; and entertains the erroneous ideas of the 
enjoyments and incidents of its life. 


28. It comes to know its subjection to decay, decrepitude and death, and of 
its wanderings on all sides of the wide sphere of this globe; it gets the 
knowledge of the knower and known, and also of the beginning, middle and 
of all acts and things. 


29. And thus, the primordial spirit, being transformed to the living soul, 
comes to know the elementary bodies of earth, air, and water, etc., and the 
varieties of created beings and conduct of men and finds itself as contained 
and confined within the limits of its body and of this earth, after its having 
been the container of all bodies and space before. (The difference here spoken 
of, is that of the personal soul of the jiva or living being, and that of the 
impersonal soul of Brahma, — the universal spirit). 


CHAPTER CLXXXIX. 
On the Unity of the divine spirit. 


Argument: — Unity of the impersonal and personal spirit treated; and the 
materiality of the living soul refuted. 


Vasishtha continued: — This spiritual body (or the personal spirit), as that 
of Brahma, — the primeval creator of all; being possessed of its volition, 
comes as by an act of chance and of its own motion, to think and brood on its 
thoughts; (which it had derived from the eternal spirit of Brahma). 


2. It continues to remain in the same state, as it is ever conscious of in 
itself; and sees of its own nature, this universe exposed before it as it had in 
his mind, nor is there and wonder in this. 


3. Now this viewer, — Brahma, and his viewing and the view of the world, 
must either all be false (as there is no duality in nature); or they must all be 
true, having the spirit of Brahma at the bottom. 


4. Rama rejoined: — Now Sir, please to tell me, how this spiritual and 
shadowy sight of the primeval Lord of creation, could be realized in its 
solidified state, and reality can there be in the vision of a dream. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — The spiritual view is ever apparent by itself within 
ourselves; and our continuous and ceaseless sight of it, gives it the appearance 
of a solid reality. 


6. As the visionary sights of our dreams, come to be realized in times, by 
our continuous poring upon them; so doth the spiritual appear as real, by our 
constant habit of thinking them as such. (So it is recorded in the case of King 
Harischandra of old). 


7. The constant thought of the reality of our spiritual body, makes appear as 


a real object to our sight; as the constant craving of deer after water, makes it 
appear in the mirage of the parched desert before them. 


8. So the vision of this world, has like every other fallacy, misled us like 
the poor and parching deer, to the misconception of water in the mirage; and 
does this and all other unrealities appear as real ones in our ignorance. 


9. Many spiritual and intellectual objects, like a great many unreal things, 
are taken for the material and real, by the avidity of their desires and ignorant 
admirers. 


10. The impression that I am this, and that one is another, and that this is 
mine and that is his; and that these are the hills and skies about us; are all as 
erroneous as the conception of reality in our dreams and false phantoms of the 
brain. 


11. The spiritual body which was at first conceived, by the prime creator of 
all, — Brahma, assumed a material form as that of a globe under his sight. 
(Meaning the Mundane egg). 


12. The living soul of Brahma, being born of the mundane egg in a 
corporeal body; forgot or rather forsook to think of its incorporeal 
intellectuality, and thought himself as composed of his present material body 
only. He looked into it and thought, that this was his body and the recipient of 
his soul; (instead of the souls being the fountain of the body). 


13. Then it becomes confined in that body, by its belief of the unreality as a 
sober reality; and then it thinks of many things within itself, and goes on 
seeking and running after them all. (But the steady soul is sedate, and has all 
within itself, without seeking them elsewhere without). 


14. This God then makes many symbolical sounds and forms (invents) 
words for names and actions; and at last, upon his utterance of the mystic 
syllable Om or (on) the Vedas rang out and sang in currents of verbiage. 


15. Then through the medium of those sacred words, the god ordained the 
ordinances for the conduct of all mankind; and everything turned to be, as he 
wished and thought it to be in his own mind. (Hence, Brahma is said the 
creative mind of God). 


16. Whatever exists in any manner, the same is the self-same Brahma itself; 
and yet no body perceives it as such, owing to the predominant error of all, of 


believing the unreal world as a real existence. 


17. All the things from the great Brahma down to all, are but false 
appearances as those of dreams and magical show; and yet the spiritual reality 
is utterly lost to sight, under the garb of material unreality. (i.e., The unreal 
matter is taken for real spirit). 


18. There is nothing as materiality anywhere and at any time; it is the 
spiritual only which by our habitual mode of thinking and naming, is said to 
be substantial, elemental and material. 


19. This our fallacy of materiality, has come to us from our very source in 
Brahma, — the creator; who entertained the false idea of the material world, 
and transmitted this error even into the minds of the wise and very great souls. 


20. How is it possible, O Rama, for the intelligent soul, to be thus confined 
in a clod of earth, all this must either be an illusory scene, or a representation 
of Brahma himself. 


21. There can be no other cause of this world, except the eternal causality 
of Brahma; who is self-existent, only without any action or causation of 
himself; thus, the Supreme soul being wholly devoid of the attributes of cause 
and effect, what can this world be, but an extension of the Divine essence? 


CHAPTER CXC. 
Ecstasis or Inertness of Rama. 


Argument: — Description of liberation, as heedlessness of the past and 
future, ignorance of the knowables, and thoughtlessness about the thinkables. 


Vasishtha continued: — Gaining the knowledge of knowables, is called our 
bondage in this world; but it is our release from the bonds of knowable 
objects, that is termed our liberation from it. 


2. Rama rejoined: — But how can it be possible, Sir, to get our escape from 
the knowledge of the knowables, and how can our rooted knowledge of 
things, and our habitual sense of bounden to them, be removed from us. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — It is the perfection of our knowledge, and feeling 
of it as such, that removes our misjudgment; and then we get our liberation 
from error, after disappearance of our inborn bias. 


4. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, what is that simply uniform feeling, and 
what is called that complete and perfect knowledge said to be, which releases 
the living soul entirely, from its fetters of error. 


5. Vasishtha replied: — The soul is full with its subjective knowledge of 
intuition, and has no need of the objective knowledge of the knowables from 
without; and perfect knowledge is our inward sense of the same, and not 
expressible in words. 


6. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, whether the knowableness of knowledge, 
that is whether the internal knowledge of the knowing soul, is the same or 
separate from itself; and whether the word jndna or knowledge, is taken in its 
instrumental or abstract sense. (i.e., whether it is used to mean the power by 
means of which we derive our knowledge, or the so derived knowledge itself). 


7. Vasishtha replied: — All perception is knowledge, and this term is 
denotative of its causality also (as we say, my knowledge is my guide, i.e., the 
instrumentality of my guidance). Hence, there is no difference between 
knowledge and the known or the knowable, as there is none between the air 
and its ventilation. 


8. Rama rejoined: — If it be so (that there is no difference between them); 
then tell me, whence arises the error of difference in our conception of them; 
the conception of the materiality of the perceptible or objective world, must 
be as erroneous as that of the horns of a hare, which had never been in esse, 
nor are likely to be at any time in future. 


9. Vasishtha replied: — The error of the reality of external objects, gives 
rise to the error of the reality to our knowledge of them also; but there is no 
inward object of thought, nor of the outward senses, has ever any reality in it. 


10. Rama rejoined: — Tell me, O sage, how can you deny the existence of 
those objects, which are evident to the senses of mine, thine and all others 
alike; and which are ever present in their thoughts in the minds of sensible 
beings. 


11. Vasishtha replied: — It was at the time of the first creation of the world, 
that the self-manifested God Virdj, exhibited the outline of the cosmos in a 
corner of his all-comprehensive mind; but as nothing was produced in reality, 
there is no possibility of our knowing any as a knowable or real entity. 


12. Rama rejoined: — How can our common sight, of the present, past and 
future prospects of this world; and our daily perception of things, which are 
felt by all in general, be regarded as nothing by your teaching. (Common 
sense cannot be controverted by abstruse philosophy). 


13. Vasishtha replied: — Just as the dreamer’s vision in sleep, the deer’s 
mistake of water in the mirage in sand, the illusory sight of a moon in the sky, 
and the prospects of our delusive fancies, do all disappear on right 
observation; so the false perceptions of worldly things, and the mistaken 
conceptions of our own entities, are as erroneous as the sights of the false 
lights in the empty air. (These dissolve as dreams upon waking, and the 
testimony of one waking man, is enough to disperse the deceptive sights of all 
dreamers and sleepers). 


14. Rama rejoined: — If our knowledge of I and thou and of this and that, 
is as false as that of all other things in the womb of the world; why then were 


these brought into existence, not left to remain in their ideas in the mind of 
their creator, as they had existed before his creation of them? 


15. Vasishtha replied: — It is certain that everything springs from its cause, 
and not otherwise; what then could there be the (material) cause, for the 
creation of the world therefrom, after the dissolution of everything at the 
universal destruction? 


16. Rama replied: — Why Sir, cannot that being be the cause of recreation, 
which remains undestroyed and indestructible, after destruction of the prior 
creation? 


17. Vasishtha replied: — Whatever substance there abides in the cause, the 
same is evolved in effect also; hence the essence of Brahma being composed 
of his intellect only, it could not give rise to the material world from itself; as 
the substance of a pot, cannot produce that of a picture or cloth. 


18. Rama replied: — Why Sir, the world existed in its subtle (or ideal) 
state, in the person (mind) of Brahma (God); from which it issued forth anew 
and again, after dissolution of the former creation. 


19. Vasishtha said: — Tell me, O intelligence Rama, how could the Lord 
God (whose nature is composed of pure intelligence), conceive the entity or 
quintessence of the world in himself, and which like the productive seed, 
sprang out in the form of the future creation. Say what sort of entity was it. 


20. Rama replied: — It is an entity of Divine intelligence, and is situated in 
the subjective soul of God in that form. It is neither a vacuous nullity, nor an 
unreal entity. 


21. Vasishtha said: — If it be so, O mighty armed Rama, that the three 
worlds are Divine intelligence only; then tell me why bodies formed of pure 
intelligence (as those of the gods and angels), and those having the intelligent 
soul in them (as those of human beings), are subject to their birth and death. 


22. Rama said: — If then there has been no creation at all at any time from 
the beginning; then tell me Sir, whence has this fallacy of the existence of the 
world come to be in vogue. 


23. Vasishtha replied: — The inexistence of cause and effect, proves the 
nullity of being and not being; (ie., its annihilation also); all this that is 
thought of to exist, is the thought and thinking of the divine soul, which is the 


triputi or triple entity of thinker, thinking and the thought together. (i.e., The 
soul is both the subjective and objective, as also their connecting predicate by 
itself). 


24. Rama rejoined: — The thinking soul thinks about the implements and 
the acts, as the looker looks on the objects of his sight; but how can the divine 
looker be the dull spectacle (and the object the same with the subject); unless 
you maintain that the objective fuel burns the subjective fire (which is 
impossible). 


25. Vasishtha replied: — The viewer is not transformed to the view, owing 
to impossibility of the existence of an objective view; it is the all-seeing soul, 
that shows itself as one solid plenum in itself. 


26. Rama rejoined: — The soul is the pure intellect only, and is without its 
beginning and end; it thinks only on its eternal and formless thoughts; how 
then can it present the form and appearance of the visible world. 


27. Vasishtha replied: — The thinkables being all causeless of themselves, 
have none of them any cause whatsoever; and it is the privation of the 
thinkables, that bespeaks the liberation of the intellect. (The production of the 
thinkables, is as impossible as the birth of the offspring of a Barren woman. 
— Gloss). 


28. Rama rejoined: — If it is so, then say how and whence have we the 
thought of our conception of ourselves; and our knowledge of the world, and 
our sense of motion and the like; (as they are suggested to us by our common 
sense, and the universal testimony of all people). 


29. Vasishtha replied: — The impossibility of cause, precludes the 
possibility of any production; how and whence could the thinkables proceed, 
when all is quite calm and quiet everywhere, and the knowledge of creation is 
but an error and a delusion. 


30. Rama rejoined: — Here tell us Sir, how this error comes to overshadow 
the unknowable, unthinkable and the immovable being, that is self-manifest 
and ever untainted and clear by itself; (Swaprakdsa or Swayamprakasa). 


31. Vasishtha replied: — there is no error or mistake herein, owing to its 
want of any causation also; our knowledge of egoism and tuism, is drowned 
altogether in that of one unevanescent Unity. 


32. Rama replied: — O venerable Sir, I am so bewildered in the error of my 
consciousness, that I know not what other question I am here to make; I am 
not so enlightened as the learned, to argue any more on this point. 


33. Vasishtha replied: — Do not desist, O Rama, from making your 
inquiries concerning the causality of Brahma; until you are satisfied with the 
proof of his causelessness, as they test the purity of gold on the stone; and 
then by knowing this, you will be able to repose yourself, in the blissful state 
of the supremely Blest. 


34. Rama rejoined: — I grant Sir, as you say, that there is no creation for 
want of its cause, but tell me now whence is this my error of the thinkable and 
its thought (so rooted in me that I cannot get rid of it). 


35. Vasishtha replied: — There is no error in the belief of the uncaused 
creation, and in its perfect calmness; but it is for want of your habit of 
thinking it so (and your bias of the reality of the world), that really makes you 
so restless. 


36. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, whence rise this habit as well as the 
desuetude of this mode of our thinking; and how does our rest proceed from 
the one, and our disquiet from the other mode of thought. 


37. Vasishtha replied: — Belief in the eternal God, breed no error in that of 
the eternity of the world; it is the habit of thinking it otherwise, that creates 
the error of creation. Be you therefore, as sound in your mind, as the solid 
minded sages have been. 


38. Rama rejoined: — Please to tell me Sir, in your preaching of these 
lectures to your audience, what other mode of practice there may be, in our 
attainment of a quietude like that of the living liberated sages. 


39. Vasishtha replied: — The lesson that we preach, is to know one’s self 
as Brahma and resting in the spirit of Brahma; and this knowledge is sure to 
release the soul, both from its longing for liberation, as also from its dread of 
bondage in this world. 


40. Rama rejoined: — This doctrine of yours, by its all negative 
distinctions of our knowledge of time and space, and of our actions and thing, 
serves to drive away our consciousness of all existence whatsoever from the 
mind. 


41. Vasishtha replied: — Yes, because all our objective knowledge, of the 
distinctions of time and place and of actions and things in our minds; is the 
effect of our ignorance of the subjectivity of the soul, beside which there is no 
other substance, — before the liberated spirit. 


42. Rama rejoined: — The absence of our knowledge of an intelligent 
agent, and also of an intelligible object; deprives us altogether of any 
intelligence at all; the impossibility of the union of the unity and duality 
together, must preserve our distinct knowledge of the knowing principle and 
the known or knowable object. (The transitive verb to know must have an 
object, and cannot like a neuter or intransitive verb, be confined to or reflect 
upon its agent. — Gloss). 


43. Vasishtha replied: — It is by your act of knowing of God, that you have 
or get your knowledge of Him; therefore, the word is taken in its active sense 
by you and others; (Who have to know a thing before it is known to them). 
But with us (or sages like ourselves), who are possessed of our intuitive 
knowledge of ourselves as the deity, it is but a self-reflexive verb. (Gloss. — 
Buddhi with the ignorant, means knowing; but with the sapient, it means 
feeling). 


44. Rama rejoined: — But how do you feel your finite selves or egoism, 
and your limited knowledge, as same with the infinite soul and omniscience of 
the deity; unless it were to ascribe your imperfections to the transcendental 
divinity, who is purer than the purest water, and rarer than the rarefied ether. 


45. Vasishtha replied: — It is the feeling of the perfections of the divine 
soul in ourselves, that we call our egoism; and not the ascription of our 
imperfect personalities unto him. And here the duality of the living and divine 
souls, bears resemblance to the unity of the ventilating breeze with the 
universal and unfluctuating air. Siaaartees | 


46. As the waves of the ocean, have been continually rising and subsiding 
in it; so the objective thoughts of one’s egoism and the world besides, must be 
always rising and falling in the subjective soul of the supreme being, as well 
as self-liberated persons. (Hence the subjective and objective cannot be the 
one and same thing). 


47. Vasishtha replied: — If so it be, then say what is the fault, that is so 
much reprehended in the popular belief of a duality; and in disregarding the 
creed of the Unity, which is eternal and infinite, full and perfect in itself, quite 


calm and quiet in its nature, and is termed the transcendent One. 


48. Rama rejoined: — If it be so, (that the living soul, is as the breeze or 
breath of the calm air of Brahma and same with it), then tell me Sir, who and 
what power is it, which conceives the ego, tu and others, which feels and 
enjoys all as their agent, if the fundamental fallacy of the world be the root of 
all. (The whole being false, there is nothing as one or an another or as 
bondage or liberation). 


49. Vasishtha replied: — The knowledge of the reality of the objective or 
knowable things, is the cause of our bondage (in this world); true knowledge 
does not recognise their reality, and full intelligence which assumes the forms 
of (and shows) all things in itself, sees no difference of bondage or liberation 
before it. (All things are alike in the full light of intelligence). 


50. Rama rejoined: — Intelligence like light, does not show us all things in 
the same light; it shows us the difference between a pot and a picture, as light 
shows the white and black to view. Again, as the light of our eye sight shows 
us the different forms of outward objects, so does our intelligence confirm and 
attest the reality of our visual perceptions. 


51. Vasishtha replied: — All outward objects having no cause of their 
creation, nor any source of their production, are as incredible as the offspring 
of a barren woman; and the appearance of their reality which is presented to 
our sight, is as false as that of silver in a conchshell or in the glittering sands, 
and not otherwise. (The phenomenal is a mirage, and deception of sight). 


52. Rama rejoined: — The sight of the miserable world, whether it be true 
or false, is like the startling apparition in a dream, and attended with pain only 
for the time; tell me therefore, the best means, how to avoid and get rid of this 
error. 


53. Vasishtha replied: — The world being never the better than a dream, it 
is the reflection of the idea of its reality, that is the best method of getting rid 
of the snare of its tempting joys and sorrows. 


54. Rama rejoined: — But how to effect this object, which may redound to 
our bliss and rest; say how to put an end to the sight of the world, which 
shows the sights of falsities as realities, in the continuous train of its deluding 
dreams. 


55. Vasishtha replied: — It is the due consideration of the antecedent and 


subsequent states of things, which must remove the erroneous impression of 
their reality; just as the conception of the substantiality of sights seen in our 
dreams, is eliminated upon reflection of their subsequent disappearance (and 
bearing no trace of former forms behind). 


56. Rama rejoined: — But how do the rising apparitions of the world, 
disappear in the depth of our minds, and what do we then come to perceive, 
after the vestiges of our gross remembrances have faded away? (The mind is 
never vacant of its thoughts of visible objects). 


57. Vasishtha responded: — After the false appearance of the world, has 
vanished like the faded sight of a city from view; the unconcerned mind of the 
unconcerned soul, looks upon it as a painting, wholly washed out by the rain. 
(i.e., as a clear blank or vacuity). 


58. Rama asked: — What then becomes of the man, after subsidence of the 
worldly sights and desires from his mind; like the gross looking objects of a 
dream; and after the mind rests in its state of listless indifference. 


59. Vasishtha replied: — Then the world recedes from his sight, and then 
this predilection of it, and his desire for its enjoyment depart and die away 
along with it. 


60. Rama rejoined: — How can this blind and deep rooted predilection, 
which has accompanied the soul from many previous births, and branched out 
into multifarious desires, resign its hold of the human heart all at once? 


61. Vasishtha replied: — As the knowledge of truth, serves to disperse the 
rooted error of the material world from the mind, so the sense of the vanity of 
human desires, and of the bitterness of their enjoyment, dissipate their seeds at 
once from the heart (where they can take root no more). 


62. Rama rejoined: — After dissipation of the error of materiality, of the 
visible spheres of worlds; say, O sage, what is that state of the mind which 
follows it, and how its peace and tranquility at last? 


63. Vasishtha replied: — After dissipation of the error of the material 
world, the mind reverts to its seat in the immaterial soul; where it is released 
from all its earthly bonds, and finds its rests in the state of an indifferent 
insouciance, — vairdgya. 


64. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, if the error of the world is as little, as 


that of a child’s idea of sorrow, then what trouble there is for a man to remedy 
it? 


65. Vasishtha replied: — All our desires, like the fond wishes of boys, 
being wholly extinct in the mind, there remains no more any cause of any 
sorrow in it; and this you may well know from the association of desires in all 
minds. 


66. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, what is the mind, and how are we to 
know its nature and workings; and what good do we derive, by our best 
investigation of the mental powers and properties. 


67. Vasishtha replied: — The inclination of the intellect towards the 
intelligibles, is called the mind, for its mending the thinkables only; and the 
right knowledge of its workings, leads to the extinction of all our worldly 
desires. (i.e., The thoughts of things, are productive of our desires for them; 
banish your thoughts, and you get rid of your desires at once). 


68. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how long continues this tendency of the 
intellect towards the thinkables, and when does the mind come to have its 
unmindfulness, which causes our coma or anesthesis of Nirvdna. 


69. Vasishtha replied: — There being a total absence of thinkable things, 
what is then left for the intellect to be intent upon; the mind dwells upon its 
thoughts only, but the want of thinkable objects, leaves nothing for it to think 
upon. 


70. Rama rejoined: — How can there be the absence of thinkables, when 
we have the ideas in store to think and reflect upon; nor is there anyone who 
can deny the existence of ideas, which are ever imprinted in the mind. (i.e., 
the eternal ideas). 


71. Vasishtha replied: — Whatever is the ideal world of the ignorant, has 
no truth in it and is denied by the learned; and the conception which the 
sapient have of it, is that of a nameless and formless unity only. 


72. Rama rejoined: — What is that knowledge of this triple world of the 
ignorant, which has no truth or reality therein; and what is the true knowledge 
of the wise about it, which is inexpressible in words? 


73. Vasishtha replied: — The knowledge of the ignorant, regarding the 
duality of the world, is wholly untrue from first to last; but the true knowledge 


of the wise, neither recognizes a duality herein; nor acknowledges the 
production hereof; (but views it in the light of a nullity and void). 


74. Rama rejoined: — Whatever is not produced in the beginning, cannot 
of course exist at any time; but how is it, that this unreal and unapparent 
nothing, could come to produce in us its conception of a something? 


75. Vasishtha replied: — This causeless and uncaused unreality of the 
world, appears unto us as a real entity; like the daydream that presents the 
false sight of the cosmos as a reality in our waking. 


76. Rama rejoined: — The sights that we see in our dreams, and the images 
that we conceive in our imagination; are but perceptions derived from our 
impressions of them in our waking state. 


77. Vasishtha replied: — Tell me, O Rama, whether the things that you see 
in your dream, or conceive in your imagination, are exactly of the same forms, 
that you see in your waking state. 


78. Rama replied: — The things that we see in our dream, and conceive of 
in our fancy or imagination; do all of them appear unto us in the same light, as 
they show themselves to us in our waking state. 


79. Vasishtha questioned: — If the impressions of the waking state, come 
to represent themselves in our dreaming, (and if our dreams are alike our 
waking sights), then tell me Rama! why do you find your house standing 
entire in the morning, which you beheld to have fallen down in your dream. 


80. Rama answered: — I see that the things seen in waking, do not appear 
the same in dreaming; but tell me Sir, why they seem to resemble those that 
have been seen before. 


81. Vasishtha replied: — It is neither the notion nor idea of anything, that 
appears as a reality in our minds; but the inherent impression of the world in 
the soul, that exhibits it to us from first to last. 


82. Rama said: — I find it now, that this world is no better than a dream; 
but tell me Sir, how to remedy our fallacy of its reality, which holds us fast as 
a goblin. 


83. Vasishtha replied: — Now consider how this dream of the world has 
come into vogue, and what may be the cause thereof; and knowing that the 


cause is not different from its effect, view this visible creation in the light of 
its invisible origin. 


84. Rama said: — But as the mind is the cause of the sights, seen in our 
dreams in sleep, it must therefore be the same with its creation of this world, 
which is equally unsubstantial and undecaying as itself. (The world is the 
permeation of the Divine mind, — its maker or pervader). 


85. Vasishtha replied: — So it is, O most intelligent Rama, the world is 
verily the manas, — mens or the mind of God, which is no other than the 
consolidation of the Divine Intellect or intelligence. Thus, the world being 
situated in the mind, and this in that, it is this mind only that exhibits these 
dreamlike shows, which originate from it, and have no other source besides. 


86. Rama rejoined: — But why am I not to think the identity of the world 
with Brahma himself, as there is the identity of the divine mind with him, and 
that of the mind with the creation. And likewise, as the relation of sameness 
subsists between a component part and its ensemble or the integral whole, as 
there is between the branch of a tree and the tree itself? (because these are but 
parts of one undivided whole). But it would be absurd to identify the 
undivided and formless Brahma, with the divided and formal world. 


87. Vasishtha replied: — It is impossible, O Rama, to identify this frail 
world with the eternal Brahma, who is increate to identify this perishable, 
quite calm and quiescent and intact in his nature. 


88. Rama added: — I come to find at last and by a haphazard, my 
erroneous conception of the world from first to last; as also the error of my 
attributing the qualities of activity and passivity, to the nature of the 
transcendent being. 


89. Vasishtha concluded with saying: — Now I have fully exposed the 
erroneous views of the world (entertained both by the wise and ignorant), both 
by the elegance of my poetical diction, as also by the enlightening reasonings 
of the learned; both of which are calculated to remove the mistaken views of 
the vacuity and delusion of the world, by establishment of the truth of the 
whole, as being composed of essence of the One sole and Supreme entity. 


CHAPTER CXCI. 
Solution of the great question of unity and Duality. 


Argument: — Concerning the identity of the world and God, or the total 
absence of the universe. 


Rama rejoined: — If it is so Sir, as you say, the world must be a great 
riddle; as it can neither be said to be in existence with all its contents, or it is a 
perfect nullity with everything quite extinct in it. 


2. This existence that shows itself as the world to sight, appears as a 
delusion or deception of vision in view; though it cannot properly be called an 
illusion, if it is composed of divine essence as you mean to say. 


3. Vasishtha replied: — The fortuitous appearance in which Brahma, 
manifests himself of his own accord; is known to him as the world and 
subsisting in himself. 


4. Rama rejoined: — How does Brahma manifest himself as the world, 
before existence of space and after its extinction (at the ultimate dissolution of 
creation); and how does the divine spirit shine itself as the world in want of 
the light of the luminaries? 


5. Vasishtha replied: — The world shines in this manner in the light of the 
Divine Intellect; and know this light to proceed from the Divine spirit, which 
is thus diffused all over the universe. 


6. As the light of the lamp or chandelier, enlightens the house with its 
lustre; it was thus the holy light of the Divine spirit that shone itself, without 
presenting its outward appearance, or having anyone to look upon it (before 
creation). 


7. Thus, it is an immaterial and imperishable entity, without any 


appearance of or looker on it; it shines with the light of the intellect, upon the 
basis or stand of the Divine spirit. 


8. It shines in its visible appearance, in the sight of the spirit only, that 
constantly looks upon it, as it sees its dreams in sleep. 


9. It shines only in the light of the intellect, and appears as the created 
world before its creation; all its visible and shining sheen being derived from 
the Supreme. 


10. The One supreme intellect alone, assumes the triple forms of the sight, 
seer, and seeing, (i.e., the subjective, objective and the attribute), in the 
beginning of creation; and shows itself as the created world of its own nature 
and accord. 


11. We have the resemblance of such like appearance, presenting unto us in 
our dreams and creatures of our fancy; and it is in the same manner, that this 
creation shines before us with the light of the intellect. 


12. This world (shining so bright and fair), is like a vacuous body 
appearing in the vacuity of the intellect; the creation has neither its beginning 
nor end, it is a development of the intellect, which is distributed through it. 


13. It has become habitual to our nature, to suppose the existence of the 
world, but the false impression of its visibility, is lost in the consciousness of 
high-minded men. 


14. To them, this creation presents no visible forms, nor any sensible 
appearance at all; it is to them a representation of fallacy only, as the mistake 
of a man in a Statue, or taking a false apparition as real. 


15. In this manner the blunder of a duality in the soul, produces a dualism 
in the mind; but ere the existence of creation, there existed no dualism of the 
creator and the created, or of the manifester and the manifested. 


16. The want of a cause causes the appearance of a duality; (i.e., of the 
causal agency and its effect, in the vacuity of the intellect); but tell me how 
could there be a cause when there is no creation in existence. (The creation 
presupposes a cause, but not otherwise nor its absence). 


17. It is the Divine intellect alone, that manifests itself in the manner of the 
world, in the total absence of all visible objects; and though this seems to be 


the waking state of the Supreme soul, yet it is neither its waking, sleeping nor 
dreaming state. 


18. The visible world is no production of dream, but a manifestation of 
Brahma himself; and there existed the Divine intellect only, in the manner of 
the infinite void, before the birth of the atmospheric vacuum of the world. 


19. The intellect which beholds this universe as its body, without being 
distributed or changed in the form of the world; is purely of a spiritual or 
vacuous form, that manifested itself in this visible form before it came to 
existence. 


20. And this visible world that is so manifest to view, is as void and 
vacuous as the empty air. 


21. Now, knowing this in your own understanding, you must remain devoid 
of all dualism in your mind; be as mute as a block of stone, nor give heed to 
the words of the universe in your heart, nor care for their sayings of earthly 
enjoyments, (for fear of losing your spiritual bliss). 


CHAPTER CXCII. 
On the attainment of spiritual Anaesthesia. 


Argument: — Raéma’s coma and trance, and his revival by the spiritual 
lecture of his preceptor. 


Rama rejoined and said: — Alas! that I have so long strayed about, in the 
erroneous maze of the world; without the knowledge of its being a mere void 
and vacuum. 


2. I now come to know the fallacy of my conception of the world, which is 
but a mere nullity; which never is nor was, nor shall ever prove to be a 
positive reality. 


3. It is all still and supportless, and existing in our false knowledge of it; it 
is an endless formation of the solid intellect, and a mere vacuous conception 
of ours, without any figure or form or colour or mark of its own. 


4. It is the transcendental vacuum and of a wholly inconceivable nature; 
and yet how wonderous it is, that we call this our world, our earth and the 
sphere of our action. 


5. How it appears as a duality (apart from the unity of God), and how these 
worlds and mountains seen as separate and solid bodies of themselves; when 
they are in reality but the pellucid sky appearing as thick and opaque to our 
misconception of them. 


6. This creation and the future world, are as the dreams that we see, but 
working of our imagination; while it is the intellect only that shows itself as 
these intelligible objects, which could not otherwise present their visible 
aspects to our conceptions of them. 


7. The thought that I am situated in heaven or hell in this life, makes this 


world appear as such unto us; because the visibles are all objects or creatures 
of our consciousness of them. (It is the mind that makes a heaven or hell). 


8. There is nothing as visible or its vision, nor this world or its creation, 
unless it is caused as such, by the intellect within us; it is neither a scene in 
our waking or sleeping, nor is this anything as real in its nature. 


9. If this be but an erroneous sight, how could the negative error produce 
this positive spectacle, should it be but a false conception of the mind, then 
tell me, O sage, how could this blank fallacy bring forth the thought of this 
real existence. 


10. It is not possible for error, to creep into the infallible mind of 
omniscience; nor is it probable that error should reign over this perfect 
creation at large; it is therefore, the Lord himself, that exhibits his glory in this 
manner. 


11. What can we think otherwise of the continuity of space, infinity of 
vacuum and infinity of time, than they are the attributes of omnipotence; and 
how are we to look on the transparency of the air and crystal, without thinking 
them as manifestation of his nature? 


12. An erroneous notion is as false, as the sight of one’s own death in a 
dream; but how can this world which is so palpable to sight, be lost to or 
expunged from our sight, without losing our sight of its great manifester also? 
(To ignore the world is to ignore its maker also, as the denial of God leads to 
that of the world). 


13. The sights of the mirage, fairy cities and double moons in the sky, are 
of course deceptions of vision and productions of our error; but the same 
analogy does not apply to our sight of the world. 


14. The boys’ apparitions of ghosts, never lay hold on adults and the 
waking, nor on any one in the day light and open air; this and similar errors 
arise in our ignorance only, but they vanish upon our second thought and true 
knowledge of them. 


15. It is improper in this place to raise the question, regarding whence this 
bug-bear of error could rise among mankind; since it is evident from our own 
reasoning, that there is no such thing as avidyd or ignorance, (which is the 
cause of error) ever in existence, nor an asat or not being even in being. 
(Because the Veda says aeasana arate, the existence existed from before). 


16. It is evident by rational reasoning, that whatever is invisible and 
imperceptible to us, the same is called as asat or not being, and the conception 
of idea or that is termed an error. 


17. That which is not clearly obtained by any proof or reasoning, and is as 
impossible as the sky-flower or the horn of a hare, how can that be believed to 
be as anything in existence. 


18. And a thing, however apparent to sight, but having no cause or 
evidence of its reality, cannot be believed as a thing in existence, but it must 
be a nullity like the issue of a barren woman. 


19. Therefore, there can no error at any time, nor can an error ever produce 
anything whatever; it is therefore, the manifest omniscience of Providence, 
that is conspicuous in every part of this wide and grand display. 


20. Whatever then is seen now to shine before us, is the manifestation of 
Supreme being itself; the same Supreme spirit fills this plenitude, and is full 
with it in itself. (So the Veda Wut Ha: WuiAg erc.). 


21. There is nothing that is either shining or unshining here at any time, 
unless it be the calm and quiet and transparent spirit of God, that inheres in its 
body of the mundane world. 


22. It is the one unborn, undying and unchanging everlasting Being, that is 
the most adorable and ever adored Lord of all, that fills and pervades the 
whole with his essence. He only is the word ego, self-manifest, — pure and 
all pervading, while I and all others are without our egoism, and shine only in 
that unity. (literally, without our duality). 


CHAPTER CXCIII. 
Mental Torpor or Tranquility. 


Argument: — Rama’s ecstatic hybernation and union with the Supreme 
unity. 


Rama rejoined: — There is the only One alone whom neither the gods nor 
the rishis know or comprehend; He is without beginning, middle and end, and 
it is that being that thus shines himself, without this world and these 
phenomena. 


2. It is useless to us to mind the difference, between the unity and duality, 
and to be led to the doubts created by the misleading verboilogy of erroneous 
doctrines; without relying in the state of one tranquil and unvarying Spirit. 


3. The world is as clearly a vacuous body, appearing in the womb of 
vacuity; as the string of pearls and the aerial castles, that are seen in the open 
sky. 


4. The world is attached in the same manner, to the solidity of the invisible 
intellect; as vacuity is inherent in vacuum, lapidity in the stone, and fluidity in 
water. 


5. Though the world, appears to be spread on all sides of space; yet it is no 
more than an empty vacuity, lying calm and quiet, in the hollow womb of the 
great intellect. 


6. This world appearing so fair and perspicuous, to the sight of ignorant 
people; vanishes as a phantom into nothing, at the sight of the boundless glory 
of the transcendent God. 


7. The impression of difference and duality, existing between the creator 
and creation, among worldly men; vanishes upon reflection, like waves into 


the waters of the sea. 


8. The existence of the world, together with all our miseries in it, before the 
light of our liberation; as the darkness of night flies away at sunrise, and the 
light of the day disappears, before the gloom of night. 


9. Whether in plenty or poverty, or in birth, death or disease; or in the 
troubles and turmoils of the world, the wise man remains unshaken, though he 
may be overpowered by them. 


10. There is no knowing nor error in this world, nor any pain or pleasure, or 
distress or delight in it; but they are all attributes of the deity, whose pure 
nature is unsullied by them. 


11. I have come to know, that this existence is the immaculate Brahma 
himself; and is the want of our knowledge, which says anything to be beside 
the spirit of the Great God. 


12. I am awakened to, and enlightened in divine knowledge; and find 
external existence cease to exist in any presence. 


13. Perfect knowledge tells us, all these worlds to be but Brahma himself; 
but want of this knowledge says, I was no Brahma before, but have now 
become so by my knowledge. 


14. The known and the unknown, the dark and the bright are all but 
Brahma, as vacuity and unity, and brightness and blueness, do all appertain to 
the one and same sky. 


15. I am extinct in the deity (in my divine knowledge), and sit dauntless of 
anything; I am devoid of all desire, with my leaning in perfect blessedness; I 
am as I am, ravished in my infinite bliss, without my sensibility of what or 
which. 


16. I am wholly that one and sole entity, which is naught but perfect 
tranquility; I see nothing but a calm and quiet, which utterly absorbs and 
enrapts me quite. 


17. Knowing the knowable (the unknown One) is to unknow one’s self and 
ignore the visible; as this cognition continues to dawn in the soul, the whole 
cosmos sinks into oblivion and seems a block of stone, without the name and 
sign of anything being known. 


CHAPTER CXCIV. 
Réma’s rest in Nirvana Insensibility. 


Argument: — Raéma’s feeling of his comatosity, and his relation of it to his 
preceptor Vasishtha. 


Rama said: — In whatever manner and form, the living or individual soul 
conceives the universal soul within itself; it has the same conception or idea 
presented before it, agreeably to its concept thereof. (i.e., The divine spirit 
appears in the same form in us, as we think it to be). 


2. All these worlds lie in concert in their spiritual state, in the boundless 
spirit of the great Brahma; but they appear to us in various lights, like the 
different rays, radiating from the one and same gem. 


3. The great and bright quarry of the Divine Mind, contains all these 
gemming worlds in its unbounded bosom; all of which unite to shed and 
scatter their conjoined light upon us, like the commingled rays of the gems 
contained in the womb of a vast mine. 


4. All these several worlds, shining together like so many lamps of a lustre; 
are clearly perceived by some and are imperceptible to others, as the blaze of 
day light is dazzling to the clear-sighted, but quite dim to the blind. 


5. As the rushing of the contrary currents, describe the whirlpools in the 
waters of the deep; so do the contact and conflict of the elementary atoms, 
produce the consolidation and dissolution of worlds, which are no acts of 
creation. 


6. The creation is everywhere but a coagulation, of the drizzling drops of 
the gelid intellect; who can therefore, count the countless watery particles, 
that are incessantly oozing out of it, and are condensed in the forms of 
worldly spherules. 


7. As the part is not different in its substance, from that of the whole; so the 
creation is not otherwise than its creator, except in the difference of the two 
terms of devious significations. 


8. The causeless and uncausing unity, being the archetype of infinite 
variety; these numberless multiplicities are only ectypes of that sole moiety, 
and neither a duality nor pluralities whatever; nor do these copies and 
counterparts, ever rise or fall apart from their original prototype, (but the both 
are showing the same). 


9. It is that intelligence which shows the intelligibles in itself; it produces 
these unproduced productions to view, as the sun light exposes the visibles to 
light. 


10. It is from my inappetency of all things in existence, that I have 
accomplished that perfection, and acquired that prosperity for myself, which 
is termed insouciance or the nirvana extinction. 


11. It is not by our understanding this bliss, nor can we have any 
knowledge of it by our percipience; neither is there any knowledge whereby 
we may know, the unknown one which is alone to be known. (Here is a pun 
and play of the word bédha or knowledge, which is explained in the gloss to a 
great length). 


12. It is a knowledge that rises of itself, and a waking of the soul 
resembling its somnolence; it throws a light as that of the midday sun in the 
inmost soul, and is neither confined in or absent from any place or time. (i.e., 
The full blaze of spiritual light, fills the soul at all times and places or as Pope 
says: — It wraps my soul, and absorbs me quite). 


13. It is after the subsidence of all desire within, and desistance from all 
actions without accompanied with one’s desistance from all wishes, that this 
stillness attends upon the enlightened soul. 


14. The saint of awakened understanding, that is confined in himself, and 
absorbed in his meditation; is neither inclined to the prurience of anything, 
nor to the avoidance of aught whatever. (“Have what I have, and dare not 
leave, enamoured of the present day.” — Young). 


15. In this state of rapture, the mind of the saint, though in full possession 
of its mental faculties; remains yet as fixed and inactive, and unmindful of all 
worldly things and bodily actions; as a burning taper, that consumes itself 


while illumes others, without any shaking or motion of its own. (i.e., 
Thoughtful and inactive). 


16. The soul becomes as Viswariupa or incorporated with the world, in its 
condition of thoughtfulness, when it is called the Viswdtma or the mundane 
soul; or else it is said to be situated in the state of the immense void of 
Brahma, when it is devoid of and unoccupied with its thoughts. Hence 
creation and its cessation, both appertain to the Divine Intellect, in its states of 
activity or thoughtfulness and its wants or stupor. 


17. He who is enrapt in divine ecstasy, and settled in his belief of the 
identity of the Deity with his excogitation of him, remains closely confined in 
himself with his rapture and secure from distraction of his mind (and 
perturbation of worldly thoughts). 


18. He who relies only in the cogitation of his self, regardless of all other 
things in the world; comes to find the reality of his self-cognition alone, and 
else beside, to be as nil as empty air. (Literally: — as empty air is not distinct 
from vacuity). 


19. The man of enlarged understanding, has an unbounded store of 
knowledge in himself; but this ultimately ends in the knowledge of the 
unspeakable one. (The end of all knowledge is the knowledge of God). 


20. It is therefore in our quietism, that we feel the very best entity of our 
consciousness, to be either dormant or extinct; and this state of tranquility of 
the mind, is unutterable in words. 


21. That which is the acme of all knowledge, is the abstract and abstruse 
knowledge of all as the true One; hence the world is a real entity, in as much 
as it abides in the eternal One (in its abstract light). 


22. The felicity of Nirvana, — ecstasy, with the utter extinction of all 
desire, and the consciousness of a cool and calm composure of one’s self, is 
the summum bonum or highest state of bliss and perfection; that is aimed at to 
be attained even by the gods Brahma, Vishnu and Siva. 


23. All things (desirable to the soul), are always present with it, in all 
places and at all times; they are ever accompanied with our concepts of them 
in the intellect, which is the only pure entity that is ever in existence, and is 
never dissolved. (The thought survives the thing it represents). 


24. Too hot is the busy bustle of the world, and very cooling is the bliss of 
Nirvana insensibility; it is therefore, far better to have the cold heartedness of 
insouciance, than the heart burning heat of worldliness. 


25. As an artist conceives in himself, the contrivance of a statue sculptured 
in relief, in the slab of his mind; so the Great Brahma sees this universe 
inscribed in him, in rilievo and not carved out of him. 


26. Just as the spacious ocean looks upon the waves, heaving upon the 
surface of its waters; so doth the great Brahma see the myriads of worlds, 
rolling about in the midst of its intellect. 


27. But ignorant people of dull understandings, behold those fixed 
inseparable spectacles, in the light of separate spectres, appearing in various 
shapes and forms, in the spheres of their intellect. 


28. In whatever manner doth anybody conceive anything in his mind, he 
verily thinks and beholds it in the same light, by his habitual mode of thinking 
the same as such. 


29. As a man waking from his sleep, finds no truth in aught he saw in his 
dream; whether it be the death or presence or absence of a friend or other; so 
the enlightened soul sees no reality in the Life or death, of any living being 
seen in this visible world because none lives by himself, nor dies or departs 
away of himself, but all are deputed alike in the tablet of the eternal mind. 


30. The thought and conviction of this truth in the mind, that whatever 
appears to pass under and away from our sight, is the fixed inert and quiescent 
réchauffé of its divine original, is sure and enough to forfend the mind, from 
its falling into the error of taking the copy for its mould. 


31. This lesson will certainly tend to lessen the enjoyments of your body, 
that none of them will ever serve to prevent its fall to naught; as also to 
protect you from the error of accounting for the reality of these numberless, 
that are at best but passing sights in your dream. 


32. Inappetency of earthly enjoyments increases our wisdom, as wisdom 
serves to diminish our worldly desires, thus they mutually serve to augment 
one another, as the open air and sunshine. 


33. The knowledge which tends to create your aversion to riches, and to 
your family and friends, is of course averse to your ignorance and dullness; 


and the one being acquired and accomplished by you, serves to put an end to 
your ignorance at once. 


34. That is the true wisdom of wise men, which is unalloyed by avarice, 
and that is the true learning of the learned, which is not vitiated by any 
yearning. 


35. But neither wisdom and inappetency, singly and simply, nor their 
combined and augmented states, are of no good unless they have attained their 
perfection, but prove as vain as the blaze of a sacrificial fire in a picture, 
which has not the power of consuming the oblation offered upon it. 


36. The perfection of wisdom and inappetence, is a treasure which is 
termed liberation also; because anybody who has reached to, and remains in 
that state of infinite bliss, is freed from all the bonds of care. 


37. In this state of our emancipation, we see the past and present, and all 
our sights and doings in them as present before us; and find ourselves situated, 
in a state of even calm and tranquility, of which there is no end nor any breach 
whatever. 


38. The self-contented man who finds all his happiness in himself, is ever 
cool and calm and tranquil in his soul, and is devoid of all desire and 
selfishness in his mind. He relies in his cool hearted indifference and apathy to 
all worldly objects, and sees only a clear void stretched before him. 


39. We scarcely find one man, among a hundred thousand human beings, 
who is strong enough and has the bravery, to break down the trammels of his 
earthly desires, as the lion alone breaks of the iron bars of his prison house. 
(The adamantine chain of avarice, binds us all alike to this nether earth). 


40. It is the inward light of the clear understanding, that dispels the mist of 
desires that overcasts the cupidinous mind; and melts down the incrassated 
avarice, as the broad sunshine dissolves the thickened ice in autumn. 


41. It is the want of desire that is the knowledge of the knowable, (or what 
is best and most worthy of being known), and stands above all things that are 
desirable or worth our desiring; it bears its resemblance to the breath of air, 
without any external action of it. (i.e., The man that is without any desire of 
his, lives to breathe his vital breath only, without doing any external action of 
his; but breathes as the current mind, to no purpose whatsoever). 


42. He sits quiet and firm in himself, with his thoughts fixed in ascertaining 
the truths and errors of the world; and looks all others in the light of himself, 
without having to do with or desire of them. 


43. He sits reclined in the immensity of Brahma, with his enlightened view 
of the visibles as subsisting in Him; he remains indifferent to all things, and 
devoid of his desire for anything, and sits quiet in the quiescence of his 
liberation; which is styled as moksha by the wise. 


CHAPTER CXCV. 
Lecture on the Enlightenment of Understanding. 


Argument: — Vasishtha’s commendation of Rama’s knowledge, and his 
further questions for his trial and Rama’s replies. 


Vasishtha said: — Bravo Rama! that you are awakened to light and 
enlightened in your understanding; and the words you have spoken, are 
calculated to destroy the darkness of ignorant minds, and rejoice the hearts of 
wise. 


2. These phenomenals that ever appear so very bright to our sight, lose their 
gloss at our want of desire and disregard of them; it is the knowledge of this 
truth, that is attended with our peace and tranquility, and our liberation and 
inexcitability. 


3. All these imaginary sights vanish from our view, at the suppression of 
our imagination of them; just as the want of ventilation in the winds, reduces 
them to the level of the one common, and calm still air. 


4. The enlightened man remaining unmoved as a stone, or moving quietly 
in his conduct in life, (i.e., who is ever unruffled in his disposition), is verily 
said to have his clear liberation. 


5. Look at Yogis like ourselves, O Rama, that having attained this state of 
liberation, have been cleansed from all our iniquities; and are now set at quiet 
rest, even in the conduct of our worldly affairs. 


6. Know the great gods Brahma, Vishnu and others, to have been situated 
in this state of quiet and freedom, that they are remaining as pure 
intelligences, even while discharging the offices of their godship. 


7. Do you, O Rama, attain the enlightenment of holy sages, and remain as 


still as a stone like ourselves. 


8. Rama replied: — I see this world as a formless void, situated in the 
infinite vacuity of Brahma; it is an uncreated and unsubstantial nihility, and 
with all its visibility, it is an invisible nothing. 


9. It is as the appearance of water in the mirage, and as a whirlpool in the 
ocean; its glare is as glitter of gold in the dust, and of sands in the sandy 
shores of seas in sunshine. 


10. Vasishtha said: — Rama! if you have become so enlightened and 
intelligent, then I will tell you more for the edification of your understanding; 
and put some questions for your answer to them, in order to remove my 
doubts regarding them. 


11. Tell me, how can the world be a nullity, when it shines so very brightly 
all about and above our heads; and how can all these things, which are so 
resplendent to sight, and always perceptible to our senses. 


12. Rama replied: — The world was never created in the beginning, nor 
was anything ever produced at any time, it is therefore as nil as the offspring 
of an unprolific woman and a creation of our imagination only. 


13. It is true that there is no result without its cause, or that nothing comes 
from nothing, but can be the cause of the world when it is a nullity, and a 
production of our error only. 


14. The immutable and everlasting deity, cannot be the creator, without 
changing itself to a finite form; how can therefore, be there a cause of this frail 
and finite form? 


15. It is the unknown and nameless Brahma, that shows himself as the 
cause of the world, which having proceeded from him is his very self, nor 
does the word world bear any other sense at all, (nor it can be made to bear 
any other sense). 


16. The first intelligence named as the God Brahma, rises from and abides 
for a little while, that unknown and nameless category of the universal spirit, 
as the conscious soul and having a spiritual body. (This is called the jivdtma 
or the living soul with a personal body of it). 


17. It then comes to see on a sudden, the luminaries of the sun and moon 


and the heavenly hosts, rising in the infinity of the Divine Mind, and thinks a 
small moment as a long year as its reverie of a dream. (The Morning and 
evening of the creation of Brahma, occupying many a year of mortals). 


18. It then perceived the ideas of space and time, together with those of 
their divisions and motions also; and the whole universe appearing to its sight, 
in the vast immensity of vacuity (of the Divine Mind). 


19. Upon the completion of the false world in this manner, its false 
contriver the soi-disant Brahma, was employed in wandering all over the 
world as his creation. 


20. So the living soul of everybody, being deluded by its mistaken 
conception of the world as a positive reality, traverses up and down and all 
about it, in its repeated wanderings amidst its false utopia. 


21. And though the events of life, takes place according to the wishes of the 
soul; yet these are mere accidents of chance; and it is a mistake to think them 
as permanent result of fixed laws. 


22. Because it is as wrong to suppose the substantiality of the world, and 
the permanency of the events; as to grant the birth of a child born of a barren 
woman, and the feeding of it with the powder of the pulverized air. 


23. Nothing can be positively affirmed or denied, regarding the existence of 
the world; except that whatever it is, it is no other than the diffusion of the all- 
pervasive spirit of the Eternal one. 


24. The world is as clear as the transparent atmosphere, and as solid as the 
density of a rock; it is as mute and still as a stone, and quite indestructible in 
its nature. 


25. The world is originally ideal, from the ideas of the eternal mind; and 
then it is spiritual, from the pervasion of the all-pervading spirit of Virdj; it is 
thus a mere void, appearing as a solid body to us. 


26. Thus Brahma being the great vacuum and its fulness, where is any other 
thing as the world in it, the whole is a dead calm as quietus, and a void devoid 
of its beginning and end. (i.e., a round sphere). 


27. As the waves have been ever heaving and diving, in the bosom of the 
waters of the deep; and as the waves are not distinct from those waters, so the 


worlds rolling in the breast of the vacuous Brahma, are no other than the self- 
same essence of Brahma himself. 


28. The few that are versed in their superior or esoteric, as well as in the 
inferior or exoteric knowledge; live as long as they live and then dive at last in 
this Supreme, as drops of water mix into the sea. 


29. The exoteric (or phenomenal) world, abides in the esoteric (or the 
noumenal) Brahma; and is of the same transcendent nature as the Divine 
Mind; for it is never possible for the gross, changeful and transitional nature, 
to subsist in the pure, unchanged and quiet state of the deity. 


30. For who that knows the nature of dream as false, and that of mirage as a 
fallacy can ever believe them as realities; so any one that knows the visible 
Nature to be of the nature of Brahma, can ever take it for dull and gross 
material substance. (Nature being one with its God, is equally of a spiritual 
nature). 


31. The enlightened sage, that has the esoteric knowledge of the world, and 
reflects it in its spiritual sense; cannot be misled to view it in its gross 
(material) light, as the holy man that tastes ambrosia, is never inclined to 
drink the impure liquor of wine. 


32. He who remains in his Nirvdna meditation, by reverting his view from 
the sight of the visibles, to the excogitation of his self; and represses his mind 
from the thoughts of thinkables, he is verily seated in the tranquility of 
Supreme spirit. 


33. Vasishtha said: — If the visible creation is situated in Brahma, — their 
cause and origin, as the germ or sprout of a plant is seated in its producing 
seed; how then can you ignore the substantiality or distinction of either of 
them from their originating source the seed or God, (who is said in the sruti, 
as the seed of the arbor of the world, — sansdramahiriipavija, etc.). 


34. Rama replied: — The germ does seem to be seated or situated in the 
seed (as a separate or different substance); but as it is produced from the 
essence of the seed, it appears to be the same substance with itself. (Were it 
not so, the germ would become another plant than that of the seed). 


35. If the world as it appears to us is inherent in Brahma, then it must be of 
the same essence and nature as Brahma; and these being eternal and 
imperishable in Brahma, needs have the world to be so also (and not of the 


seed and sprout, or the begetter and begotten). 


36. We have neither seen nor ever heard, that any finite, formal or 
perishable, has ever proceeded from an infinite, formless and imperishable 
cause, (therefore, this world is not as it appears to us). 


37. It is impossible for a formless thing, to remain in any form or other 
whatsoever; as it is never possible for an atom, to contain a mountain in its 
bosom. 


38. It is the voice of an idiot only who says, that the stupendous world with 
its gigantic form, abides in the formless abyss of Brahma; as bright gems are 
contained in the hollow of a box or basket. (The basket has a base to support 
anything, whereas the vacuity of Brahma has no basis at all). 


39. It does not befit anybody to say that, the transcendence and tranquility 
of God, supports the material and moving world upon it; nor that a corporeal 
body, (the corpus mundi), is an imperishable thing (as the divine spirit). 


40. Our perception of the world having a form, is no proof of its reality; 
because there is no truth whatever in the many curious forms, that present 
themselves before us in our dreams. (This is a refutation of the Buddhists’ 
reliableness in perception). 


41. It is an unprecedented dream, that presents us the sight of the world, of 
which we had no innate or preconceived idea in us; while our usual dreams 
are commonly known, to be the reproduced representations, of our former 
impressions and perceptions, and the results of our past remembrances of 
things, etc. 


42. It is not a day dream as some would have it to be, because the night 
dreams disappear in the day time; but how does a dreamer of his own funeral 
at night, come to see himself alive upon his waking in the day? (This 
continuous sight of the world day by day, is not comparable to a transient 
dream by day or night, but a permanent one in the person of the Great God 
himself). 


43. Others again maintain that, no bodiless things can appear in our dream, 
since we dream of certain bodies only; but this tenet has no truth in it, since 
we often dream of, as well as see the apparitions of bodiless ghosts both by 
day and night. 


44. Therefore, the world is not as false as a dream, but an impression 
settled like a dream in our very conscious soul; it is the formless deity, that 
manifests itself in the various forms of this world, to our understandings. 


45. As our intellect remains alone and in itself, in the forms and other 
things, appearing as dreams unto us in our sleep; so doth Brahma remain 
solely in himself in the form of the world we see; for God being wholly free 
and apart from all, cannot have any accompaniment with him. 


46. There is nothing that is either coexistent or inexistent in him (that is 
what can be either affirmed or denied of him); because we have no concept or 
conception of him ourselves, nor do we have any notion or idea we are to 
form of him. 


47. What is this nameless thing, that we cannot know in our understanding; 
it is known in our consciousness, (i.e., we are conscious of it), but it is in esse 
or non-esse, we know nothing of (this world). 


48. It is an inexistence appearing as existent, as also an existence seeming 
to be unexistent; all things are quite manifest in it at all times and in all forms 
(but how and whence they are is quite unknown). 


49. It is the development of Brahma in Brahma, as the sky is evolved in 
vacuity; for nothing can be found to fill the vacuum of Brahma, except 
Brahma himself (or his own essence). 


50. There I, my seeing and my sight of the world, is all mere fallacy; it is 
the calm and quiet extension of the Divine intellect only, that fills the infinite 
vacuity of his own spirit, and naught beside. 


51. As the aerial castle of our imagination, has no building nor reality in it; 
so is this world but a calm and quiet vacuity, and unfailing vacant ideality. 


52. It is a boundless space full with the essence of the Supreme spirit, it is 
without its beginning and end, wholly inscrutable in its nature, and quite calm 
and quiet in its aspect. 


53. Ihave known my own state also, to be without its birth and death, and 
as calm and quiet, as that of the unborn and immortal Brahma himself; and I 
have come to know myself, (ie., my soul) also, to be as formless and 
undefinable, as the Supreme soul or spirit. 


54. I have now given expression, to all that I find to be impressed in my 
consciousness; just as whatever is contained in the seed, the same comes to 
sprout forth out of it. 


55. I know only the knowledge that I bear in my consciousness, and 
nothing about the unity or duality (of the creation and creator); because the 
question of unity and duality rises only from imagination (of the one or other). 


56. All these knowing and living liberated men, that have been liberated 
from the burthen of life by their knowledge of truth; are sitting silent here, and 
devoid of all their earthly cares, like the empty air in the infinite vacuity. 


57. All their efforts of mixing with the busy bustle of the world, are here at 
an end; and they are sitting here as quiet and silent as yon mute and 
motionless picture on the wall, medalling on the bright regions in their minds. 


58. They are as still as the statues engraven in a rock, or as people 
described in fancy tales, to dwell in the erial city built by Sambara in air; (i.e., 
as the inhabitants dwelling in the Elysian of Plato, or in the utopia of Sir 
Thomas Moore); or as the airy figures in our dream. 


59. This world is verily a phantom appearing in our dream of the creation; 
it is a structure without its base, and a figure intangible to our touch. Where 
then is its reality? (Its tangibleness is a deception of our sense). 


60. The world appears as a positive reality to the blinded ignorant, but it is 
found to be a negative nullity by the keen-sighted sage; who sees it in the light 
of Brahma and a manifestation of himself, and as still as the calm air, reposing 
in the quiet vacuity of that transcendent spirit. 


61. All these existences, with their moving and unmoving beings, and 
ourselves also, are mere void and vacant nullities, in the knowledge of the 
discerning and philosophic mind. 


62. I am void and so are you too, and the world beside but mere blanks; the 
intellect is a void also, and by having all several voids in itself, it forms the 
immense intellectual vacuum, which is the sole object of our adoration (being 
as infinite and eternal, as well as all pervading and containing all as the 
supreme spirit). 


63. Being thus seated with my knowledge of the infinite vacuity of Brahma, 
I take thee also, O thou best of biped beings, as indistinct from the knowable 


One, who is one and same with the all comprehending vacuum, and so make 
my obeisance to thee. 


64. It is from the all comprehensiveness, (i.e., omniscience) of the vacuous 
intellect, that this world rises and sets in it by turns; it is as clear as the 
transparent air, and has no other cause of it but the undulation of the same. 


65. This hypostasis of Brahma is beyond all other existences, and above the 
reach of all Sdstras, it is by attaining to this state of transcendentalism, that 
one becomes as pure and superfine as empty air. 


66. There is nothing as myself, my feet and hands, or this pot or aught else 
that I bear, as any material existence; all is air and empty and inane as air, and 
knowing this, let us turn ourselves to our airy intellects only. (i.e., I think 
ourselves as intellectual and spiritual beings only, in utter disregard of our 
bodies and earthly things). 


67. You have shewn me Sir, the nullity of the world and the vanity of all 
worldly things; and the truth of this doctrine is evident in the light of our 
spiritual knowledge, in defiance of the sophistry of our opponents. 


68. The sophist that discomfits the silent sage with his sophistry, can never 
expect to see the light of spiritual knowledge to gleam upon him. (spirituality 
is got by silent meditation and not by wrangling). 


69. The Being that is beyond our perception and conception, and without 
any designation or indication; can be only known in our consciousness of him, 
and not by any kind of reasoning or argumentation. 


70. The Being that is without any attribute, or sight or symbol of his nature, 
is purely vacuous and entirely inconceivable by us, save by means of our 
spiritual light of him. 


CHAPTER CXCVI. 
Story of a Wood-Cutter and his Gem. 


Argument: — IIlustration of the efficacy of knowledge derived from Books 
and Preceptors. In the story of the Wood-cutter, and his obtaining a precious 
Gem. 


Valmiki relates: — After the lotus-eyed Rama, had said these words, he fell 
into a trance and remained silent, with his mind reposing in the state of 
supreme bliss. (The ecstatic state of rapture and transport of the devout). 


2. He felt himself supremely blest at his repose in the Supreme spirit, and 
then awaking after a while from his holy trance, he wistfully asked his sagely 
preceptor, saying: — 


3. Rama said: — O Venerable Sir, that art the dispeller of my doubts, as the 
clear autumn is the scatterer of dark clouds; that the doubt which had so long 
rankled in my breast, has at last quite set at rest. 


4. I find this knowledge of mine to be the best and greatest of all, and 
capable of saving me from the boisterous ocean of this world; it transcends all 
other doctrines, which are mere verbiology to ensnare the heedless minds of 
men. 


5. If all this is certainly the very Brahma, and our consciousness of him; 
then O Venerable Sir, he must be unspeakable and inexpressible in words, 
even by the most learned and wisest of men. 


6. Remaining thus in the meditation of the knowable One, and without any 
desire in our minds of any earthly good; we are enabled to attain the 
consciousness of our highest bliss (The Turiya state), which is unattainable by 
learning and unutterable in words. (The divine state is only known to one’s 
self, but never to be spoken or expressed). 


7. How can this certain and invariable state of felicity, be obtained from the 
dogmas of the Sdstras; which are at variance with each other, and are 
employed in the enumeration of their several categories. (The ever-varying 
Sdstras cannot give us any knowledge of this invariable felicity). 


8. We can gain no true knowledge from the tenets of the different Sdstras, 
that are at best but contradictory of one another; it is therefore, in vain to 
expect any benefit from them, that are based upon mere theories of our 
pretended leaders. 


9. Tell me, therefore, O Venerable Sir, whether it is of any good to us, to 
learn the doctrines of the Sdstras or attend to the teaching of our preceptors 
(when our true knowledge is derived from within ourselves, i.e., from our 
intuition, self-consciousness and our personal experiences). 


10. Vasishtha replied: — So it is, O mighty armed Rama, the Sdstras are 
not the means to divine knowledge; those being profuse in wordy torrents, and 
this beyond the reach of words. 


11. Yet hear me to tell you, O thou best of Raghu’s race, how the dictates 
of the Sdstras and the lectures of your preceptors, are of some avail towards 
the improvement of your understanding. 


12. There lived in a certain place some wood-cutters, who had been ever 
unfortunate and miserable in their lives, (or who were miserably poor all their 
lives). They pined and faded away in their poverty, like the withering trees in 
summer heat. 


13. Excessive poverty made them cover themselves with patched up rags, 
and they were as emaciated in their despair as the fading lotus flowers for 
want of their natal water. 


14. Being parched by famine, and despairing of their lives; they only 
thought of the means of filling their bellies. 


15. In this state of their distress and despondence, one thought gleamed in 
their minds; and it was to carry the woods day by day to the town, and to live 
upon the profits of their sale as fuel. 


16. Thus determined, they went to the forest to fell down the woods, 
because any plan that is hit upon in distress, is best to be availed of, for the 
preservation of life. 


17. Thus they continued daily to go to the forest to fell the woods, and fetch 
them to the town for sale; and to fill their bellies and support their bodies with 
the sale proceeds thereof. 


18. It happened that the skirts of the forest whither they went, were full of 
woods with hordes of treasures, consisting of gold and precious gems, lying 
hidden under the trees, and also exposed to view. 


19. It then turned out that some of the log-bearers, happened by their good 
luck to espy the brilliant gems, which they took with them to their homes 
from the forest. 


20. Some saw the valuable sandalwood trees, and others beheld beautiful 
flowers in some place; some found fruit trees somewhere, all which they took 
and sold for their food and livelihood. 


21. Some men of dull understanding, slighted all these goods; and kept 
collecting the blocks of wood, which they bore to the way side of the forest, 
and there sold at trifling prices. (Nothing is valued at home unless it is taken 
to a distance). 


22. Among all these wood men, who were employed in common in 
collection of woods, some of them happened by their good luck, to find some 
precious gems there, which set them at ease for every care. 


23. Thus amongst all of these that had been toiling and moiling in the same 
field of labour; now it happened to obtain their desired boon the Philosopher’s 
gem. (That converts all things to gold, and is desired by all but found by few). 


24. Now they having obtained the desirable gem, which bestowed upon 
them all the blessings of affluence and prosperity; they became preeminently 
happy with their fortune, and remained quite content in the very woods. 


25. So the seekers and sellers of worthless wooden blocks, being gainers of 
the all-bounteous gem of their heart’s desire (Chintdmani); remained happily 
with themselves, as the gods dwelling together in harmony in the Elysian 
field. 


26. Thus the Kir woodmen, having obtained their best gains of what forms 
the pith and gist of every good in the main, remained in quiet and quite 
content in themselves, and passed their days without any fear or grief, in the 
enjoyment of their everlasting equanimity and felicity. 


27. This world is compared to the wilderness, and all its busy people are as 
the day-labouring Kiri foresters, daily toiling and moiling in their hard work, 
for their help of daily bread. Some amongst them are happy to find the 
precious treasure of true knowledge, which gives them the real bliss of life 
and lasting peace of mind. 


CHAPTER CXCVII. 
On the Excellence of Learning. 


Argument: — Study of the Sdstras whether for temporal ends or ultimate 
bliss tends mainly to the edification of the Mind. 


Rama said: — Do thou, O greatest of sages, deign to give me the best 
treasures of knowledge, as the wood-cutter obtained their precious treasures 
of the Philosopher’s stones, and whereby I may attain to the full, perfect and 
indubitable knowledge of all things. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The woodmen that I have mentioned bear allusion 
to all mankind in general and their great poverty that I have described, refers 
to the extreme ignorance of men which is the cause of all their woe. (three- 
fold miseries, — tritapas of the body, mind and soul, or of this world and the 
next. — Gloss). 


3. The great forest which is said to be the place of their residence, is the 
vast wilderness of knowledge, which the human kind have to traverse under 
the guidance of their preceptors and the Sdstras; and their labour in felling 
and selling the wood for their daily food, is the hard struggle of human kind in 
their life time for their simple fare and supportance. 


4. The unavaricious men that are unemployed in business, and are yet 
desirous of the enjoyments of life; are the persons that devote themselves to 
the acquisition of learning. (Such is the literary body of students and 
scholars). 


5. And those people also, who pursue their callings for the provisions of 
life, and are dependents on others for their supportance; become successful in 
the acquirement of learning in their minds, by their practice of the precepts 
and studious habits. 


6. As the wood-cutters, who sought for the worthless wood at first, get the 
very valuable gems at last; so men prosecuting their studies for a paltry 
maintenance and self-supportance, succeed to gain divine knowledge at the 
end. (Secular knowledge often leads to the spiritual). 


7. There are some sceptics who say by way of derision, what is the good to 
be derived from poring upon books? but these have been found to have turned 
to true believers at last. (Those who came to deride, returned believers at the 
end and confessed the truth). 


8. Worldly men devoted to the objects of their fruition in life, and 
acquainted with the objects of mental and spiritual truths; coming distrustfully 
to listen to the doctrines of the Sdstras, have become fully convinced of their 
truths at last. 


9. Men are led away to many ways by the different tenets of the Sdstras, 
and by direction of their various desires and inclinations; but they come to 
meet at last in the same path of glory, as the gemming forest of the woodmen. 


10. He who is not inclined to the injury of others, but goes on in his own 
beaten course; is called the upright man, and it is his judgement which is 
sought and followed by everyone. 


11. But men ignorant of truth, are dubious of the result of righteous 
conduct, in earning their livelihood; and are doubtful also of the benefit, 
which is derived from the study of the Sdstras. (Hence, they fall to 
misconduct and neglect their studies also, in order to earn their bread by foul 
means). 


12. But men persisting in their righteousness, gain both their livelihood and 
liberation at once; as the honest woodmen obtained their wood as well as the 
gems together, and in the same place. 


13. Among these, some succeeded to get the sandal woods, and some to 
gain the precious gems, while others met with some common metals, and a 
great number of them, found the wood of the forest trees only. (So are our lots 
differently cast among different individuals, according to our respective 
deserts). 


14. Some of us gain the objects of our desire, and some acquire riches or 
deeds of virtue and merit; others obtain their liberation; and attain their 
proficiency in the Sdstras. 


15. Know, O Rama, that the Sdstras deal only with instructions for the 
acquirement of the triple blessings of our livelihood, riches and virtue; but 
they give no direction for our knowing the supreme One, who is inexpressible 
in words. (Because no word nor thought can ever approach to the unknowable 
One). 


16. The words and their significations (which are used in the Sdstras), serve 
only to express the intelligible objects which are signified by them, as the 
seasons denote the seasonal fruits and flowers which they bear; but the 
knowledge of the supreme being, is derived from one’s intuition, and is felt in 
our consciousness alone. 


17. Divine knowledge is said in the Sdstras, to transcend the knowledge of 
all other things; and the transparency of the Divine person, surpasses the 
brightness of all objects, as the beauty of the female body excels the lustre of 
the brightest gems. (The personal grace of females, transcends the beauty of 
all their decorations). 


18. The transcendental knowledge of the Deity, is not to be derived from 
the doctrine of the Sdstras, nor from the teachings of our preceptors; it cannot 
be had by means of our gifts and charities; nor by divine service and religious 
observances, can we ever know the unknowable One. 


19. These and other acts and rites, are falsely said to be the causes of divine 
knowledge, which can never be attained by them; now attend to me, O Rama, 
and I will tell you the way to your rest in the Supreme soul. 


20. The study of the Sdstras, serves of course to purify the mind from 
vulgar errors and prejudices; but it is the want of desire or aversion to worldly 
enjoyments, that makes the mind look within itself, wherein it sees clearly the 
image of God shining in it. 


21. This Sdstra stablishes right understanding in lieu of ignorance, and this 
right reasoning serves to drive away all gross errors from the mind at once. 


22. The Sdstra or learning serves principally to cleanse the mirror of the 
mind, from its dross of errors at first, and then it purifies the person of its 
possessor, by the force of its doctrines. (So, the Sdstra has the power of 
purifying both the body and mind of the learned man). 


23. As the rising sun casts his image spontaneously, on the dark bosom of 
the ocean; so doth the luminary of Sdstra or learning, shed of its own accord 


the bright light of truth, in the minds of ignorant. 


24. As the sun enlightens all objects, by his presence before them; so doth 
the light of learning illumine the dark understandings of the illiterate, by its 
benign appearance therein. 


25. In this manner, there is an intimate relation between the learning 
derived from the Sdstra, and the mind of the man that is desirous of his 
liberation; in as much as the Sdstra alone affords the knowledge of the 
otherwise unknowable One to our minds. 


26. As the sight of the sun and the ocean, shows us the blue waters of the 
one, turning to a bright expanse by the rays of the other; so the instance of the 
Sdstra and its doctrines, shows the enlightenment of human intellect by means 
of the other. 


27. As boys in their play with pebbles, rub them against one another in the 
water, and have their hands cleansed of dirt by abrasion of the stones; so the 
discussion of the Sdstras, clears the minds of the disputants of their errors, by 
refutation of discordant opinions. 


28. So also do learned men, by their confutation of repugnant doctrines, 
clear their minds of doubtful questions; and become perfected in forming right 
principles, and ascertaining the truth from falsehood. 


29. The Sdstras distil with sweetness of the holy texts, and infuse the sweet 
balm of true knowledge into the mind; they are as profuse of dulcitude, as the 
sugarcane exudes with its saccharine juice, which is so delectable to taste. 


30. As the rays of sunlight falling on the walls of houses, become 
perceptible to us, by means of our visual organs; so the light of spiritual 
knowledge, pierces into the souls of men, by means of our hearing the Sdstras 
through the medium of our ears. 


31. Learning acquired for the acquisition of the triple good of this world, 
namely virtue, wealth and the objects of our desire; is no learning at all 
without the knowledge of the Sdstras leading to our liberation. Much learning 
both in theory and practice, is worth nothing without the salvation of our 
souls. 


32. That is the best learning, which gives us the knowledge of truth; and 
that is true knowledge, which causes our equanimity in all states of our being; 


and that is called perfect equanimity, which produces our hypnotism in 
waking; (i.e., whereby we may sleep in insensibility over the waking and 
tumultuous world). 


33. Thus are all these blessings obtained from learning of the Sdstras, 
therefore, let everyone devote himself to the study of the Sdstras with all 
diligence. 


34. Hence know, O Rama! that it is the study of the Sdstras, and meditation 
of their recondite meanings; together with one’s attendance on his preceptor, 
and audience of his lectures and counsels, as well by his equanimity, and 
observance of his vows and discipline, that he can attain his supreme bliss, in 
the everlasting God, who is beyond all worldly things, and is the supreme lord 
God of all. 


CHAPTER CXCVIII. 
Excellence of Universal Toleration. 


Argument: — Sama-darsana or equanimity agreeing with stoic fortitude 
under all the various shades of its meaning, elaborately treated here. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear me Rama, to tell you again for the perfection 
of your understanding, (after what I have said already in praise of the virtue of 
equanimity); because the repetition of a lesson, serves to impress it the more 
in the memory of inattentive persons. 


2. Rama! I have told you before about the existence of the world, after I 
had related to you in length regarding its creation or production; whereby you 
have come to know, that both the appearance and subsistence of the world, 
(i.e., its coming to and being in existence), are mere fallacies of our 
understanding. 


3. I have next explained to you also, in the Upasama-Prakarana or my 
lecture on Insouciance, of the necessity of observing and maintaining a total 
indifference in regard to the whole creation, (which is here repeated as leading 
to our nirvdna or lukewarmness in this our living state). 


4. In my discourse on indifference, I have described to you the different 
stages of non-chalance; the attainment of the highest pitch of which, will 
conduce ultimately to your obtaining the blissfulness of the nirvana 
numbness, which is treated of in this book on anesthesia. (From the stage of 
Upasama or allaying of all excitements to that of upasdnti or absence of 
excitability, there are some intermediate states spoken of before). 


5. You shall have here to hear (or learn) from me, regarding the manner in 
which the learned are to conduct themselves in this phenomenal world, after 
they have learnt and obtained, whatever there is to be known and obtainable 


herein. (i.e., after their attainment of divine knowledge and wisdom). 


6. A man having received his birth in this world, should habituate himself 
from his boyhood, to view the phenomenals as they are of themselves, and 
without any concern with himself; in order to have his security and happiness 
apart from all others. (i.e., Constrain yourself to yourself, and without any 
concern of yours with any). 


7. Regard all in the one and same light with yourself, and observe a 
universal benevolence towards all beings, and then placing your reliance in 
your own equanimity, conduct yourself safely and securely everywhere. 


8. Know the plan of your even-mindedness, to be productive of the fruits of 
purest and most delicious taste; and bearing the blossoms of unbounded 
prosperity, and the flowers of our unfading good fortune. 


9. Meekness of disposition, yields the fruit of universal benevolence, and 
makes the prosperity of the whole world wait at its service. (Blessed are the 
meek; for they shall enjoy all the blessing, etc.). 


10. Neither the possession of a kingdom on earth, nor the enjoyment of the 
best beauties herein; can yield that undecaying and essential happiness, which 
is derived from the equanimity of the meek. 


11. The utmost limit of a cool disposition, and the entire want of all 
anxious cares, are the two antidotes that set at naught the fervour and vapours 
of sorrow from the human mind. 


12. It is very rare to meet a person, amidst the spheres of all these worlds; 
who is fraught with the ambrosia of cool insouciance, who is friendly to his 
enemies and whose enemies are his friends, and who looks on all alike as he 
does to himself. 


13. The mind of the enlightened man, shines as brightly as the luminous 
moon; and dazzles with drops of ambrosial dews; the sages all lived to drink 
the cooling draught of immortality, as you learn from the lives of the royal 
sage Janaka and others of immortal fame. 


14. The man practising his demureness, has his faults described as his 
qualities, his sorrows seem as his pleasure; (i.e., he rejoices in his misery); 
and his death is eternal life unto him. 


15. Sdmyam or stoicism is ever accompanied, with a good grace, good lot 
and placidness; all of which are constant attendants on the stoic sage, as 
faithful wives fondly cling to the sides of their beloved husbands. 


16. Equanimity is the perpetual prosperity of the soul, and not the transitory 
hilarity of the mind; therefore, there is no treasure (i.e., spiritual bliss) 
whatsoever, which is a stranger to the meekness of spirit. 


17. He that is honest in all his dealings, and steady in his own professions; 
and liberal in his minds, (i.e., taking no heed of the faults of others); are men 
as valuable as richest gems, and are deemed and desired by all as gods upon 
earth. (Because men with godly virtues, are deemed and deified as gods). 


18. The even-minded man, that is righteous and upright in all his doings 
and dealings, who is magnanimous in his soul and benevolent in his mind; 
such a man is neither burnt by fire, nor ever soiled or sullied by water. (i.e., 
nothing can alter the even tenor of his mind and the smoothness of his 
conduct). 


19. Who can foil that man that does what is right, and observes things in 
their true light; who is not susceptible of joy or grief (but goes on in the even 
course of his life). 


20. The righteous and unflinching man, is relied upon and esteemed by all 
his friends and enemies also; he is honoured by his king and master, and loved 
by all wise men with whom he has any dealing. 


21. The wise and even sighted men are of indifferent minds, and do not try 
to flee from evil, nor rejoice to receive any good; they are content with 
whatever comes to pass upon them, as aught of good or bad, they care for 
naught. 


22. These meek minded men are unmindful of any good or desirable thing, 
which they may happen either to lose or leave from them; because they have 
to resort to the happy state of their equanimity, (Samatd or stoic sameness); of 
which no calamity or chance can deprive them. 


23. Men enjoying the felicity of equanimity, laugh to scorn at the 
tribulations of the world; and live uninjured under all the varying 
circumstances of life; they are venerated by the gods also, for the invariable 
samatd or sameness of their minds, (as those of the gods themselves). 


24. If the (unfavorable) course of events, ever happened to ruffle the 
countenance of the forbearing man; yet the inward equanimity of his mind, 
serves to shed the ambrosial beams, of a placid moon light within himself. 


25. Whatever the even minded man acts or does for himself, and 
whatsoever he says in opprobrium of the misdeeds of others; are all lauded 
with applause by the majority of men, (who like to see the goodness of others, 
and to learn of and correct their own faults). 


26. Whatever good or evil is known or seen to be done by the impartial 
observer, at any time whether past or present; are all approved of by the 
public, (under the impression of their being done for common good). 


27. The man that sees all things in the same light (of indifference), is never 
displeased or dejected in his countenance at any calamity or danger, that may 
betide him at any time. 


28. The prince Sibi of old, is recorded in history to have passed pieces of 
flesh from his own body, and to have fed a hawk therewith, in order to save 
the life of a captive pigeon from his claws. (This is an instance of samadristi 
or fellow feeling even towards the brute creation). 


29. Again, mind the impassible prince, who did not sink into despondence 
seeing his beloved consort to be maltreated before his sight. (This is an 
instance of unimpressible fortitude). 


30. Mind also how the king of Trigarta, offered his only son who was 
accomplished and successful in all his desires to the horrible Rakshasa; upon 
his being vanquished by the fiend, at a certain wager he had laid with him. 


31. Look at the great king Janaka, how he remained undismayed and 
undejected, at the burning of his well decorated city of Mithila. 


32. Look at the quiet and submissive prince of Salyadesa, how he calmly 
struck off his head from his body, as if it were the plucking off of a lotus leaf 
or flower from its stem, in order to satisfy the demand of a deity for the same. 


33. The Sauvira sovereign, who had won the big Airavata elephant of the 
god Indra, in a combat with him; made at last a gift of him to the very god, 
with as much unconcern, as one offers a heap of white kundu flowers, or huge 
heaps of rotten straws upon the sacrificial fire. 


34. You have heard how the elephant named kundapa, employed his trunk 
in sympathy to the Brahman’s kine, in lifting them from being plunged in the 
mud; and afterwards devoted his body to the service of the Brahman; 
wherefore he was taken up to heaven in a celestial car. 


35. Let your continued observance of toleration, preserve you from acts of 
intolerance, which tend at best to the oppression of others; and know that the 
spirit of intolerance, is as the goblin of the kadamba forest, (whose business 
was the havoc and depredation of all living beings). (@e., By want of 
forbearance, you make yourself an enemy to all, and make them as enemies to 


you). 


36. Remember the young and gentle Jadabharata, who by the natural 
hebetude of his mind, devoured the firebrand that was thrown into his alms- 
pot, thinking as a piece of meat, and without any injury to himself. (To the 
meek and tolerant, a furnace of fire, becomes a bed of roses and flowers). 


37. Think of the sober-minded kura, who notwithstanding his following the 
profession of a huntsman all his lifetime, was at last translated to heaven, and 
placed by the souls of the righteous men after his demise. 


38. Think of the listlessness and want of concupiscence, in the person of 
the royal sage Kapardana, who being seated in the garden of paradise in his 
youth, and beset by celestial damsels all about, felt no desire for any of them. 


39. Know how many princes and Lords of peoples have from the 
unperturbed apathy of their souls, resigned their realms and society of 
mankind, and betaken themselves to lonely forests and solitary caves of 
Vindhyan Mountains, and there spent their lives in motionless torpidity. 


40. Think of the great sages and saints, and of divine and devoted adepts, 
who were adored by even the gods, for the steadiness of their holy devotion, 
that have passed away in the observance of their rigid and unruffled vows of 
an universal indifference. 


41. Call to your mind the instances of many a monarch, of ordinary men 
and of base and mean huntsmen also, that have been honoured in all ages and 
countries, for their observance of an unimpressed equality in all states and 
circumstances of their lives. 


42. All intelligent men strictly observed the rule, of preserving their 
equanimity in their course through life; whether it be for the achievement of 


their acts for this life or the next, as also for the success of their 
understandings of every kind. 


43. They neither long for longevity nor desire their death in difficulties; but 
live as long as they have to live, and act as they are called to act, without any 
grudge or murmur. 


44. It is the business of the wise man, to conduct himself in the career of 
his life, with a contented mind and placid countenance, both in his favourable 
and unfavourable circumstances, as well as in the happiness or misery of 
himself or others. 


CHAPTER CXCIX. 
State of Living liberated Man. 


Argument: — The liberated man neither gains nor loses anything, by his 
observance or neglect of the acts of life; and yet he is enjoined to act in 
conformity with the prescribed rules of conduct of his society and country. 


Rama said: — Tell me Sir, why the wise and liberated man is not freed 
from his subjection to the prescribed rules of conduct, when his soul is 
beatified with the spiritual light, and his mind is emancipated from all earthly 
cares. 


2. Vasishtha replied: — The observance and avoidance of all ritual and 
pious acts, are equal and of no avail to the truly enlightened man; who is 
indifferent to aught of good or evil to his life. (i.e., who is neither solicitous to 
have anything desirable or leave what is unfavourable to him into the world). 


3. There is nothing whatever in this frail world, which may be desirable to 
the man of right understanding, not aught of positive evil, which deserves the 
avoidance and abhorrence of the wise man. 


4. The wise man derives no positive nor permanent good, by his doing of 
any act prescribed by custom or usage; nor does he lose anything by his 
neglect of them; wherefore, it is best for him to stand in the middle course, 
and according to the common rules of society and his country. 


5. As long as there is life in the body, it is called a living body and has its 
motion also; therefore, measure your movements according to the breathings 
of your life, nor accelerate nor slacken them beyond their just measure (i.e., 
neither outrun thy breath, nor halt in thy course). 


6. If it is equal to anyone, to walk either by this way or that to his journey’s 
end, yet it is much better for him, to walk by the beaten path, than in a strange 


and unknown one. (So if it be the same thing to sleep at home or abroad; yet it 
must be safer and more comfortable to everyone to sleep at his own lodge 
than elsewhere). 


7. Whatever actions are done at any time, with meekness and mildness of 
disposition, and with a placid frankness of the mind, is ever held as perfectly 
pure and contrite in its nature, and never blameable in anywise. 


8. We have seen many wise, learned and far-sighted men, to have 
conducted themselves very honorably and blamelessly in this world, which is 
full of faults and pitfalls, and beset by traps and snares on every way. 


9. Everyone is employed with perfect compliance of his mind, in 
discharging the duties of the particular sphere in which he is placed; some 
commencing their career in life, in the state of householdership and others 
ascending gradually to state of living liberation; (when they are not exempted 
from observances of particular duties also). 


10. There are many wise and well discerning kings and princes, like 
yourself and those sitting in this assembly who are vigilantly employed in the 
ruling of their respective states, without their attachment or tenacity to them, 
and without their desire of reaping any fruition from them, and by way of the 
disinterested discharge of duty. 


11. There are some that follow the usages, according to the true sense of 
the Vedas, and take their food from what is left after their daily offerings to 
the sacrificial fire. (The early Aryans ever fed upon cooked food, after their 
first offerings to the gods by their mouth of the fire. (Agner vaidevanam 
Mukham)). 


12. All men belonging to any of the four classes, are employed in the 
observance of their respective rites and duties, and in the acts of the worship 
of the gods, and in their meditations with different ends and views, (Kamya- 
karma). 


13. Some men of magnanimous minds, and higher aims of future liberation 
or Moksha, have renounced all their ritual acts, karma kdnda; and remain 
inactive as ignorant people, with their spiritual knowledge of the only One. 


14. Some are seen to be sitting silent and insensitive, in their posture of 
deep and unbroken meditation; in dreary and dismal deserts untraversed by 
the deer and wild beasts; and in distant and lovely solitudes, where no trace of 


a human being was never seen even in a dream. 


15. Some are found to resort to some sacred place of pilgrimage, and there 
to perform their acts for future rewards; while others are known to recline in 
some holy hermitage or sacred shrine of saints, and there to pass their lives in 
the practice of resignation and indifference and quite unknown to men. 


16. Many are seen to leave their own houses, and quit their native 
countries, in order to avoid the enmity and scorn of their fellow countrymen; 
and betake themselves to other lands, where they settle as strangers. 


17. There are many who being dissatisfied with their families, forsake their 
company and desert their homes; and rove about as wanderers, from forest to 
forest, over hills and dales, and cities and towns, without being settled 
anywhere. 


18. How many are there that travel to the great city of Benares, and to the 
holy city of Allahabad and visit the holy hills and cities, and the sacred shrine 
of Badarikasrama (for performance of their acts of righteousness there). 


19. How many are seen to resort to the holy places at Sélagrama, and to the 
sacred cell in Kalapagrama, how many are on their way to the holy city of 
Mathura, and the sacred hill at Kalinjar. 


20. See the numbers of pilgrims thronging in the woodlands on Mahendra 
mountains, and upon table lands of Gandhamadana hills; see also the pilgrims 
on the plains of Dardura hills; as those also upon the level lands of Sahya 
Mountains. 


21. See the pilgrims thronging on the craigs of the Vindhyan range, and 
those dwelling in the hollows of the Malaya Mountains; see them that dwell in 
the happy groves of Kailasa, and those in the caverns of Rikshavata mounts. 


22. In these as well as many other holy places and mounts, you will find a 
great many hermits and far-sighted devotees dwelling in peace, and wholly 
devoted to their holy devotion. 


23. Those among them that have become sannyasins, are deserters of their 
prescribed duties, while they that are Brahmacharins, are strict observers of 
the law and their sacred rites; but those that have the faith of Buddha, are 
apostates from the holy faith, and fanatics in their practices. 


24. Some of these have left their native homes, and others have quitted 
their natal lands altogether; some have their settled habitations in some place, 
and others leading their nomadic lives from place to place. 


25. Among these, O Rama, that dwell in the sublunar sphere of this globe, 
as also among them that live at the antipodes, and are known as daityas: — 


26. Some are of clear understandings, and well acquainted with the civil 
laws of their society; some are of enlightened understanding, and others again, 
are acquainted with the past, and have a foresight of the future. 


27. Some are of unenlightened understandings, and are always in suspense, 
and suspicion of their minds; they are addicted to vice, and unable to govern 
themselves, are always under the government of others. 


28. Some there are who are half-enlightened, and proud withal of their 
knowledge of truth; they break loose from the observance of customary 
duties, and are not yet the esoteric Yogi or spiritualist. 


29. Thus, among these great multitudes of men, that are wading in the vast 
ocean of life, everyone is striving to get the end, according to his different aim 
and object. 


30. But it is neither one’s confining himself at home, or remaining in his 
native country, nor his betaking him to hermitage or dwelling in some solitary 
forest; nor the observance of customary duties; nor practice of painful 
austerities, whereby one may ford over the unfordable gulf of this world. 


31. Neither dependence on righteous acts nor the forsaking of them; nor 
one’s employment in the observance of customary usages, or his attainment of 
great powers, can be of any avail to him, in saving him from the turmoils of 
the world. 


32. It is one’s self-control only, that is the means of his salvation. (Jit., 
getting over the sea of the world); and the man whose mind is not attached, or 
tied down to anything in this world, is said to have got or gone over it. 


33. It is no matter whether a man does or neglects, the righteous deeds of 
his religion and society; provided he keeps the contriteness of his mind in 
both, and is never attached to nor affected by either; such a man is deemed a 
sage and saved from his return to this nether world. 


34. The man that does neither any righteous or unrighteous action in his 
life, but has his mind fixed in this earth, and attached to earthly objects, is 
deemed a hypocrite, and destined to revisit this earth in his repeated births. 


35. Our minds again, are of the nature of nasty flies, which are prone to fly 
about and pour upon the sores of worldly pleasures; from which it is hard for 
us to deter them, as it is impossible for us to kill them at once for attainment 
of our salvation. (or, our minds are as surfeited bees, cloyed with the honey of 
their cells from which they cannot fly away. — Gloss). 


36. It sometime comes to happen and by the good fortune of a person, that 
his mind turns of itself towards its perfection; and then by a flash of inward 
light within itself, comes to see the presence of the divine spirit in the very 
soul. 


37. The mind being enlightened by the flash of spiritual light in the soul, 
becomes enrapt at the sight, and losing all earthly attachment, is unified with 
the supreme unity. 


38. Being unmindful of everything, and conscious of thy entity as a particle 
of the infinite vacuity, remain perfectly happy with thyself, and in the 
everlasting felicity of thy soul. 


39. Being replete with the knowledge of transcendental truth, and devoid of 
the faults and frailties of thy nature, have the magnanimity of thy soul, with 
the equanimity of thy mind and elevation of thy spirit; and thus remain, O 
thou support of Raghu’s royal race, without sorrow and fear of death and 
rebirth, and be as holy as the holy of holies. 


40. Know the translucent state of the most Holy Brahma, to be quite clear 
of all the grossness and foulness of nature, and free from all the qualities and 
properties that are attributed to Him. He is beyond our conception and above 
the reach of our thought. He is increate and ever existent of Himself, and 
manifest in his abode of our intellect. Knowing him then as thyself, remain 
quite free and dauntless forever. 


41. There is nothing more that can be gleaned from greater verbosity on 
this subject; nor is there anything remaining to be communicated to you, for 
your best instruction in divine knowledge. You are roused, O Rama, to your 
full knowledge of the essential doctrines of divinity, and you have become 
cognizant, of whatever is knowable and recondite in nature. 


42. Valmiki says: — After the chief of sages had spoken so far, he saw 
Rama rapt in his ecstasy and bereft of his mental efforts; and the whole 
assembly sitting fixed in the one and same tenor of their meditation. They 
were all entranced in their reveries and musings, in the mysterious nature of 
the Divinity; as the humming bees ramble over the lotus petals with their soft 
and silent murmur, and revel upon the sweetness of the honey cups of flowers. 


CHAPTER CC. 
The Loud applause of the court on the sage’s 
speech. 


Argument: — Narration of the plaudits of the assembly, accompanied with 
the showering of flowers and uproar of musical instruments, at the end of the 
holy sermon. 


Valmiki continued: — Upon the termination of the holy sermon on 
Nirvana, — anesthesia, there arose loud hubbub without the court house, 
which put a stop to the sage’s proceeding further in continuation of his 
discourse. 


2. But the whole audience in the court hall, was immerged in a state of 
steadfast hypnotism, and settled intentiveness in the Supreme; and the 
faculties of their mind were quite clear, and their workings at rest. 


3. The whole audience on hearing the lecture on investigation after 
intellect, became passengers on the raft of sat, and they all gained their 
salvation. 


4. Immediately there arose a loud chorus of applause, from the mouths of 
the emancipated sages or Siddhas, dwelling in the upper regions of the skies, 
and it filled the concave of heaven, with the acclamations of praise to the 
venerable sage. 


5. In the same manner there rose shouts of praise also, from the holy sages 
seated in the assembly; together with the loud acclamation given by the son of 
Gadhi, — Viswamitra, who sat at their head. 


6. Then was heard a swelling sound, filling the face of the four quarters of 
the firmament; just as the blasts of wind filled the hollows of the withered 


bamboos in the forest, and make them resound with a sound with a soft sweet 
melody. 


7. Next arose a flourish of trumpets from the celestials, mingling with the 
hosannahs of the Siddhas; which rumbled together and resounded loudly, 
amidst the hollow caves of distant mountains and dale. 


8. Along with the flourish of celestial trumpets, there fell showers of 
flowers from above, resembling the driving rain of snows, which blocked the 
faces on all sides of heaven. 


9. The floor of the court hall was strewn over with flowers, and the fanfare 
of the drums and timbals, filled the mouths of hollow caves and caverns; the 
flying dust covered the face of the sky, and the rising odours after the rain 
were borne upon the wings of the winds to all sides. 


10. Then there rose a mingled rumble of the shouts of applause, and the 
peal of heavenly trumpets; joined with the whistle of the hissing showers of 
flowers, and the rustling of the winds all about. 


11. The courtiers all looked around with their uplifted faces and eyes, and 
were struck in their minds with wonder and surprise; while the beasts all 
about the palace and in the parks, remained amazed at the event with their 
pricked up ears. 


12. The women and children in the inside, sat staring with their wonder 
stricken eyes; and the princes sitting in the court hall, looked astonished on 
one another with their smiling faces. 


13. The face of the firmament became exceedingly brightened, by the 
falling showers of flowers from above; and the great concavity of the world, 
was filled with the hissing sound of the falling rains. 


14. The showers of flowers and drizzling rain drops, with their hissing 
sounds, made the royal palace an appearance of festivity. (With the scattering 
of fried rice, sprinkling of rose water and blowing of conch-shells). 


15. Not only the palace, but all places in the worlds, seem to celebrate their 
festive mirth, with tossing of flower garlands, joined with celestial music. 


16. The shouts of the Siddhas and their ejaculations of joy, rolled and 
growled as high in the upper sky; as the rolling billows and rebillowing 


waves, howled in the depth of the ocean and sea. 


17. After the hubbub of the heavenly hosts had subsisted, (in the lull of the 
rains and rackets); the following words of the Siddhas proceeded from above, 
and were heard to be uttered in an audible and distinct voice. 


18. The Siddhas said: — We have erewhile since time erst began, listened 
to delivered thousands of sermons, in the assembly of Siddhas or perfect 
beings, on the means of attaining liberation, (which is the highest pitch of 
perfection of the living soul); but never heretofore heard a lecture so 
impressive on the mind, as this last locution of the sage. 


19. We see boys and women and the bending brute creatures, together with 
the creeping and crawling animals, are all enrapt by this soothing speech, 
which will doubtless enrapture its readers and hearers in future. 


20. The sage has used every argument and example, for rousing Rama to 
his beatification; such as it is doubtful whether he had ever shewn such 
affection to his Arundhati or not. 


21. Hearing this lecture on liberation, even the brute creation of beasts and 
birds, become emancipated from the burthen of their base bodies; and as for 
men, they forget altogether the trammels of their bodies in their embodied 
state. 


22. Our draught of these ambrosial drops of divine knowledge, through the 
vessels of our ears; has not only satiated our appetite for wisdom, but 
renovated our understandings, and added a fresh beauty to our spiritual 
bodies. 


23. On hearing these words of the heavenly host of Siddhas, were struck 
with wonder, and looked upward with full open eyes; and then as they cast 
their looks below, they beheld the surface of the court-hall, to be strewn over 
with flowers and lotuses, falling in showers from above. 


24. They saw heaps of mandara and other celestial flowers, piled up to the 
roof of the lofty hall; and observed the court yard to be covered over with 
blossoming plants and creepers, and with wreaths and garlands of flowers 
without an interstice. 


25. The surface of the ground, was strewn over with buds and blossoms of 
Pdrijata plants; and thick clouds of Santanaka flowers, shadowed over the 


heads and shoulders of the assembled people in the court. 


26. The saffron flowers of Harichandana, (yellow sandal wood), hung over 
the jewelled crests of the princes; and seemed as an awning of rainy clouds, 
spread over the glittering chandeliers of the court hall. (Harichandana is a tree 
in the garden of Paradise). 


27. Seeing these events in the court, the people all gave vent to the repeated 
shouts of their loud applause; and talked to one another of this and that, as 
was fitted to the solemnity of occasion. 


28. They then adored the sage with the prostration of their bodies and 
limbs, and made him their obeisances, with offerings of handfuls of flowers. 


29. After the loud peals of applause had somewhat abated; the king also 
rose and prostrated himself down and then worshipped the sage, with the tray 
of his presents and wreaths of flowers held in his hands. 


30. Dasaratha said: — It was by your admonition, O thou Lord of 
Arundhati; that I was released from this my mortal frame; and gained the 
transcendent knowledge which filled my soul, and joined it with the supreme 
essence in perfect bliss. 


31. We have nothing in this nether earth, nor is there anything with the 
gods in heaven, which I ween is worthy enough to be given, as a proper 
offering in thine adoration. 


32. Yet I beg to pray you something in order to acquit myself of my duty to 
you, and to render my services to thee prove effectual to me, and hope you 
will not be irritated at this address of mine. 


33. That I adore you myself with my queens and my weal in both worlds, 
together with all these dominions and servants of mine, (all which I now offer 
humbly at your venerable feet). 


34. All these possessions of mine are yours entirely at present, so my lord, 
take them as yours, and make them as parts of your hermitage; please to 
dispose of these as you please, or use them as you like. 


35. Vasishtha replied: — Know, O great king, that we Brahmans are 
pleased, only with the mere obeisances of people; we are verily satisfied with 
receiving reverence of men, and these you have already done and shown to 


me. 


36. You know to rule the earth, and therefore, its sovereignty is suitable to 
thee; nor can you show a Brahmin to have ever reigned as a king, keep 
therefore what is yours to yourself and prosper therein. 


37. Dasaratha answered: — What is this trifle of a realm to me, which I am 
ashamed to call and own as mine; it cannot lead me to the knowledge of its 
true Lord, therefore, do so as I may clearly and truly know the most high. 


38. Valmiki relates: — As the king was saying so, Rama rose from his seat, 
and threw handfuls of flowers on the sacred person of his preceptor; and then 
lowly bending himself before him, he addressed him as follows. 


39. Venerable Sir, as you have made the king speechless, by telling him 
that you are pleased with mere obeisance of men; so I am taught to wait here, 
with my bare prostration at your venerable feet. 


40. Saying so, Rama bowed down his head, lowly at the feet of his guide; 
and then scattered handful of flowers on his pure person, as the trees on the 
sides of a mountain, sprinkle their dew drops at the foot and base of the 
mount. (Gloss. — The branches of trees serving as their hands, and the leaves 
as their palms). 


41. Then the pious prince made his repeated bows of reverence to his 
venerable preceptor; while his lotus like eyes were suffused with the tears of 
his inward joy and piety. (Ananddsru, — tears issuing from pious and joyous 
feelings). 


42. Next rose the brother princes, of Dasaratha’s royal race; namely 
Bharata, Satrughna and Lakshmana, together with their equals in kith and kin; 
and they all advanced to the sage, and bowed down to him with their 
respectful reverence. 


43. The other chiefs and nobles and regents, that sat in their order at a 
distance; together with the saints, sages and the clergy at large, rose in groups 
from their seats, and did their homage to the sage, with flinging handfuls of 
flowers upon him. 


44. At this instant the sage was almost covered with and hid under the heap 
of flowers, that were poured upon him from all sides; in the same manner as 
the snowy mountain of Himalaya, is wrapped and concealed under the snows 


of water. 


45. After clangor of the assembly was over, and the peals of their prandma- 
hailings had ended; Vasishtha remembered his saying with the assembled 
sages, of proving to them the truth of his doctrines, and of removing the 
doubts of his audience regarding the miracles he had wrought. 


46. He then shoved off with both his arms, the heaps of flowers from about 
his sides; and showed out his fair face from amidst them, as when the disc of 
the moon, shines forth from within the hoary clouds. 


47. Then there ensued a hush over the flourish of the trumpets, and a 
silence upon the fanfare of applauses; the falling of flowers was at a stop, and 
the murmur of Siddhas above, ceased with the clamour of the assemblage 
below. 


48. After the princes and assembled nobles, had made their obeisances and 
greetings, there occurred a calm stillness in the assembly, as when a lull takes 
place in the atmosphere after a storm. 


49. Then the chief of sages Vasishtha, upon hearing the applauses poured 
upon him from all sides; spoke softly to the royal sage Viswamitra, from the 
unblemished purity of his soul. 


50. Hear me, O sage, that art the lotus of the princely race of Gadhi, and ye 
sages that are assembled here, namely Vamadeva, Nimi and Kruta, together 
with Bharadwaja, Pulastya, Atri, Narada and Ghrishti, and Sandilya. 


51. Hear me also, O ye sages Bhasa, Bhrigu, Bharanda, Vatsa and 
Vatsyayana, with all others that are assembled here at present, and had the 
patience to listen to this contemptible discourse of mine. 


52. Please now with your well known affability to me, point out to me 
whatever you have found as meaningless or unintelligible and ambiguous in 
my discourse. 


53. The audience responded: — O Venerable Sir, we have never heard or 
marked in a single word in this spiritual and divine discourse of thine, that is 
meaningless or unintelligible to anybody. 


54. We confess that whatever foulness was inbred in our natures, by our 
repeated births in this sinful world; has been all purged out by your holy 


lecture, as the alloy in gold is burnt away by the purifying fire. 


55. O Sir, our minds are as expanded by your divine sermon, as the blue 
lotus buds are opened to bloom, by the cold and ambrosial beams of moon 
light. 


56. We all bow down to thee, O thou chief of sages, as our best guide in 
divine knowledge; and the giver of true wisdom to us, with regard to all things 
in nature. 


57. Valmiki relates: — The sages said so far and then hailed and bowed 
down to Vasishtha again, and their united applause of him, rose as high as the 
loud roar of raining clouds. 


58. Then the speechless Siddhas, poured down again their showers of 
flowers from above; and these hid the body of the sage under them, as the 
clouds of winter cover the rocks under ice and snows. 


59. Afterwards the intelligent and learned men in the court, gave their 
praises to King Dasaratha and to Rama also; saying that the four princes were 
no other than the four-fold incarnation of the God Madhava or Vishnu 
himself. 


60. The Siddhas said: — We hail the four princes of Dasaratha line, who 
are the quadruple forms of the self-incarnate Vishnu, and are quite liberated 
from the bonds of flesh, in these their living states of humanity. 


61. We hail king Dasaratha, as having the mark of the sovereignty of the 
whole world. (Imprinted in his person); that is of this world which extends to 
the limits of the four oceans, and lasts forever in his race. 


62. We hail the sage Vasishtha, who is as bright as the sun, and stands at 
the head of the whole host of sages; and also the royal sage Viswamitra of 
renowned fame and dignity. 


63. It is through their means, (i.e., because of their assemblage in this 
court), that we had this fair opportunity of hearing this divine discourse, 
which is so full of knowledge and fraught with reason, that it serves to dispel 
the great gloom of error at once. 


64. So saying, the Siddhas of heaven again let fall their handfuls of flowers 
in showers; and made the assembly look up to them in silence, with their 


uplifted eyes and gladdened minds. 


65. And then there was a mutual greeting of the Siddhas from above, and of 
the assembled people to them from below. 


66. At last the assembly broke, with their respectful greetings to one 
another, accompanied with their mutual offerings of flowers and salutations. 
And the celestial and terrestrial, the great Munis and sages, the Pandits and 
Brahmans; together with the princes and nobles, bade adieu to and took leave 
of one another (in order to repair to their respective abodes). 


CHAPTER CCI. 
Explanation of rest and repose in ultimate and 
perfect Bliss. 


Argument: — Raéma’s conclusion on the lecture of Vasishtha, and 
Viswamitra’s request over Rama. 


Valmiki related: — After the assembly had rejoined the next day, there was 
observed a profound silence over it; and there appeared a cheerfulness in the 
countenances of princes from the enlightenment by the last lecture. 


2. The people seemed to be smiling in their faces, by reflecting on their 
former errors and follies, after their coming to the light of truth. (The 
reminiscence of the freaks and follies of boyhood, is a source of delight in old 


age). 


3. The wise men in the assembly, appeared to be sitting fixed in their 
steadfast meditation, by having the feelings and passions of their minds, 
curbed and subdued upon their access to the relish of true knowledge. 


4. At this time, Rama sat with his brothers, in their posture of padmdsana, 
— having their legs crossed upon one another; had the palms of their hands 
folded together, and their eyes fixed steadfastly upon the face of their 
preacher. 


5. The king Dasaratha remained in a sort of entranced meditation, and 
thought himself as liberated in his life time, and placed in a state of infinite 
bliss. 


6. The sage, after holding his silence as long as he was adored by his 
reverential audience, spoke to them at last in distinct words, and wanted to 
know what they would now like to hear about. 


7. He said, O lotus eyed Rama, that art as the cooling moon in the clear 
sphere of thy race, tell me what thou now wishest to hear, as most desirable 
and delightsome to your mind. 


8. Tell me the state in which you find yourself at present, and in what light 
you view the appearance of the appearance of the world now before you. 


9. Being thus addressed by the sage, Rama looked at his face; and then 
bespoke to him in his distinctly audible voice, and his plain and unfaltering 
accents. 


10. Rama said: — It is all owing to thy favour only, O Venerable Sir, that I 
have attained to my state of perfect holiness, and become as pure as the clear 
atmosphere in autumnal calm and serenity. 


11. I am entirely freed from all the errors, which are so detrimental to the 
right course of our lives in this world, and an act as pure as the clear sky, in 
the true and very state of finite vacuity. (The very state of the deity). 


12. I am set free from all bonds, and released from all attributes and 
adjuncts; I find myself situated in a crystalline sphere, and shining there as 
clear as crystal. 


13. I am quite pacified in my mind and am neither willing to hear or do 
anything else; I am quite satiate in myself, and require nothing more for my 
satisfaction. I am quite at rest as in the state of hypnotism. 


14. My mind is quite calm in its thoughts, and entirely pacified in its 
wishes; all my desires have fled from it, and I find my mind to rest in its 
perfect peace and supreme bliss. 


15. I am staid in all my thoughts and allayed in my desires, whilst living in 
this waking world; I am enrapt and entranced, while I am quite sane and 
sound and sleepless at all hours by day and night. 


16. With my soul devoid of all wishes and expectations, I live while I am 
destined to live in this material body of mine; and remain smiling (ie., 
rejoicing) as long as I sit to listen to your inspiring lessons. 


17. Now I am no more in need of admonition or instruction of the Sdstras, 
or of the acquisition of riches or friends; nor am I willing either to get rid of 
them at any time. (Because of my utter indifference to them as is theirs also to 


me). 


18. I have found and am in the enjoyment of that unalloyed happiness, 
which attends on one in heaven or Paradise, or in his attainment of the 
sovereignty of the whole world. 


19. The world which I perceive within myself by my outward senses, is 
conceived to be brighter far and more transparent than the outward 
atmosphere, by being viewed in the light of the intellect, and considered as a 
part of its infinite vacuous sphere. 


20. This world I ween, is certainly a vacuum; and it is by my belief in the 
nihility of the phenomenal, that I am awaked to my immortality. (The visible 
world is a passing and vanishing sight, and it is by our belief in the spiritual 
only, that we see the everlasting scene). 


21. Let me remain content with all that is, or comes to pass on me, whether 
they are desirable to me or occur themselves; and let me act as the law enacts 
to its full extent and without fail, but without any object of mine or 
expectation of reward. 


22. I am neither content nor discontented with anything, nor rejoice nor 
repine at any event; I do what is my duty in society, without retaining the 
erroneous conception of reaping their reward. 


23. Let this creation be otherwise or go to perdition, let the winds of the last 
destruction blow with their fury also; or let the land smile in its plenty and 
beauty, yet I sit unmoved by them, and remain in the divine self or spirit. 


24. I rest in myself which is unseen or dimly seen by others, and is 
undecaying and untainted in itself; I am not enchained to my wishes, but am 
as free as air, which you cannot compress in your clutches. 


25. As the fragrance of flowers upon the trees, is wafted by the breeze and 
deposited in the air, so is my soul borne away from the confines of my body, 
and posited in empty vacuity (where it ranges at large in its freedom). 


26. As these princes and rulers of people, live and enjoy themselves in their 
realms at pleasure; and whether they are enlightened or not, they are 
employed in their respective occupations. 


27. So do I enjoy myself with the steadiness and equanimity of my mind, 


which is freed from all fear, grief or joy and desire. 


28. I am happy above all happiness (derived from this frail world); my 
happiness is in the everlasting One, than which there is no happiness to be 
preferred by me. But because I live here as a human being, you are at liberty 
to appoint me to any duty, in common with all mankind and becoming to 
humanity. 


29. I cannot be averse, to manage myself with the trifles of this world, as 
long as I am destined to them; in the same manner as boys are never to be 
blamed, for indulging themselves in their playthings in their boyhood. So long 
Sir, as I shall have to live in this body of mine, I must do my bodily acts, with 
my mind fixed in the sole One only. 


30. I must live to eat and drink, and continue in the course of my business 
in life; but I am freed from all fear of my failings in them, by the kind 
counsels to me. (That the liberated man is at liberty to do or undo his duties). 


31. Vasishtha replied: — O Bravo Rama! that you have chosen for yourself 
the most meritorious course of life; wherein you shall never have to repent, 
from the beginning to the end of your career. 


32. By this cold indifference in thy self, and complete equanimity in every 
state, you have verily secured to the unbroken rest in your life, as the visible 
firmament has found in infinite vacuity. 


33. It is by your good fortune, that you have got rid of your sorrows, and it 
is fortunate to you to be set so well composed in yourself; it is your good luck 
to be freed from the fears of both worlds, and it is happy for you to be at your 
heart’s ease and rest. 


34. You are lucky, my lord, to be so fraught with your holy knowledge; and 
to have purified the lineage of Raghu, with your knowledge of the present, 
past and future. 


35. Now prepare yourself to accomplish the object, of the chief of sages, — 
The great Viswamitra’s request and by completion of his holy sacrifice at your 
sire’s behest, continue to enjoy the sovereignty of the earth; in subordination 
to your royal parent. 


36. May the mighty king reign forever in prosperity, over this prosperous 
realm of his; in conjunction with yourself and his other sons, relatives and 


nobles and in possession of all his infantry, cavalry, his chariots and his lines 
of elephants, etc., and without any disease and fear of his enemies. 


CHAPTER CCII. 
Recumbence of the Assembly to their Hypnotic 
Rest. 


Argument: — Entrancement of the audience to a state of somnolence 
known as Hybernation, hypnotism and Ecstasis in Theosophy. 


Valmiki related: — Upon hearing these words of the sage, the assembled 
princes and lords of men in the court, felt a sang froid or coolness in their 
souls, as if they were all besprinkled with ambrosial waters upon them. 


2. Rama, with his lotus like eyes and moon like face, remained as 
resplendent, as if they were filled with ambrowaters, or the nectarious liquid 
of the Milky ocean. 


3. Then the sage Vamadeva and others, who were fraught with divine 
knowledge, exclaimed with their admiration for the preacher; O the holy 
instruction, that you have imparted unto us this day! 


4. The King with his pacified soul and joyous mind, shone as shining in his 
countenance, as if he had a new light infused in himself (and causing the hairs 
on his body to stand on their ends, from his inward gladness). 


5. After many other sages, who were well acquainted with the knowledge 
of the knowable One, had thus pronounced their praises; the enlightened 
Rama, (/it., who was purged from his ignorance), opened his mouth again, and 
spoke in the following manner. 


6. Rama said: — O thou seer, that knowest the past and future; thou hast 
cleansed away all our inward dross, as fire serves to purge gold from its 
impurity. 


7. Venerable Sir we have now become cosmognostics or all knowing, by 
our knowledge of the universal soul, though we are confined in these visible 
bodies of ours, and seeming to all appearance, as knowing nothing beyond 
them. 


8. I feel myself now as perfect and full in all, and to have become quite 
undecaying in myself; I am freed from all fear and apprehension, and am quite 
cognoscent with all things. 


9. Iam overjoyed to no end, and am happy beyond all measure; I have risen 
to a height from which there is no fear of falling, and am elevated to the 
supreme acme of eminence and perfection. (Parama-purushdartha). 


10. Alack! how am I cleansed by the holy and cooling water of divine 
knowledge, which you have so kindly poured forth in me, and whereby I am 
as joyous, as a full-blown lotus in the lake of my heart. 


11. I am now set, Sir, by your favour to a state of happiness, which 
brightens to me the face of universe with ambrosial delight. 


12. I now hail myself, that have become so fair within myself with the 
clearness of my mind, and by disappearance of all sorrow from it. I have 
received a grace in my face, from the peace of mind and purity of my wishes. 
I am joyous in myself with my inward joy, and I am wholly pure with the 
purity of my soul. 


CHAPTER CCIII. 
Description of Nirvana or self-extinction in divine 
meditation. 


Argument: — Sounding of midday trumpet, performance of daily ablution, 
and description of the setting sun. The meeting of the assembly on the next 
morning upon the discourse on Nirvana. 


Valmiki related: — As Rama and the sage had been remonstrating in this 
manner, the sun advanced towards the zenith, to listen to their holy 
conversation in its royal dome. 


2. The solar beams spread on all sides, with greater force and effulgence; as 
if to expose to clearer and greater light the sense of Rama’s speech. 


3. Then the lotus beds in the tanks of the pleasure gardens, all about the 
royal palace, began to expand their embosomed buds to bloom before him, as 
the princes shone forth in brightness amidst the royal hall. 


4. The air was exhilarated with joy at hearing the holy lectures of the sage; 
and seemed to be dancing with the sunbeams, glistening in the strings of 
pearls, suspended at the windows of the palace. 


5. The premature gleams of the sun, glistened as bright at the glittering 
glass doors and shining chandeliers of the court hall; as the gladdened hearts 
of the audience, glowed at enlightening speech of the sage. 


6. After Rama was settled in his sedateness, his face shone as bright as a 
blooming blue lotus by its reflexion of the rays of the sage’s look upon it. 
(Here the blue complexion of Rama, is compared to a blue lotus, blooming 
under the moon bright look of fair Vasishtha’s countenance). 


7. The sun advancing towards the summit of the horizon, like the marine 
fire rising on the surface of the blue ocean; sucked or dried up by his darting 
flames the dewy humidity of the sky, as the sub-marine heat resorbs the 
waters of the deep. 


8. The cerulean sphere of heaven, appeared as the lake of blue lotuses, and 
the shining sun seemed as the golden pericarp of the flower; his bright beams 
resembled the aureate farina of flowers, and his slanting rays likened the 
aslant pistils in the air. 


9. He shone as the dazzling crown upon the head of the azure queen of the 
worlds; and was hanging down like the resplendent earring, pendant on the 
ear of heaven; while the little lay hid under his glaring light, like bits of 
diamonds lying concealed under the effulgence of a blazing ruby. 


10. The ethereal maids of all the quarters of heaven, held out the mirrors of 
silvery clouds before his face, with their uplifted arms of the mountain peaks 
all around; and these are emblazoned by solar rays, like the rainless clouds on 
mountain tops. 


11. The sun stones in the quarries on earth emitted a fury blaze, which 
emblazoned the skies around, with a greater light than that of the sun. 


12. The trumpets sounded aloud, with the wind blown by the mouths of 
trumpeters; and the conch-shells blew as loudly at midday, as the winds of the 
last deluge, set the sea waves to their tremendous uproar. 


13. Then the spherules of sweat, appeared on the faces of the princes, as the 
dew drops falling on lotus leaves; and they were so closely connected 
together, as to give them the appearance of strings of pearls. 


14. The thickening noise of the hurry and flurry of men, resounded as 
hoarsely within the hollow walls of the hall, that they filled the ears of men, as 
the dashing waves fill the concave of the hollow sea. 


15. The waiting maids then came forward with cups of liquid camphor in 
their hands; in order to sprinkle them on the persons of the princes; to assuage 
their fervour of the solar heat. 


16. Then the assembly broke, and the king rose from his seat in company 
with Rama and the princes and Vasishtha, together with all the lords and 
nobles, that were present in the assembly. 


17. The assembled lords and princes, the ministers of the state and religion, 
together with the high priests and sages; rose from their seats, and having 
gladly made their greetings to one another, took their leave and departed to 
their respective abodes. 


18. The front of the royal inner apartment, was fanned with flappers of 
palm leaves, wafting the clouds of camphor powder, that was scattered for 
allaying the midday heat. 


19. Then the chief of sages, — Vasishtha, opened his mouth and spoke out 
to Rama, amidst the sonata of noonday music, that resounded amidst the walls 
of the royal hall. 


20. Vasishtha said: — Rama! you have heard whatever is worth hearing, 
and known also all that is worth your knowing; and now I see nothing further, 
that is worth communicating to you for your higher knowledge. 


21. Now you have to reconcile in yourself, and by your best 
understandings, all that you have been instructed by me, and what you have 
read and learnt in the Sdstras, and harmonise the whole for your guidance. 


22. Now rise to do your duties, while I hasten to the performance of sacred 
ablutions; it is now midday, and the proper time of our bathing is fastly 
passing away. 


23. And then whatever else you have to enquire about, for the satisfaction 
of your wishes, you can propose the same to me tomorrow morning, when I 
shall be happy to expatiate on the subject. 


24. Valmiki related: — After the sage had spoken in this manner, the 
mighty king Dasaratha saluted the parting chiefs and sages, and honoured 
them according to their proper ranks and degrees. 


25. And then being advised by Vasishtha, the virtuous king with Rama by 
his side, proceeded to give their due honours, to the sages and Siddhas and to 
the Brahmanas also one after the other. 


26. He gave them gems and jewels, and monies and bouquets of flowers; 
and he gave to others riches equivalent to the values of the gems and jewels; 
while he gave strings of pearls and necklaces to some also. 


27. He honoured some with his respects and civilities, and others with 


monies suited to their worth and degree, while he gave his gifts of cloths and 
seats, food and drink, and of gold and lands to others. 


28. He saluted others with perfumeries and aromatic spices and wreaths of 
flowers; he honoured the elders with due respects, and gave his bare regards to 
others. 


29. Then the king rose from amidst the assembly, with the whole body of 
his courtiers, and the holy sages and Vasishtha with him; as the splendid 
moon rises in the sky, with the train of stars about him. (The moon is 
masculine in Sanskrit, and twin brother of the sun). 


30. The rising of the assembly and its people, was attended with a rumbling 
noise, as it is heard in the treading of men, over a bog of knee-deep mud and 
mire. 


31. The clashing of the concourse against one another, and the cracking of 
their armlets and wristlets by their friction with each other; joined with the 
broken jewels and scattered pearls, slipped from the torn necklaces of the 
nobles, gave the floor of the court hall, the appearance of the spangled heaven. 


32. There was a close concussion of the bodies, of sages and saints, of 
Brahmans and princes and nobles all jumbled together; and there was a rapid 
undulation of the chourie flappers, waving in the hands of fanning maid 
servants. 


33. But there was no huddling or dashing or pushing one against the other; 
as they were intent upon reflecting on the sense of the sages preaching, and 
rather asking excuses of one another, with the gestures of their bodies, when 
they came in contact with others. 


34. At last the king and the sages and nobles, accosted one another with 
sweet and soft words; and took their parting leave (for repairing to their 
respective abode for the day). 


35. They then left the palace, and proceeded to their residences, with their 
gladdened faces and contented minds; as when the immortals repair to all 
parts of heaven, from the synod of the king of gods, — Indra or Sakra. 


36. After every one had taken leave of others, and arrived at his house; he 
employed himself in the discharge of his ritual services of the day. 


37. Thus the king and all, performed their daily ablutions and services as 
usual, until the end of the day. 


38. As the day ended with the discharge, of the duties of the daily ritual; so 
the sojourner of the ethereal path, — the tired sun, sat down to rest in the west 
(as the birds of air repair at eve, to their respective nests). (The sun is said to 
be the unka or falcon of heaven; resting at his aspiand or nest in the west, by a 
poet of Persia). 


39. After the performance of their vespers, the prince Rama and the people 
at large, passed their nights awake and fastly, with talking about and thinking 
upon the discourse of the day. 


40. Then the rising sun advanced in the east, with sweeping away the dust 
of darkness from before his path, and strewing about the starry flowers on his 
way, in order to fix his seat in the midst of his dome of the universe. 


41. The infant or rising sun, reddened the skies with his rays, resembling 
the crimson hue of kusambha flowers; and then he embarked on the board of 
his bright orb, amidst the wide ocean of the ethereal region. (The sun sailed in 
the ethereal sea, through the scattered island of the hidden stars and planets on 
his way. — Gloss). 


42. Then the regnant princes and lords of men, together with the nobles, 
peers and their ministers, met at the court hall of King Dasaratha; when there 
gathered also the great saints and sages, with Vasishtha at their head. 


43. They entered into the court and took their seats, according to their 
different degrees and ranks; just as the stars of heaven appear and occupy their 
places, in their respective constellations and circles in the expanse of heaven. 


44. Then the king and his ministers, advanced and bowed down to 
Vasishtha, and ushered him to his high seat or pulpit; and they all poured forth 
their praises to him, after that sage was seated in the rostrum. 


45. Now the lotus-eyed Rama, who sat before the king and the holy sage, 
opened his lotus like mouth, and spoke in the following manner, with his 
natural good sense, and usual elegance of speech. 


46. Rama said: — O Venerable Sir, that art acquainted with all religions, 
and art the great ocean of knowledge; thou art the axe of all knotty questions 
and doubts, and remover of the griefs and fears of mankind. 


47. Please tell us whatever more is worth our hearing and knowing; for 
thou knowest best whatever there remains to be said, for the edification of our 
knowledge. 


48. Vasishtha replied: — Rama you have gained your full knowledge, and 
have nothing more to learn; you have attained the perfection of your 
understanding, and obtained the summum bonum which is sought by all (but 
found by few), and wherewith you are quite content in yourself. 


49. You better consider in yourself and say, how do you find yourself and 
your inner mind at present; and what else is there, that you wish to know and 
hear from me. 


50. Rama rejoined: — Why Sir, I find myself fully perfected in my 
understanding; and being possessed of the peace and tranquility of my mind, 
with the blessing of Nirvdna or ultimate beatitude of my soul, I have nothing 
to ask or desire of thee. 


51. You have said all that you had to impart to me, and I have known all 
that is worth my knowing; Now Sir, take your rest with the Goddess of 
speech, who has done her utmost for the instruction of us all. 


52. | have known the unknown and knowable One, that is only to be known 
by us as the true reality; and knowing this all as the One Brahma, I am freed 
from my knowledge of the duality (of the living and supreme soul); and 
having got rid of the deception of the diversity of the visibles, I am released 
from my reliance in all worldly things. 


CHAPTER CCIV. 
Identity of abstract Intellectuality and Vacuity. 


Argument: — The abstraction and intellection of all knowledge, merging in 
the infinite vacuum. 


Vasishtha resumed and said: — Hear me moreover, O Rama, to tell thee, a 
few words on transcendental knowledge, that the mirror of the mind shines 
more brightly, by expurgation of the external images that are reflected on it, 
than when it is eclipsed by those outward shadows. (i.e., Wipe off visibles 
from the mind). 


2. Again, the significant words that are the symbols of the objects of our 
knowledge, are as insignificant as the hissing murmurs of waters and waves, 
and the phenomenal is but a semblance of the noumenal, as a dream is the 
réchauffé or reflexion of the mind, and the visible world, is but a recast of the 
visionary dream. 


3. The waking state is that of dreaming, and its scenes are those of our 
dreams; and presenting themselves before us in both these states from our 
remembrance of them: they are the inward concept of our consciousness, and 
appearing to be situated without it. (e., They are the innate ideas of our 
minds, and not perceptions of our outward organs of sense). 


4. As I am conscious of the clearness of my intellectual sphere, 
notwithstanding the view of the fairy lands in its state of dreaming; so I find 
my mind, to be equally clear in my waking also of all its imaginary forms of 
the three worlds and their contents, which in reality are a formless vacuity 
only. 


5. Rama rejoined: — If all things are formless amidst the formless void of 
the universe, as in empty vacuity of the intellect; then tell me Sir, whence 


arise these endless shapes and forms, as those of earth, water, fire and those of 
these hills, rocks and pebbles? 


6. Tell me why the elements are of different forms and qualities and why 
the empty air, space and time have no forms nor properties of theirs; what 
makes the wind so very fleet, and what is the cause of the motions and actions 
of waving bodies. 


7. How came the sky to be a vacuum only, and why is the mind of the same 
nature also; these are all the various natures and properties of things, that 
require to be well explained from my knowledge therein. 


8. Vasishtha replied: — You have well asked these questions, Rama, as 
they naturally suggest themselves to every inquirer after truth; but tell me in 
one word, why do you see the varieties of earth and sky, as well as of all other 
things that you see in your dream. 


9. Whence do you see the waters in your sleep, and how are the pebbles 
scattered about you in your dream; why do you see the flaming fires in your 
vision, and all sides of heaven appearing before your sight. 


10. Say how you have the idea of time in your dreaming, and perceive the 
actions and motions of persons and things at that time; and tell me from where 
do all those accidents proceed, that you see to occur in your sleeping and 
dreaming moments. 


11. What is it that creates, produces and gives the formless dream its 
fascinating form, and then dissolves it to nothing at last; you find it produced 
and presented to your view, but cannot say how it acts and of what stuff it is 
composed. 


12. Rama replied: — The dream of the dreaming world, has no form nor 
position of its own; its soul and substance is mere void, and the earth and 
rocks which it presents to sight, are nil and in nubibus, (and leave not a rack 
behind). 


13. The vacuous soul only, is its sole cause, which is likewise as formless 
and supportless like itself; The formless void is never in need of a support for 
it. 


14. Nothing whatsoever of it is ever produced, nor bear any relation with 
our consciousness; they are the reflexions of the intellect only, and are 


situated in the recess of the mind. 


15. The mind is the evolution of the intellect, which reflects the images of 
things in the form of ideas upon the mind; hence the notions of time and 
space, and of air, water, hills and mountains, are all reflexions of the intellect 
upon the mind. 


16. Our consciousness is also a void, and receives the impressions of 
vacuum in the form of its vacuity; and those of the stone, air and water, in the 
forms of their solidity, fluidity and liquidity. (i.e., The vacuous mind receives 
and retains only the abstract ideas of all concrete bodies in the universe). 


17. In reality there is nothing as the earth or any solid body or its form or 
sight in existence; but they all exist in their abstract states in the great void of 
the intellect, and are equally void in their natures with itself. 


18. In fact there is nothing in reality, nor anything which is visible to sight, 
there is only the infinite vacuity of intellect, which represents all things in 
itself, and is identic with all of them. 


19. The intellect has the notion of solidity, in the abstract in it; and thereby 
conceives itself in the forms of the earth, rocks and hills. (The idea or 
conception of solidity, gives rise to the perception of solid bodies, and not the 
perception of solids, that produces the abstract idea of their solidity; or that 
the innate ideas, give birth to appearances in the concrete). 


20. So by its conception of oscillation and fluidity, it perceives the form of 
air and water in itself; and so also by its inward conception of heat, it feels the 
fire in itself without forsaking its intellectual form. 


21. Such is the nature of this intellectual principle, in its airy and vacuous 
form of the spirit, soul or mind; that develops itself in all these various 
modalities and schemes, without any cause or incentive. (These modes or 
states of being, are here called nishkdranaguna, and Akdrana 
gunotpannaguna in Nyaya philosophy, and same with the Vibhu-nishthaguna 
of Vedanta; all meaning them to be the increate and eternal qualities or 
attributes of the supreme soul or deity). 


22. There is nothing anywhere in nature, beside these intellectual attributes 
of itself; as there is no sky or vacuum without its vacuity, nor the vast expanse 
of the ocean, devoid of the body of waters in it. 


23. Know then there is nothing else anywhere, nay, not even the sense of 
thyself or myself or any other, except in the recess of intellectual vacuity; so 
commit thyself to that all teeming void; and remain quite sedate in thyself. 


24. As you see the earth and heaven and all their contents, in thy dream and 
creation of thy fancy, in the recess of thy mind and in the midst of this house 
of thine; so should you behold everything in their incorporeal forms to be 
contained in the ample space of the infinite vacuum of the divine intellect and 
its all-knowing intelligence. 


25. The vacuum of the intellect shines forth as the substratum of all bodies, 
but without a body of its own in the beginning of creation; because nothing 
having any prior material cause for its corporeal existence, it is the intellect 
alone which must be understood, to exhibit all formal existence in its vacuous 
space and to our ignorance. 


26. Know your immaterial mind, understanding and egoism, together with 
the material existences of the elemental bodies, these hills, skies and all 
others, to be situated as dull and dumb stones, in the quiet, calm and clear 
sphere of the infinite intellect. 


27. Thus you see there is nothing produced nor destroyed, nor anything, 
that may be said to exist of itself; this world as it appears to exist, exists in this 
very form (of its immateriality); in the vacuity of the divine intellect. 


28. It is the sunshine of the intellect, that manifests the world in its visible 
shape and form; as the sunlight shows the hidden objects of darkness to view, 
and as the fluidity of water, gives rise to the waves and bubbles. 


29. This appearance of the world, is no real appearance; it is the 
representation of the intellectual vacuum only, in its true and proper senses 
and light, as it is viewed by the wise; though the ignorant may view it in any 
light as they please. 


CHAPTER CCV. 
Refutation of the doctrine of the causality of 
creation. 


Argument: — The existence of the world in its spiritual sense, and nullity 
of its creation, destruction and material existence. 


Rama rejoined: — If it is so, Sir, that the whole plenum is vacuum, as the 
phenomenon in our dreams; it must follow therefrom, that the world we see in 
our wakings is vacuity also, and there can be no doubt in it. 


2. But tell me Sir, in answer to this important question of mine; how the 
formless and bodiless intellect appears to become embodied in all these 
various forms of bodies, that we see in the state of our waking dream. (i.e., 
The vanishing visions of our sleeping dreams, prove them to be quite vacuous 
and nil; but not so the lasting scenes of our waking state which appear to be 
substantially positive; and how does the negative intellect assume this positive 
form). 


3. Vasishtha replied: — Rama, the visibles that appear to view in our 
waking dream by day light, are all vacuous bodies; owing to their being born, 
resting and supportance in empty vacuity; hence you cannot on any reason 
doubt about their vacuousness (whose or when their production, sustentation, 
substance and supportance, do all depend on the infinite and all 
comprehending vacuum, which is the very attribute of the unity of the 
formless deity. — Gloss). 


4. This infinite and eternal void, being entirely devoid of all the material 
causes, (i.e., earth, air, water and fire, which are necessary for the production 
of anything); it is impossible that creation could come out from this nothing in 
the beginning. (Ex nihilo nihil fit). 


5. And as the formless intellect could not bring forth the earth, efc., for the 
formation of solid bodies; it is impossible to believe this phenomenal 
appearance, to have their real existence in nature. (The subtle mind cannot 
make or become any solid body). 


6. Therefore, the airy intellect sees the visibles in the day time, in the 
manner that it sees the visions in its dreams by night. It sees them all rising, in 
their intellectual light within itself; but appearing as real and formal objects, 
set without it by its delusion. (Mdyd or Illusion). 


7. It is the reflexion of the workings of the intellectual soul, that appears as 
real within the hollow sphere of the intellect; it resembles the representations 
of the memory in the mind in our sleep, and takes the name of the visible 
world. 


8. It is the clear perception of these intellectual representations, in the 
vacuum of the mind only, that is styled by us as a vision or dream, while it is 
the gross conception of them in the mind, that is called the gross or material 
world. 


9. It is thus the different views, of the same internal thought and ideas, have 
different names and appellations, given to them by the very intellect itself; the 
finer and purer ones being called as thoughts, and the grosser ones, as sensible 
and material objects. 


10. Thus, it is the same reflexion of the intellectual, which takes the names 
both of the dream as also of the world; the working of the mind and its 
reflexion in itself are natural to intellect, and though the visions subside with 
the disappearance of the dream upon waking, yet the working and reflecting 
of the mind are never at rest, either in waking or dreaming. 


11. Many such visions of creation rise and set alternately, in the vacuity of 
Brahma’s mind, and are never apart from it; just as the empty air is either in 
motion or at rest in the hollow of the great void, and always inseparable from 
it. (Hence the air, vision, dream, efc., are all void, and the world is but a 
phantom in it). 


12. Rama said: — Sir, you have spoken of millions of worlds to me before; 
tell me now which of them are situated within the sphere of the mundane egg, 
and which of them are beyond this egg (or supermundane ones). 


13. Which of them are the terrestrial globes and which the vacuous spheres; 


which of them are igneous bodies in the sphere of fire, and what are the airy 
bodies in the regions of air. 


14. Which are the superfices of the earth, situated in the midst of vacuity; 
of which the hills and forests set at the antipodes, are opposed to one another 
on both sides, and hang up and down perpendicular in empty air. 


15. Which are the aerial bodies with their living souls, and which the 
inhabitants of darkness with their darksome shapes; what are they that are 
formed of vacuum only, and what can they be, whose bodies are full of worms 
and insects. 


16. What sorts of beings settle the ethereal sphere, and what are they that 
live in the midst of rocks and stones; what are they that dwell in the vessels 
and basins of water, and what be they that people the air like the aerial fowls 
of air. 


17. Tell me, O thou greatest of philosophers, how this mundane egg of ours 
is situated among them. (These are questions of cosmogony, and bear no 
relation to theology). 


18. Vasishtha replied: — These wondrous unknown, unseen and unheard of 
worlds, are mentioned and described in the Sdstras with their exemplifications 
also; and they have been received and believed as true by their students. 


19. Rama, the cosmology of the world, has been described, — given by 
gods and sages, in hundreds of their Sdstras called the Agamas; all of which 
you are well acquainted with. 


20. Now as you are well acquainted with the descriptions, that are given of 
them in the Sdstras; it is not necessary to relate them again in this place. (The 
cosmology of the world has been given before in the narrative of Lila). 


21. Rama rejoined: — Tell me yet, O Venerable Sir, how the great void of 
the intellect came to be produced from divine spirit; tell moreover its extent 
and duration in time and space. 


22. Vasishtha replied: — The great God Brahma, is without beginning and 
ever existent and without decay; there is no beginning, midst nor end of him, 
nor are there any shapes of figures in his transcendent vacuum. 


23. The vacuum of Brahma is without its beginning and end, and is spread 


unspent and unbounded to all eternity; it is this which makes the universe, 
which is ever without its beginning and end. 


24. The reflexion of the intellectual vacuum in its own vacuity, is called the 
universe by itself to no purpose (by itself or the human mind, which views the 
world in the wrong light of creation, and not as the Divine Mind itself. — 
Gloss). 


25. As a man sees a fair city in his dream by night, so is the sight of this 
world to him, in his dream by day light. (The Sanskrit word Bhano in the text 
meaning reflexion, corresponds with the Greek Phano to see, and hence, 
phantom or false sights). 


26. Think not the solid rock to have any solidity in it, nor the fluid waters 
any fluidity in them; do not think the empty firmament to be a vacuity, nor the 
passing time to have any flight or counting of it. (All these are seemingly so, 
but they are nothing in reality). 


27. All things are fixed in their formless, invariable and ideal states in the 
divine intellect; but it is the fallacious and fickle nature of the human mind, to 
give and view them in different forms, according to its own fancy. 


28. The mind views the non-created eternal ideas of the intellect, as created 
objects before its sight, just as it sees rocks where there are no rocks, and the 
sky in a skyless place in its dream. 


29. As the formless and insensible mind, sees the formal world in its sleep, 
as if it were in its waking state; so does it see the invisible and formless world 
in its visible form, during its waking hours of the day also. 


30. As the motion of air always takes place amidst the air at rest, (i.e., as 
the winds fluctuate amidst the still air); so also doth the spirit of Brahma, 
oscillate in his own spirit incessantly, and without its rise or fall. 


31. This world resides in the same manner in the divine spirit of Brahma as 
the property of fluidity is inherent in water; and vacuity appertains to vacuum; 
and as substantiality is essential to all substances in the abstract. 


32. The world is neither adventitious nor extraneous to the soul, and does 
not occur to or transpire from it, in the life or deaths of anybody; it is 
causeless and comes from no cause, and is neither joined with nor set separate 
from the divine spirit. 


33. The One that has no beginning nor end; nor has any indication of itself; 
that is formless and is of the manner of the intellectual vacuum only, can 
never become the cause of the visible and material creation. (Therefore, the 
world is to be supposed to exist in its ideal and immaterial form, in the vacuity 
of the divine intellect). 


34. Thus as the forms and features of a whole body, are but parts and 
properties of its entirety tout ensemble; so is this vacuous world situated, in 
the undivided and formless vacuity of Brahma. (“as parts of one undivided 
whole,” — Pope). 


35. All this is a hiatus and quietus, without its support and substratum, it is 
but pure intelligence, without any grossness or foulness herein; there is no 
entity nor non-entity here, nor can anything be said to exist or not exist 
(independent of the Divine Mind). 


36. All this is but an air drawn city, of our imagination and dream; and 
everything here, appears to be stretched out in a fairy dance all about us; but 
in reality it is only a calm and quiet vacuity, full with the unchanging and 
undecaying spirit of God. 


37. The whole is the hollowness of the divine heart, and the vacuous sphere 
of the Omniscient Intellect; it is its intellection, that reflects many a 
transparent image in its own sphere and to no end. This it is which is called 
the world or the image of the divine soul, which continues forever and ever, 
(and is said, — the world without end. Amen). 


CHAPTER CCVI. 
The great inquiry, or questions of the Buddhist. 


Argument: — Entity of Brahma and non-entity of the world, illustrated in 
the story of the king of Kushadwipa. 


Vasishtha resumed: — The uncreated phenomenon of creation, that appears 
to view, is nothing in reality. It is the transcendental principle of supreme 
Brahma, that is the only true reality. 


2. It was on this subject, that I was once asked by someone, to my reply to 
a certain question of his; which I will now relate to you, O high-minded 
Rama, for strengthening your understanding to the full knowledge thereof. 


3. There is the great island of Kushadwipa, surrounded by the seas on all 
sides; like a watery belt about it, and this land is renowned (for its beauty), all 
over the three regions of the world. 


4. There is the city called Iavatt, situated on its north eastern side, and is 
beset by a colonnade of pillars, gilded all over with gold, and glittering with 
radiant beams, reaching from earth to the skies. 


5. There formerly reigned a prince, known by the name of Prajnapti; who 
ruled on earth as the god Indra in heaven; and to whom this earth or land paid 
its homage (as the skies do to the regent of heaven). 


6. It was on one occasion, that I happened to alight at the presence of this 
prince; as the sun descends on earth on the last day of desolation. 


7. The prince hailed and adored me with offerings of flowers and presents, 
made me sit by him with due reverence; then in the course of my conversation 
with him, he fondly asked me as follows. 


8. Tell me Sir, said he, what becomes of the world after the destruction of 
all things; and when the causalities of recreation are all extinct and 
annihilated, in the undefinable vacuum of desolation. 


9. What then becomes the prime cause of the causation of things, at the 
recreation of the world; and what are accompanying elements for the 
reproduction of objects, and how and whence they take their rise. 


10. What is the world and what was the beginning of its creation; what was 
the primeval chaos, and whence is this earth? What is the air the support of 
the seas, and what is hell, which is filled by worms and insects? (i.e., Whence 
are these varieties from the one source of Brahma?) 


11. What be the creatures contained in the womb of air, (i.e., the celestials), 
and what are they that are contained in the bosom of the mountains, (i.e., the 
demons); what are the elementary bodies and their productions, and how the 
understanding and its faculties have come to existence? 


12. Who is the maker of all these, and who is their witness; what is the 
support of the universe, and what are these that are contained therein? I am 
quite certain, that the world can never have its ultimate destruction. 


13. All the Vedas and Sdstras are opposed to one another, in their different 
views and interpretations; and every one of them has made a supposition, 
according to its particular view. 


14. From our knowledge of the world, we know not whether it is 
indestructible or an unreality in itself. (i.e., If it is an ideal unreality, it needs 
have no cause nor is it destructible at all; but should it be a reality and 
destructible thing, then what must be the cause of the production and 
destruction thereof? — Gloss). 


15. Again tell me, O thou chief of sages, what is the form and cause of 
those bodies that are doomed to dwell in hell; after the demise of men on 
earth, and cremation and destruction of their bodies here. 


16. What are the accompanying causes of the regeneration of bodies, after 
their destruction on death? The virtues and vices of departed souls, being both 
of them formless things, cannot be their accompanying causes, towards the 
formation of their corporeal frames. 


17. It is quite an absurd reasoning, that want of matter could possibly 


produce a material body; just as it is impossible to believe, that there should 
be an offspring, without the seminal cause of its parents. 


18. Tell me Sir, what else should be the cause, of the production of material 
bodies (after death); and for want of any such cause, it is improper also, to 
deny the existence of a future state. 


19. It is contrary to the dictates of Vedas and Sdstras, as also to the 
conviction and common sense of mankind, to deny the future state of our 
existence. The resurrection of our bodies is as unavoidable as our 
transportation to a distant land by decree of law, though it be against our wish 
or will. 


20. How are beings born and actuated in the course of their lives, by 
invisible causes which are quite unconnected with them. (i.e., by the merit or 
demerit of the acts of their past lives, which are altogether detached from their 
present bodies?). Just as the pillars of stone were converted to gold (by word 
of the Brahman), and without being gilded over by it. Say, Sir, how this vast 
treasure was obtained in a moment by the Brahman. (i.e., What could be the 
cause of this preternatural event). 


21. How that to be called a great one, which remains for a moment only? 
further what necessity is there to frame strict laws for the present to reap 
harvest in future, when that does not stand good on sound reasoning? 


22. Tell me Sir, how do you reconcile such discordances in the Vedas, 
which mention the existence of a being and not being in the beginning; and 
tell us also that, the Not being existed before creation, and then the Being or 
creation was born of the not being. (The discordant passages are, HUgl $447 


Heated Sct Aasa | again, Hades SAAT Brat Aes GPA saa HAT 1). 


23. How could the primeval non-entity become Brahma, or how could the 
latter be produced from the former; or if it were the mighty vacuity which 
gave birth to Brahma, then tell me Sir, why there were no other Brahmas also, 
born of its spacious womb. 


24. Tell me how the vegetable and other creations, could be produced 
without their different sources; and how they derived their nature of 
propagating their kinds, by their own seeds and property. 


25. Tell me why the life and death of one man, are coeval with those of his 
friend or adversary; and do people happen to obtain their wishes in their next 


lives by dying in the holy places of Praydga, etc. 


26. Should the wishes of men, be crowned with success in their next lives; 
then tell me Sir, why the sky is not filled with myriads of moons, when the 
worshippers of that luminary, are daily seen to be dying with the expectation, 
of becoming a brilliant orb like it, in the next state of their existence in 
heaven. 


27. Say how can men succeed to their wishes in future, when most of them 
desire to gain the same object, and it falls to the lot of one of them; just as a 
maid expected to be wedded by many, is destined to and secured by one man 
only. 


28. Again, how can a woman be called a wife, who is either unchaste, or 
leads a life of celibacy even when dwelling in her husband’s house? 


29. Say Sir, what is the difference between the blessing and curse, which 
are pronounced on the Brahman brothers, for their sovereignty over the seven 
continents on the one hand, and their having no such thing on the other; when 
they remained thinking themselves as monarchs of the world in their very 
house. 


30. The acts of piety consisting of charities, austerities and obsequious 
ceremonies, which are productive of unknown rewards in the next world, and 
are of no benefit to their observers on earth; then what is the good derived 
from them, if they are not attended with any earthly benefit to the earthly 
body, but to a future body with which no one here has any concern. (Lit., to 
which none bears any affection). 


31. Should it be said that the soul of the pious observer, reaps the reward in 
its future state; this also is impossible because the disembodied soul is 
incapable of enjoyment; and should it have another body to enjoy hereafter, 
but of what use is that distant body to the person of the present observer (of 
the pious acts)? 


32. Should these acts be accompanied with any reward, either in this life or 
in the next, they could be known to the actor, but in want of this, their 
observance appears to be an irreconcilable incongruity. 


33. These are my doubts (in the Sdstras and practices of men), which I beg 
you will kindly remove by your cool and clear reasoning, as the moon-light 
disperses the evening twilight. 


34. Now Sir, deign to dispel my doubts in my inquiry after transcendental 
truth, that it may conduce to my good in both worlds; because the company of 
the righteous, is ever fraught with very great blessings to all people. 


CHAPTER CCVII. 
Replies to the Aforesaid Queries (of the Buddhist). 


Argument: — Desultory replies of the sage to the foregoing questions in 
the three following chapters. 


Vasishtha replied: — Hear me prince, and I will clearly expound to you the 
doctrine, which will root out your doubts all at once. 


2. All these entities in the world, are inexistent nullities forever; though 
they appear as realities in our consciousness. 


3. Whatever appears in any manner in our consciousness, (either as existing 
or non-existent, or as so and so); the same is thought as real as it seems to be, 
without our consideration of its true nature of a reality or otherwise. 


4. Such is the nature of this consciousness, that it is thought to be one and 
same with the bodiless soul, by everyone who knows what it is (by his 
acquaintance with the science of psychology). 


5. It is this knowledge (or the idea) of a thing in the mind, either in waking 
or dreaming, that they call to be its body; hence it is this erroneous 
consciousness of anything, that is believed as its body, and there is nothing 
else beside this that they call a solid body. 


6. The world shines (or shows itself) before us, like the sights seen in a 
dream; and the privation of all causes towards the production of the (material) 
world, prove it to be not otherwise than the phantom of a dream. 


7. Thus this pure and immaculate knowledge of the universe, is termed the 
very Brahma himself (because God is said to be infinite knowledge only. Aca 
RiGhore del). The very same shines as the world, which is not otherwise than 
that. 


8. Thus doth the world remain quite pure and unchanged, from ever before 
and forever more; and so it is thought and said to be, by the Vedas and all 
good and great Sdstras, as also by the joint assent of all thinking men, in all 
ages and countries. 


9. They are the most ignorant fools, and resemble the croaking frogs 
dwelling in the recess of dark caves and pits; who deny the sole existence of 
the beings which is impressed in the consciousness of all beings, which is full 
and perfect everywhere, and is acknowledged by all great souls. 


10. There are many at present, who are deluded by their notions of the 
appearances of things, and the evidence of their senses, and have fallen into 
the error of understanding the gross body, as the cause of consciousness and 
inward impressions. (i.e., they maintain the objectivity of their knowledge as 
derived from without, and deny the subjective consciousness derived from 
within). 


11. They are giddy with their wrong notions, and are not worthy of our 
discourse; because no conversation can be held with them that are intoxicated 
without intoxication, and are learned with their ignorance or learned fools. 


12. When the discourse of the learned, is not capable of removing the 
doubts of men in all places; such discourse is to be understood as the foolish 
talk of the universe. 


13. He who relies in his belief in the sensibles only, and regards the 
believer of the invisible as a fool; such a man, (i.e., the Buddhist or 
Charvaka), is considered for his unreasonable reasoning, as a block of stone or 
stony block head. 


14. The fool that maintains this (materialistic) doctrine, in opposition to all 
rational philosophy, is said to be a frog of the dark cave (or as a blind mole of 
the hole); because he is blind both to the past which is out of his sight, as also 
to the invisible future and is concerned only what is present before him. 


15. It is the veda and the sayings of wise men, and the inferences of their 
right reasoning (in support of the invisible), as I have maintained in these 
lectures, that can remove the doubts in these matters. 


16. If the sensible body, (i.e., its sensation), be consciousness, (according to 
the Buddhist); then why is the dead body unconscious of anything? (To this 
the Buddhist retorts by saying:) — Should the conscious and all-pervading 


soul be the body, then why doth not the dull corpse think as the living body? 
In reply to this foolish question, it is thus said in the veda: — 


17. This world is an imaginary city of the divine mind, in its form of 
Brahma, — the creator; and it is hence that the phenomenon of the world, 
appears to our minds as a phantom in our dream (or as a reflex of the same). 


18. Therefore, all this that you see, is but the creation of the divine intellect, 
and an intellectual entity in itself; and you are not amiss in your judgement, if 
you consider them as phantoms in your dream, and appearing in the vacuity of 
your mind. 


19. Hence this earth and the skies, these hills and cities, are all but 
appearances in the void of the intellect, and conception of your mind, as those 
appearing in the reveries of dream, or as air-built castles. 


20. It is the dense vacuum of self-consciousness, which is called the great 
Brahma or the personal god of creation; and it is the display of his will in the 
concrete, which is known as Virdj or the visible universe; thus is the pure and 
discrete consciousness of Brahma, condensed into the form of the world. 


21. Whatever is imagined in the imaginary city of Brahma, the same is 
conceived as existent in reality; as you conceive the objects of your desire or 
fancy, to be present before you in actuality. (ie., The thought of a thing 
appears as the thing itself). 


22. So whatever is thought of in the fancied city, or fairy land of one’s 
imagination at any time; the same seems to be present before him for the time 
being, as you see in the air-drawn castle of your fancy. 


23. Hence, as Brahma in his form of the mind, thinks of the action of living 
and quietus of death bodies; so are they thought of by all mankind. 


24. After the great dissolution of the world (and dissolution of all things), it 
is said to be reproduced and renovated anew from nothing; but as the want of 
any material cause, cannot produce the material world, it is certain there is no 
material being in existence. 


25. Brahma, — the lord of creatures, having got rid of the world upon its 
dissolution, was freed also from all his remembrance and ideas of creation 
forever; therefore, it is the reflexion of divine light only which appears as the 
world before us. 


26. Thus the supreme soul of Brahma, reflected itself in itself in the 
beginning, in the manner of an imaginary castle of his will, which was air- 
drawn as the visible sky in the invisible vacuum, and known as the cosmos or 
world subsisting in empty space. 


27. As an imaginary castle is the creation of the brain or intellect, and 
presents to our minds only its intellectual form alone; so does the world 
appear to us in its intellectual form, and only as an evolution of the intellect, 
and without having any other cause for its appearance. 


28. Whether there be any body or not anywhere, there is the vacuous 
intellect which is everywhere. (ie, the hollow space of the mind 
comprehends both the plenum as well as the vacuum of the world). And know 
the divine spirit to pervade all over this totality, whether it be the embodied 
duality or vacuous unity. 


29. Hence the vacuous mind of a dead body, beholds the figure of the 
whole world within its vacuity; the empty mind of a living being, sees the 
shapes both of solid and subtle bodies, in its imagination or dream. (It means 
to say that, the death of the body does not involve the death of the mind). 


30. As the living man thinks this immaterial world, to be a solid mass of 
dull matter; so doth the dead person think this vacuous universe, as a solid and 
substantial existence lying exposed before him in its mind. 


31. But as the enlightened or awakened soul of a living body, sees no trace 
of scenes of its dream upon its waking; so the redeemed soul of a dead being 
sees no trace of the objects-sight in this world, upon its redemption and 
beatification in the next world. 


32. The very same is the case with the enlightened soul, of everybody in 
this world; that it bears only the inward conception of it within itself; but no 
outward perception thereof without. Therefore, there is no material reality in 
existence, as there is no substantial causality in vacuity. 


33. As the sleeping man sees the visionary world of his dream, in the light 
of a real existence; so the unenlightened person views the phenomenal world, 
as a sober reality before him; and so do the souls of the dead, deem the empty 
void of air as the world of their departed spirits. (Thus, there are three 
different worlds, for the sleeping, waking and departed souls of men). 


34. The unpeopled or open air, appears as the earth and heaven, and full of 


mountains, efc., as before to the souls of the departed (from their bearing 
those impressions with them even to the next world, and so on throughout all 
their future transmigration). 


35. The departed soul perceives its separation from a dead body, and thinks 
of its regeneration in another frame on earth; where it will have its enjoyments 
and suffering again as before. 


36. The soul never gets rid of this delusion of its regeneration, (and of its 
desire of renovation also), so long as it neglects to resort to the means, of 
obtaining its salvation and final liberation; it is by means of its knowledge of 
truth and absence of desire, that is freed from its error of reproduction. 


37. Hence, it is the consciousness of the soul, of its righteous or 
unrighteous desire; that represents the picture of this airy world, in the hollow 
sphere of the mind. (Thus, the world is only the picture and production of 
one’s own desire). 


38. The world is therefore, neither of a substantial nor vacuous form, but 
the display of divine intelligence; the want of this knowledge is the source of 
all misery to man, but its true knowledge as representation of divine wisdom, 
is fraught with all bliss and joy. 


CHAPTER CCVIII. 
Solution of the Great question. 


Argument: — Answer to the question of future rewards and punishment of 
departed souls in another world. 


Vasishtha continued: — Hear me now to tell you, why men happen to meet 
with their (unexpected) good or fortune at home; and in the same manner how 
rewards and retributions, come to attend on departed souls from unforeseen 
causes in the far distant (or next) world. 


2. You know the whole world to be the volitional city (or fabric) of Divine 
will, and appearing as phenomenal to our outward sight, and as noumenal in 
the light of our inward insight of it, and as Brahma himself in its spiritual 
light. (.e., God has so willed the world, as to be viewed in the triple light of 
the physical, intellectual and spiritual also). 


3. In this volitional city, everything appears in the same light, as one would 
behold it in any of its different aspects. 


4. As in your own house, you are master of the direction of your offspring, 
and of the disposal of your things and affairs as you please; so is the Lord the 
sole disposer and dispensator of all things in this world of his will, as he likes 
of his own accord. 


5. As in the desired dwelling of your liking, you find everything to be as 
well-disposed as you wish it to be; so doth he direct and dispose all things in 
this world of his. 


6. The disorder that there appears to take place in the order of nature, is to 
be attributed to the Divine Will as the sovran law of all. 


7. The good or evil which waits on men, owing to the obedience to or 


transgression of law; is both attributable to the Divine Will (which has 
originated the laws and ordained their results). 


8. It is the dispensation of the Divine will also, whereby all living bodies 
have their perceptions of worldly things; just as they have the conception of 
the existence of the world, which in reality has no entity of it. 


9. It is by will of the divine intellect, that everything appears to be existent 
before us; as it is the oscitation and occlusion or the gaping and closing of the 
intellect, which causes the appearance and disappearance of the world to our 
view. 


10. The king said: — Tell me Sir, if the world was the production of the 
divine will, why was it not known to exist before with the eternity of the Will 
divine, and why and when it came to be manifested and known to others 
afterwards; tell me also, whether the world is an unstable and vanishing 
appearance in the air, or it has any fixity in the divine mind or stability in 
nature. 


11. Vasishtha replied: — Such is the nature of the vacuous and volitional 
city of divine intellect; that it comes to being and not being in succession, in 
the states of repeated waking dreams of creation, and in the sleeping oblivion 
of its desolation. 


12. Like the mud-built house of playful boys, and the air drawn castles of 
fanciful men, do the appearances of creation, appear both as real and unreal in 
the divine intellect as well as to our minds. 


13. As you build and break your imaginary city in the air, and make and 
unmake a fabric of your will elsewhere; whether it be of your own or choice 
or for any other reason, so it is with the Divine will, to construct and protract 
or retract or annul any of its works ad libitum. 


14. Thus are all beings, continually rising and falling, in this vacuous city 
of the divine will; which is ever shining in its nature, with the pure light of the 
divine mind. (God throws his own light on the work of his will). 


15. The whole plenum of the world is a vacuum, and full with the dense 
intelligence of omniscience; therefore, it is this omniscient intelligence, which 
doth still whatever it thinks upon and wills. (This passage shows that the 
Vedanta Brahma, is not inactive or Nishkriya as many believe; but the living 
God, and sole agent of all things and director of all accidents in this world). 


16. Therefore, it is not the hidden but self-manifest God, that does all 
things even at the distance of Millions of miles, and myriads of ages, as if 
they lay before him at the present time. 


17. So there is nothing in any country or in any world, which is not known 
nor thought of by the sole and unhidden soul of all. (The gloss applies it to 
every individual soul, which is conscious of its merits and demerits 
everywhere). 


18. As a brilliant gem reflects its light and shade within itself, so doth the 
gem of the intellect reflect by its own light the various vicissitudes of the 
world in itself. (i.e., The human mind is sensible of its deserts). 


19. Laws and prohibitions, which are necessary for the preservation of 
people, are implanted in the human soul. (As they are the eternal varieties of 
the divine mind), and accompany it everywhere with their just rewards. 


20. The soul never sets nor rises, (i.e., It neither dies nor revives, but 
supposes itself as such by its error only); It is Brahma himself and his 
reflexion in others, and emanating always from the divine soul its source and 
origin. 


21. As from being the viewer, it supposes itself to be the view, and thinks 
its imaginary world as a visible phenomenon; (i.e., believes itself both as the 
subjective as well as objective); so it thinks itself to be born, living and dying 
(by the like error of its own). 


22. When the soul of its own nature ceases to cast its reflexion, or 
suppresses it within itself, and remains quietly in the vacuous sphere of divine 
intellect, by assimilating itself with the universal soul of Brahma, it is then 
said to be quietus of quiet in death. (The word for death in the text is Sdnta- 
Samita or extinct, or instinct in the divine soul). 


23. The emission and intromission of its reflexion, are as natural to the 
ignorant and imperfect living soul of animal beings; as oscillation and calm 
are congenital with air (or as respiration and inspiration with breath). 


24. Now as you see in the city of your imagination, the growth, decay and 
death of people, at different times and places; — 


25. So it is the nature of this imaginary city of God, to exhibit these 
changes everywhere, as in the cases of animals, vegetables and all things in all 


the three worlds. 


26. But God neither wills nor does everything himself, in this creation of 
his will, but he acts by general laws and secondary causes, as in the cricket 
play of boys, and growth of grass from grass, and production of trees and their 
fruits, etc., from seeds. 


27. It is the nature of the almighty intellect of God, to bring forth forthwith 
to being whatever it wills to be and appear. (The almighty thought, will or 
word, is variously said to be the prime cause of all). 


28. All things being originally of intellectual form, appear afterwards in 
various forms, and with different natures; as the almighty intellect invests 
them with. 


29. Hence everything here, is verily of an intellectual form, by their 
originating from the divine intellect; and as the intellect includes all things in 
itself, it is omniform and shows itself in any form it likes. 


30. This very intellect is the omniscient and universal soul, without having 
its beginning, middle or end; it is omnipotent and something which is nothing, 
and an entity appearing as non-entity; It appears such as it remains anywhere, 
and shows itself as anything; it is the origin of all things and beings, and the 
source of all vegetables and grass. 


CHAPTER CCIX. 
On the Consciousness or Intuitive knowledge of 
Extraneous Existences. 


Argument: — Reconciliation of the opposite results of virtuous and sinful 
acts, on one and same person at the same time. 


Vasishtha continued saying: — The life of a person is dear and useful to 
him, as long as he lives and not afterwards; but hear me tell you the good of a 
man’s dying in some holy place, with a wish for future reward in his next life. 


2. God has ordained certain virtues and merits to certain places, even from 
the beginning of his imaginary city of this world (as to all other things at their 
very beginning). 


3. Whatever merit is assigned to any place, the same awaits on the soul of 
the person, after its release from bondage, by his performance of the acts of 
piety enjoined by the Sdstras. 


4. Hence, any great sin that is committed by anybody anywhere, is either 
partly or wholly effaced by the good act of the person, according to 
comparative merit of the holy place, or the degree of absolution in the mind of 
the penitent sinner. 


5. In any case of the insignificance of the sin, with regard to the greater 
sacerdotalism of the place; there the sinner is quite absolved from his guilt, 
and attains the object of his wish (in his future life). 


6. But in case of the equality of the merits of penitence, with the holiness of 
the place; the penitent man receives two bodies in his next life, that is both a 
physical body and spiritual soul. 


7. Such is the effect of the primeval guilt and merit of mankind, that they 
are endowed with double bodies, consisting of their physical frames and 
spiritual souls, (the one maculate and the other immaculate), and such the 
divine soul even from before. 


8. The principle is called Brahma in its sense of the whole, and as Brahma, 
— the totality of the living soul jiva; and also as aham or the ego, meaning 
any living soul in particular; and as he remains in any manner of the whole or 
part, so he manifests himself in his semblance of the world. 


9. The reflexion of purity acquired in some holy place, appears to the 
penitent soul in the same manner; as it appears in its contrary light to the 
guilty soul, which is not so absolved from its sin in any holy place. (These 
different reflexions, present the appearance of heavenly bliss to the soul of 
one, and that of hell torments to the other, as in their visions of paradise and 
Styx in dream). 


10. The one sees the visions of his own death, and the weeping of his living 
relatives; and deems himself as a departed ghost to the next world, all alone 
and without a single soul beside him. 


11. He sees also the deaths of his friends there, and thinks also that he hears 
the wailings of their relations at that place; he sees the chimeras of all these in 
his phrensy, as a man of deranged humours sees the spectres of bug-bears in 
his delirium. 


12. So it happens with great souls also, to see the sights both of good grace 
and affright, according to the measure of their merit or guilt in this life; and 
thus thousands of hopeful and hideous shapes, float about in the imaginations 
of men, owing to the purity and depravity of their natures. 


13. The friends of the dying man, lying insensible as a dead body; weep 
and wail over his corpse, and then take him to the funeral ground for his 
cremation. 


14. But the guiltless man being accompanied by his self-conscious and 
righteous soul sees the approach of his decrepitude and death, with firmness 
and without any feeling of sorrow (as if he had no decay nor death). 


15. With his present body he sees himself to be a living being; and with his 
invisible part or inward soul, he sees his conquest over death by the merit of 
his holy pilgrimage (and the immortality of his soul in the future world). 


16. The guiltless man is in fear of his death for a moment only, but is 
conscious of the indestructibility of his inward soul, as a man clad in mail, is 
dauntless of the shafts of his unarmoured antagonist. (The pure soul is 
invulnerable to the shafts of death). 


17. In this manner the relatives of the deceased, find his pure soul, to obtain 
its immortality after his death; and that life and death are indifferent to the 
virtuous and purified person. 


18. The sights of all the three worlds, are equally fallacious both in their 
tangible and intangible forms; as the vision of one object in a dream, is as 
false as another in their visionary nature. (The gloss says that, one error 
succeeds another, in the same way as one lie is followed by another). 


19. We have clear conceptions of the fallacies, arising in our minds, both in 
our dreams and imagination; but the fallacies of our waking dreams by broad 
daylight, are more obvious and never less conspicuous to our apprehension 
than either of them (the latter being more general and lasting than the former 
ones). 


20. The king said: — But tell me Sir, how virtue and vice, both of which 
are bodiless things (as being the abstract qualities of our actions), assume to 
themselves the bodily forms of living beings, in the course of the 
transmigration of our souls. (Virtuous souls being blessed with human bodies, 
while vicious spirits are doomed to suffer in various brutish forms). 


21. Vasishtha replied: — There is nothing impossible to the creative power 
of Brahma, to be produced in the imaginary fabric of this world of his mind; 
nor is it impracticable to the substantive divine will to give substantial forms 
to understand things. (The substantive will is called satyasankulpa which 
brings the inexistent to real existence). 


22. There is nothing which is unimaginable, and cannot be produced by the 
mind of Brahma; as it is with us to have no idea of anything and nothing in 
being, of which we have no imagination in our finite minds. (Brahma has 
given forms to all the imaginary ideas of his mind, which we cannot do to our 
formless and abstract idea of any). 


23. A visionary city in the dream and an imaginary castle of fancy, do both 
present the like ideal form to the mind; and yet both of them are composed of 
a train of ideas, which appear as real objects for the time being. (So the ideal 
seems as real for a time). 


24. All the numerous thoughts, which lie as a dead and dormant mass, in 
the states of our deep and sound sleep; appear to us in endless forms in the 
vision of our dream and waking our imagination and leave their traces in the 
memory. 


25. Who is there that has not had the notion, of the aerial castles of his 
dream and imagination; and found them not to be composed of our concepts 
only, in the airy world of our vacuous consciousness. 


26. Therefore, what thing is there, that is not capable of being produced in 
this rial world, which is the production of the airy imagination of the 
vacuous intellect; and what thing also which is substantially produced 
therefrom? (The creatures of the mind, have mental forms only). 


27. Therefore, it is this fallacy only, which appears in the form of the 
visible universe; where there is nothing in real existence or inexistence; but all 
things appear to be in esse and non esse, in the Nabhas and in the Nubibus of 
the divine mind. 


28. Anything that is perceived in any manner, the same is thought as a 
manifestation of its Aker in the same manner; and the enlightened seekers of 
truth, find no impropriety in their belief as such. (These as they change, are 
the varied God. — Thomson’s “The Seasons’). 


29. Hence, when a man is taught by the tenets of his religion, to hope for 
the enjoyment of flowery banks, (/it., — hills), and streams flowing with 
nectar in paradise, (/it., — heaven); it is very probable that he will meet with 
the same things, in his future life in the next world. (So, the Moslem is taught 
to expect the gratification of all his carnal desires in heaven, as the promised 
rewards of his holy Koran. The Hindus likewise, have bodily delights to 
expect in their different heavens). 


30. Hence, the acts that are done in this world by anybody, are attended 
with their like rewards unto him in the next; and there is no inconsistency in 
this belief, though it appears so to the unbeliever (The adage, — as you sow, 
so shall you reap, holds equally true in every religion with regard to future 
retribution, as in every case here below). 


31. Should there be anything, which may be said to be permanent in this 
world, it must be ever present in the view of its viewer; let then any man say 
upon this criterion, which he does not lose the sight of all other things before 
his eye sight, except the ideas of things in his mind, which are ever present in 


his knowledge, and never lost sight of in his consciousness. 


32. I have given you the analogy of our dreams and thoughts, to prove the 
essentiality of our notions and ideas; and whereas the worlds appertain to the 
will and subsists in the mind of omniscience, they are not otherwise than the 
essence of the Great Brahma Himself. 


33. As there is nothing wanting or impossible to be produced, in the erial 
castle of your imagination; so there is nothing which does not and cannot exist 
in the will and mind of the almighty. 


34. Whatsoever is thought of in any form, in the Divine Mind, the same 
remains fixed therein in the very form; and the same appears to be situated in 
the same nature before our views in its photo or in a scenography. 


35. Hence, this semblance of the Divine Mind, is perceived only by our 
internal senses, and not perceptible to the external organs, or to both of these 
at once; because it is for our minds only to perceive the impressions of the 
eternal mind, and to impel the internal organs (by their inward efforts), to 
receive those reflexions. 


36. As the lord has willed everything at first, so it lasts with him to the very 
last of his creation. (i.e., from the very beginning of his Sankalpa, to the end 
of the Kalpa epoch); when his will of creating the world anew, gives another 
form to the state of things in future. 


37. The Lord manifests himself as he wills, in the manner of his will, and in 
the form of another world in every Kalpa duration of creation; as the minds of 
men come to see another world and another state of things, each in their 
successive dream. 


38. There is nothing which does not exist, in this worldly city of Divine 
will, and all that exists therein is naught but the production of the Divine 
Intellect; therefore, this world is to be known, as full of the forms of the 
productive mind of God. 


CHAPTER CCX. 
Refutation of the conception of a Duality in unity. 


Argument: — End of Vasishtha’s Replies to the important queries, and his 
showing the unity of the world with Brahma himself. 


Vasishtha resumed and said: — Now hear me tell you in reply to the 
question, why the heaven is not filled with a hundred full moons, if it were the 
wish of a hundred persons to shine as such a luminary on future, and if the 
wishes of all are crowned with success in their next state of being. (The souls 
of the pious are said to twinkle as stars in heaven). 


2. Those that aspired to become as bright as the full moon of heaven, 
became actually so in their conception of themselves as such in the sphere of 
their minds; and not by their situation in the vault of the sky or in the orb of 
that luminary. 


3. Say, who has ever and anywhere, got into the imaginary city of another; 
and who has ever got any fancied treasure, except the framer of the fancy and 
the fabricator of the wished for wealth. (Every one is the master of his own 
Utopia and delights in his hobby horse). 


4. Everyone has a heaven of his own, in the utopia of his creation; wherein 
he is situated and shines as a full bright moon, and without its phases of the 
wane and waste. 


5. All those aspirants to luminosity, had thought of entering into the moon 
of his own mind; and there he found himself to rest at last, with full light of 
that luminary and delight of his conscious soul. 


6. Each of them thought of entering into the disc of the moon shining in 
their minds, and felt themselves glad in their situation, as if they were seated 
in the orb of the celestial moon. 


7. Whatever one seeks and searches after, the same becomes con-natural 
with his consciousness; and in the case of his firm belief in the same state, he 
thinks and feels himself to be the very same. 


8. As every aspirer to the state of the full moon, came to be such in his 
respective conception of that luminary; so the suitors of the same bride in 
marriage, became wedded to her according to his own conception of hers. 
(Everyone imagines his doxy, as a fairy paragon of beauty). 


9. The one pure maiden that is thought of being taken to wife, by many 
men in their minds; is never defiled by any one of them in her character, by 
their simple enjoyment of her ideal only. (The ideal is not tangible 
possession). 


10. As the sovereign ruler of the seven continents, holds his sway over 
them, without ever going out of his city; so the soul passes to them all, by 
remaining in the precincts of its body; and so does every man see his 
imaginary castle, in the sphere of his own house. 


11. When the whole universe owes its origin to the imagination of its 
omniscient originator, — the self-born Brahma; what can it be otherwise, than 
an intangible vacuum and quite calm and quiet in itself. (The moving bodies 
are the fixed figures of the divine mind, and appear to be turning round like 
the pictures in a panorama or the objects in a scenograph). 


12. Now hear me tell you of the unknown and invisible results of the acts 
piety, such as charity, obsequeous rites, religious austerities and the 
mutterings of holy mantras, which accrue to the departed ghosts of bodily 
beings in the next world. 


13. The souls marked with traces of pious acts in them, come to view them 
vividly as their actual works, and painted in as lively colours as their dreams, 
by fabrications of their lively intellects. 


14. The carnal mind, distrusting the reality of these impressions of 
consciousness, and disregarding the internal operation of the inward intellect; 
becomes restless for its sensuous enjoyment and exercise of the outward 
organs of action, until by abatement of this fervour, it is restored to its inward 
peace and tranquility. 


15. It is the theme of early poets which tells us, that the impressions of the 
acts of piety and charity which are imprinted in the intellect, are reflected over 


the passive soul in the next world, when the conscious soul continues to keep 
the gratification of those acts. 


16. Thus the rewards of charity and uncharitableness, are equally felt in the 
gratification and dissatisfaction of the soul in this world also, where 
everything is by our feeling of it. 


17. Thus have answered fully to whatever you have asked of me; and now 
know from all this, that the sensible world is an intangible dream, and an air 
drawn spectacle of the mind. 


18. The prince rejoined: — But please to tell me Sir, how could the 
intellect alone and itself before the production of the body; and how can a 
light subsist without its receptacle of a lamp or lantern. 


19. Vasishtha replied: — The sense in which you use the world body, is 
quite unknown to the spiritualist, who discard the material meaning of the 
term, as they reject the idea of the dancing of stones in air. (The learned know 
the spiritual body only). 


20. The meaning of the word body, is the same as that of Brahma (who is 
all in all); and there is no difference in the meaning of the two, as there is none 
between the words fluid and liquid. 


21. The body is a visionary appearance, and the great body of Brahma, is 
likened unto the figure of a phantom in vision, which represents the forms of 
all things as in dream in the stupendous fabric of the universe. [Brahma is 
more likely the phantasmagoria that shows all forms in it. — Gloss]. 


22. But the difference between thy dream or vision and spectrum of 
Brahma, consist in the former representing the figures of thy previous 
thoughts alone, which disperse and vanish upon thy waking; but the universe 
which is exhibited in spectrum of Brahma, is not so evanescent as that of 
other. 


23. What is thing then we call the body, and how does it appear into us in 
the shape of something in our dream; and why doth anything appearing as a 
reality in dream, appear as nothing and vanish as an error upon our waking. 


24. There is no waking, sleeping or dreaming, nor any other condition of 
being, in the Turiya or transcendent state of Brahma, [as in those of the divine 
hypostases of Brahma, Virdj and others]. It is something as the pure and 


primeval light and as the transparent air, all quiet and still, [as the infinite 
eternity]. 


25. It is the same as the unknown and inscrutable light, which shows and 
glows before us to this day. It is the same primeval and primordial light, that 
showed first the sight of the world to view, as if it were a dream in the gloom 
of night. (Light was nature’s first born, and brought forth all nature from it). 


26. As in passing from one district to another, the body though proceeding 
onward, is ever in the midst of its circuit, and yet never fixed at any spot; so 
are all things in their endless rotation in this world, whether singly or 
collectively. 


27. The sight of the world, like that of a dream, presents a favourable 
aspect to some minds, but it presents a clear and serene prospect to men of 
unclouded intellects. 


28. The vacuum as well as the plenum of objects, and the reflexion, as 
likewise the eclipse or adumbration of things; the existence and inexistence of 
the world and matter, and the unity and duality of the divine entity, are all but 
the extraneous phases or aspects of the same vacuous intellect. 


29. The world is entirely or completely evolution from the fulness of the 
deity; and stands as a complete counterpart of the original; it is neither a 
shining or unshining body by itself, but is as bright as the contents of a crystal 
within its bowels. 


30. Wherever there is the evolution of the world in the intellect, there is the 
presence of the subtle soul also at that place, and whenever there is a jot of 
thought anywhere, it is attended with the thought of the world also. (The mind 
and soul are one with creation, and the same thing). 


31. The vacuum of intellect is present everywhere, (pervading and 
comprehending the whole). And this omnipresence is the divine presence 
(which engrosses and envelopes this all) which is termed the world. [The 
word world-jagat passing [in our right], is spiritually santa or quiet]. 


32. The divine soul is as quiet and unchangeable, as this universe is stable 
and stationary; and it is the fluctuation of the supreme mind, which causes 
these variations in the face of the city of the divine will [or the world]. 


33. The impossibility of any other inference [of the world’s duality or its 


being aught otherwise than the divine entity]; proves it necessarily to be of the 
very same essence. Any unreasonable hypothesis of sophists is inconsistent 
with this subject [of the absolute unity]. 


34. The joint assent of the common belief of mankind, the testimony of the 
Sdstras, and the dicta of the Vedas, are established and incontrovertible truths. 
Hence, nobody can have any doubt in regard to the real entity of the Divine 
spirit. 


35. This being confessed, it becomes evident that the world is the deity 
itself; and when the world appears as one with the deity, it is seen in our 
clairvoyance to be extinct in the Divine essence. (Clairvoyance is charama- 
sdkshat kara or the last sight of creation at one’s dying moment; when the 
world disappears, and eternity appears full open to view. — Gloss). 


36. From this analogy of the ultimate evanescent sight of the world, it will 
be evident to the living soul, that the sight of the phenomenal is wholly lost 
before it in the noumenal. This is the doctrine of cosmotheism, wherein whole 
nature is seen in nature’s God. 


37. He who is acquainted with the sphere of his intellect, is not 
unacquainted with the fact of the dependency of the arbour of the world to it, 
he sees the three worlds in himself, in either of his two states of bondage and 
liberation. (The fettered soul is fastened to the sight of the material and 
temporal world; but the liberated soul views it in its spiritual light). 


38. The visible world though so manifest to view, is entirely lost to sight 
upon its right knowledge; and the knower thereof in its light, becomes like the 
setting sun, wholly invisible to public sight, and remains as mute as a clod of 
silent stone. 


39. The way that is established by the Vedas, and received by the general 
assent of wise men; is to be acknowledged, as the right path leading to sure 
success. (vox populi vox dei). 


40. He who adheres steadily to his own purpose, by utter disregard of all 
other objects in his view; is said to be firmly fixed to his point, and is sure to 
reap his success at the end. 


41. Everything appears to one in the same light, as he is accustomed to 
view and take it for; and whether this object of his faith is a true or false one, 
it appears just the same to anybody as he is wont to believe it. 


42. This is the conclusion of your question, as I have determined and 
delivered to you; now be quick and walk your way with perfect ease of your 
mind, health of your body and agility of your limbs. 


CHAPTER CCXI. 
Lecture on transcendent Truth. 


Argument: — Relation of Brahma as the all-pervading spirit, and of the 
means of the presentation of spiritual being before one. 


Vasishtha resumed: — As I was sitting relating these things to the prince, 
he honoured me with his obeisance; and then thinking I had dispensed my 
task to him, rose up to proceed on my aerial journey (from the Ilavrita- Varsha 
of Kushadwipa). 


2. Thus I have related unto you this day, O most intelligent Rama, 
regarding the omnipresence of the Divine spirit; keep this vacuous view of 
Brahma before your sight, and proceed everywhere with the peace of your 
mind (as you are ever living and moving in the Lord). 


3. Know all this to be Brahma itself, and a nameless and unsubstantial void 
only; it is something unborn and increate, all calm and quiet, and without its 
beginning, middle and end. (It is infinity in space and eternity in duration). 


4. It is said to be the reflexion of the intellect, and named as Brahma from 
its immensity, it is termed the most transcendent, and something without any 
designation at all. 


5. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how can we have the sights of the 
celestial, and of the Siddha and Sddhya spirits, of Yama, Brahma and of the 
heavenly Vidyadharas and choristers; and tell me also Sir, how the people of 
the other spheres can be visible to us. 


6. Vasishtha replied: — The celestial Siddhas, Sddhyas, the gods Yama and 
Brahma, and the Vidyddhara demi-gods; these together with all other beings 
of great souls and wondrous might; — 


7. Are all visible to you both by day and night, and above, below, behind 
and ever before you, if you will but look at them with the eyes of your mind; 
but if you shut your mental eye against spirituality, you can never have the 
sight of spirit presented before your view. (This passage is illustrated in the 
story of Chudaloka. — Gloss). 


8. These beings being habituated to be viewed in our minds, are never afar 
from us, and as they are represented to be volitive or self-willed beings, they 
are said to be ever roving everywhere. (The spirits are of two kinds; some 
stationary in their particular Jokas or spheres; and others to be wandering 
about. — Gloss). 


9. These volitional beings are as fickle as the living creatures of this earth 
of ours; and as the volatile winds, which are blowing at random in every 
direction. 


10. These resemble the airy creatures of your imagination and dream, 
which hover and gather about you by day and night; while the others are 
devoid of their volition and motion, and are settled stationary in their 
respective spheres. 


11. If you can in the calm quietness of your mind and soul, secure the 
reflexion of any of these spirits in your silent and steadfast meditation; you 
can without fail, have the visitation of the same in the inmost recess of your 
soul, (and hold your secret communion with it also. — Gloss). 


12. In this manner, do men see the gods as they see the Siddhas, arrayed 
with all their majesty and glory, as they are feigned to be in their intense 
meditations. (Dhydnenaivapara-devah). 


13. Now, as men of steady minds find themselves to be soaring to heaven, 
in the company of the Siddhas and clad in all their glory; those of fickle and 
unsubdued minds, have to take great pains, in order to confine the fleeting 
object of their contemplation under their control. (It is often dangerous to the 
unadept novice in meditation, to let slip the object of his contemplation from 
his grasp). 


14. The world is altogether an unsubstantial and imperceptible thing; and is 
ever as silent and a serene void, as the vacuum of the intellect (or the Divine 
mind). It appears however as a solid and compact mass, according as the 
notion we have of it in our consciousness. (i.e., This nothing is thought of as 
something, according to our mistaken notion or conception of it). 


15. It does not exist in our unconsciousness, nor does it appear to be in 
existence or otherwise it is not dull, insensible and unthinking beings; it is a 
vacuity and nullity, and utterly an intangible and imperceptible thing in our 
sensibility and unconsciousness of it. 


16. It is the nature of the intellect to reflect in itself, and all that is seen 
about us, is the shadow of that reflexion; the knowledge of substantiality in 
this shadowy reflection, proceeds from the vanity of the intellect, and not from 
its nature which is free from mistake. 


17. There can be no talk of causation, production or vegetation, in the 
nature of the universe; which being an absolute void, is entirely devoid of the 
elements of cause and effect. (Ex nihilo nihil fit, etc.). 


18. That which appears to be produced, is only a void in the midst of 
primeval vacuum, (feo et beo); nor can there be the attribution of unity or 
duality to the infinite vacuity. 


19. Yet the world appears as something existent in your mind; and as 
visible before your eyes; and this happens in the same manner as you have the 
consciousness and sight of your dreams; in the unruffled calm of your hollow 
sleep. 


20. As imagination causes the mountains and mountainous regions, to rise 
in the hollow sphere of our minds; but neither is the one nor the other found to 
be really existent therein; such is this creation an airy working of the divine 
mind (and leaving no trace of it left behind). 


21. Hence, it is the nature of the wise and sapient to remain as quiet and 
mute as motionless blocks of wood or stone; and the character of great minds, 
to manage themselves as wooden puppets, moving wholly as they are moved 
by the prime mobile power of God alone; (Without being actuated by their 
own desire, or deeming themselves as free agents). 


22. As the waves are seen to roll about on the surface waters, and as the 
eddies are whirling round and hurling headlong into the deep; so the whole 
creation and all created things, turn about the pivot of the great Brahma alone. 
(Not an atom herein, has an excentric course of its own). 


23. As vacuity is inborn in the firmament, and undulations are immanent in 
the air; so are these creations inherent and inseparably connected with the 
divine spirit, in their amorphous or formless and ideal shapes. (This passage 


maintains the idealistic theory of the ancients). 


24. As an air drawn castle of our will or imagination, presents a substantial 
shape before us with all its unsubstantialness; so does this world appear as a 
compact frame exhibited before us, notwithstanding its situation in the 
formless mind of Brahma. 


25. All these three worlds, that we are accustomed to believe as real ones, 
and as seats of our temporal as well as spiritual concerns; are all void and 
formless, and as unreal ones as the airy castles of our imagination. 


26. As it is the thought of our minds, that creates full populous cities in 
them; so it is the thought of the mind of God, that creates these numerous 
worlds, and presents them to our minds and eyes. 


27. Though ever and all along thought as a reality, this visible world bears 
no meaning at all; and resembles the sight of a man’s own death in his dream. 


28. As a man sees the funeral of his dead body, conducted by his son in his 
dream; so the unreal world is seen as a reality, in as much as it is reflected as 
such by its supreme contriver. 


29. Both the entity and non-entity of the cosmos or world, constitute the 
corpus of the immaculate deity; just as a fictitious name applied to a person, 
makes no difference in his personage. 


30. Whether what I have said is true or not, (that the Siddhas and others are 
mere imaginary or spiritual beings), you have nothing to lose or gain 
therefrom, (because we have no concern whatever with them); and as it is 
useless for wise men to expect any reward by casting fruits into the Phalgu 
river, so it is of no good to the intelligent who have known the true God, to 
take the pains of invoking the aid of the minor gods instead of Him. 


CHAPTER CCXII. 
On ascertainment of truth. 


Argument: — Thinking God as the Ego, Brahma and the creation, and the 
description of God. 


Vasishtha resumed: — The man that considers himself as the Ego, from his 
possession of the intellect and intellectual powers in him; elevates him to the 
rank of Brahma and contains the whole world in himself. 


2. As the Lord Brahma or Hiranyagarbha remained in this state (of the 
totality of souls) he was not then the creator of the world; but was alike the 
increate Brahma, — the everlasting God, as he continued from all eternity. 
(Brahma assimilating himself to the impersonal God, had no personality of 
himself, so the holy trinity was all One, before the Lord caused his coeternal 
son to create the world; as nothing was created but by the son). 


3. It is in our consciousness, that the world appears in this manner, and is 
like the mirage in a desert, where its very unreality shows itself as a reality. 
(Hence our consciousness, is not always the test of truth). 


4. It is since the creation, that the primeval vacuum began to present, the 
blunder or falsity of the world in itself; but how and whence arose this 
blunder, unless it were the presentation of Brahma himself. (Delusion is God 
also). 


5. The world is a whirlpool, (a revolving sphere), in the vast ocean of 
Brahma. (i.e., in the great expanse of vacuum). Where then is the question of 
unity or duality in this, or the talk of the dualism of the eddy from the waters 
of the deep, or how can there be the topic of unity in want of a duality. (The 
world is therefore Brahma-dharma or an hypostasis of God. — Gloss). 


6. The great Brahma is profoundly quiet, and having his intellect inherent 


in himself, he is conscious of his being the great or sole Ego, (or the totality of 
beings) in his mind, and sees himself as the midst of the vast expanse of 
vacuity. 


7. As fluctuation is inherent in air, and heat is inbred in fire; and as the 
moon contains its coolness in itself, so does the Great Brahma brood over the 
eternal ideas of things, contained in the cavity of his fathomless mind. 


8. Rama rejoined: — Tell me Sir, how does the divine mind come to think 
of and brood upon his creation; when the eternal intellect is ever employed in 
its process of intellection. The course of Divine thought being unobstructed 
from eternity to eternity, its even tenor cannot be supposed to be now and then 
turned to the act of creation, or even said to be brought in its action and 
motion, since the time that this creation first began to exist (There can be no 
talk of the beginning or end of the world before eternity). 


9. Vasishtha replied: — It is even so, O Rama! the great Ego of God always 
thinks of everything in itself; and the increate and ever existent spirit of God, 
has never anything unknown to his knowledge. (The evolution and involution 
of the world, are known by the terms of its creation and annihilation). 


10. The vacuous is ever and everywhere present both in creation and non- 
creation. (i.e., both before as well as after it); and there is nothing that is 
known to him as existent or non-existent at any time, (since the ignorant know 
the world as existent, and the learned consider it a nihility; but the Lord 
knows them all in himself). 


11. As the mind is conscious of its fluctuation, and the moon of her 
coldness; and as the air knows its voidness, so doth Brahma know himself as 
the Ego, and never thinks himself without the other. (They are Misra or 
combined together). 


12. Such is the entity of God, and never unlike to or otherwise than this; 
and whereas the world is without its beginning and end, it must be as 
imperishable as Brahma himself. (The world is without end). 


13. It is only from your want of sufficient intelligence, and hearing of or 
prejudice in the word non-ego; that you are led to the belief of a duality, in the 
undualistic unity of the Deity. 


14. Never does anybody nor anything here, think of itself of anything 
whatever; there is none and naught whatsoever, that can think unless it is the 


same with the Divine Ego. 


15. The apparent threefold world, ever appears in this manner; as one with 
and inseparable from God that dwells alike and evenly in all, which composes 
one uniform whole, without admixture of any diversity or duality (all which 
blend together in harmony in one universal unity). 


16. Know, O Rama, that is nothing like a rock or tree, is produced in empty 
vacuity; so these seeming solid worlds, can never be produced in the vacuous 
spirit of Brahma, (but are all mere phantoms of what they appear to be). Know 
this, and go on freely in your own way. 


17. Precepts to men of little intelligence and doubtful minds, fail to 
persuade them to the knowledge of truth; and so long as they cannot 
comprehend the unity, they are ever apt to believe in the multiplicity of 
objects. 


18. Neither precepts nor Sdstras, can lead the ignorant to the knowledge of 
truth, unless they can get rid of their prejudice of diversity, which the creator 
Brahma, has spread over the minds of men. 


19. Rama rejoined: — I understand Sir, what you say (regarding the ego as 
the agent); but I beseech you to explain it by some illustration, for my clear 
knowledge of it. 


20. What does the supreme Brahma do, by his assuming the title of ego or 
thinking agent to himself; you know all this (by your vast knowledge), though 
it is not quite satisfactory to your audience. 


21. Vasishtha replied: — The supreme One that was quite indistinct before 
(as the undistinguishable chaos); becomes after his assumption of the title ego 
to himself, divided and distinguished into the distinct essences of vacuum, 
space and its directions and time with all its divisions. (The ego itself is 
diversified into these various forms). 


22. The ego then assuming its personality, finds many such distinctions 
appearing before itself; which are quite imperceptible in its state of 
impersonality. (The personal soul only, is conscious of these). 


23. The knowledge of these vacuous principles, their qualities and 
attributes, which is preserved in the soul in the forms of their abstract ideas; is 
expressed afterwards by certain symbolical sounds or words, which are also as 


void as air. (A word is a breath, and the breath is air). 


24. It is thus the formless and vacuous principle of the ego, entertains in 
itself or its soul, the notions or knowledge of times and space in their ideal 
forms. 


25. This universe which appears as the réchauffé or reflex of the ideal of 
the ego, and seems as the visible and substantial world, is in reality but the 
intangible Brahma, and appearing as the tangible non Brahma to view. 


26. The world is verily the quiet spirit of Brahma, it is one with Him, and 
without its beginning, middle or end; it is verily the void of Brahma, who 
assumes to himself the titles of Ego and the living soul, vacuous himself in his 
own vacuous self, as this vast and extensive phenomenon, and as something 
otherwise than what He is. (The world is the mirror of the divine Mind and its 
thoughts). 


CHAPTER CCXIII. 
Narration of Rama’s prior pupilage under 


Vasishtha. 
Argument: — Vasishtha’s relation of a lecture delivered to Rama in a 
former birth. 
Vasishtha continued: — O Rama, the destroyer of thy enemies, this very 


question that you have asked me today, was put to me once before, when you 
had been a pupil under my discipline. 


2. In a former age, there was once this spiritual discourse betwixt ourselves, 
when you had been a pupil of mine in a certain forest, (according to 
Metempsychosis), the present is but a repetition of a past life. The wheel of 
life rolls and revolves incessantly from age to age. 


3. As I sat there as your preceptor, and your sitting in my presence as my 
pupil; you then had put this very question to me, with the gravity of your 
understanding. 


4. The Pupil said: — You Sir that know all things, now deign to remove 
this doubt and difficulty of mine, regarding what things die and perish at the 
great deluge, and what things are not liable to destruction. 


5. The Preceptor replied saying: — Know my son, that the relics of all 
things are utterly destroyed at the last deluge; as your thickening dreams 
disappear in your sound sleep. 


6. The hills and rocks on all the ten sides of the earth, are all destroyed 
without any distinction, and of the actions of men and routine of their 
business, there remains nothing behind. 


7. All beings are destroyed at the end, and the great void (that is the 
receptacle of all bodies), becomes a perfect void. 


8. The gods Brahma, Vishnu, Indra, Rudra and others, that are the prime 
causes of the causal agencies of this world, do all become extinct at the end of 
the world, and there remains no vestige of them at last. 


9. There remains only the great vacuity of the divine intellect, which is ever 
existent and undecaying; and this appears from the divine spirits remaining as 
the witness both of annihilations as also of the regeneration of the past and 
future worlds. 


10. The entity never becomes a non-entity, nor the non-entity never comes 
to be an entity; tell me therefore, where the past world disappears, and from 
whence the future world comes to existence. 


11. The Preceptor replied: — This world, my boy, is not wholly destroyed 
nor does it become altogether extinct; and it is quite true that nothing ever 
goes to nothing, nor does anything, nor does anything ever proceed from a 
nihility. 


12. That which is an entity in reality, never becomes a non-entity in 
anywise, and how can that which is inexistent of itself, ever become a nil and 
null afterwards. (Ex nihilo nihil fit, etc.). 


13. Where is water to be had in the mirage, and when are the two seeming 
moons to be seen in the sky; where are the delusive hairs found to be floating 
in the air, and when does a false conception prove to be true. (So the seeming 
world is a nullity, although it appears awhile as something to our deluded 
sight). 


14. Know my son, all these phenomenals to be mere delusions, and without 
any reality in them; they appear as cities and towns in our dreams, and are 
ever obtrusive on us. 


15. They are however liable to vanish away quite out of our sight at last, as 
our dreams disappear upon our waking, and as our waking scenes are lost and 
hid under the veil of our sleep. 


16. As we know nothing where the city of our dreaming, vanishes away at 
last upon our waking; so we are quite ignorant about that chaotic void, 
wherein the universe submerges upon its exit. 


17. The Pupil rejoined: — If the world is a nullity as you say, then Sir, be 
pleased to tell what is it that thus appears to and disappears from us by turns; 
and what is that vacuous intellect which presents this extensive view before 
us; as also how does the void present its reflexion of the plenum and to what 


purpose. 


18. The Preceptor replied: — It is the vacuous sphere of the intellect, my 
boy, that thus shines with its transparency; and it is this reflexion of it which is 
called the world, which is no other than this. 


19. It is the reflexion of the widely extended substance of the great void of 
the intellect; and this apparently solid figure of it, is no other than the same 
transpicuous form of that intellect. (So says the sruti, Brahma reflects his two- 
fold forms to us, the one opaque and seen with our naked eye, and the other 
translucent and viewed by our mental sight). 


20. The incorporeal Brahma like all corporeal bodies, presents both a fair 
as well as a dark complexion, (the one being his clear or intellectual form seen 
by the clear sighted, and the other his hazy figure viewed by gross 
understandings). He also discloses himself sometimes and closes at another, 
which cause the creation and annihilation of the world. (Manu calls it the 
waking and sleeping of God, and others the evolution and involution of the 
divine spirit). 


21. The clearness of the divine spirit, ever remains the same and unaltered, 
both before and after the creation and its dissolution; as a fountain of limpid 
waters is always clear, whether it reflects the shadows of its bordering arbours 
or not. (No change in nature can affect the spirit of God). 


22. As a man remains unchanged in his sleep, whether he be dreaming or 
enjoying his sound rest; so the spirit continues alike in its intellect, whether it 
is in the act of creation or annihilation. 


23. As the ideal world appears to be calm and quiet, both in the dream of 
the dreamer, as well as in the sound sleep of the sleeper; so this visible world 
of ours is ever viewed in its calmness, in the tranquil spirit of the Lord and of 
the contemplative saint. 


24. Hence, I do not recognize the existence of a vacuum or sky, anywhere 
and independent of our soul; nor can we expect the same sphere appearing in 
the souls of others, as it does in ours according to our view of it. 


25. If we can perceive the light of our intellect, even at the point of our 
death, and disappearance of the world from us; why should we not conceive 
the same to be the case with others, and that they do not perceive the same 
intellectual light also in their consciousness. (This is an evidence of the 
immortality in our souls). 


26. The Pupil rejoined: — If such is the case, that others who are awake, 
have the same view of the world, as the dreamer has in his dream; then I 
believe that all those that are living, have the same view of the world as those 
that are dying; (i.e., A mere faint idea of it and not a substantial one). 


27. The preceptor replied: — So it is, O my intelligent lad, the world then 
does not appear in its real form (of a solid body to the dreamer and the dying), 
as it appears as a reality to the intellects of others (that are waking and living). 
Idealism presents the true picture of the world. 


28. The world does not appear and is not anything, and nothing that is real 
or has any reality in it; it is a mere reflexion of the intellect, and there can be 
no reality in our false sight of it. 


29. It is apparent everywhere, and seems to be in every way at all times; but 
it does not exist in reality in anyway, anywhere or at any time. 


30. And because it is both the real and unreal form of Brahma, it is both a 
reality as well as unreality likewise; and being of the intellectual void, is never 
destructible nor ever destroyed. 


31. The vacuous entity of the supreme intellect, which exhibits the 
phenomena of creation and its destruction (in repeated rotation), abounds with 
our misery only, if we attend to its occurrences with any degree of concern; 
but it does not affect us at all, if we can but remain altogether unconcerned 
with its casualties. 


32. All these appearances exist everywhere at all times, in the same manner 
as they appear to the ignorant; but in truth, they appear in nowhere, in any 
manner or at any time to the wise and learned, (who know the nature of 
worldly delusions). 


33. It is the one self-same Being that appears as a god in one place, and as a 
pot or clod in another. Here he is seen as a hill and there as a rill or dale; He is 
an arbour here, of furze or bush there, and the spreading grass in another. He 
is the moving and movable somewhere and the unmoving and unmovably 


elsewhere; and He is the fire and all other elements also everywhere. 


34. He is entity and nonentity, and both vacuity and solidity also; He is 
action and duration, and the earth and sky likewise. He is the being and not 
being, and their growth and their destruction likewise, and He is good as well 
as the evil, that attends on one and forefends another. 


35. There is nothing that is not He, who though one is always all things in 
all places; He is in and out of everything, and extends along the beginning, 
middle and end of all things. He is eternity and duration and the three 
divisions of time also; (i.e., the present, past and future, called the triple time). 


36. He is all, and existent in all things, in all places and times; and yet He is 
not the All, and neither existing with anything at any time or place (but is but 
dimly seen in these His lowest works. — Milton). 


37. Know now, Rama, that Brahma being the universal soul, He is all in all 
places and times; and because Brahma is the conscious soul, He exhibits all 
things to our consciousness, as if they were images in our dreams or the 
creatures of our imagination. (i.e., A corporeal God only can form a formal 
and plastic world; but the intellectual soul of God, can make only a formless 
and immaterial creation, as we see in our dream and phantasies). 


38. The maker of the terrene world, must have an earthly body; and the 
framer of the woody arbours must have a wooden frame, but the Lord God of 
all, has neither a corporeal body nor a material shape. (Thus, they frame a fire, 
air and water God, but the true God is none of these elements). 


39. Others make a mountain God as the Lord of all; and some even make 
and worship a human figure as the supreme God (and so are all the heathen 
gods represented in human figures). 


40. Some make a picture the Lord and maker of all; and others make some 
image as such, and worship it as the great God of all. 


41. But there is only one supreme Being, who is the maker, supporter and 
the Lord God of all others; He is without beginning and end, and the Lord 
Brahma, whose spirit upholds and supports all others. 


42. A straw made image or an earthen pot, is attributed with divine powers, 
and represented as the Most-high; and so the formless God is shown in frail 
images, which are made and destroyed by human hands. 


43. An outward object is made the actor and enjoyer of acts; but the wise 
know intelligence only, as the active and passive agent of all actions. 


44. But the truly wise (i.e., the vacuist) acknowledges no active nor passive 
agent of creation; although many among the wise (i.e., the Pashupatas) 
recognize one God alone, as the only actor, and enjoyer of all. 


45. All these views may be probable, and well apply to the most-high, who 
is the sole object of all these theories; and as there is nothing, which can be 
positively affirmed or denied of Him. (Here the vacuist Vasishtha is a tolerator 
of all faiths, as suited to the capacities of the different understanding of men). 


46. All these believers look to their desired objects, as manifest to their 
view in the vacuous space of their intellects, and by viewing the whole world 
in themselves, they remain undecayed at all times. 


47. All visibles and all laws and prohibitions, together with all desires and 
designs of men; are confined with their knowledge of them in themselves. 
Hence those that are true to their faiths, and firm in the observance of their 
duties and performance of their acts, are verily of the nature of the divine soul, 
by their viewing all nature in themselves. 


48. This very doctrine was inculcated to before, when you had been a pupil 
under my preceptorship; but as you could not fully comprehend it then, you 
are doomed to another birth, to learn it again from me. (Vasishtha means to 
say that he is immortal, though Rama may have his transmigration in many 
incarnations). 


49. The world representing the longsome dark and dreary winter night, 
presents the pure light of knowledge, shining with the serene and cooling 
beams of the autumnal lunar disk; now, O Rama! as you are edified by your 
pure intelligence, shake off the dross of dull ignorance from you, and continue 
in the discharge of your duties, as they have lineally descended to you and to 
your royal race. 


50. Do you remain released from your attachment, to all things of this 
temporal world; and relying solely in the One supreme and universal soul, 
whose pure nature is perceptible throughout all nature; then be as lucid as the 
pellucid sky, with the peace of your mind and transport of your soul, and learn 
to rule your realm with justice and equity. 


CHAPTER CCXIV. 
Description of the great jubilee of the assembly. 


Argument: — Demonstration of the exceeding exultation of the audience at 
the close of the long-winded lengthy lecture. 


Valmiki related: — As the sage had finished saying these things, or so far, 
the celestials sounded their trumpets from heaven, as the clouds resounded in 
the rainy skies, with showers of nectarious rain drops (on the earth below). 
The face of the sky was whitened on all sides, as by drifts of snowfalls in 
hoary winter, and the surface of the earth was covered by rain drops, dropping 
like showers of flowers. (The sound of celestial trumpets, is ever accompanied 
with or followed by a shower of refreshing rain). 


2. The earth appeared to be blessed with prosperity in the beauty of the 
flowers, stretching their pistils and peduncles like beauties in their evening 
decorations, and sending afar the fragrance of their farinacious dust, like the 
perfumery on the persons of fairies, their outer garniture and inner cool 
sweetness are verily the gifts of the gods. 


3. The falling flowers of heavenly arbors, dropped down from their dried 
boughs, by the rampant and apish hurricane of heaven, are now vying with the 
glittering stars, scattered all over the face of the firmament, and deriding at 
their grim laughter with their bashful and blushing smiles. 


4. The lowering clouds accompanied with sounds of trumpets, and 
drizzling rain drops and falling of flowers, (which bore resemblance to one 
another); next lighted upon the court hall, like the shadowy snow fall on 
Himalaya’s head, and filled the assembly with wonder, and gaping mouths 
and staring eyes. 


5. The assembly seated in their order, took hold of handfuls of these 


heavenly flowers; and poured them upon Vasishtha with their obeisance, and 
cast away all their earthly cares and woes with those celestial offerings to the 
sage. (Every offering confers and recurs, with an equivalent blessing to the 
offerer). 


6. The King Dasaratha said: — O wonder! that we are so lightly released of 
our cares and woes, in this wide extended vale of miseries of the world; and 
that our souls are now lightened of their throws by your grace, like the heavy 
clouds lightened of their weight, and floating lightly at last on Himalayas. 


7. We have reached to the goal of our acts, and seen the end of our miseries 
of this life; we have fully known the knowable One (that is only to be known), 
and have found our entire rest in that supreme state (by your good grace 
alone). 


8. We have known to rest in the ultimate void in our meditation, and to get 
rid of our erroneous thoughts of bodies, by means of our intense application to 
the abstract (or Platonic abstraction). 


9. It is by our riddance from the coinage and vagaries of our imagination, 
and by our escape from the feverish fervour for the sights of the dreaming 
world; as also by our ceasing to mistake the shells and cockles for silver, and 
by our deliverance from misdeeming ourselves as dead either in our sleep or 
dream, (that we may be enabled to the true knowledge of ourselves, etc.). 


10. It is by our knowledge of the identity of the wind and its oscillation, 
and of the sameness of the water with its fluidity; as also by our distrust in this 
talismanic world, and in this fairy land of our fancy (that we can attain to the 
knowledge of truth, efc.). 


11. It must be by our discredit in the magical scenes of this world, and in 
the aerial castles of fairies; as also by our mistrust in the limpid currents of the 
mirage, and in the aerial groves and double moons of heaven (that we can 
come to know the truth). 


12. It is no earthquake, if our tottering foot steps should shake and slip in 
our drunkenness; nor can we view a ghost in a shadow as boys do, nor see the 
braids of hair hanging down from the clouds in heaven. 


13. From these and other instances, which you have given for our 
instruction; you have Sir, at once effaced our credit in the visible sights of this 
world. 


14. Rama added: — My ignorance is dispelled, and I have come to the 
knowledge of truth by your good grace; and O thou chief of sages, I 
acknowledge thee to have brought me to light from my impervious darkness. 


15. I am freed from my doubts, and set to the light of the true nature of 
God; and I will now act as thou sayst, in acknowledging the transpicuous truth 
(or viewing God as manifest in nature, and not as hidden under her veil). 


16. Remembering and reconsidering thy words, that are so fraught with 
ambrosial sweetness and full of delightsome taste; I am filled with fresh 
delight, though already satisfied and refreshed by their sense. (i.e., the more I 
think of them, the happier I seem to feel myself). 


17. I have nothing to do for myself at present, nor is there any left undone 
or remaining to be done by me. I am as I am and have ever been, and always 
without any craving for me. (This state of self-satisfaction and _ self- 
sufficiency, is the highest bliss for man). 


18. What other way to our true felicity can there be, than this that has been 
shown by thee? or else I find this wide-extended field of the earth, to be so full 
of our woe and misery. 


19. I have no foe to annoy me nor a friend to give any joy to me; I have no 
field to work in, nor an enemy to fear nor a good soul to rely in. It is our 
misunderstanding that makes this world appear so troublesome to ourselves, 
while our good sense makes it all agreeable to us. (If the world will not suit 
thee, suit thyself to it). 


20. How could we know all this (for our happiness) without thy good grace 
unto us; as it is never possible for a boy, to ford and cross over a river, 
without the assistance of a boat or bridge. 


21. Lakshmana said: — It is by reason of your removing the doubts, that 
had been inherent in and inherited by me in my repeated births; and it is by 
virtue of the merit, that I had acquired in my former births; that I have come 
to know the truth this day, by the divine sermon of the holy sage; and to feel 
the radiance of a holy light in me, shining as brightly as the cooling beams of 
moonlight. 


22. It is strange that in disregard of this heavenly bright and vivid light, that 
men should be entangled in a thousand errors, and be burnt at last as dried 
wood or fuel, by their foul mistake and great misfortune. 


23. Viswamitra said: — O! it is by our great merit, that we have come this 
day, to hear this holy lecture from the mouth of the sage; and which has at 
once expurgated our inner souls, as a thousand lavations in the clear stream of 
Ganges. 


24. Rama rejoined: — We have seen the highest pitch of all prosperity, and 
the best of all that is to be seen; we have known the end of all learning, and 
the last extremity of adversity; we have seen many countries and heard many 
speeches; but never have we heard, nor seen nor known anything better than 
the discourse on the beauty of the soul, which the sage has shown to us today. 


25. Narada added: — Our ears are purified today, by the hearing of what 
we have never heard heretofore; to be preached by Brahma or the gods above 
or men below. 


26. Lakshmana rejoined: — Sir, you have entirely dissipated all our inner 
and outer darkness also; and have shewn us the transcendent light, of the 
bright sun of the Divine soul. 


27. Satrughna said: — I am satisfied and tranquilized, and uncomposed in 
the supreme soul; I am forever full and perfect in myself, and sit quite content 
with my soliety. 


28. Dasaratha repeated: — It is by the merit of our deeds, done and 
acquired in our repeated lives, that we have been, O thou chief of sages, 
sanctified this day by thy sacred and sanctifying speech. 


29. Valmiki related: — As the king and his courtiers, were speaking in this 
manner, the sage opened his mouth again, and thus bespoke his words fraught 
with pure and purifying knowledge. 


30. Vasishtha said: — Hear me, O thou moon-like king of Raghu’s race, 
and do as I bid you to do; Rise now and honour the assembled Brahmans, who 
deserve their due honour at the close of a discourse. 


31. Rise therefore, and satisfy their desires with thy ample gifts; and thou 
will obtain thereby, the merit that attends on the learning of the vedas, and 
doing thy duties according to their dictates. 


32. It is incumbent on even a mean worm-like man, to honor the Brahmans 
to their utmost at the termination of a sermon on salvation; how much more 
important must it then be on the part of a monarch to acquit himself of this 


necessary duty. 


33. Hearing this behest of the sage, the king held his reverential silence; 
and beckoned to his heralds to proceed to all the ten sides of his dominions, 
and invite thousands of Brahmans, that are acquainted with the vedas 
forthwith (to the royal court). 


34. He bade them to go to Mathura, Surashtra and Gauda, and to bring with 
them with due respect all the Brahmans, that are born of Vedic families, and 
are abiding in those districts and lands. 


35. There then assembled more than ten thousands of Brahmans to the 
royal palace, and the king fed them all alike and paying particular regard to 
the more learned among them. 


36. He treated them with the best sorts of food and rice, honoured them 
with their honorariums, and gave them a good many gifts; and after honouring 
them in this manner, he offered his oblations to the manes of his ancestors, 
and gave his offerings to the tutelar gods of his house. (A Brahman has his 
precedence in a feast to the gods and patres; but the merit of giving a feast is 
lost unless it is followed by other gifts). 


37. The king next treated his friends and relatives with proper repast, and 
then fed his companions and servants and the citizens all on the same day. His 
attention was at last directed to the feeding of the poor and needy, and of the 
lame and blind and lunatics. 


38. Having discharged to his utmost the duties of the festival, he 
commanded a great festivity to be held in his hall, all over decorated with silk 
and embroidery, and with gold, gems and pearls. 


39. The city then being adorned and lighted, like the ever-bright mount of 
Meru, there went on a merry dance and ball of giddy girls and players in every 
house (as a sign of general joy). 


40. There was a ringing of bells and sounding of cymbols all about, with 
the beating of drums and trimbrels at every door; flutes and wind instruments 
were blowing on every side, and guitars and wired instruments were playing 
with loud gingling, and vying with each other. 


41. The markets were closed, and the marketers stopped in their course; the 
air appeared as an arbour of plants, shaking with the uplifted and quavering 


and waving arms of the merry dancers in the streets; and it seemed as the 
starry heaven, by the glittering light of the teeth of strolling players, displayed 
in their comic dance and loud laughter. 


42. There was the heroic dance attended by the loud shouts of the players, 
and melodramas accompanied with the soft and sweet strains of the 
performers, there was also a staggering and strutting dance on one foot and 
leg, and thumping the ground with the other. 


43. Here they flung wreaths of flowers glittering like stars and falling down 
in showers; and there the scattered flowers, which were strewn over the 
ground as rain drops, were indiscriminately trodding down under the feet of 
passersby. 


44. Here the actresses dance about with their loose ornaments and gestures 
of love; and there the bards chanted their hymns with clearness, as the 
Brahmans recited them and the songstresses sang. 


45. Here the sots and topers drank their fill of wine; and the food mongers 
fed upon their eatables of various kinds. (i.e., some were seen to be indulging 
their drink and others in their eating). 


46. The insides of houses were daubed with wine, as the outer bodies of the 
princes with ointment of moon light hue. 


47. The attendent servants and waiting maids on the king, sauntered about 
trimmed in gaudy attires of various colours; and graced the royal festival with 
their decorations of necklaces and sweet perfumes on their persons. 


48. The sprightly ballet girls, being besmeared with a paste of all 
perfumeries (called the Yaksha dust), and decorated with glittering ornaments, 
repaired to the ball at the royal hall with all alacrity. 


49. Thus the king Dasaratha held his entertainment for a whole week, and 
passed full seven nights in festive mirth and rejoicing; while he distributed his 
gifts and food for as many days, which redounded to exhaustless prosperity on 
earth. 


CHAPTER CCXV. 
Eulogy on this work and the mode of its recital. 


Argument: — Valmiki speaks in praise of this work to this pupil 
Bharadwaja, and blesses him to be as blessed as the divine Rama with the 
hearing of it. 


Valmiki said: — O most intelligent Bharadwaja, and the chief of my 
pupils, you have now heard how the great Rama and others, came to the 
knowledge of the knowable One (that is only to be known), and passed across 
this vale of misery and sorrow, by their attention to these lectures. 


2. Do you thus fix your sight to the light of Brahma, and conduct yourself 
gladly, by abandoning all your affections and cares of this world, and by 
remaining dauntless with your living liberation and tranquility of mind. 


3. Know, O thou sinless one, that the learned and the meek, that do not mix 
with the society of worldly men, but remain steady as Rama and others in 
their right principles, are never liable to be deluded although they are beset by 
temptations on all sides. 


4. Thus these men of great natures, as the king Dasaratha and the prince 
Rama and his brothers, together with companions, have attended to the state 
of the living liberated (even in their lifetime). 


5. Thou my son Bharadwaja! that art naturally of a liberal mind, hast now 
become more liberated at present, by thy hearing of these sermons on the 
salvation of our souls. 


6. It is possible even for boys to obtain their liberation, by their attention to 
those holy lectures, as the most evident and surest means to salvation; and 
cannot therefore, fail to convince thee of the truth thereof. 


7. As the high-minded and sinless and sorrowless sons of Raghu’s race, 
have attained to their holy state of perfection and self-liberation; so do thou 
also obtain that best and highest state, by your attending to the lectures of the 
divine sage Vasishtha. 


8. It is by advice of the good and service under the great, as also by means 
of humble inquiries to and explications of the learned; that weak men of good 
understandings, can know the knowable, as the Raghavas and others did under 
Vasishtha. 


9. The ties of avarice and affection that have fast bound the hearts of the 
ignorant (to this world); do all tend to debar them like playful boys from 
inquiring into the means of their liberation, until they become too old to 
benefit by their knowledge. 


10. Those that can discern the minds of high-minded men, can only come 
to their knowledge of truth; and such men only have no more to return to this 
world of woe; and this is the substance of all that I can speak to thee. (i.e., 
know and have the minds of the great, in order to become as great thyself, so 
says Gay in his Fables. (Hast thou fathomed Tully’s mind, and the vast sense 
of Plato’s head)). 


11. Having first received your instruction from the preceptor, you must 
weigh well and digest its meaning in yourself; and then communicate its 
sense, to the most sensible and intelligent student. This is said by sages and 
saints, as the trivium of science; know this and you need no more, to become 
wise when your boyhood is over. 


12. Whoso will read this book, not without understanding its sense and 
whoever will manuscript it without the expectation of getting its fee; as also 
anybody who will recite or cause it to be recited (to a public audience), either 
with or without any desire of reward, shall have his ample recompense in the 
land of Aryas, (both in his present and future lives). (So it is with the public 
preaching of its doctrine). 


13. These men receive the reward, awaiting on the performance of the 
Rajastiya sacrifice, and are entitled to their heavenly seats in their pure 
essence; as often as they ascend to it after their demise on earth, and until they 
attain their final liberation, which attains on them as prosperity does on the 
meritorious (after the third transmigration of their expurged souls). 


14. It was at first that the god Brahma of unknowable form, had composed 


this work in his excellent diction; and then considering it as the only means to 
the liberation of mankind, had revealed it to the assemblage of saints (of 
which Vasishtha or Valmiki has made this version). Let nobody therefore, 
take the truthfulness of this saying for an untruth. 


15. At the close of the recital of these lectures, on the means of human 
salvation, it becomes every sensible man of good sense, to honour the 
Brahmans with diligence; and to serve them with their desirable gifts of food 
and drink, and furnish them with goodly houses for their lodging. 


16. They should also be rewarded with their honorariums, and supplied 
with monies to their hearts’ desire, and to the utmost capacity of the donor; 
and then the giver or master of the ceremony should rest himself assured, of 
having acquitted his duty to and reaped its merit to the intent of the Sdstras. 


17. I have thus rehearsed to you the great Sdstra, in elucidation of divine 
knowledge and its pure truth; with addition of a great many tales and stories, 
serving as example and illustrations of the abstruse doctrines for your clear 
understanding of them. May your hearing of these, serve to lead you to your 
utter indifference of this world, and to the desire of your liberation in it, while 
you are alive herein. May this tend also to your continued prosperity, in order 
to engage your attention towards the perfection of your knowledge and 
devotion, and to the discharge of the duties of your station without failing. 


CHAPTER CCXVI. 
Conclusion of the celestial messenger’s message of 
liberation. 


Argument: — Acknowledgment of the obligation of Arishtanemi and 
others, to their preceptors and preachers. 


Valmiki continued to say: — I have thus related to you, O prince, whatever 
the pot-born Vasishtha had taught and preached to the princes; and it is certain 
that you will attain the same elevated state, as they did by the hearing of these 
lectures on sacred knowledge. 


2. The Prince Arishtanemi replied: — O Venerable Sir, your kind look is 
enough to extricate us from bondage in this world; and it is hence that I am 
not only brought to light, but saved from the ocean of this world by your 
favour. 


3. The Heavenly Messenger said: — After saying so, the said prince 
seemed to look amazed in his look; and then he began to speak these words to 
me with a graceful voice. 


4. The Prince said: — I bow down to thee, O Messenger divine, and wish 
all safety to attend on thee; it is said that the friendship of the good is attended 
with seven benefits, all which hast thou conferred upon me. 


5. Now return in safety to your seat in the heaven of Indra, and well know 
that, 1am both gladdened as well as grown insouciant of worldly concerns, by 
hearing this discourse of thine. 


6. I shall continue to remain here forever more, and without feeling any 
anxiety, to think well and ponder deeply into the sense of all that I have heard 
from thee. Now I tell thee, O Lady! that I was quite surprised (to see so much 


civility on the part of a prince). 


7. He said: — I have never heard before, such words and fraught with so 
much knowledge, as I have come now to hear from thee; It has filled my 
inward spirit with as much joy, as if I have drunk my fill of an ambrosial 
draught just now. 


8. I then repaired to thee, O thou sinless fairy, at the bidding of Valmiki; in 
order to relate unto thee all that thou hast asked of me. And now I shall bend 
my course, towards the celestial city of Sakra. 


9. The fairy said: — I must thank thee now, O thou very fortunate emissary 
of the gods! for all that thou hast related to me; and my knowledge whereof, 
has entirely composed my spirit, by its benign influence. 


10. I am now quite satisfied in myself, and will ever remain from sorrow 
and all the sickening cares of life; and you may now to your destination at 
Indras, with all speed attending on your journey thither. 


11. So saying, Suruchi, — the best of fairies, continued to keep her seat on 
the slope of the Himalayas, and contiguous to the Gandhamadana mount of 
fragrance, and reflect on the sense of what she had heard (of divine 
knowledge). 


12. Now as you have fully heard, my son, all the precepts of Vasishtha, you 
are at liberty to do as you like, by your weighing well their purport. (For the 
effecting of your liberation which is the main object of man, both in this life 
as well as in the next). 


13. Karunya said: — The remembrance of the past, the sight of the present, 
and the talk of future events, together with the existence of the world; are all 
as false as the sights in our dreams or of water in mirage, or as the birth of a 
boy of a barren woman. 


14. I gain nothing from my deeds, nor lose aught by what is left undone; I 
live to do as it happens, or at the impulse of the occasion and without any 
assiduity on my part. 


15. Agasti said: — Karunya, — The worthy son of Agnibesya, said in the 
aforesaid manner, and continued to pass his time in the discharge of his 
duties, as they occured to him from time to time. 


16. And you, O Sutikshana! should never entertain any doubts regarding 
the acts, that you shall have to perform after your attainment of divine 
knowledge, (lest they entail their retribution on you afterwards). Because 
dubitation destroys the virtue of the deed, as selfishness takes away its merit. 


17. Upon hearing this speech of the sage, which reconciles the duplicity of 
action and reflection, into the unity of their combination; he bowed to his 
preceptor and uttered as follows with due submission to him. 


18. Sutikshana said: — Any action done in ignorance of the actor, is 
reckoned as no act of his, unless it is done in his full knowledge to be taken 
into account. (So the brute activities of the giddy mob, bear no value or blame 
in them before the wise). But actions done with reason and reasonable men, 
are invaluable in their nature. All our acts are best seen by the light of the 
intellect as the actions of stage-players are seen only in the candle light. (So 
are all our mental and corporeal acts, actuated by the essence of the great soul 
in us). 


19. It is the presence of the supreme soul in us, that the action of our hearts, 
directs the motions of our bodies; as it is the malleability of gold, that moulds 
it to the many forms of jewelleries. (Hence, we should never reject the one for 
the other). 


20. As it is the great body of waters, that gives rise to the boisterous waves, 
as well as the little playful billows, that heave and move in our sight; so it is 
the inbeing of the great soul, that fills all the great and small alike. 


21. I submit to and bear with all that befalls to me, because there is no 
escape from destiny, nor slighting of the sound sayings of sages; and I 
acknowledge O Venerable Sir, to owe my knowledge of the knowable One to 
thy good grace only. 


22. I own myself to be quite felicitous to thy favour, and bow down 
prostrate to thee on the ground, for thy lifting me up from the doleful pit of 
the world; because there is no other way to repay my gratitude to my 
venerable preceptor. 


23. Nay, there is no other act, whereby one may give expression to his 
obligation to his tutor, for his salvation in this world, save by means of 
offering himself to his services; with his whole body and mind and the words 
of his mouth. 


24. It is by thy good grace, O my good Sir, that I have passed over the 
Rubicon of this world; I am filled with infinite joy amidst all these worlds, and 
am set free from all my doubts. 


25. I bow down to that Brahma, who is sung in the SAama-veda, as filling all 
this universe, as the waters of the ocean fill the boundless deep; and whose 
remembrance fills our soul with ecstasy. 


26. I bow down also to the sage Vasishtha, who is of the form of incarnate 
knowledge alone, and who is immerged in the joyous bliss of divine felicity; 
who is beyond all duality and sees the only One in the unity of infinite 
vacuity. Who is ever alike the pure and immaculate One, and witnesseth the 
inmost of all minds; who is beyond all states and conditions (of so and so or 
of such and such); and who is quite devoid of the three qualities (which 
belong to all bodies), i.e., There is no known quality or property that can be 
predicated to the Deity. The qualities of the unknown One, as unknown, 
peculiar and unique as own nature. 


27. Here ends the Maharamayana of the sage Vasishtha, with its 
continuation by his recorder Valmiki, and the speech of the celestial 
messenger at the latter end of the Book on Nirvana or the ultimate Extinction 
of the living soul. 


FINIS. 


