Translation   of   PARATRISIKA   VIVARANA



          by JAIDEVA      SINGH
PARATRISIKA-VIVARANA
SUNY Series in Tantric Studies
Paul Muller-Ortega, EDITOR
              ABHINAVAGUPTA


       A Trident of Wisdom


Translation of PARATRISIKA-VIVARANA
            by Jaideva Singh




              Foreword by
      PAUL MULLER-ORTEGA




     State University of New York Press
Published by
State University of New York Press, Albany
©1989    State University of New York
All rights reserved

Printed in the United States of America
No part of this book may be used or reproduced
in any manner whatsoever without written permission
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews.

For information, address State University of New York
Press, State University Plaza, Albany, NY 12246
Library of Congress Cataloging-in Publication Data
Abhinavagupta, Rajanaka.
     [Paratrimsikavivrti. English]
     A tident of wisdom / Abhinavagupta ; translation of Paratrisika
  -vivarana by Jaideva Singh ; with a foreword by Paul Muller-Onrtega.
         p. cm. — (SUNY series in tantric studies)
     Translation of: Paratrimsikavivrti.
     Bibliography: p.
     Includes index.
     ISBN 0-7914-0180-4. — ISBN 0-7914-0181-2      (pbk.)
      1. Tantras. Rudrayamalatantra.     Paratrisika—Commentaries—Early
  works to 1800. 2. Kashmir Saivism—Doctrines—Early works to 1800.
  I. Singh, Jaideva, II. Title. III. Series.
  BL1142.6.R846A2413       1989

 294.5'95—dce19                                                           89-4425
10987654321                                                                 CIP
                             CONTENTS


      Foreword by Paul Muller Ortega ....-.-++++eeseer    eres ix
      List of Abbreviati ons 1.6    .ee eee
                                       .0.  eee e rete
                                                   ..  eens   Xxi

 Part I : Paratrisika-Vivarana of Abhinavagupta:
          Translation with Notes
         Preliminaries (Benedictory Verses 1-5)         ......+++++++             1
   Verse 1 of Paratrisika                                             BAr ice    ee)
         Commentary ....5.00es+eee      225s                                     7
           Different  implication s of the word Devi ......-.+-                 10
           The rationale of the past tense in ‘said’
               (UUGCA) cra Omae Seas Vans eee Se PO PORON® FOETE S              1]
               The Final Resting Place of all questions
                                                      s
                                            wens eevernene
               ANA ANSWETS. vee eee sce aeaseeen                                14
               Sixteen interpretations of anultara     ....-6+6++eees           20
               Interpretation of kaulika-siddhidam     ......+++0++++           31
          Exposition on Verse | and Commentary ..-.--.-+++ 47
    Etad guhyam mahaguhyam...Text and
          Commentary .......6                       e arene nesens 53
                                    eee e eee e ere0cee
    Verse Os     Sc pavnnd cab sites sence mamas   sieiaesule re mnes Fa 7S
      Commentary
    Verses 3 and 4
       Commentary
    Verses 5 to 9a...      . cece ee eevee
       Commentary
    Verses 9 to 18b
       Commentary...
    Verse 19) cs siccees
       Commentary
    Verse20 2 cceerusvacccaee            ces         ao         E
       Commentary .... 6. e eee ee eee e nee e ence    en eenenres“939
    Verse 21
       Commentary... .. 0. cece cece eee n econ eee eeeeenenences 240




ae ae
                                                             Para-Trisika-Vivarana


  NMGree OP a t, aca: gtk alae afeserb'g eis arava ease elena wre sterere ois ase 241
     Commentary
  WETSOILS. daca dsusias waa ccbe owns enemas eee Hepes
     Commentary                                                                         |
  Werse! Dain    i tasoo etrenties tinteis cite ne the einineas es aac silane
     Commentary
  Verses 25 to 26
     Commentary
  VEIse- 27 bak snieandeac           neie
                      ed wee dee aGoksanaan op aenee
  Verse OG: an ran aevarivenunasi       mies eemaeenesare@   sae  seebdRt
  NETS’ D5) pga decade baasnen                   wonvine
                                              Melee a beet alee {soos 54
  Verse B00 ai ciate ales asi Santa nae Seevecee Haase es tig Fe pele
  Verses 31 to 33
     COMMENEATY «5 60.04 cies os oo tials ois Fee TE oe ae come hang 251
  Verse 34
  Verse 35
     COMMENEATY. ...-oe ceeds oe seen anne see sees ese views 262
  VETS SG cn cs.ciG va dc aaldy sre bin delete de ese aiedige fs SamearE 268
     Commentary...       600s cece eres cece renee rere erececnee 268
   VERSE ST. chiara coweset tide            wacs cree Romels iaias ec einnine 269
         ComMENtary......ceeceeecenccesesesenseeasesacces 269
   Autobiographical Verses of Abhinavagupta..........+-+-- 270
   General NGSX. 4 Valens, vin tenes Ssdiaiie UraaueG eamree rake)

Part II : Paratrisika-Vivarana : Sanskrit Text                           9-4ek
   List of Additions & Corrections (Sanskrit
   PERC) Goa, sh bed cans elsisajsl deren vinsies salem saces.e, Sivas scar qos
   Index of Half- Verses of Paratrisika ...........0ee0e              eee 4919
   Index of Quotations ....... 6c ece cence cree eee                   ee en eens qe

    List oF CHARTS
   1.     The various anda or ellipses contained in anuttara ...103
   2A.     The identity of the original source (bimba) and
           its reflection (pratibimba) ....6..cccee  cece eee eees 106
   2B.     The transposition of the tattvas (categories of
           existence) in reflection (pratibimba)           ......006+eeenes 107
           The arrangement of letters according to Matrka
  oe




           in parasamvitti in sarvagrarupata 1.60.6.
                                                e reer eee ee 13:
                                                                          vii
Contents

                                             g to Matrka in
   4.        Arrangement of letters accordin
                                                 d ...++++se06+ sande
             parparasamvitti in sarvamadhyaripat
                                                   representa-
   5,        Letters of Malini together with their
                                            consciousness or
             tion with reference to supreme                               138
                                                       Sea ERA cee
             parasamvilli....eeeeeeer ees vine
                                                   s)—
   6.         Parasamvitti (supreme consciousnes
                                  eeer reer eecr rere ees walslen/arehtas 143
             SArvagrarUpaa ..ss
                                                   -non-supreme
    i        In parapara-samvittisupreme-cum
                                             a in the order of
             consciousness, sarvamadhyarupat
                                        +--e     ete Sanene ewer 145
                                              eers
             Matrka-letters ....-+sree                                           {
                                               to Matrka in
        8.   Arrangement of letters according                             es)
                                                     - aeerees? ey
              paraparasamvitti sarvantya-rupata...+
                                                 ka in pasyanti or
        9.    Malini in apara samwvitti and Matr                           Gil
                                                   cesses            ee
              parapara samvitli .... sees eee e re
                                                trident and
    10.       The outline of the Mandala of the
                                                       eters stress 237
              lotuses (tristlabjamandala) .....+++eree
                                  FOREWORD

   It is quite fiting that the inaugural volume in the State
University of New York Press series on Tantric Studies should be
this book. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to state that the present
translation of Abhinavagupta’s Paratrimsika-vivarana (PTv) repre-
sents both a landmark and a new staging point for the investi-
gation of the Hindu Tantra. This translation of the PTv brings to
light a treasure-laden           text such as the romantic imagination                       of
visionaries         and   scholars      have      sought     in       India   for centuries.
Composed           as one of the first major works of Abhinavagupta (ca.
975-1025 CE), preceded perhaps only by the Malini-vijaya-vartika
(MVv),        it is written    in the difficult but elegant style of the great
tantric Saiva master of Kashmir. In this text Abhinavagupta
addresses himself to advanced disciples as well as to those who
have already achieved liberation.
     After the demise of the Trika as a lineage in Kashmir in the
late thirteenth century, due in large measure                            to the invasion of
Islam, a few rare manuscripts of this important and complex text
miraculously survived, copied and recopied by scribes who prob-
ably     little    understood         it. Then,     almost        a   millenium      after   its
composition, it emerged in 1918 as one of the early publications
of the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies. Now, some seventy
years after the publication of the Sanskrit text, the PTv is made
available to the larger public, It is indeed curious and significant
that three translations of this text should be published indepen-
dently within several years of each other, the present one into
English, one by Raniero Gnoli                     into Italian in 1985, and one by
Nilakantha Guru into Hindi.
     The present translation by Thakur Jaideva Singh represents
the culmination of a life-work dedicated to making available the
central texts of the non-dual Kashmir Shaiva traditions. Already
in     1963       Singh   published       a translation           with     notes   and   com-
mentary of Ksemaraja’s Pratyabhijnahrdayam,                            followed in 1979 by
an annotated rendering of the Vijnanabhairava, also in 1979 the
Siva-siitra-s, and        in   1980    the Spanda-karika-s.              Indeed,   one   could

                                                                                               ix
x                                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana


say that the current vogue and apparent popularity of Kashmir
Shaivism is due in large measure to these publications which
have made the foundational texts of the tradition available to a
wider public.
   Nevertheless, in undertaking a translation of the PTv, Singh
took on a task of considerably greater magnitude and difficulty
than these previous publications. Not only was he attempting a
work by Abhinavagupta, an author whose Sanskrit is conceded to
be very difficult, but he was taking on what many scholars agree
    is perhaps his most complex and difficult work. The PTv is the
    repository of some of the most advanced and abstruse formula-
    tions of the non-dual Shaivism of Kashmir.
       It is indeed a pity that Singh did not live to see this final work
    published, because he succeeded quite remarkably in the task he
    undertook. In this book, Singh presents us with a readable and
    lively rendition of the text. Aided by Swami Laksmanjee, who is
    the only living, modern representative of the tradition, Singh
    comments liberally on the meaning of the text in very helpful
    notes and expositions. In addition, he has illustrated complex
    doctrinal schemes with the help of ten charts. The book includes
    a corrected version of the Sanskrit text as well as several useful
    indices. Clearly, Singh went to great                    lengths      to facilitate     the
    reader's understanding of the text.
          As this and other tantric texts of the tradition become available
    for     scholarly    investigation,        a crucial     chapter     in    the    religious
    history of India is slowly being recaptured, one that is pre-
    cipitating a new understanding of the development of the Tantra.
    In the person of Abhinavagupta we find one of the earliest and
    most articulate figures in the synthesis of the Hindu Tantra. He
    is usually counted as being the most illustrious representative of
    the tradition rather imprecisely referred to as ‘Kashmir Shaivism’.
    This      misleading        term   refers      to   several   related       lineages      of
    Northern Shaiva masters which include Vasugupta (ca. 9th cent.)
    transmitter of the foundational text known as the Siva-sutra-s; his
    disciple     Kallata,      to whom     are     usually    attributed      the     important
    Spanda-karika-s; Somananda,                  also ninth century, author of the
    influential         text   known      as     the    Siva-drsti,     and     his    disciple
    Utpalacarya, author of what has come to be recognized as the
    foundational text for the philosophical explication of the tradi-
Foreword                                                                                xi


tion, the [svara-pratyabhijna-karika-s.
  In addition      to these    important      intellectual       and     spiritual    for-
bears, the tradition which Abhinavagupta inherits and comes
eventually to synthesize includes powerful influences from a
large number of celebrated agama-s and tantra-s. Abhinavagupta
studied    these   revealed    texts   with   several        teachers,      and    finally
achieved liberation under the guidance of a Kaula master from
outside of Kashmir      known      as Sambhunatha.             Certainly, all subse-
quent Saivite and Sakta authors, including those of the important
Srividya lineage, were profoundly influenced by Abhinavagupta’s
early and precise formulations.
   It is a curious fact that, given Abhinavagupta’s importance in
the   development     of the    Hindu      Tantra,      he    has   until    now     been
better known as an aesthetic theoretician or even as a Saiva
philosopher. This has been due in large measure to the unavail-
ability of translations of his tantric texts, and of suitable inter-
preters of the teachings he sets forth in them. By bringing to
light Abhinavagupta’s tantric teachings which contain his central
religious and spiritual vision, this translation of the PTv serves an
important purpose. Here Abhinavagupta expounds the esoteric,
inner teachings of the Trika-Kaula lineage, teachings whose
entire purpose was the enlightenment and liberation of disciples.
   In the commentary to verse I (p. 18, below), Abhinavagupta
declares that the purpose (prayojana) of the PTv is jivanmukti, the
achievement of liberation while still alive. Abhinavagupta tells us
that the primary characteristic or power of Siva is his freedom
 (svatantrya). In his freedom, Siva mediates and transcends all
 opposites and polarities. Through the practice of absorptive
 mediation (samavesa), the practitioner finally achieves the highest
 spiritual posture which consists of the extrovertive or open-eyed
 trance (unmilana-samadhi). Here the jivanmukta achieves the
 freedom of Siva as the experience of unified perception (ekarasa),
 the blissful and unitary vision of the all-pervasiveness of the
 Ultimate, For the thus liberated one, all of the usually con-
 straining polarities—inner and outer, life and death, pure and
 impure, good and evil—no longer hold. In the direct perception
 (anubhava) of the Supreme in the Heart, the sadhaka or practi-
 tioner becomes a siddha, a perfected one who wields the power
 of the Embodied Cosmos, the kauliki-siddhi.
                                                          Para-Trisika-Vivarana


  In the same passage, Abhinavagupta tells us that the subject
matter (abhidheya) of the PTv is the Supreme Power, the blissfully
self-referential Self, the AHAM, the unimpeded and totally free
consciousness of Siva. Consonant with this emphasis on the
Supreme     consciousness       is Abhinavagupta’s      focus on interioriza-
tion, and on the interpretation of all ritual actions in terms of
inner    transformations       of consciousness.     Indeed,   the keynote      of
the PT», as of the entire non-dual Kashmir Shaiva tradition, is
the freedom of this highest consciousness.
   Despite the differences of emphasis that characterize the other
tantric texts of Abhinavagupta, the PTv forms an almost seamless
thematic web with them. These               include the monumental            Tan-
traloka (TA); its shorter summary, the Tantrasara (TS); the shorter
commentary on the Paratrimsika, the Paratrisika-laghuvrtti (PTlv);
and the incomplete comment                 on the Malinivijayottara     Tantra
(MVT),     the Malini-vijaya-vartika.       In these texts, Abhinavagupta
poured out the most potent distillation of his teachings on the
Tantra. With enormous skill and dexterity, he applied his genius
for language to the task of conveying the nature of the Ultimate,
the character of liberation, and the variety of the methods              for the
achievement of freedom. By means of the present translation, we
are afforded the rare luxury of access to these powerful teach-
ings. As we peer through the delicate lattice-work of this tenth-
century Sanskrit text, we catch a glimpse of the marvelous and
exotic world of the Kashmiri Shaiva Tantra. We can imagine the
tantric guru saturated by the blissful nectar of the inherent unity
of all conscious experiences patiently teaching his disciples the
 secrets and intricacies of the Tantra.
     In the secret Heart of reality, Siva continuously explicates him-
 self, His rumbling vibratory monologue to himself unfolds to
become      the   delightful    and    enlightening     dialogue   of Bhairava
 and the Devi, the Goddess. As the Supreme consciousness self-
 referentially    doubles      back   on   itself (vimarsa),   it generates     the
 power of the Embodied Cosmos, the hauliki-Sakti, which is the
 continuous urge towards liberation and freedom that surges
 perpetually at the core of reality. For the non-dual Kashmir
 Shaiva tradition, this text, the Paratrimsika, along with Abhinava-
 gupta’s vivarana on these ancient agamic verses, represent one
 of the highest available transcriptions of this dialogue. Thus, the
Foreword                                                                                               xiii


publication of Singh’s translation of the PTv may be seen not just
as a scholarly event, but as a moment of great importance in the
understanding of these ancient wisdoms of India.
   We might perhaps characterize the present translation by
Jaideva    Singh,       inspired and         aided by Swami                  Laksmanjee,            as a
translation from the tradition itself. It may therefore be con-
trasted to Gnoli’s translation into Italian which could be termed a
translation from Indological scholarship. Despite the understand-
able differences of style inherent in these two stances, both trans-
lations are based on a meticulous reading and correction of the
published Sanskrit text. For, just as Gnoli presents us with a
critical   reading        of the     Sanskrit           text,   so    too    Singh        has    taken
considerable care to emend and correct the corrupt published
edition of the work, and he gives us the fruit of his text-critical
labors as part of the present book. It will be the occupation of
future scholars to compare the independent work of textual
 reconstruction of these two authors. (I omit mention here of the
 Guruti translation into Hindi only because I have not yet seen
 it.)
      It is beyond the scope of the present brief foreword to attempt
 a thematic introduction to the text. (In this regard I might
 immodestly refer the reader to my own translation and interpre-
 tation of the PTlv recently published as The Triadic Heart of Siva
 (SUNY     1988), as well as to the other important volumes of the
 SUNY Shaiva Traditions of Kashmir Series.) The PTv takes up
 many of the themes dear to the tantric Shaivite master: the
 nature    of    consciousness          as        the     AHAM,       the     fully      free   ‘T’;    the
 nature of the Embodied Cosmos, the kula, that emerges from the
 Heart of reality quite freely and impelled by the power of Siva;
 the nature of the Heart, the hrdaya, which harbors and conceals
 the innermost core of reality, and which continuously plays at
  expansion       and     contraction;            the     many       forms        of the Sakti,          the
  power of Siva; the secret teaching of enlightenment conveyed
  continuously       by      Bhairava        to     the     Goddess          in    the     Heart;        the
  Emissional        Power,     the    visarga-Sakti,            which        both        oversees        the
  process of manifestation of the many transmigrational abodes of
  the embodied          self, as well as impels and facilitates the various
  methods       for its eventual achievement of liberation and freedom;
  the nature of language, from the Supreme                                   word, para-vak, co-
xiv                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana


equal with the supreme consciousness, through various stages, to
the manifestation of everyday speech: a topic that forms a central
focus in the text, and which is of immense importance in
understanding the exegetical method of Abhinavagupta as he
extracts the many meanings contained in the words of Bhairava;
the nature of mantra, the primary tool announced by the PT”
verses for the achievement of liberation; the various paths to
liberation, of which this text focuses on the highest, the so-called
non-method, anupaya; the coiled and mysterious energy of the
kundalini, which resides at the center of the yogic body, awaiting
ecstatic release; the thirty-six fattva-s or principles that structure
the fabric of reality; and so on.
  No doubt, it is the articulate and precise treatment that Abhin-
avagupta gives to this variegated subject matter that constitutes
one of the most appealing features of the text. Yet this very same
 thematic complexity creates great difficulties for the reader and
 interpreter, difficulties which are compounded by a number of
 other factors. These include the fact that throughout his com-
 ment Abhinavagupta evidently has in mind a lost comment on
 the same PT verses by Somananda known as the vivrti. Moreover,
 Abhinavagupta’s writings are informed by a precise knowledge of
 the entire gamut of intellectual and philosophical formulations
 of ancient India, among which we should not forget to mention
 the Vyakarana      (grammar),    and     the philosophies    of Nyaya    and
 Purva-mimamsa.       We   should    also emphasize        Abhinavagupta’s
 encyclopedic     knowledge      of the    Saivagamic     corpus.   The   PTv
 presupposes in the reader a knowledge of the ritual and technical
 expositions which Abhinavagupta would later expound in the TA,
 and is based on the scriptural authority of the MVT, the text held
 in highest reverence by Abhinavagupta and his tradition. Thus,
 Abhinavagupta’s commentary is densely packed with implicit
 connections to this large and complex intellectual horizon.
      Nevertheless, Singh’s translation     and expositions allow us entry
  into this complex religious world. All persons interested in
  Abhinavagupta and the Hindu Tantra are deeply indebted to the
  dedicated labors of Singh, Swami Laksmanjee and editor Baumer
  in bringing to us this translation of a very important Sanskrit text.
  The reader will find in the following pages some of the most
  sublime passages of Indian religious and philosophical writing.
Foreword                                                                xv


   In a traditional myth still current in Kashmir, Abhinavagupta
was never seen to die, but rather disappeared with some twelve-
hundred of his disciples into a cave. This myth-fragment pre-
serves the ancient imagery of the enlightened mahasiddha who
bypasses the usual passage into death by entering into the cave
of the Heart, the cave where the universal sky of consciousness
shines perpetually. It is out of this cave that reality unfolds. As it
does so, each object that emerges contains enfolded within it the
totality, Siva, and thus, all other objects as well. Similarly, it is out
of the cave of the Heart that each word spoken by Bhairava in
his liberating teachings emerges. Every word which thus unfolds
into the multivalent symbolisms of speech is a compressed sonic
manifestation of the infinity of Siva. Every word sparkles with the
barely concealed reality of Siva which hovers just under its
surface    meaning.   As Abhinavagupta      says in his TA (26.65), in
words that could appropriately refer to the PTv:

  The supreme nectar of consciousness, which removes birth, old age
  and death, flows gushing from it. I use it as the supreme oblation, like
  clarified butter, and in this way, O Supreme Goddess, I gladden and
  satisfy you day and night.

I invite readers to partake of the limpid streams that flow in the
pages that follow.

                                                 Paul E. Muller-Ortega
                          ABBREVIATIONS

  A.G.              Abhinavagupta
  A.P.S.            Ajadapramatrsiddhi     (Utpala)
  Bh.G.             Bhagavad    Gita
  TPs.              Isvarapratyabhijia Karika (Utpala)
  KSTS              Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies
  LV,               Laghu Vrtti     (on Paratrisika )
  M.V.T.            Malinivijaya Tantra (also Malinivijayottara)
                    Pratyabhijfia Karika (same as I.P.K.)
                    Paratrisika
   PAT:V;           Paratrisika Vivarana
                    Sivadrsti
                    Spanda Karika
                    Svacchanda Tantra
                    Upanisad
                    Vijfiana Bhairava
                    Yoga Siitra (also P.Y.S. for Patajijali Yoga Sitra)

                    amas sarafate
                2
      HAAN AA HS
              aa




                    esac seatfastarfear
AAAVPPIAZA




                    Rafts
                    azretfrat
                    seafast after
                    araqtrar
                    Herat
                    Herarey
                     aifedtt fasta
                     area
                     areata
                     arasaana
                        PRELIMINARIES




   (Parentage of Abhinavagupta and a desire for spiritual well-
being. )

           Vimalakalagrayabhinavasrstimaha         janani
            Bharitatanusca paficamukhaguptarucirjanakah.
            Tadubhayayamalasphuritabhavavisargamayam
            Hrdayam anuttaramrtakulam mama samsphuratat.             (1)

                             TRANSLATION
                 (There is double entendre in this verse)

                          First INTERPRETATION
May my heart?         (i.e., the reality which is designated as jagad-
dnanda, the divine beatitude made visible in the form of the uni-
verse), whose very nature is manifestation? bursting into view by
the union? of both, viz., Siva and Sakti (tadubhayayamala-sphurita-
bhava-visargamayam), which is the very emblem of supreme
immortality be fully flourished         (samsphuratat).
   Ubhayam or ‘both’ refers to janani or mother and janaka or
father. The janani or mother is the Sakti, the universal Divine
Energy which expresses its stamina in ever fresh creativity that
is inspired by pure, absolute autonomy* (vimalakalasrayabhinava-
srstimaha)—the father is Siva who is perfectand complete in Him-
self not lacking anything whatsoever           (bharitatanuk) and whose
zest in creativity is brought to realization by five powers?      (pajica-
mukhaguptarucih).

 Notes
   1.      Adaya or heart here refers to jagadananda, the divine beati-
 tude which is immutable,        which never declines, which is visible
 in the form of the universe, which is the very core of manifestation.
 Cf. Tantraloka I, 1 with Jayaratha’s Commentary.
   2.      Jayaratha explains visarga as bahirullilasisdsvabhdvah, i.e. it
 is the very nature of the Divine to manifest Himself externally.
                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana

  3.    Union or yamala denotes the sdmarasya or perfectly unified
or undifferentiated state of Siva and Sakti which is the pair and
origin of all differentiation.
   4. The word kala in this context means, as Jayaratha puts it,
Svatantrya-Sakti i.e. absolute autonomy.
   5. ‘Five powers’ refers to the main powers of the Divine, viz.
cit (consciousness), dnanda (bliss, beatitude), iccha (will), jnana
(knowledge) and kriya (activity).
   Vimala or pure in the text means ‘not having any of the dpava,
mdayiya and karma malas’.

                SECOND INTERPRETATION OF THE VERSE
May my heart! which is full of the supreme                  quintessence      of
reality (anuttaramrtakulam), and which is the product of the exu-
berance of emotion due to the mating of both (i.e. my father and
mother) (tadubhayaydmalasphurita-bhavavisargamayam)                 expand    in
supreme consciousness.
    The mother (janani) is one whose name is constituted by the
letters (kala), vi, ma, la (literally whose name rests on the letters
vi, ma, la,? vimalakalasraya) and whose delight consisted in giving
birth to Abhinavagupta (abhinavasrstimaha). The father is one
whose glory is known        by the   appellation      Simhagupta        (pajica-
mukhaguptarucih)? and who is complete in himself (bharitatanuh*).

Nores
   1.   Adaya    or heart   in   Saivagama   refers    to    that    centre   or
madhyadhdima from which all the five sensory activities or jfidnen-
driyas proceed and to which they return.           In yogic parlance, it is
known as susumnd.
   2. The name of Abhinavagupta’s mother was Vimala.
   3. ‘Pafica’ in paficamukha is derived from the root ‘pafic’ (I.P.A.
paiwati, paftcate) which means ‘to spread out’. Paficamukha, there-
 fore, means ‘one whose mouth is wide open’ i.e. ‘simha’ (lion).
 Simhagupta is a short form of Narasimhagupta which was the
 name of Abhinavagupta’s father.
   4, He is said to be ‘bharitatanu’ or complete in himself, because
 he had samdvefa or compenetration in Siva-Sakti.
   Jayaratha in his commentary on Tantraloka, vol. I, Ist verse
 says that Abhinavagupta was ‘yoginibhih’ (one born of Yogini)
Abhinavagupta                                                           KE}
for himself. Yoginibhak is one whose father is a ‘siddha’ (a perfect
one in yoga) and whose mother is yogini. One born of the union
of siddha and yoginiis known as yoginibhih.
   Second and third verses are expressive of homage to the Devi
 (goddess).

                            SEconD VERSE
                Yasyam     antarvigvam etad vibhati
                Bahyabhasam bhasamanam visrstau
                Ksobhe ksine’ nuttarayam sthitau tam
                Vande devim svatmasamvittim ekam.          (2)
                             TRANSLATION
I bow to that one goddess in the form of Self-consciousness! in
whom this universe which appears as an external objective exis-
tence in the state of manifestation, shines (vibhdti), on the extinc-
tion of that delusive understanding? which makes one identify
oneself with one’s vehicles, inwardly (antar) in the state of
Supreme Reality? (anuttarayam sthitau).
Notes
  1.    ‘Svatmasamvitti?   means   the consciousness of the Real Self,
not of that psycho-somatic state which masquerades as the Self.
   2. Ksobha, literally ‘agitation’ means here that disturbing delu-
sive understanding which uproots us from our real mooring and
makes us identify ourselves with our vehicles, and thus shows the
universe as external to the Divine Consciousness.
   3. Anuttara or Supreme Reality is that state in which the
external objective existence is felt as only     an expression of the
Self or Divine Consciousness. External has a meaning only with
reference to the empirical consciousness identified with its
vehicles, not to the Divine Consciousness.      The external     world is
like a reflection in the mirror of consciousness which, though not
different from the mirror, appears as different from it.

                             Turp VERSE
                    Naragaktisivatmakam       trikam
                    Hydaye ya vinidhaya bhasayet
                    Pranamami param anuttaram
                    Nijabhasam pratibhacamatkrtim,        (3)
                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana
4

                                TRANSLATION
                                                  consciousness
I offer my homage to the wondrous delight of that
which is supreme           (pardm) and unsurpassable, which is effulgent
                                                   the group of
by its own light, which while having within itself
                                               Universal Spiritual
the three, viz. phenomenal reality (nara), the
    Energy (Sakti), and Siva makes them appear externally.
                                FourtH VERSE
                     (Homage to the Guru or spiritual guide )

             Jayatyanarghamahima vipasitapasuvrajah
                                                            ah. (4)
              Srimanadyaguruh Sambhuh Srikanthah parameévar

                                 TRANSLATION
                                                           the great lord
    Hail to the primordial Guru Sambhu,! Srikantha?
                                       light), whose greatness is beyond
    who is full of radiance (spiritual
                                                            group of
    all evaluation, and who cuts asunder the bondage of the
    bound souls.

    Notes
                                                       with pity for
       1. Sambhu-Siva who as Srikantha was moved
                                                        the message
    suffering humanity and inspired Durvasas to spread
                                                       Guru of this
    of Saivagama. Therefore, he is the primordial
                                                            guru in
    Sastra. Sambhunatha was the name of Abhinavagupta’s
                                                       be a   double
    Trika and Kaula Sastra. Therefore there appears to
     entendre in the word Sambhu.      In that case, ddya guru would mean
     initial guru.
                                                                   that
        2. Srikantha: This is one of the names of Siva. It is said
                                                        He, therefore,
     he was touched by pity for suffering humanity.
                                                              Saiva-
     commissioned the sage Durvasas to revive the teaching of
                                                                 into three
     gama. The sage divided the teaching of Saivagama
                                                            and doaitadvaita
     classes: advaita (non-dualistic), dvaita (dualistic)
      (non-dualistic   cum   dualistic)   and  taught them  to Tryambaka,
                     and   Srinatha,    respectively. Tryambaka    was the
     Amardaka,
                                                                    belongs.
     founder of the Advaita School to which Abhinavagupta

                                    FirrtH VERSE
                 (The purpose of Abhinavagupta’s     Commentary )
Abhinavagupta                                                          5

           Nijasisyavibodhaya prabuddhasmaranaya ca
           Mayabhinavaguptena       sramo’yam kriyate manak. (5)

                           TRANSLATION
For the clear understanding of my pupils and for refreshing the
memory of those who are already proficient in this Sastra (this
philosophical discipline) I, Abhinavagupta, am making a little
exertion (in writing this commentary).

         THE TEXT WITH THE COMMENTARY
                      Sri Devi    vvAca
                ANUTTARAM KATHAM DEVA
                SADYAH KAULIKASIDDHIDAM
                YENA VIJNATAMATRENA
                KHECARI-SAMATAM VRAJET (1)

                  MEANING oF IMporTANT Worps
Anuttaram: the Supreme, the unsurpassable, the Absolute Con-
sciousness; sadyak: immediately, spontaneously, kaulika: pertain-
ing to kula or the supreme energy of Siva appearing in the entire
cosmos. Consisting of the body, senses, worlds etc. Aula also means
ghanata, i.e. solidification, concretization   (of consciousness) ;
siddhi: accomplishment, perfection of achievement; fulfilment of
aim; spiritual power. Kauliki siddhi therefore means the achieve-
ment of identity of the individual consciousness, of the empirical
I with the perfect I-consciousness of Siva which has become
concretized in the form of the cosmos, an achievement which
comes about in this very physical body.
  Khecari-‘bodhabhimisancarini sati iyam samoit faktih(L.V., p. 11),
the Consciousness-power moving about in the sphere of universal
knowledge. Khecari: ‘khe carati iti khecari, means literally that
which moves about in kha or sky. Kha or sky is the symbol of
the unobstructed expanse of Consciousness. Here according to
Abhinavagupta, it means Samvid-Sakti or consciousness-power.

                         TRANSLATION
The exalted goddess said (to Bhairava): ‘‘O God, how! does the
unsurpassable divine Consciousness? bring about immediately*
6                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

the achievement of the identity of the empirical I with the perfect
I-consciousness of Siva which comes about in this very physical
body* and by the mere knowledge of which one acquires same-
ness with the Universal Consciousness-power (khecari)?”>

Nores
The Devi is the parasakti who on the plane of pasyanti and madhyama
puts a question as the Devi in order to bestow grace on human
beings, and on the other hand being poised in anuttara answers
as Bhairava.
      1.    Katham: How     i.e. ‘kena prakdrena’—in what way, by what
    means.
      2, Anuttaram:      the unsurpassable Divine Consciousness is so
    called, because, as Abhinavagupta puts it, it is the Experient of
    all, and there is none other that can make it his object of experi-
    ence. It is the universal subject par excellence. “Tasya tu cidat-
    manah svaprakdsasya na grahakantaram asti iti anuttaratuam”       (L. V.
    p. 1). ‘‘Anuttara is so called, because there is none other who can
    act as subject of that Self-luminous Universal Consciousness.”
    It is the Eternal Universal Subject of all experience.
       3.    Sadyah: Immediately i.e. at the very moment when it is
    known. In Laghvi Vrtti, Abhinavagupta adopts the reading
    ‘svatah’ in place of sadyah. Svatah has been explained in Laghvi
    Vrtti as ‘svatantratah’ i.e., by its absolute autonomy.
       4. Kaulika-siddhih: means ‘kule dehe bhavd kauliki siddhil’, i.e.
    an achievement that occurs, that is experienced in this very phy-
    sical body. There are two important words in this phrase, viz.
    kaulika and siddhi, Kaulika is the adjective from kula, happening
    or occurring in kula; siddhi means achievement, the desired
    fulfilment.   What    is this   achievement,   what   is this fulfilment?
    The achievement is ‘cidaikatmya’ i.e. identity with, unification
    with cit or universal Consciousness. Kula includes deha or physical
    body. So, ‘kaulika-siddhi” means the achievement of the unifica-
    tion of the empirical consciousness with the Divine Universal
    Consciousness in this very body. The limitation ofthe individual
    consciousness disappears, it is transformed into unity-conscious-
    ness, and the individual views the world and life in a different
    light. Kula on the macrocosmic plane, is the divine creative
    energy, the para vak which brings about the phonematic emana-
Abhinavagupta                                                                    7

tion up to ‘ha’, the manifestation of the universe.          On the micro-
cosmic plane, it refers to that energy which works in the human
body. Kaulika siddhi thus brings about the perfect harmony                   of
the microcosmic with the macrocosmic.
  There   are, however,   many     shades   of meaning      of kaulika siddhi
which   will be clear from the translation of the Vivarana                com-
mentary of Abhinavagupta.
 5. Khecari-samata.
   Khecari: A.G. in L.V. says, ‘khecari bodhabhimisaficarini sati iyam
samoic-chaktih.’ (p. 2). ‘Khecari’ is the Consciousness-power that
moves about on the plane of bodka or the universal Divine Con-
sciousness. What are the characteristics of this bodha? A.G. says,
‘They are avikalpatvam, piirnatuam. Bodha or the Universal Divine
Consciousness is (1) thought-free        (avikalpa) and       (2) it is pina
i.e., whole, complete, undivided, unconditioned, integral. In one
word, it is not limited or determined by any external condition.
Khecari, therefore, is the Sakti that pertains to this plane of
consciousness.
   Samaté means ‘sameness’. So ‘khecari-samatém vrajet?’ means he
acquires the same integral, unconditioned,               undetermined con-
sciousness as that of Siva or the Divine.
   One who does not rise to that level does not have the experi-
ence of khecari. As A.G. puts it in L.V., “‘Tatprakdraparijndne tu na
khecari abodhariipe vedyamSe    saficaranat’’   (L.V.,    p. 2),   “one   who
does not have the experience of that level does not have the
experience of khecari, because his consciousness moves about in
abodha which is only objective-external like blue colour or jar
or cloth or internal like pleasure, pain, etc.’’ Abodha in this con-
text is a technical term meaning empirical consciousness. A.G.
 clarifies this idea further by saying: “Tata eva vedyaih nilddibhirni-
pantriteti na piirnasaktik” (L. V.2). Since the empirical consciousness
is determined, conditioned by ‘blue’, etc., therefore it is not pina,
not integral, not unconditioned.       The consciousness of the khecari
level alone is unconditioned and hence parma             or whole in itself.

                               ComMENTARY

                                  Text

    From paramesvarah on p. 2 upto devi ityucyate on p. 3, 1. 5
                                                Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                             ‘TRANSLATION
The Highest Lord ever brings about the five-fold act.t He is in
fact the very Grace itself, being always equipped with His
                                                             (it
Supreme Divine Energy (Sakti) whose very nature is Grace
                                                  s herself   as
should be borne in mind that Sakti never consider
different from Siva.2) (The Supreme Divine   Energy    or  para
Sakti expresses itselfin para vak). This Sakti which is full of the
thought   of Grace   for the entire world    is, to begin   with,   non-
different (in the undifferentiated or nirvikalpa state ) from pasyanti
who is parémarfamayi i.e. who is always cognizant of the essential
nature of the Divine and who has a hundred powers which are
boundless in operation which however will be described later. She
(the Supreme vak) is, in the most initial stage, stationed in the
Divine I-consciousness which       is the highest mantra and which
is not limited by space or time.   In that stage she (para-vak ) abides
without any distinction of question and answer which will start
in pasyanti.
  The paravak which is non-dual i.e. identical with the (supreme )
consciousness is present in all experients* always in her integral
nature (of knowership and doership) uniformly in all states i.e.,
even at the level of paspanti, madhyama and vaikhari. Therefore,
pasyanti comprehends in a general indeterminate (nirvikalpa) way
whatever is desired to be known if it is awakened by due causal
conditions   just as one who has experienced variegated colour like
dark,   blue  etc., as in a peacock’s tail and whose experience is
determi  ned   by many impressions, positive and negative, recalls
 only that particular colour which is awakened by the proper
 causal condition of the memory. At the time of initial indeter-
 minate knowledge     in pasyanti in which there is no distinction in
 the word and its referent, there was obviously not any sense of
 difference between the word and its referent.
    Madhyama, however, which shows the difference between the
 word and its referent is concerned with its comprehension only in
 the same location (sémanadhikaranya) i.e. in the antakkarana or the
 inner psychic apparatus.‘    In vaikhari, on the other hand, there is
 a clear difference between the two i.e. between the word and its
 referent.®
   When this regular, fixed relation of the word and its referent
 (wavasthayam) is proved in one’s own experience, it will be found
Abhinavagupta                                                                      9

that what is the stage of para vak is the power of non-mdyiya word
and is of the nature of the highest truth. It is unconventional
 (asamketika), natural (akrtaka), having as its essence the stamp of
the highest truth, and is inspired by the truth of the energy of the
mantra of I-consciousness, the principle of which will be described
in the sequels.
   She abides in the subsequent conditions of pasyanti etc., also,
for without her there would accrue the condition of non-mani-
festation, in pasyanti etc., and thus would arise the contingency of
absolute insensateness (jadata).
   In that stage (i.e. in the pardvdk stage), there is absolutely
no thought of difference such as ‘this’ (a particular entity or
individual), ‘thus’ (a particular form), ‘here’ (particular space),
‘now’ (particular time). Therefore, beginning with pasyanti which
is the initial creative state of the energy of the highest mantra,
up to vaikhari in which manifestation of difference of all the
existents has proceeded fully, this pardvak full of the wondrous
delight of her own self, resting within her own self which is all
Light, continues pulsating (sphurati). That pulsation is I-con-
sciousness whose highest truth is uninterrupted continuity.® This
matter   will be   clarified    further     on.   In   that   (pardvak)   alone,
in the pasyanti stage in which there is just an incipience of differ-
ence, in the madhyama state in which there is an appearance
 of difference (inwardly in the psychic apparatus), which consist
 specifically of jadna (knowledge ) and kriyd (activity ) respectively—
Jnana which is the predominant attribute of Sadasiva and kriya
which is the predominant attribute of Isvara, the wondrous de-
light of I-consciousness which encloses within itself the joy of
objective existence of innumerable universes is fully operative.
Therefore, Supreme Consciousness even while appearing as
pasyanti and madhyamé actually experiences Herself as the Supreme
Consciousness. It is this Supreme Consciousness (para samvid)
that is said to be ‘Devi’      (goddess).

Notes
    1. The five-fold act refers to (1) srsfi or manifestation, (2)
sthiti or maintenance, (3) samhara or withdrawal or absorption,
 (4) vilaya or veiling the essential nature, (5) anugraha or reveal-
ing the essential nature i.e. grace.
10                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana

      2.   As the Sakti   (the Divine   Energy)   is never different from
Siva       (the Supreme   Lord), it is all the same whether one calls
Sakti as anugrahdtmika i.e. Grace incarnate or Siva as anugrahétma
or Grace incarnate.
   3. She is present in all experients and in all conditions as
the innermost Supreme or Divine Consciousness. The experients
can be divided under seven broad heads, viz., sakala, pralayakala,
vijnanakala, mantra, mantresvara, mantramahesoara and Sivapramata.
She is present in all of them.
    4. The difference between the word and its referent is, in the
stage of madhyamd, only in a subtle mental state; it has not yet
been externalized. Samanadhikarana means in the same location,
ive. antahkarana or the psychic apparatus.
     5. In vaikhari, there is ayadhikarana vimarsa i.e. the location
of the word is in the mouth, but the location of the referent is in
 external space.
    6. The highest truth of the Divine I-consciousness is that its
 continuity is uninterrupted (avicchinnatéparamartham). It is always
 present in everything. It never takes a holiday. It cannot be
 escaped from. Nothing can elude it, or give a slip to it. That is
 why Siva is said to be immanent in the universe.

                                    TEXT
                 Different implications of the word Devi:

     From iyatapasyantyadisrstikramena on p. 3, 1. 5 upto devatavyavaharah
     on p. 3, 1. 14

                                 ‘TRANSLATION
        (She is called Devi because of the following reasons: )
       1. Because in the succeeding order of creation from pasyanti
     down to external manifestation like blue etc., she sports with the
     creative delight of her consciousness, for the root ‘div’ from which
     the noun Devi is derived means ‘to sport’.
        2. The Divine Bhairava transcends everything and abides
     in an all-exceeding eminence. Because of His desire to remain
     in that state i.e. because of His desire to overcome and surpass
     everything; and abiding in transcendental eminence who is
     none other than that Divine desire is called Devi, for the root
Abhinavagupta                                                        ll

‘div’, from which the word ‘Devi’ is derived also means vijigisa
i.e. ‘the desire to overcome and surpass’ (there being no differ-
ence between Bhairava and His divine energy, Bhairavi).
  3.     Because of her carrying on the activities of life in so many
innumerable ways of knowledge, memory, doubt, ascertainment
etc., she is called devi for the root ‘div’ also means ‘to carry on the
activities of life’.
  4.     Because of shining in the forms of ‘blue’ etc. which appear
everywhere, (she is called Devi)      for the root ‘div’ also means to
shine or irradiate.
  5. Because of being adored by all who are (inevitably) possess-
ed by Her (Devi’s) light and are devoted to Her (she is called
Devi) for the root ‘div’ also means ‘to adore’.
  6. Because of Her access to all things according to Her will,
separated though they may be by space and time, (she is called
Devi), for the root ‘div’ also means ‘to go, to have access to’.
   7. Hence ‘divinity’ (devata@) applies especially to Bhagavan
Bhairava. Devi is (reasonably.) applied to Bhagavati also, for she
is His very Sakti. This interpretation of Devi is supported by
the Science of Grammar which declares that the root ‘div’ is used
in the sense of ‘sport, the desire to overcome or surpass al], behav-
iour, irradiation, adoration, and movement’,
   Thus the epithet devatd is applied also to Visnu, Brahma etc.
inasmuch as they partially partake of the divinity which is parti-
cularly applicable in its wholeness only to the Highest Lord and,
which is the same thing, his Sakti.

                                  TExtT
       The rationale of the past tense in ‘said’   (uwodca) :

From evam bhagavati pasyanti madhyamé         ca on     p. 3, 1. 14 upto
Sphutayisyate ca etat on p. 4,1. 15

                              TRANSLATION
 When     the glorious pardvak becoming pasyanti and madhyama        (i.e.
 in the stage of pasyanti and madhyama) thus recollects Herself,
 “I myself as Paravak Devi said thus’, then (i.e. in that state of
 recollection), shining forth (ullasat) in that form (i.e. as paravak),
 she regards Her own para stage as past in accordance with the
12                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

fact of difference brought about by maya, because in comparison
to Herself that stage (of pafyanti) is the commencement of maya,
and because of her travelling through the passage of inner senses
 (in the case of madhyama) and outer senses (in the case of vaikhari),
whose life consists in     manifesting difference,     she     regards the
pard stage as past (paroksataya).
   The today of Brahma is not limited by the (human)            day whose
division of day depends on the (apparent) motion of the sun. The
measure of his today is determined by many kalpas.1 The day of
Visnu and others is even longer than that, and in the case of
Yogis the term day is used even for one-thousandth part of the
human day on account of his inward motion of prana (breath).?
Thus how can the concept of today or the present which is un-
settled and fictitious apply to unfictitious Consciousness (which
is beyond    time)?
     According to this principle, paravak who fulfils the sense of the
past in all its aspects, viz. sdmdnya bhitta (lun i.e. aorist), anadya-
tana (lan i.e., imperfect ) and paroksa (lit. i.e. past perfect) reflects
thus in the first person of the paroksa (past): “I the same Paravak
Devi unseparated from Siva        (vacya) and the Sastra        (vdcaka) or
from the word and its referent thus said,’ This is the sense of the
use of the past tense.
   (An example of such reflection about the past in the present
may be cited from common experience: )
   “While asleep, I, indeed, bewailed’’. In this experience, there
is the proof of reflection about       the past in the present.     In the
above example, the person does not remember the past experi-
ence, for he did not have that experience in the past             (and re-
membrance is only of a past experience). Now after awaking, he
experiences that state in astonishment either by the great re-
liability of the statement of another person or by perturbation
due to affections in his body through sobbing etc., caused by
excessive    bewailment,   exuberant     singing   etc. This    is not   un-
 believable. “In an insane condition or in the condition of being
 asleep, I, so they say, uttered moaning sound’’—in this statement,
 there is a reference to the past even without any objective experi-
 ence in insanity, dream, swoon etc. In the para (supreme) stage,
 there is, indeed, total absence of any object whatsoever.
    Only because this is the experience of the fourth state, the
Abhinavagupta                                                                       13

experience in this is identical with the experient whereas in insa-
nity etc., the experience is due mainly to the excess of bewil-
derment. This is the main difference between the two. The past-
ness is, however, common.
   Thus every experient whether situated in the position of a
teacher or disciple, etc. or in any other capacity, is able to carry
out all his dealings always by entering her (paravak); therefore
he apprehends her only (in every state), When it is stated, ‘The
goddess said”, it means      “I   (Paravak)           only always know every-
thing in an undifferentiated way in the highest stage (parabhimau),
otherwise this (question-answer matter) would not acquire clear
expression in the stage      of pasyanti and            madhyamd.”     This   is the
sense of the statement:       “The goddess said.” It is in this way
that the later statement, “Bhairava said,” should be considered.
There also, the sense of the statement is, “I, only as Bhairava i.e.,
without the division of Siva and Sakti (guru and Sisya in this con-
text) said,” “Only being predominantly the divine Energy, it is
in her aspect of her creative nature that She (para) uses the term
‘aham’ (I). Thus being predominantly the possessor of that
Energy, the delightful experience of Bhairava in His aspect of
withdrawal or absorption assumes the form of ‘ma-ha-a.”? This
will be clarified later.

Notes
   1.     Kalpa is a fabulous period of time, according to which a day
of Brahma is one thousand yugas or a period of four thousand,
three hundred and twenty millions of years of mortals.
    2. The time occupied by a yogi in samadhi in one circuit of
respiration covers centuries of external years.
    3. Aham and Ma-ha-a: ‘Aham’ consists of three letters, viz.
‘a’, ‘ha’ and ‘m’. In this ‘a’ denotes Siva, ‘ha’ denotes Sakti, ‘m’
denotes     ‘nara’ i.e., all objective existents. Thus             ‘akam’ denotes
the state of manifestation or expansion (prasara) of the Divine
in objective existence. Aham is known as srstibija. Ma-ha-a:
This is the reverse process of aham, i.e., the process of the with-
drawal or absorption (pravefa). In this ‘ma’ denotes ‘nara’ or
objective    existents, ‘ha’ denotes        Sakti,     and     ‘a’ denotes    ‘Siva’.
This    is known   as samhara-bija     or    the     process   of withdrawal.      In
both    cases, Sakti is the medium.         In ‘aham’, Sakti is the medium
14                                                     Paré-Trisika-Vivarana

through which Siva passes into phenomena.              In ma+ha--a, again,
Sakti is the medium through which manifestation is absorbed
into Siva. That is why Sakti is said to be the entrance door in
Saiva philosophy “‘Saivi mukham ihocyate”’.

     The    Final Resting Place of all questions and answers

                                  TEXT
From etacca pasyanti madhyamabhuvi on p. 4. 1. 15 upto                tacchdsana
pavitritandm yatnak on p. 6, 1. 12

                              TRANSLATION
  This is the experience of the highest consciousness characterized
by will power (i.e. of pardvak) in the stage of paspanti and madh-
yama, characterized by jadna Sakti (power of knowledge). This
is the aim of all the Sastras (the texts indicating the spiritual dis-
 cipline) from beginning to end; therefore, there is the actual ex-
perience of the energy of the highest mantra of the I-consciousness
of the Divine in jAdnasakti (power of knowledge) only which is the
characteristic of Sadasiva because of the appearance of the former,
ive. the question of the Devi and the latter, i.e. the answer of
Bhairava therein in the form of the construction of the words
 “Devi uvdca’ and ‘Bhairava uvaca’ by means of the letters, D, e, 2,
i, u, v, a, ca and Bh, ai, 7, a, va, u, v, d, ca.
     It has been rightly said in Svacchanda Tantra: “The                     God
 Sadasiva      Himself assuming     the     position   of both     teacher   and
 pupil revealed the Tantra by means of former                and latter sen-
tences i.e. by means of question and answer.”              (Vol. IV,     KSTS,
p- 20).
     Thus    the power   of grace of the Divine        is always     and in all
experients uninterrupted. Therefore, she (the power of Grace)
alone, the life and soul of Trika Sastra, constitutes the highest re-
 lationship (between the experients and the Divine Consciousness ).
    In the matter of anuttara, i.e. in order to attain to anuttara (the
 unsurpassable, the Supreme),             all other kinds of relationship,*
 e.g. mahat, antarala, divya, adivya, etc. are in accordance with the
 said teaching, aimed at the Supreme only. The same thing has
 been said in Trikahrdaya:
     “The highest Lord is always intent on creativity               (visargapara-
Abhinavagupta                                                           15

mak) through His Sakti. He showers grace, manifests and with-
draws without any restraint (for grace only).”
   Thus there is always the active presence of anuttara. So the
inner content i.e., question-answer which appears in the con-
sciousness of the highest Lord in an undifferentiated way because
of its being the highest truth, is thought of in the pasyanti stage
in an indeterminate form (in nirvikalpa form) with a desire to put
it in apportionment of letter, word, and sentence; it is posited
with a sense of separateness in the madhyamé stage in a determinate
form (i.e. in savikalpa form); it is finally expressed in the form
of question and answer in the vaikhari stage i.e. in gross speech
consisting of mdyiya letter, word and sentence, such as ‘how the
unsurpassable etc.’
  This is that unobservable      face   (i.e. Sakti)     of Bhairava   full
of the feel of manifestation, of which the essence is the unsurpas-
sable I-consciousness, full of the stirring joy (ksobha)* brought
about by the union (samghatta) of Siva who is symbolized by ‘a’
and Sakti who is symbolized by ‘a’ which is the source of the
appearance and extension of manifestation according to the Trika
system of philosophy and Yoga, which is the original (maulikam),
enduring state (dhruvapadam) and the life of all living beings.
Therefore, it is not right to associate the Divine with a parti-
cular station? etc., for in the absence of any limitation in His
case, designation of a particular place for Him is thoroughly
unjustifiable.
  The   fact of question   and   answer    (vastu)     is an ever present
reality which is in the first instance, i.e. at the level of paravak
without division (i.e. without the division of a question and its
answer). Therefore, this is all what is meant to be said here. The
Self who is the natural state of all existents, who is Self-luminous,
amusing Himself with question-answer which is not different
from Himself, and in which both the questioner (as Devi) and
the answerer (as Bhairava) are only Himself, reflects thus as I,
“I myself, being thus desirous of wonderful delight knowing the
truth as it is, appear as question and answer (tathaiva bhavami).”
So the book begins with, “The Devi said—how the unsurpassable
etc.”, says in the middle, “Bhairava said, Listen, O goddess,”
and ends with “This constitutes Rudrayamala              (the pair of Siva
and Sakti).”
16                                              Para-Trisika-Vivarana

   Moreover, from all the Sastras which have come out from five
sources! up to worldly dealings—all this is said to be the highest
relationship (parak sambandhah)
     “In my   explanation   I, Abhinavagupta,     have   revealed    the
entire hidden wealth of question-answer mode which has to be
kept secret, which is the quintessence of the teaching that makes
one identify oneself with Siva and which always leads oneself in
experience to the state of Bhairava.”
   However with a desire for the good of my pupils, I am sum-
ming up the whole teaching in the following verses: “In                all
dealings, whatever happens whether it is a matter of knowledge
or action—all that arises in the fourth stage (twryabhuo?) i.e. in the
paravak in an undifferentiated (gatabhedam) way. In pasyanti
which is the initial field of the order of succession (kramabhijisu),
there is only the germ of difference. In madhyama, the distinction
of jreya (object of knowledge) and kdrya (action) appears in-
wardly, for a clearcut succession is not possible at this           stage
 (sphutakramayoge ).
   Moreover, madhyamé or pasgyanti fully relying on para which is
ever present and from which there is no real distinction of these
 (bhysam param abhedato adhyasya) (later) regards that state as if
past like a mad man or one who has got up from sleep.
     This state of the unsurpassable will be explained in this way
 (i.e. the subject-matter, nomenclature, connexion, and purpose),
     The same thing has been said by revered Somananda in his
commentary® (on Paratrisika) in the following words:
   “After the initial pulsation of Energy in the form of Devi uvdca of
revered Bhairava who is (always) intent upon the fivefold act...”
   I who have been purified by his (Somananda’s) commentary
am attempting only to clarify the difficulties (lit., to cut asunder
the knots) that have remained in that commentary.

Notes
   1. There are six kinds of sambandha or relationship between
the teachers and the taught:
        (1)   Para-sambandha: in which the questioner and the
     answerer, the teacher and the taught are both Siva. It is the
     highest relationship. It only means the resolution of all doubts
     by entering anuttara, i.e. the highest divine consciousness.
Abhinavagupta                                                          17
       (2)    Mahan sambandha: in which the questioner is Sadasiva
  and the answerer is Siva.
       (3)    Antardla sambandha: in which the questioner is Ananta-
  bhattaraka and      the answerer is Sadasiva.
       (4)    Divya sambandha: in which the questioner is the sage,
  Nandakumara and the answerer is Anantabhattaraka.
       (5)    Divyadivya sambandha: in which the questioner is the
  sage, Sanatkumara and the answerer is Nandi.
     (6)  Adioya sambandha: in which both the questioner              and
  answerer are human beings.
  2. Ksobha in this philosophy indicates the urge of manifes-
tation.
  3.      For instance the association of Siva with the Kailasa moun-
tain, etc.
   4. The five sources from which all the Sastras have come out
are the five aspects of Siva, viz. Isana, Tatpurusa, Sadyojata,
Vamadeva, Aghora. Igana predominantly represents cit fakti;
Tatpurusa predominantly represents dnanda Sakti; Sadyojata re-
presents icchd Sakti; Vamadeva represents jfidna fakti, and Aghora
represents Kriya Sakti.
   5. This commentary        is not available now.

                                  Text
From uktak sambandhak        on   p. 6, 1. 12   upto   sambandhabhidheya-
prayojanani on p. 7, 1. 11

                         TRANSLATION
The relationship has already been described.           Now, we are going
to describe the abhidheya or subject-matter. Trisika is a com-
pound word. This is its analysis ‘the ifika of the three’ (tisrnam
ifika). ‘Of the three’ means ‘of icchd (will), jfana (knowledge ),
kriyd (activity).’ The three are also designated by such other
words as srsfi', sthiti, samhara (with reference to the physical plane)
or ‘udyoga’, ‘avabhasa’ and ‘carvana’ (with reference to the spiritual
plane). ‘sik’ means ‘Ifvari’, the goddess who governs and
controls the three i.e. iccha, jfidna and kriya or srsti, sthiti and
samhara, or udyoga, avabhasa, and carvana. It should be borne in
mind that ‘ifand’ or governance or control in this context means
“being non-different or identical with that which is to be governed
18                                                   Para-Trisikd-Vivarana

                     Therefore,   the revered    goddess    ‘para Sakti’   (i.e.
or controlled.”
                                                     ends this
the supreme divine Consciousness) who at once transc
                       (viz. srsti, sthiti, samhara etc.) and    is identical
division of three
                                                        and because
with it is the abhidheya or subject-matter of the book,
                                                            of this Sastra is
of its connexion with pard, the title (lit., name)
                                          given   by   venera   ble teachers
paratrisika.’ Another reading of trifikd
                                         rity  of  words,      they   give the
is ‘trimSaka’, and owing to the simila
following etymology:
                                                               or powers” is
    “That which speaks out (kdyati) the three saktis
                                            from     its    connex  ion with
 trimsakd. The word. trimsika derived
                                        Even  thus,   it is  not  the  number
 thirty (érimsat) verses isnot correct.
                                              that    should     be   adopte d.
 of verses but only the sense of trimsaka,
 For instance, it has been said in Tantra     sara?:
                                                         in arange of
    “The sense of TrimSaka has been declared by you
 a crore and half verses.”
                                                       subject-matter
    The relationship of the title of the book and the
                                           to the same  Reality. This
 is that of the supreme, for both refer
 has been practically pointed out already.
                                                      of all experients
    The aim or purpose of the Sastra is liberation
                                             entitle d  for this know-
 in life-time, experients who have become
     ledge of the unsurpassable     (anuttara) derived from grace in the
                                                      ). This liberation
     form of excellent descent of divine Sakti (power
                                                   ty   in the essential
     connotes penetration with complete identi
                                                           I-consciousness
     nature of Bhairava and unification with perfect
                                                essenti al  Self and is the
     which is the delightful flash of one’s own
                                               of his essential nature
     achievement of one who by the realization
                                                    of existence sup-
     regards the entire multitude of the categories
                                                    s of his sportfulness
     posed to be bondage as mere different aspect
                                                 of  his delight.
     which is the expression of the abundance
                                                        from those things
        It is averred that liberation is deliverance
                                                            ly considered
      (the categories of existence ) which are conventional
                                                     who  lives and grows
     to be bondage, deliverance of the individual
                                                     is the inner and outer
     in the body, prana etc. whose field of activity
                                                                (i.e. the body,
     senses (jfdnendriyas and karmendriyas), and which
                                                  life consists in strenuous
     prana etc.) are as drives> and whose
     endeavour.
                                                       by maya (i.e. the
        Ifall the impressions (samskara matra) caused
                                                   the annou ncement of
     impressions of difference ) vanish, what does
                                                             is this liberation?
      such liberation signify and with reference to what
Abhinavagupta                                                                19

   The same idea has been expressed in Spandakarika (in the
following lines):
   “He, who has this understanding (viz., that the universe is
identical with the Self), regards the whole world as a play (of the
Divine), and thus being ever united (with the universal Consci-
ousness) is, without doubt, liberated while alive” (Sp. K. II, 5).
   This will be clarified shortly. Thus this realization (i.e., identity
of oneself with the perfect I-consciousness of Bhairava ) constitutes
the purpose of the Sastras and so this purpose is the culmination
of the object of human existence.             An inquiry about the purpose
of purpose is uncalled for. So the connexion, the subject-matter,
and the purpose have been described.®

Notes
   1, In the classification according to sysfi etc., there are five
aspects, viz. srsti, sthiti, samhdra, pidhdna or vilaya and anugraha
and according to udyoga etc., there are also five aspects, viz.
udyoga, avabhasa, carvand, bijavasthapana, and vildpana. Here accor-
ding to three-fold classification, pidhdna and anugraha have been
included in samhdra, and bijavasthapana and vilapana are included
in carvand for the sake of uniformity.
   2. This book is not available now.
   3. Mukti     or liberation    does   not     mean   deliverance   from    the
categories of existence         but rather identity      with the    essential
nature of Bhairava or in other words with the perfect                I-consci-
ousness which is the essential nature of one’s own Self.
    4. Etc. refers to puryastaka.
    5. By ‘drives’, Abhinava does not mean that they drive one to
misery, but that they drive or push the individual to higher life;
their very short-coming acts as a stimulus for rising to a higher
life.
   6. This refers to what is known as            anubandhacatustaya, or     four
indispensable elements of any Sdstra. They             are (1) the prayojana
or purpose or aim,     (2) the adhikdri, i.c. one      who is competent      for
the study of the particular Sastra, (3) abhidheya, the subject-matter
of the Sastra, (4) sambandha or relationship or connexion between
the title of the Sastra (abhidhdna) and the subject-matter (abhi-
dheya).
   (1)   Abhinavagupta says that the prayojana or purpose of the
20                                                  Para-Trisikd-Vivarana

Sastra is mukti or liberation, but he scouts the popular idea of
mukti as deliverance from the vehicles of the Self or from the
categories (tattodni) of existence. He valiantly maintains that
mukti only means identification of the self with the Supreme
T-consciousness of the Divine.
     (2) Abhinava has not directly used the word adhikari, but has
suggested it in ‘vibhoh parasaktipatanugrahavasotpannaitavadanut-
 tarajfidnabhajanabhavandm’ (P.T., p. 6, 1. 22) i.e. they alone are
 fit to study this Sastra in order to attain mukti who are oriented
 towards the Lord through grace.
       (3) With    regard   to abhidheya or subject-matter,     Abhinava
                                     para (P.T.
 saysthatit is samvidbhagavatibhattarika           , i.e., the
                                             p. 6.1.15)
 Supreme Divine Consciousness, the Supreme Divine Sakti that
 ever flashes as I and expresses itself in paravak or Supreme Sound.
    (4) So far as sambandha is concerned, Abhinava says, “‘abhi-
 dhanabhidheyayosca para eva sambandhah tadatmyat” (P.T. p. 6,1. 21),
 the relationship of the subject-matter and the book is that of
 the Supreme, for both refer to the same Supreme Reality.

                                    Text
       From    atha granthdrtho vyakhyayate on p. 7, |. 12 upto ityddi on
     pe it, iit.

                                TRANSLATION
     Now the meaning of the   text   is being explained. (Abhinava takes
     up the first word of the  first   stanza, viz., anuttaram for explana-
     tion. He has explained it in sixteen ways).
         1. Uttara may be interpreted as ‘more, additional’, ‘an’ means
 ‘not’. ‘Anuttaram’, therefore, means ‘na vidyate uttaram adhikam
 yatak’, ie. ‘Than which there is nothing more, or additional’.
     The other thirty-six ¢attvas (categories of existence) upto Ana-
  srita Siva! whose very existence is proved by their entrance into
  the consciousness of highest Bhairava (i.e. which owe their very
  existence to Para Bhairava) point to the Consciousness of Bhairava
  as something more than or superior to themselves. Not like
     this   is the highest, most perfect Consciousness of Bhairava (i.c.,
     the Bhairava-Consciousness does not point to anything more or
     higher than itself), because of its essence being unrestrained, non-
     relative, delightful flash of knowership.
Abhinavagupta                                                              21

  2. Anuttara is that state in which there is neither question, nor
answer (i.e. in which a question formulated in ‘Devi uvdca’ or an
answer formulated in ‘Bhairava uvaca’ does not arise). It is that
ocean of supreme Consciousness, from which arises infinite know-
ledge upto that of Anaérita Siva, and by which the pupil be-
comes competent for the clarity of the question to be raised. It is,
in fact, that Reality which is ever awake. In that state how can
there ever be an occasion for another answer (than the perfect
Bhairava Consciousness) which comes from a preceptor or Guru?
   3. ‘Uttara’ means crossing i.e. liberation.       This is the libera-
tion accepted by the dualists. This does not go beyond the fixed
order of things.
   According to this, one has, first of all, to enter from the stage of
body to the stage of praya, then the stage of buddhi, i.e. one at
first considers the body to be the Self, then the prana, and then the
buddhi to be the Self, then the stage of prana (the universal prana-
Sakti spandanakhyam jivanaripatam ), then the state of the void which
connotes the dissolution of all objectivity, and then on attaining
the highest pitch (atifayadharapraptau) of the successive diminu-
tion of all the malas (limitations), the emprical individual is freed
on the manifestation of the state of Siva. All this stupendous
ascension is, indeed, futile (for were not the previous stages also
the expression of Siva?).
  4,   Similarly, rising of the Sakti from the navel to the heart,
then to the throat, then to the palate, then to the top of the head
(brahma i.e., sahasrara), then to the Bhairava bila (the point above
the sahasrdra) in an upward succession is ascension. Anuttara
signifies that in this Saiva Agama, mounting to Bhairava by an
upward succession through the six cakras is not indispensable (na
vidyate uttarah i.e. tirdhvataranakramah yatra).
   5. Uttara also means ‘that from which one has to go beyond’
i.e., bondage or the world.         It also means      ‘crossing over’ i.e.
moksa or deliverance.
    Therefore, anuttara is that    in which there are no such          cros-
sings (i.e. according to anuttara, the world is not really bondage,
and when the world is not bondage, the question of deliverance
does not arise),
   6.   Uttara also means speaking in a limited way (about Rea-
lity) e.g. ‘Itis like this, it is like that’, i.e. limiting Reality in these
22                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana

ways.      Therefore,   anuttara is that which has not got limitations.
It is unlimited, infinite Reality.
   7. Even pointing to Highest Reality® by the mere word ‘this’
is also limiting it, for such indication is also limitation. Thus be-
cause of its sense of exclusion        (vyavacchedakatvdt), even a simple
                                                          t-construct,
denotation as ‘this’ is only a vikalpa ive. a mere though
                                                                nameva ).
because of its essence being ‘limitation’ (vyaccheda-pra
                                     experi ent   (mayiya h  pramat a) is
Therefore, so long as an empirical
                                             e   Reality )   so  long   he
desirous of entering anuttara (the Suprem
                                       )  of   a particu lar   form   (i.e.
remains in vikalpa (thought-construct
                                                                that that
in samadhi). In this context, (it must be borne in mind)
 which is indeterminate        (avikalpitam) and necessarily inherent in
                                                                 me Con-
 everything (avindbhavi),® that is really anuttara (Supre
                                           inate   concep  t  cannot      ap-
 sciousness), for without it even a determ
                                            fact,  in   anuttar a    (tatra),
 pear (tadvina kalpitariipasphuranat). In
                                                                       inap-
 contemplation, concentration etc. (bhavanadeh) are wholly
                                                  declar ed    (by    Soma-
 plicable. Therefore, it (anuttara) has been
                                                                  that bha-
 nanda) to be beyond contemplation, karana, etc. Not
                                                     about    the     purifi-
 vand is wholly useless, (ie. it can only bring
                                                            anuttara
 cation of mind, but not the realization of anuttara). Such
                                                             in the life
  (i.e. the nirvikalpa, thought-free anuttara) abides even
                                                    its awaren ess). It
 of the work-a-day world (for those who have
     has been (thus) said by myself in one of my hymns:
                                                                     patan)
        “Slender (pratanu) rain falling continuously (avicchidaiva
                                                     iva nabhasi ) but  it is
     is not visible in the far-spreading sky (vitata
                                                                  or the
     clearly visible in juxtaposition with the tree of the forest
     eaves of the roof ofa house. Even so, the Supreme Bhairava, being
     too subtle, never appears in the range of experience. Under the
                                                                       de-
     circumstances, it is only by its connexion with means which
                                                      that  that  consci-
     pend on space, form, time, pattern, and state
                                                                  aware-
     ousness is generated instantaneously in them in whom the
                                                    s  that is indicat ive
     ness of Bhairava is subdued—the consciousnes
     of thy presence, O Lord |”
                                                                        is
        So it will be said further that what is posited as an answer
     really no answer. Now we proceed further with the      explan ation
     of anuttara.
                                                              nara i.e.
        8. Thus the sakta upaya is said to be higher than the
                                                                  Sakta
     dnava upaya. Sambhava updya is higher even than that (i.e.
                                                                 them-
     upaya). Evenin Sambhava upayas there is a hierarchy among
Abhinavagupta                                                               23

selvesin the forms of bhata, tattva, mantra, mantresvara, ( Sakti etc.).
Again even      among physical elements, there is a hierarchy
in the form  of  the earth, water etc. The dreaming is higher
than the waking, sleep is higher than that (dream); the fourth
state     (turya)   is higher than that     (sleep); the state   beyond    the
fourth (turyatita) is higher than that (i.e. the ¢urya). Even in the
waking condition there is a hierarchy of these states among
themselves through four varieties. I have conclusively dis-
cussed this matter in detail in Sripirvapaiicika.® I have not des-
cribed it here in detail, because that will serve no useful purpose,
and will unnecessarily increase the volume of the book. This
kind of uttaratva (hierarchy) only shows higher and lower and
contains the delusion of dualism.
   9.   Uttara (in anuttara) is used in an abstract sense in which
there is no indication of superiority or inferiority as in the division
of brahmana, ksattriya, vaisya, Sidra, the lowest caste (the caste
last in order).
    10. Uttara (is used) in the sense of Saktis like pafyanti® etc.
   11.  Uttara may mean Saktis like Aghora and others.’
   12.  Uttara may mean ‘para’ etc.® Anuttara is that where these
don’t exist.
    13.     Anuttara may     be analysed into a+nut+tara.          The    noun
 ‘nut’ is derived from the root ‘nud’ which means to impel, to            push,
 and      tara means    crossing,   going   beyond   the worldly   existence.
 Nuttara would, therefore, mean ‘going beyond the worldly
 existence through impulsion’ by the process of initiation.
    The guru (spiritual guide) sets in motion his own consciousness
 in the consciousness of the disciple. Thus he (the guru) applies
 an initiation which is intended to bring about liberation (moksada)
 by means of the process (paripdtyd) of the central point (viswoat)*
 etc. which is devoid of the movement of prana (exhalation) and
 apdna     (inhalation) breaths which assume the utterance of hamsa,
 and is the junction of both and by the difference of sthana’® on the
 sakala niskala™ initiation and through the practice of yojanika’®
 initiation on the occasion of the last function of the complete
 oblation.
    Now in all these, how is this kind of mockery made of the un-
 surpassable consciousness (anuttara caitanya) that is self-luminous,
24                                                   Para-Trigika-Vivarana

omnipresent, unmodified, i.e. unrestricted by the limitation of
space, time and form?!
   Therefore anuttara is that in which      a crossing over does       not
occur by such impulsion as will be said in: “Thus initiation that
leads one to liberation is achieved only in the case of one who
knows the Truth in reality” (P. T. v. 26).
   14,  ‘An’ from the root ‘an’ ‘to breathe’ with the suffix ‘kvip’
means one who breathes. Thus ‘An’ means anu or the empirical
individual whose life consists in breath and who considers his
gross body     (deha) or the subtle body   (puryastaka) etc., i.e. prana
as the Self. Similarly ananam may mean life (pranand), existing
in the body etc., consisting of different powers devoid          of I-con-
sciousness, as in the case of one who is known as Sinya-pramata.!
So anuttara would mean superiority over the empirical individual
and the Sinya-pramata, having preponderance over everything,
because of its being the highest truth, i.e. because of its being
Bhairava Himself.
     In this world full of sentient and insentient existents, the non-
sentient ones exist because of their dependence on the sentient
ones. The life of all living beings consists indeed in the afore-
mentioned divine powers of knowledge and action in the case of
other experients also (paratra) as in one’s own. Only the bodies
etc. appear as different.
    And that which is life appears in every one without any dis-
tinction i.e. life appears in every one whether he is deha-pramata,
puryastaka-pramata or $inya-pramatéd. This indeed is the highes
truth. As has been said by revered Utpaladeva:
   “Knowledge      (jiana) and activity    (Kriya)    are the very life of
living beings.”    (P.K. I, 4)
   Thus life consists only in knowledge and activity,           i.e. know-
ledge and activity alone are symbolic of life.
   15. Anuttara may be analysed as a+-nut+-tara meaning the tara
or flotation of the nut or impulsion of ‘a’. ‘A’ is the Sakti (kala)
who is above the range of maya (amdyiya), who is not found in
Sruti-sastra (i.e. in the Vedic tradition), who is the bliss (camat-
kara) of the very waveless ocean of consciousness abiding in the
natural, supreme Light, who covers both the initial and the final
stage of the perfect I-consciousness (i.e. both ‘a’ and ‘ham’ the
Sanskrit word for ‘I’), which comprehends the entire cosmos
Abhinavagupta                                                                25

which is the expression of the creative delight of Sakti. Nut i.e.
impulsion is the culmination of the expansion                (visargantata)™ of
that (i.e. kala). Tarah means the flotation or swimming of that
nut i.e. the continuance of that state over everything else. (The
sense is that though anuttara in its expansion is denoted by Sakti
and nara, yet it is never separated by these. It pervades up to the
very end).
   16. Anuttara is now analysed as anut+-tara. ‘A’ in anut means
avidyamana      (not existing),    ‘nut’ in ‘anut’ means       impulsion    i.e.
successive     action   (kramatmaka-kriya)    depending       onthe    duality
of going and coming i.e. movement in space and time. So ‘anut’
means that in which there is no impulsion of the successive move-
ment (kriydmayi prerana).
  This ‘anut’ is well-known among people as dkdfa (ether) etc.
i.e. Sanya or void (for in a@kdfa or void, there is no possibility of
coming and going etc.).
    ‘Tara’ is a sign of comparison, meaning better, higher. So
‘anuttara’ means higher even than dkéfa or ether.
  In ‘akdSa’ (ether) etc. also there may be said to be successive
action on account of incidental contact with a jar or various other
incidental contacts and on account of constant and intimate
connexion as that of sound. In the supreme Consciousness, how-
ever, which has as its essence, the sovereign power of thoroughly
uninterrupted, absolute Freedom, which has I-consciousness full
of the entire multitudinous objectivity characterized by thisness,
the condition of which is accepted (svikrta) by Siva but is viewed
with hesitancy (fankyamana), by Anasrita Siva, with a feeling of
ease characterized by delight in differentiated objectivity (vicchin-
na-camatkéramaya-visrantyd), which is ever beyond all appearance
(nirébhdse),     but    which     is always   shining   in     manifestation,
in which what was non-appearance for Anasrita Siva has been
accepted as appearance by Siva (svikdrabhasikrtanabhase), the
activity of I-consciousness is successionless, because of the absence
of the relativity of space and time which are characterized by
objectivity (in manifestation) and absence of objectivity (in
withdrawal), which is full of the delight of its own consciousness,
well known in the matsyodari'® and mata Sastra. This succession-
less I-consciousness is the anuttara (supreme, unsurpassable).
26                                               Para-Trigika-Vivarana

      (Now Abhinavagupta takes up the question as to why the word
anuttara has been used instead of anuttama. )
                                                             tama)
   According to the rule of grammar, the suffix famap (i.e.
is used (in the superlative degree of adjectiv e), denotin g   that
                                                              tarap
which surpasses everything (atifayamatra), but the suffix
 (i.e. tara, denoting comparative degree) has been used here which
shows only a comparison of two things. For instance when we
                                                             both of
say, ‘This is whiter’, what we mean is that of two things
                                       ss  (atiSayen a Suklah)  than
which are white, one has more whitene
 the other. But in the sentence ‘of these white things, this has
 more whiteness’—what is the additional sense in this? For in-
                                                             swan is
 stance in: ‘This palace is white, this cloth is white, this
 also white’, that which has the greatest whiteness is said to be
 whitest (suklatama). The palace is also white, the cloth is also
                                                            in ‘the
 white—what additional information has been given
                                              formati on of the sen-
 whitest’? Therefore in the tamap suffix, the
                                                           does
 tence in the above way is inappropriate. The tamap suffix
 not describe anything more than the tarap suffix.
                                                  tamap   suffix   is used
      This is what is meant to be said: “The
                                                            about
 when a particular correlative is not intended to be spoken
                                                                   suffix
  (i.e. when there is no comparison between two), the ¢arap
                                                    there   is compari -
 is used with reference to a correlative (i.e. when
                                                     )   is  used  when
 son between two). The secondary word (upapada
                                                                  e to a
 there is a distinction made by a dual number with referenc
     correlative.” One only is a correlative. ‘Of the two, this is more
     white’-—in this, a third is not acknowledged. For expressing
     specific ascertainment, the first is considered to have a corre-
     lative. There is no expectancy of more than two in comparison.
                                                                      to
     There is comparison of only one simultaneously with reference
                                                                    does
     the other. In using the tamap affix by way of gradation, one
                                                        of  ‘tarap’  and
     not get any additional information. The use
     ‘tamap’ suffix in the sense of graded or comparative value is only
     conventional;   it has no regular or proper derivation.       It is not
                                                                    If
     in accordance with the sense of ‘tarap’ and ‘tamap’ suffix.
     tarap and. tamap indicate graded excellence, so may    tarya and
     témya also. Enough of displaying ability unnecessarily regarding
     a matter a bit of which we have heard from scholars.
        Here it is in order to indicate graded correlatives along with
     ‘uttara’ that the tarap suffix has been used. Even if there were no
 Abhinavagupta                                                              27

 occasion to express correlatives, the usage of ‘anuttamam’ would
 also have borne the same sense.
   So in another Agama,        it has been said:
   “There is no one to whom         that unspecified Highest Reality
 (anuttamam) is unknown which, however, is not known even now
to the wise who have become perfect in sddhand (spiritual
praxis).”"?7_ (Even now means even when so-called jana has been
acquired. )
   Thus the unsurpassable (anuttara) is that whose essence is
absolute Freedom,      which is not determined by time, i.e. which
transcends all temporal concepts, which is an embodiment of
activity (kriyasakti)}8,
   The same thing has been said by revered Utpaladeva in the
following lines:
   “Tt is only in worldly activity that there is succession, due to
the Lord’s power of time (kdlasakti) but there can be no succession
in the eternal activity (kriydfakti) of the highest Lord (which is
of the nature of vimarga) just as there is no succession in the Lord
Himself” (I.P.K. V. II, 1, 2).!®
   Thus this unsurpassable Reality      (anuttara) has been explained
in sixteen ways. In the Trikasara” also, it has been said:
   “‘Anuttara is the heart (centre) of all. There is a knot in that
heart. Knowing that knot to be sixteen-fold, one should perform
one’s actions at ease.”*?
   Similarly, “The knot abiding in the heart can be untied only
by Anutiara Himself.”

Notes
   1. The following form the thirty-six tattvas or categories of
existence according to this commentary:
Mahabhiitas      (gross physical elements)   —5        (earth,   water,   air,
                                                       fire, ether)
Tanmiatras                                    5        (riipa, rasa, gandha,
                                                       Sabda, sparsa)
Jiianendriyas                                     5
K armendriyas                                     i}
Buddhi, Manas, Ahamkara                           3
 Prakrti                                          1
Purusa                                             1
28                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

Maya together with her five kaficukas            6
Suddha vidya                                     1
Tsvara                                            1
Sadasiva                                         i
Anaérita Siva and his Sakti                      2
                                                36

      2. The Highest Reality cannot be designated as ‘this’ for that
would only objectify it, whereas the Highest Reality can never be
objectified. It is the Eternal Subject.
  3. Avinabhavi is that which is necessarily inherent in everything.
The akalpita or indeterminate is the avindbhavi, for without the
indeterminate, the determinate (kalpita) cannot exist.
    4. Details of these upayas are given on page 215 of Tantraloka,
 vol. I. (KSTS ed.)
       5. ‘These four varieties are (1) jagrat-jagrat,     (2) jagrat-svapna,
     (3) jagrat-susupti, (4) jdgrat-turiya.
      6. This book is not available now.
    6. These pasyanti, madhyamd, etc. are Saktis, and not gradations
 of speech.
     7. The Saktis (powers) referred to are:
          (1) Aghora Saktis that lead the conditioned experients to
       the realization of Siva.
          (2) Ghora Saktis that lead the jivas towards worldly plea-
       sures and are a hindrance in the way of liberation.
           (3) Ghoratari Saktis that push the jivas towards          a down-
       ward path in samsara.
       8. These are:
          (1) Para which brings about a sense of identity with Siva.
           (2) Parapara Saktis which belong to the intermediate stage,
       they give a sense of unity in diversity.
           (3) Apara which brings about only a sense of difference.
        These Saktis carry out their function through Aghora, Ghora
     and Ghoratari Saktis.
        9. Visuvat prabhrti= visuvat etc. Visuvat in a general sense means
     middlemost, central. In a specialized or technical sense, it means
     equinox—a point where day and night become equal. The
     idea common in both cases is a central point where two forces
                                                                        is a
     become equal. Hamsa prana means hamsa-riipi prana. ‘Ham’
Abhinavagupta                                                       29

symbolic word for the utterance indicated by préna (exhalation)
and ‘sah’ is a symbolic word for the utterance indicated by apdna
 (inhalation) breath. So ‘hamsapréna-finya-visuvat?) means that
central point where both prana and apdna are equally balanced,
the middle-most point where there is neither prana nor apdna
(hamsapranadisinyavisuvat), the zero point intermediate between
prana and apdna. It is at such a point that the guru impels the
consciousness of the disciple in the universal consciousness.
Prabhyti, i.e. et cetera refers to abhijit. It is also symbolic of the
meeting point of the prdna and apana. The difference between
the two is that in viswvat, the neutral or zero point comes at the
end of prana and commencement of apdna, whereas in abhijit, it
comes at the end of apana and commencement of prana.
   10. Sthdna-bheda refers to the difference of bahyadvddasanta and
Gntaradvadasanta.
   11. Sakala and   niskala initiation:
  Sakala initiation is for one who after realization of the Supreme
wants to remain in the world and help others in their realization
of liberty. By initiation, the future and past karmas of such a
disciple are destroyed, but his prarabdha karma (i.e. karma which
has commenced to bear fruit) is untouched so that he may re-
main in the physical body in order to liberate other souls. A
parallel may be noticed in the Bodhisattva of Buddhism.
   Niskala initiation is for one who only wants his liberation and
is not concerned with the liberation of others. A parallel may be
noticed in the Pratyeka Buddha of Buddhism.
   For details, see Tantraloka, 15th Ahnika, verse 30 ff.
   12. Yojanika diksa: In this, the guru unites the consciousness
of the disciple to a particular taltva according to his desire. Cf.
“tato yadi bhogecchuk syat tato yatraiva tattve bhogecchd asya bhavati
tatraiva samastavyastataya yojayet”, Tantrasara, p. 159.
   13, It is not modified by defa (space) i.e. it is vydpaka or all-
pervading, not modified by kdla (time) i.e. it is nitya or eternal,
not modified by any particular akdra or form, i.e. it is visvakara
i.e. all-containing.
    14, Sanya pramata: having the experience of only void. He is
devoid of I-feeling in respect of the various powers of the senses;
he is also devoid of the sense of objectivity.    He has simply life
without even the breath.
30                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                         expansion
      15. The culmination of the Sakti in her visarga or
                                                          unity ‘ha’
consists in aham, of this ‘a’ is symbolic of abheda i.e.,
                   of bheda or diversity, the anusodra or dot on         ‘ha’ is
is symbolic
                                                            are
symbolic of bhedabheda i.e. unity in diversity. These three
known as para visarga, apara visarga and pardpara visarga.
                                                           inwardly
  16. Matsyodari: The belly of the fish keeps throbbing
without any external movement.                 So the I-consciousness keeps
throbbing without movement.
       17. The wise want to know          it by reason, and fail miserably.
                                                               of all
The common people know it instinctively as the ground
existence.
   18, Here kriyasakti includes jidnasakti also.
                                                               rrup-
   19, There is no succession in I-consciousness. It is uninte
 ted. So it is beyond time.        The      anuttara is the Lord’s I-conscious-
                                                          .
 ness, and so successionless i.e. beyond temporal concept
    20. Trikasarasastra is not available now.
    21. The sixteen knots are the following:
                                                                  a or
     Reality is expressed in (1) prameya or object, (2) praman
                                                           (4)  pramiti
 knowledge, (3) pramata or subject of knowledge,
                                                               subject-
 or non-relational knowledge, i.e. knowledge without
                                                     viz. srsti, sthiti,
 object relation. Each of these four has four states
                                                      up sixteen.
 samhara and anakhya. ‘Thus altogether, they make

                                         TEext
                                                       the same page,
     From tata idrk on p. 11, 1. 11 upto ayakhydtam on
     1, 16.
                                   ‘TRANSLATION
                                                                        on katham
        (Now Abhinavagupta gives three interpretations
     (how) of the verse. )
                                                                           Case—
         (‘Katham’ may be taken in the sense of an Instrumental
                                                                    ng: )
     tritiyartha. Then its meaning will be like the followi
                           (kena prakare na)   is such  anuttar a to  be realized:
        1. In what way
                                                              ise?
     by abandoning the uttara or the world or otherw
                            in the sense   of Nomina  tive   Case,   prathamdrtha.
         (It may be taken
     Then its meaning will be like the following: )
                                    Since     anuttara is all this multitude       of
         2. What    is this way?
                                                           knower i.e.
     knowledge (jfdna), object of knowledge (jiieva) (and
                        on   all sides mutual opposi tion consist ing of
     jrata) which meets
Abhinavagupta                                                                31

difference, therefore, there are bound to be superiority and in-
feriority. What is this kind of anuttara with higher and lower
grade?
   (It may be taken in the sense of Locative Case, saptamyartha.
Then its meaning will be like the following: )
  3. In which way is there anuttara in liberation or even in what
is supposed to be bondage? Since there is no definite rule regar-
ding taking the ‘tham’ suffix in the sense of any particular case,
and since it can be taken in a general sense of kind or sort, this
question   beginning     with   ‘katham’     concerns    only kind or sort.
The word ‘deva’ has already been explained.
   (Now Abhinavagupta explains sadyah kaulika-siddhidam of the
verse. )

                                    Text
   From kulam sthila siiksma etc. on p. 11, 1. 17 upto             kimaparena
vagjadlena on p. 13, 1. 10.

                                TRANSLATION
   (First interpretation of kaulika-siddhidam)
   ‘Kula’ is gross    (sthiila), subtle    (siksma),    and ulterior   (para),
prana   (life-breath), indriya (senses), bhitddi (the five gross phy-
sical elements)      both in a collective sense         (i.e. in the sense   of
totality of manifestation),1 and in the sense of cause-effect. As
has been said: ‘‘By reason of action          (only) in collaboration with
another”    (Y.S. IV, 24).?
   So kula or totality is so called, because            Consciousness itself
abides in the various forms of objectivity?             (yathavasthanat)® by
means of coagulation* and Consciousness itself (voluntarily)5
assumes bondage by its own Freedom. It is said: ‘The word
‘kula’ is used in the sense of coagulation and kindred.”            (samstyane
bandhusu ca).®
   Without Consciousness which is Light itself, no entity which
is devoid of the light of manifestation         (aprakasamdnam vapuh) can
acquire existence.
   Now ‘kauliki’ is that which is related to the whole universe
including the body;       siddhi or achievement         is the acquisition of
bliss (dnanda) by turning round            (parivytya)? to have a firm hold
on that very principle i.e. the light of the universal consciousness
32                                                            Para-Trigika-Vivarana

(tathdtoa-dardhyam), in other words, identity with the perfect
                                                                    whose
I-feeling of Siva, who is the highest Consciousness and
                  or  the eternal  throb  of  delight  in  manifes tation
nature is spanda
                                                               ) So ‘kau-
 (hydaya-svabhdva-parasamwidatmaka-Siva-vimarsa-tadatmyam
                                                                 achieve-
lika-siddhidam’ is that which enables one to have such
                  words,   by  achievi ng  identity   with  anuttara,  the
ment. In other
.otality of manifestation becomes like that anuttara itself.
   As has been said in the following lines:
   “By means of negative and positive proof® (ayatireketarabhyam)
                                                              and
there is settled conviction concerning the Self (nijatman)
                  (anya, lit., the other).     Such conviction          is known       as
objectivity
 fixity     (vpavasthiti),    firm standing     (pratistha),      complete        attain-
 ment      (siddhi), and final beatitude       (niroytti).””

                    (Interpretation of the word sadyah)
                                                                  day’
       The word ‘sadyah’ is used in the sense of ‘on the same
                            As  has been said previou sly, there is no
     (sa=same, adya=day).
 fixity of the day or the present              (i.e. it is only conventional).
                                                           Sameness
 So, ‘sadyaf’ in this context means at the same instant.
                          samenes s of the moment , but  rather ‘ter-
 here does not connote
 minating in Reality’            (tattvaparyavasayt), for it is in this way that
     the word sadyah is to be understood.          Therefore if sadyah is to be
     taken in the sense of ‘at that very moment’, then on account of the
                                                                      s
     limitation of the present moment, the past and future moment
                                                                            in its
     would be rejected, and thus the present whose life consists
                               ly  with    referen ce   to the   past   and    the
     being reckoned relative
     future will also have  to be rejected .
                                                                                (so
        For the kula (total objectivity) that has been described
                                   (cakra)   of the  rays® of  the  divine   Sun,
     far) is the collective whole
                                                                    its external
     viz. Bhairava and is of the essence of Light (in
                When,        however,   that   (kula)     acquires      nirodha      (rest,
     aspect).
                                                                        Bhairava
     stoppage) by identification with the inner supreme
                               is full of  the relish     of  the   ambrosi a of
     Consciousness, then it
                                        endent  to all   aspects    and  phases) ,
     supreme bliss, is anuttara (transc
                                        of the form    of   visarga,! ° and  ever-
     beyond space and time, eternal
                             thing has been said in Vadyatantral                   in the
     risen. The same
     following lines:
        “Having retained         (within one’s essential nature) one’s entire
                         (that are extroverted)         and    having    (thus)     drunk
     group of saktis
Abhinavagupta                                                                       33

incomparably the most exquisite nectar                   (of Self-realization), one
should abide happily in that state!*                 (of self-realization),    unrest-
ricted by the past and the future.”
  At another place, I have described in detail the non-restrictive
characteristic of both these times (i.e. the past and the future).

                (Second     interpretation      of    kaulika-siddhidam )
  Kaulika-siddhi means siddhi or achievement of definite experi-
ence of objects derived through ula i.e. by means of the body,
préna, and puryastaka. The siddhi (achievement) consists in the
definite grasp of blue, pleasure etc. (i.e. objective and subjective
experience) which are completely diverse (lit., whose life consists
of diversity). Kaulika-siddhidam, therefore, means that which
gives i.e. brings about the definite grasp of objective and sub-
jective phenomena by means of kula i.e. by means of the body,
prana, and puryastaka. Indeed it is the body, mind, etc., which,
 through the penetration in them of the energy of the eternal ‘a’
ie.   ‘Siva’,    and      His   externalizing        Sakti symbolizing        ‘ha’, the
energy    that is beyond         the sphere of time and that mounts                 the
intermediate stair of prana etc., which bring about the success in
the form of the definite perception of the existing entities. As
has been said,
   “Tt is rather by coming in contact with the power of the Self
that the empirical individual is equal to that (ie. the divine
Being)’ (Sp. K. I, 8).
  Similarly,
   “Resorting to that power               (of spanda        tattva),   the divinities,
Mantra etc., being endowed with the power of omniscience
proceed to carry out their assigned functions towards the embodied
ones just as the senses of the embodied ones by resorting to the
power of spanda proceed to carry out their (specific) functions”
 (Sp. K. II, 1).

                (Third      interpretation      of kaulika-siddhidam)
  Kula means—though kula of the form of Siva-Sakti is close at
hand, i.e. though it is present in every one, it is not realized by
all. Siddhi means, according to the principle already described,
liberation in life itself (in the form of identity with the divine
consciousness)         generating     the much          sought-after     supernormal
34                                                       Pard-Trisika-Vivarana

             anima    etc.   Sadyah   means     spontaneously        without     any
powers,
effort or anticipation       (andkalitam eva) i.e. without contemplation
 (bhavana)*4, karana® etc.       So ‘kaulika-siddhidam’ means that which
brings about liberation in life (in the form of unification with the
                                                                 the
divine consciousness) generating spontaneously without
                                                                        powers     of
effort of contemplation etc., the much sought-after
anima etc.
   As has been said by revered Somananda:"*
   “Because of Siva’s being present always, what is the use of
contemplation, karana etc.?” (S.D. VI, 101)
   Similarly, (it is said in the following lines) :
   “Having once acquired the knowledge of omnipresent Siva
                                                                e,
with firm conviction through experience (pramana), the scriptur
                                           nothing  to be done any
and the statement of the guru, there is
 more by means of karana or bhavana.”                (S.D. 5b-6).

               (Fourth interpretation of kaulika siddhidam )
                                                            Siddhi
   “Kaulika means kule-jaté i.e., born or sprung in kula.
                                                     y, beginni ng
 means the achievement of the appearance of diversit
 with the expansion of ‘ha’, the expression of Sakti’s delight and
 ending with the evolution of the multitude of external existents.
 That which brings about such achievement is kaulikasiddhidam.
    It is anuttara itself of the nature of eminent Light, which has
 implicitly within itself the expansion of the universe as identical
 with consciousness,” that explicitly evolves diversity through the
                 of the delight of power issuing from its own                  unsur-
 abundance
 passed Freedom. Mayd or prakyti which is not Light of Consci-
 ousness (aprakasaripam) cannot be the cause of the manifesta-
 tion of existents. If that is supposed to be of the nature of Light,
                         is the exalted       Lord    Bhairava      Himself.    Then
     then it certainly
     what is the use of another snare of words?
     Notes
       1. Kula or the totality of manifestation appears in three forms,
     viz., gross (sthila), subtle (siksma) and the ulterior (para) either
     as material object or as the body. In the case of the body it is
             as sthila Sarira, sitksma-Sarira, and para or karana               Sarira.
     known
     In the sense of cause-effect? it means that bhitadi or pafica maha-
                                                                          air,
     bhatas, the five gross physical elements, viz., earth, water, fire,
                                                             the indriyas   or
     and ether are the effect of sthiila or gross matter,
Abhinavagupta                                                         35

senses are the effects of subtle or siksma matter, and prana is the
effect of the para or ulterior matter.
   2. This is a quotation from Patafijali’s Yoga-Siitras (IV,      24).
The full Sitra is as follows:
  tadasamkhyeyavdsanabhiscitramapi pardrtham samhatyakdritvat.
ie. “That, viz. the citta or mind though variegated by innumer-
able sub-conscious impressions exists for another (i.e. the purusa
or Self) by reason of its acting in collaboration with another i.e.
because    of interdependently joint     causation.”
   3. Yathdvasthandt means that every material object appears in
its own space, time and form.
   4. Agyanaritpatayd or ‘by means of coagulation’ means that
subtle energy of consciousness assumes the solid form of matter,
but even in that thickened mass of matter, consciousness does not
lose its nature, even as water in becoming ice does not lose its
nature.
   5. The kula or totality of matter assumes bondage or limitation
not by any compulsion, but bodhasodtantryadeva, by the inherent
Freedom of the divine Consciousness, i.e. the divine Conscious-
ness voluntarily descends into the limitation of matter.
   6. The double entendre in ‘bandhusu’ cannot be brought out
in translation. The word ‘bandhu’ is derived from the root ‘bandh’
which means to bind. ‘badhndti manah snehadina iti bandhuh’. A
kindred or friend is called ‘bandhu’ because he binds the mind by
affection etc. In bandhabhimanat, A.G. suggests that ‘kula’ binds
or limits not only in the sense of matter, but also in the sense of
kindred or friend.
   7. Pariortya is a very significant expression       in this context.
Parivytya means ‘turning round, going back’ to its origin. ‘Pari-
ott’ the noun form of the verb ‘pariart’ is a technical word of this
system. It is defined as ‘idantdtmakam visvdbhasam ahantatmani
pitrnabhase samsthanam’—the entire objective manifestation appear-
ing as ‘this’ abiding in the full blaze of perfect I-consciousness of
the divine’. The kauliki siddhi comes when the fragment returns
to the whole, the perfect I-consciousness. The objective pheno-
mena then appear as a ray of the noumenal Light.
   8. ‘Vyatireka-itarabhyam’—‘Vyatireka’ means exclusion, a negative
proof, ‘itara’ means    other than gyatireka, i.e. anvaya or positive
proof.    Vyatireka is defined as ‘yadabhdve yadabhavah’ i.e. it is that
                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana
36

                                         of the other also occurs.
where in the absence of one, the absence
                                                     it is that where in the
‘Anvaya’ is defined as ‘yatsattve ‘yatsattvam’ i.e.
                                               other    also occurs.
presence of the one, the presence of the
                                              or the collective whole
   9. Rays or ‘rafmicakra’ means fakti-cakra
of the Saktis of the Divine.
                                             supreme Siva, the first
    10. ‘Anuttara dhruva’ is the ‘a’ or the
                                              ‘aham’ upto the anu-
letter of ‘aham’. Visarga is the expansion of                    in
                                          d by a dot on ‘ha’
svara i.e. the nasal sound which is marke
                                           ‘ha’ represents ‘Sakti’,
aham. Thus ‘a’ in aham represents Siva,
                                      though Siva is manifested
the anusvara represents the fact that
                                            divided thereby; he
right upto earth through Sakti, he is not
                                            u-ripataya )
remains undivided (avibhagavedanatmaka-bind
                                            Siva-Sakti is visarga
   Visarga: The very nature of anuttara or                                     in
                                     viz., srsti or expansion
 or expansion which has two aspects,
                                      and samhdra or return
 manifestation upto nara or phenomena
                                        whole cosmic play of
 movement from phenomena to Siva. The
                                            The visarga is indicated
 srsti-samhara is of the nature of visarga.
                                             (:) and also by the dot
 in srsfi with two dots above one another
                                            of ‘ha’ is known as full
 on aham which is only half visarga. Half
                                              or bindu             (.).
 visarga and half of this visarga is anusvdra
       11. Vadya Tantra is not available now.
                                                    ie. in the state
    12. ‘Vartamane’ here means svariipalabhadasayam
 of one’s realization of his essential nature.                  ing
                                              a OY Siva’s externaliz
       13. Anuttara symbolizes ‘a’ and visarg
                                                  cannot bring about
     Sakti symbolizes ‘ha’. The body, prana, etc.                  y
                                           themselves.         It is the energ
     the definite perception of objects by
                                                     them enables them to
     of the inner Divine ‘I’ which by enliving
     have objective and subjective    exper ience .
                                                           powers are inter-
        14, In the non-dualistic Saivagama all these
                                            Siva   or  Bhair ava who is our
     preted in the light of identity with
     own   essential Self. Thus
                                                                  manifestation
           (1) Animdis the power of assimilating the entire
                                                     is our essential Self.
        to the cit or the Divine Consciousness which
                                                            of diversity.
           (2) Laghima is the power of discarding all sense
                                                                   ervasiveness
           (3)   Mahima is the acquisition of the sense of all-p
        of the   Divine.
                                                                  essential Self.
           (4)    Prapti is the power of abiding in one’s own
                                                 ng  the variet y   of the world
           (5)    Prakamya is the power of viewi
        as the   delightful play of the Divin e.
Abhinavagupta                                                             37

     (6)      VaSitva   is unity-consciousness   with   all.
      (7) Isitytva or Ifitva is the power of abiding as the Divine
Consciousness without interruption.
      (8) Yatrakamavasayitoa is the power of developing icchd-                 |
fakti characteristic of Siva.                                                  |
   14. Bhavana in a general sense includes dharand (concentra-
tion), dhyana (meditation), samadhi (absorption);       in a specific
sense, it means creative contemplation.
   15. Karana is one of the dnava upayas in which the aspirant
contemplates over the body and the nervous system as an epitome
of the cosmos.
   16. Somananda lived in Kashmir in the ninth century a.v. He
wrote Sivadrsti, and a commentary on Paratrisika which is not
available now. He was the great-grand-teacher of Abhinavagupta.
   17, The entire objective manifestation exists in anuttara as a
form of Consciousness or vimarsa.

                                    Text
  From     tatha yena anuttarena on p. 13, 1. 10 upto      vijRdtamatrena on
p. 13, 1.17

                                TRANSLATION
   ‘Now Abhinavagupta explains ‘yena vijfidtamdatrena’ of the first
verse in different ways. )

          (First interpretation of ‘yena-vijfatamatrena’ )
  ‘Yena’ means anuttarena i.e. by which anutiara.
   Vijidta means visesena jidta i.e. distinctively known, very well
known.
  Matrena—This consists of two words mdé-+-ira. Ma means matré
i.e, m@nena or pramdtmand, meaning ‘by means             of the knowledge
 (of the Self),’ tra means tranam i.e. palanam or protecting, nourish-
ing, maintaining or patitva i.e. rulership, guardianship.
    So, trénam means protection of the pramata (knower), pramana
 {knowledge and means of knowledge), prameya (knowable object)
and pramiti (right conception). So, mdtra is one that protects or
maintains by the knowledge of the essential Self pramdata, pramana
etc. Therefore, vijfiatamatram means ‘that anuttara by which the
above mdtrda is very well known’,
38                                                    Pard-Trisika-Vivarana

                 (Second   interpretation    of vijfdtamdtrena)

     That which is very well known i.e. known with firm conviction,
is already known. Being once already fully known (sakrd-vibhata-
tmatvat) it is not to be known again. Jfidtamdtram means already
known as on object (jfevaikaripatodt), for instance a jar, never a
 subject (na tu kadacit jfdtr-ripam). So, vijfidtamatra means that
 which is already known as an object. Similarly, it also means
 maya which is known as an object bringing about diversity.
    Now, vi-jfdtamatram is that in which both the known (jndtama-
 tra) i.e. objects such as jar etc. and mdyd have ceased (‘vi’ in this
 context meaning ‘vigata’, ie. ceased). Therefore, vi-jfdtamatrena
 is that in which objects such as jar etc., are no longer objects
 but being identified with the subject appear as one’s own light,
 and where       maja no longer prevails.
     Three ideas have been brought about in the above explanation:
  (1) It is anuttara by means of which is maintained that Self
 through which alone exist the pleasures of pramatd, pramana,
 prameya and pramiti. (2) The Self once recognized one requires
 no further support through bhdvand etc.             (3) The object cannot
 replace the subject. That in which the object and maya do not
 prevail is vijfdtamdtra.

                                    Text
       From    khe brahmani on p. 13, |. 17 upto uktanayena on p. 18, 1.3.

                                 TRANSLATION
       (Now Abhinavagupta offers an explanation of khecarisamata )
       The    meaning   of khecari is as follows.      That   Sakti    is khecari,
     who abiding in kha, i.e. brahma        (i.e. cit) which is identical with
     herself roams about i.e. functions in various ways           (carati).   This
     khecari in her universal aspect functions (carati) in three ways.
     She (as gocari) brings about a knowledge of objects, (as dikcari)
     effects movements, such as grasping, relinquishing, etc., (as
     bhicari) exists in the form of objective existents. Thus this
     khecari exists as gocari in the form of antahkarana (the inner psychic
     apparatus), as dikcari in the form of bahiskarana (i.e. outer senses),
     as bhicari in the form of objective existents, as blue etc., or
     subjective existents as pleasure etc.
Abhinavagupta                                                                39

  Similarly, in the individual aspects, the faktis that are known
successively as gyomacari in the void (of consciousness) in which
the distinction between subject and object has not yet appeared,
as gocari in the form of antahkarana in which there is just ap-
pearance of knowledge, as dikcari in the form of the outer senses
suggesting the appearance of diversity in which state there is
diversity of the knower from the knowable object, as bhicari in
the form of bhavas or existents in which there is preponderance of
clear diversity in the objects,       are in reality,    according       to the
principle enunciated, non-distinct from khecari which abides in
the essential nature i.e. anuttara. Thus that Sakti of the Supreme
Lord is only one. As has been said,
  “His faktis constitute the entire universe, and the great Lord
is the possessor of all the faktis.” Or according to another inter-
pretation: “There is only one possessor of Sakti, viz., MaheSvara
and   the entire phenomenal        manifestation is the varied form of
His svdtantrya Sakti     (sovereign   autonomy).’’       Consequently she
(khecari) is indicated in feminine gender.
   It would not be proper to have a fixed, regular order or sepa-
rateness between khecari Sakti whose sphere is the self, gocari whose
sphere   is the antahkarana      or mind,   dikcari whose       sphere   is the
senses and bhicari whose sphere is external objects, because in
that case an intimate connexion between them would not be
possible, and also because as completely separate from khecari,
they would not appear at all (merely through the activity of the
senses).
  That very khecari is perceived separately             (from the Divine)
in the form of desire, anger, etc. However, the samaté or same-
ness of khecari means the perception of her full divine nature
everywhere      (in fabda or sound,     ripa or form      and     colour,   rasa
or taste, gandha or smell, sparsa or contact) because of her being
of the nature of perfect Bhairava. Even an iota of the ignorance
of the nature of the integral anuttara amounts to a contrary state
of the mind.     It is this contrary state that constitutes transmigra-
tory existence      (samsdra).
   In this state, there is active display of dnava mala bringing
about as it does the sense of extreme smallness in oneself because of
his considering himself as thoroughly imperfect, of mdyiya mala
which    is   due   to   perception   of diversity      which comes about
40                                                           Para-Trisika-Vivarana

because of the longing for making up (lit. filling) for the limitation
caused by arava mala, of karma mala which arises because of
laying hold of the residual traces of good and evil actions                      done
 under the influence of mapa.
    When owing to the absence of limitation, the aberration (vai-
 samya) of the modes of the mind caused by the non-recognition
 of the essential nature ceases, the very states of anger, delusion,
 etc., appear as only an expression of the consciousness                       of the
 perfect, revered Lord Bhairava Himself.               As revered       Somananda
 has said: “Siva is that whose very nature consists in the expansion
 of His Saktis”         (Sivadrsti, III, 94). Similarly, “Whether                 it is
 the state of pleasure          (the expression of sattoa) or of pain                (the
 expression of rajas), or of delusion (the expression of tamas),
 I abide in all of them as the Supreme Siva” ($.D. VII, 105).
       In   pain also, the purpose is steadiness through the                   efflore-
 scence of the essential nature by means of endurance” etc. (S.D.,
 MeO):
        Even the states of anger etc., exist because of their identity
     with the wondrous play of the (divine) consciousness, otherwise
     their very existence would be impossible (lit., otherwise the very
     acquisition of their nature         would   be impossible). The divine
     sense-goddesses themselves carrying out the various play (of life)
     are like the rays of Siva-sun, The sense-divinities' by combining
     among themselves become of innumerable sorts. They are
     either of terrible or beneficent kinds arrayed for various appro-
     priate   purposes    (parikalpita-tattatsamucita-saumya-rudraprakarah )
     and    employed     for terrible     (raudra)    actions     of uccatana®       and
     marana or for gentle,       beneficent actions         (sSantyadiriipesu karmesu )
     and in the mata astra} etc., are said to be worthy of worship as
     deities according to their division as kytya* etc. They constitute
     the family of revered Bhairava. As has been said, beginning with:
     “One    should    assume    the   crow-faced    pose     for uccatana”’   and     in:
     “they are the rays of the God of gods and hold the power of ‘ka’
     and other groups of letters.””
        If the real nature of these rays i.e. faktis is not realized, then
     concealing (tirodadhatyah) the wondrous play of the divine Con-
     sciousness which remains without any differentiation even in
     the midst of differentiations (vikalpe’pi nirvikalpaikasdram), they
     bring about the state of pasus (limited experients) by worldly
Abhinavagupta                                                                     41

snare, by means of the multitude of various kinds of letters, by
means of the ghoratari Saktis who carry on their sports (i.e. devatd-
tmand) in the form of various kinds of concepts      (vikalpariipena)
by entering them (i.e. the limited experients) in the form of fear
arising from doubt.
   As has been said in the following lines:
   “‘Mahdaghoras are the deities of the pithas who delude people
constantly”, and in: ““They push those limited experients down
and down who are engrossed in objects of pleasure.” And also in:
  “Being    deprived       of his glory    by   kala,   he    (the   individual)
becomes a victim of the group of powers arising from the multi-
tude of words and thus he is known as the bound one.”                        (Sp. K.
TET; 13}.
  When      their   real   nature   is    known,   then      these   very mental
states (such as anger, delusion, etc.) bring about, by the means
referred to (viz. khecari-samatd) liberation in life itself. As has
been said:
   “When, however, he is firmly rooted in that supreme spanda
principle, then bringing the emergence and dissolution of the
puryastaka entirely under his control, he becomes the real enjoyer
and thenceforth the lord of the collective whole of the Saktis.”
 (Sp. K. III, 15).
   This is what is meant by the knowledge of their (i.e. the states
of desire, anger etc.) real nature. These states of anger, etc.,
at the time of their arising are of the form of nirvikalpa i.e. they
are sheer energy of the divine.
   So even when an aberrant thought-construct                    (vikalpa)     (such
as kéma or krodha) arises (which at the time of arising is non-
aberrant) and is influenced by the varied words which are the
outcome of the multitude of letters, it is not united with the
group of the faktis associated with the multitude of the letters
so that it cannot annul the yogi’s nature determined by his
earlier state of nirvikalpa. The thought-constructs are not entirely
detached from the indeterminate state of consciousness (niroi-
kalpa) which is only another kind of vikalpa or thought. It is
only the indeterminate consciousness (nirvikalpa) which by the
power of its autonomy (sedtantrya) differentiates from itself the
various entities (bhdvas) from which are derived the differences
of the gross elements (labdhabheda-bhitadi) known as vijfdna-
42                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana

cakra and is thus the master or regulator of it (i.e. the vijfdna-
cakra).
      Therefore,   homogeneousness        (sdémya or samata)     of the khecari-
Sakti constitutes liberation. This homogeneousness (sameness )
of the khecari Sakti is due to the awareness of the essential nature
of the anuttara (i.e. the unsurpassable Absolute Reality) which is
constantly present and which arises from the bliss of the recogni-
                                                        with Siva,
tion of the completion of the union of the divine Sakti
                                             of  the conscio usness
and acquires stability by the realization
of bliss of both (ubhayavimarsanandariidhi).
      Siva intent on creativity in the form of expansion by means of
                                                            viz.
 the energy of the great mantra of the Supreme primal word,
 the perfect I, in union with Sakti, in whom the urge for expansion
 is implicit, and in whom abounds the bloom of the compactness
 of their energy, becomes engaged in the act of creative expansion.®
    Now whatever enters the inner psychic apparatus or the outer
                                                                     i-
 senses of all beings, that abides as sentient life-energy (cetanari
 pena prandtmand) in the middle channel i.e., susumnd    whose  main
 characteristic is to enliven all the parts of the body. That life-
 energy is said to be ‘ojas’ (vital lustre), that is then diffused
                                                           energy
 as an enlivening factor in the form of common seminal
  (virya) in all parts of the body.’ Then when an exciting visual
                                                                of
 or auditory perception enters the percepient, then on account
 its exciting power, it fans the flame of passion in the form of the
     agitation of the seminal energy.
        As has been said:
        “By conversation or contact with the body etc.”
        Of the form, sound etc., even a single one, because of its being
                                                            previously,
     made powerful by the augmented vigour referred to
                                                                all
     can bring about the excitement of the senses pertaining to
     other objects also.    Since every thing is an epitome of all things
     for all people, even memory or idea of a thing can surely bring
                                                                              kinds
     about agitation because of the excitement of innumerable
                      like sound   etc.    lying  subcons ciously   in  the  omni-
     of experiences
                                                                               con-
     farious mind. Only well-developed seminal energy (virya)
                           sence  of   all   experie nces   (paripus ta-saroa maya-
     taining the quintes
     mahdviryameva) can bring about full development and endow one
                                                                                re
     with the power of procreation (pusti-srstikdri), not its immatu
                    )   as in the case     of  a child,  or its diminis  hed   state
     state (apirnam
Abhinavagupta                                                               43

(ksinam) as in the case of an old man. When the seminal energy
that has been lying within and identical with one’s Self in a
placid state (svamayatvena abhinnasyapi) is agitated        (viksobha)
i.e. when it is in an  active state, then the source of its  pleasure
is the Supreme I-consciousness full of creative pulsation, beyond
the range of space and time          (adefakdlakalitaspandamayamahavima-
rSa-riipameva), of the nature of perfect          Bhairava-consciousness,
the absolute sovereignty, full of the power of bliss.
   Even a (beautiful) figure brought into prominence                   by   the
meeting of two eyes affords delight only by the device of its union®
with the mighty seminal energy (mahdvisarga-vislesana*-puktya)
which stirs up the energy of the eyes (tadviryaksobhatmaka) ; such
is also the case when the ears hear a sweet song.
   In the case of other sense-organs also, the perception by itself
(i.e. without its union with the seminal energy) cannot acquire
full expansion because of the springing up of energy only in the
sense-organ itself (sodtmani eva ucchalandt).
   So in the case of those in whom the seminal energy has not
developed     (tadvirya-anupabrmhitanam),       in whom the pleasure of
love that excites the seminal energy as in other cases, is absent,
who are like stone, to whom the beautiful figure of a charming
young woman with large and handsome hips, with face moving to
and fro and with sweet, soft and melodious song cannot give full
delight. To the extent to which an object cannot bring about full
excitement to that extent it can provide only limited delight. If
there is complete absence of delight, it only spells insentiency.
Engrossment in a profuse delight alone excites the seminal energy
and that alone signifies a taste for beautiful things (sahrdayata).
Excessive delight is possible only to those whose heart is expanded
by seminal energy which has the boundless capacity to
strengthen sensibility and which is established in them by
repeated association with objects of enjoyment.
   In grief also, there is the same wondrous experience of delight
 (to those who have kKhecari-sémya). Whatever pleasure is derived
from one’s wife and son, the pleasure which is animated by semi-
nal energy, and which abides in the heart (antargyavasthitam),

    *Vislesana in this context means not separation but union: visesena Slesanam
i,e. uniting in a definite characteristic way.
44                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana

when contrary to all anticipation (bhavand-asadysa) there is an
apprehension of the loss of the loved one aroused by tears and
shrieks, that very pleasure becomes the cause of grief (ksobhatma-
kam) and when that grief reaches its climax                 (vikdsam dpannam)
                                                                           any
and one thinks that that pleasure will not be experienced
longer, then owing to despair (nairapeksya-vasa) the nature of
that grief is suddenly turned into distinct joy (camatkriyatma)
 (owing to the expansion of the essential nature or khecari-samya),
so it has been said:
   “Even in grief, by the expansion of the essential nature etc.”
 ($.D. V, 9).
    When there is the dissolution of praéna and apdna (marudadi),
 in susumn@ which, as the central channel, is full of the storage of
 the energy of all the senses, then one’s consciousness gets entry
                                                                   it
 into that stage of the great central susumnd channel where
 acquires union with the pulsation of one’s Sakti (nijasakti-ksobha-
 tadatmyam),     then all sense of duality dissolves, and there is the
 perfect     I-consciousness    generated    by    the     abundance     of the
 perfection of one’s own inherent Sakti.          Then     by one’s entry into
 the union of Siva and         Sakti   (rudrayémalayogdnupravesena)      which
 consists in the bliss of their essential nature of manifestation and
                                                                 e flow
 by one’s complete integration (viflesana) with the expansiv
                                                        ousness,   there
 of the energy of the great mantra of perfect I-consci
                                                         e)   Bhairav a-
 is the manifestation of the akula or anuttara (absolut
 nature which is beyond all differentiation (nistaran     ga),  unalter-
 able and eternal (dhruvapadatmaka).
     In the case of both sexes sustained by the buoyancy of their
     seminal energy, the   inwardly     felt joy of orgasm          (antahsparsa
                                                                   of the
     sukham) in the central channel induced by the excitement
                                                            thrill  (kam-
     seminal energy intent on oozing out at the moment of
     pakale sakalavirya-ksobhojjigamisdtmakam) is a matter of   personal
     experience to every one. This joy is not simply dependent on the
                                                                        it
     body which is merely a fabricated thing. If at such a moment
                                                                   of the
     serves as a token of remembrance of the inherent delight
     Divine Self (tadabhijfidnopadesadvarena) (i.e. if at such a moment
     one realizes khecari-sémya), one’s consciousness gets entry in the
                                                                         of
     eternal, unalterable state (dhruvapade) that it realized by means
                                                                         of
     the harmonious union (vislesana) with the expansive energy
                           ousness   which   constitu tes   the venerabl e
     the perfect I-consci
Abhinavagupta                                                       45

Supreme   Divine Sakti    (pardbhattarikdrape)   who is an expression
of the absolutely free manifestation of the bliss of the union of Siva
and Sakti denoting the Supreme Brahman. It will be said later
that ‘one should worship the creative aspect of the perfect I-
consciousness’ (P.T., Verse 29b).
  It is rightly said, “‘As the great banyan      tree lies only in the
form of potency in the seed, even so the entire universe with all
the mobile and immobile beings lies as a potency in the heart of
the Supreme”     (P.T. Verse 24).
   Similarly, “This is the achievement of the reward of mantra.
This is the union of Siva and Sakti. By the practice of this, one
achieves the power of omniscience.’’ (P.T. Verse 35).
   At another place also, it has been said:
    “O goddess, even in the absence of a woman, there is a flood
of delight, simply by the intensive recollection of sexual pleasure
in the form of kissing (lit. licking), embracing, pressing etc.”
 (V. Bh. Verse 70).
  The above has been said in the following sense:
  Even when the contact with a woman        is intensely remembered,
that is reflected in the sexual organ    (tatsparsa-ksetre) and in the
central channel which is the channel pertaining to the natural,
supreme     Sakti   (madhyama-akytrima-paratmaka-Saktindlikapratibim-
bitah). Then even in the absence of contact with an actual
woman     (tanmukhyasaktasparsdbhdve’pi) the intensive memory of
the contact excites the seminal energy pertaining to contact
with women which lies in it (in the central channel). In this
connection, it has been said, ‘At the time of sexual intercourse
with a woman, complete union with her is brought about by the
excitement which terminates in the delight of orgasm. ‘This only
betokens the delight of Brahman which in other words is that
of one’s own self.”   (V.Bh. Verse 69).
  Further, “By love, one should understand the achievement
Pertaining to Kula.”
  The eminent, venerable Vyasa has also said:
   “Every womb is my great Sakti (mahat-brahma). I deposit the
semen in it. From that occurs the birth of all beings, O son of
Bharata.” (Bh. G. XIV, 3).
   The venerable    Somananda     also says in his commentary      (on
Paratrisika) :
46                                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana

      “The      question of the Devi in amorous                    union with Bhairava
                                                             from
though pertaining to para-sambandha® was put to Bhairava
the standpoint of mahat!® and   antardla * samband ha in complet e
harmony with parasambandha. ”
      Enough        of this long introduction              to the esoteric teachings of
Trika-scripture.            So, according to the principle set forth above,
                                                               which
this is what is meant by the first verse, that it is anuttara
                              if underst ood  brings  about   khecari-
gives kaulikasiddhi and which
 sdmya.

 Notes
                    activities   of the         senses   as they    occur   are     known     as
       1. The
                                                                are
 indriya oytti and lead only to worldly activities, but if they
                                                                  rmed
 given a turn towards higher consciousness, they are transfo
                                     karaneSv ari, marici-c akra, etc.
 into indriya-Sakti and are known as
                                                                    a
       2.      Uccdtana and marana: Employment of a mantra by which
                                                      and                             a mantra
 person is completely distracted is known as uccdfana
 for killing a person is known as mdraya  mantra.
       3. This is a system of Tantra teaching doaitadvaita.
                     is a goddess       with       whose    help tantrikas         destroy   the
       4, Kytya
     enemies.
       5. Kala here means the Sakti of letters.
       6. This cryptic sentence of Abhinavagupta defies translation.
     The following ideas are involved in this sentence.
         (1) Siva is of the nature of ‘sdmanya-prakasa-spandana                               i.e.
       is full of the pulsation of general creativity.
           (2) Sakti is of the nature of stimulating the general potential
        creativity        of Siva   into        vifesa-vimarsa-maya      spandana      i.e. into
        specific manifestation             of fabda or sound,            ria or form         and
        colour, rasa or flavour, sparsa or touch, gandha or smell.
           Therefore the union of both isa sine qua non of the rich variety
        of manifestation.
              (3)   This union bespeaks the expansion of ‘a’ kala of anuttara.
        The first stage is the Santa-virya or only prakdsa of Siva. Second
        is the stage of vimarsa or rich variety of manifestation.
              (4)   The     Absolute       is    androgynous        in   nature.     The     male
            principle is represented by Siva and                   the female      principle is
            represented     by Sakti.      It is out of the union           of the two that
            there is manifestation.
Abhinavagupta                                                          47

  7. This means that it contains the ojas or vital lustre of sabda
(sound), rapa (form), rasa (savour), gandha (smell), sparsa
(touch).
   8. Vislesana here means visesena Slesah, definite junction or
union. Mahdvisarga-vislesana is a technical word of the system
which means that all joy arises        by   union    with   the   perfect
I-consciousness.
  9. Para sambandha or the relation between the teacher and the
taught is that in which the teacher and the taught are both Siva.
   10. Mahat or mahan sambandha is that in which the questioner is
Sadasgiva and the answerer is Siva.
  11, Antarala sambandha is that in which the questioner is Ananta-
bhattaraka and the answerer is Sadasiva.

                            ExposITION
There are four important points in the long commentary of A.G.
on this verse, viz. (1) What does the dialogue between the Devi
and Bhairava actually mean? (2) The connotation of Anuttara,
 (3) What is kaulika-siddhi?, (4) The concept of khecari-samata.
   We may take up these points one by one.
   1. What does the dialogue between the Devi and Bhairava
mean? ‘Deoi uvdca’ means, “The Devi said’ i.e, put a question, and
Bhairava uvdca means      ‘Bhairava    answered’. Does      this refer to
some remote past in which there was a dialogue between the
Devi and Bhairava? What does the past tense connote? Who is
the Devi? Who is Bhairava?
   A.G. says, “‘Paraiva ca samvit ‘Devi’ ityucyate”. The Devi is none
other than the Supreme Divine Consciousness which is not an
abstract idea but living, throbbing Conscious Power, or Energy
 (Paragakti), the Supreme Verbum (Paravak), constantly pulsat-
ing as ‘I’ (aham vimarfa). And the question is nothing but Self-
reflection. As A.G. puts it, “Tat pasyanti-madhyamatmika sodtmanam
eva vastutah parasamvidatmakam vimysati.” The Devi while appear-
ing as pasyanti and madhyama knows Herself to be the Supreme
 Consciousness.
    Who is the questioner? A.G. reveals the following answer : ““Aham
 eva sa pardvagdevi-riipaiva saroa-vacyavacakavibhaktatayd evam uvdca.” ‘1
 myself as the same Supreme Divine Speech-power undifferentiat-
 ed from all words (vacaka) and their referents (vdcya) spoke thus.”
48                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana

    A.G. says: Evam paramarthamayatodt paramesvarasya cittattoasya,
yadeva avibhagena antarvastu sphuritam, tadeva pasyantibhuvi varna-
pada-vakya-vibhajayisaya paramystam,     madhyamapade      ca     bhedena
 sthitam vastupiirvakam  sampanna m  ydvat  vaikharya ntam    ‘anuttaram
 katham’ ityadi bhinna-mayiya-varna-pada-vakya-racanantam.
    “So, the inner content i.e. question-answer which appears in
the consciousness of the highest Lord in an undifferentiated way
because of its being the highest truth, is thought of, in the
                       h to put it in the apportionment of letter,
                  a desire
pasyanti stage, wit
 word and sentence, is posited, with a sense of separateness in the
 madhyama stage, and is finally expressed, in vaikhari stage, in
 mayiya form i.e. in gross speech consisting of letter, word and
 sentence.”
      At the pard or highest stage, there is neither question nor answer.
 There is simply Truth. It is only when it is to be revealed that it
 assumes the form of question and answer and is expressed in
 words.
      Finally, A.G. sums up the issue in the following words: Etdva-
 deva atra tatparyam—svatmd sarvabhavasvabhavah svayam prakdsamanah
 svdtmanam eva svdtmavibhinnena prasnaprativacanena prastr-prativaktr-
 svatmamayena ahantaya camatkurvan vimySati.
    “This is all what is meant to be said here. Self who is the
 natural state of all existents, who is self-luminous, amusing Him-
 self with question-answer which is not different from Himself,
 and in which both the questioner (as Devi) and the answerer
  (as Bhairava) are only Himself, enjoys self-reflection.”’
     So the divine dialogue is, in the ultimate analysis, a spiritual
     monologue,    a   sort   of self-reflection,   self-recollection.
        This also solves the enigma of the past tense. At the pard or
     supreme level, there is the eternal Truth which is timeless. So
     there is neither question nor answer, neither past nor present, nor
     future. It is only Reality shining in its own light. Reality, not
     static, but dynamic, pouring itself out (prasara, visarga) in mani-
     festation, throbbing with self-expression. It is only when the
     Truth of the para level is to be described or revealed that it
     descends to the pasyanti level, embodies itself in the form of the
     Devi, and the divine dialogue starts. So ‘waca’ or reference to
     the past is logical, not chronological.
        2. The connotation of anuitara.
Abhinavagupta                                                                           49

   A.G. has explained the concept of anuttara in sixteen ways from
different points of view. In his Laghuvrtti, A.G. gives the gist
of the connotation of anuttara which covers all points of view.
“Uttaram utkrstam uparivarti, tacca jadapeksaya grahakaripam. Tasya
tu ciddtmanah soaprakaSasya na grahakantaram astiti anuttaratoam.
Tena anuttaram samvidripam sada sarvatravabhasitam pirodparadesa-
kadlavihinam anapahnvaniyam” (L.V., pp. 1-2).
   “Uttaram means higher, superior. In comparison to the insen-
tient, it is the subject or experient. Hence uttaram        means
higher, superior. Since, of the self-luminous Consciousness, there
is no other experient, since it is the universal Experient, therefore,
is it anuttara. Therefore, anuttara is the supreme Consciousness,
eternal, omnipresent,      beyond          time        and       space,         undeniable
Reality.”
  3. Kaulika-siddhi:
  A.G. interprets kaulika-siddhi           from        two      points of view,        the
extroversive and the introversive.
   From the extroversive point of view, kaulika-siddhi means ‘kulat
agata siddhih’, i.e. achievement of definite experience of objects
like jar, a piece of cloth, etc., derived from kula. ‘Kula’ means
‘pranadehadih’   prana,   body      etc.         So      ‘kaulikasiddhidam’ means
pranadehadeh dgata siddhih bhedaprananam nilasukhadinam niscayarapa
tam dadati iti, i.e. that which brings about definite and certain
objective experience      like blue        and        subjective        experience     like
pleasure,   through   prdna,     manas,      body        etc.     (to     the    empirical
experient), Does the mind-body complex bring about this
experience by itself? No, the mind-body complex is only the
medium. It is anuttara, the unsurpassable Reality that brings
it about through the medium of mind-body. “‘Sarirddayo hi jhagiti
anuttara-dhruva-visarga-virydvesena  akalakalitena pranddimadhyama-
sopdndrohenaiva bhadvandm tathdatoaniscaya-riapam siddhim vidadhate.”
Indeed it is the body, mind, etc. which through the penetration
in them of the energy of Siva and Sakti, the energy that is beyond
the sphere of time, that mounts the intermediate stair of prana
etc., that brings about the success in the form of the definite
perception of the existing entities.”
   So kaulika-siddhi is definite perception through the medium of
kula or mind-body complex, brought about by anuttara.
   From the introversive point of view i.e. from the point of view
                                                          Para-Trisika-Vivarana
50

                                        means the following: ‘kula’
of the return movement, kaulika-siddhi
                                       and  subtlest manifestation.
means the totality of gross, subtle,
                                                      Consciousness. ‘Kule
This is only congealment of the Supreme
                                             perta ining  to the total com-
bhava kauliki siddhif’ i.e. it is the siddhi
                                                    here  means “‘tathdtoa-
plex of gross, subtle manifestation. Siddhi                            maka-
                                           vabhava-parasamoidat
dardhyam pariortya anandaritpam-hrdayas
Sivavimargatadatmyam tam siddhim dadati .”
                                                             by turning
   “<Siddhi or achievement is the acquisition of bliss
                                             iple,   i.e.,  the   Light of
round to havea firm hold on that very princ
                                           ident ity  with    the   perfect
Universal Consciousness; in other words,
                                               iousn  ess    and     whose
I-feeling of Siva who is the highest Consc
                                            of  His   delig ht   in  mani-
nature is spanda or the eternal expression
                                                   such    achie  vemen  t.
festation.” It is anuttara which brings about
       4, The concept of Khecari-samata:
                                                   ri-samata. This
    The main objective of Devi’s question is kheca
                                                 gue  between the
 is the focal point round which the entire dialo
 Devi and Bhairava revolves.
                                                 which are (1)
    This is a compound word, the components of
                                             to under stand the
 khecari and (2) samata. We have, therefore,
     connotation of these two words.            Let us, first of all, take up the
                                                     which means sky,
     word khecart. ‘Khe’ is the locative case of kha
                                     this   context,   it means   ‘brahman’   (the
     void,   or    brahman.   In
                                                               . As A.G. puts
     Absolute) and cari means that which moves about
                                                             i,” ‘‘khecari is that
     it, “Khe brahmani abhedariipe sthitva carati iti khecar
                                                          ute in indistinguish-
     which, while stationed in brahman or the Absol
                                       In other woras,    khecari isthe   dynamic
     able unity,     moves about.”
                                                   iousness-Power that
     divine consciousness. It is this divine Consc
                                                    empirical experient,
     in manifestation appears in the form of the
                                                          of the psychic
     when she is known as ayomacari, in the form
                                                       form of the outer
     apparatus, when she is known as gocari, in the                 tive
                                              the form of the objec
     senses, when she is known as dikcari, in
     existents, when she is known as bhicari.
                                                         er it is a matter
         At the empirical level, every experience, wheth
                                               r, etc., or a subjective
      of perception such as sound, form, savou
                                                           or krodha (wrath)
      state of mind, such as kama (passionate longing)
                                                               ng to do with
      appears as distinct in its own right, having nothi
                                     When    it is viewe d  in  this light, i-e.,
      the Universal Consciousness.
                                         clamo  uring    imper  iousl y for its
      as something in its own right,
Abhinavagupta                                                        51

gratification then it is khecari-vaisamya i.e. contrary to the actual
nature of khecari.
   When, however, all perceptions and subjective states of mind
like kama and krodha are regarded only as an expression of khecari
or the Divine Consciousness, when they are viewed subspecie
aeternitatis, then even these states throw back the mind of the
aspirant in the sweet embrace of the Divine; then they serve only
as liaison between the human and divine consciousness.
   As A.G. puts it, “‘Saiva khecari kdma-krodhddiritpatayd vaisamyena
laksyate; tasyah samatasarvatraiva paripiirna-bhairavasvabhavat.”
   “When kdéma and krodha are viewed only as aberration of the
mind, then they constitute khecari-vaisamya or heterogeneity of
khecari. The samaté or homogeneousness of khecari consists in
viewing every object and state as the nature of integral Bhairava.
  Again “‘svariipaparijidnamayatadvaisamya-nivyttau malabhavat krodha-
mohadivrttayo hi paripitrna-bhagavadbhairavabhattarakasamuidatmika eva.”
    “The vaisamya or disparateness of khecari is due to the ignorance
of the essential nature     of anuttara or the Absolute.    When    this
ignorance is removed, then all limitations of the empirical con-
sciousness disappear and with the disappearance of these limita-
tions, even krodha, moha etc., appear as of the nature of the perfect
divine Bhairava-consciousness.””
   By khecari-samatd, the aspirant feels divine Presence everywhere,
in every object, in every state, even in passion and wrath. It is
an attitude which has to be constantly maintained. His whole
outlook on life is changed.
   In this context, A.G. examines the question of sex. Sex is
usually considered to be only a biological phenomenon, only an
 animal instinct having nothing to do with the Divine, and is
 looked down upon with monkish disdain. A,.G. turns his tantric
 microscope upon the problem and examines it with shattering
 candidness. According to him, sex is only a microcosmic aspect
 of a macrocosmic divine creative energy. The thrill of sex is only
 a pale reproduction of the thrill of this divine creative energy.
 The divine creative energy radiates from the union of Siva and
 Sakti. It has to be borne in mind that Siva and Sakti are not
 two separate realities, but only aspects, the prakdfa and vimarsa
 aspect of one Reality, and their union is a sort of hermaphroditic
 or androgynous    union.
52                                                       Para-Trifikd-Vivarana

   In the mammalian kingdom, energy is stored in the central
                                                                 as
channel of the spinal column which is the generating, storing
                                        ing  to A.G.  whatev er   is
well as the distributing centre. Accord
                                       or percept ion (e.g. sound,
taken in, whether in the form of food
           awareness     of form,   savour,   contact,     etc.)   is converted
visual
                                                                  ;
first in the central channel in the form of gjas (vital energy)
                                           energy  (siya)   which
then this ojas is converted into seminal
                                                          e func-
permeates the whole body. All reproductive and creativ
tions are performed by this energy.           Whether it is the enjoyment
                                                                       poem,
of good food, beautiful scenery, sweet music, entrancing
                                           it is  this  energy     that   is at
the embrace of a dear one, everywhere
                                              energy      (khecari )   on    the
play. It is the representative of the divine
                                                 owe    their   life  to   that
physical plane. Even passion, anger, grief,
                                                                     form of
divine energy. When that energy is used as a distinct
                                                       energy,     then     it is
mere physical, chemical, biological or psychic
                                                       teness     of  khecari.
 khecari-vaisamya, the heterogeneity, the dispara
                                                                        divine
 When everything is viewed and used as a form of
 energy, as

       A motion and spirit that impels
       All thinking things, all objects of all thoughts
       And rolls through all things
                                                       sness of khecari.
 then it is khecari-sdmya; then it is the homogeneou
                                     ion, liberat ion from the octopus-
 This khecari-samya leads to liberat
     like hold of the sensuous life.
                                                                      nameva
        “Khecari-samyameva moksah. Tat ca anuttara-svariipaparijid
                                         samgha ttasam dpatty é ubhaya vimar-
     satatoditam paramesvaryah Sivatmani
     §aanandariidhi.”
                                                              liberation.
        “‘Homogeneousness of the khecari-Sakti constitutes
                                         -Sakti is due to the awareness
     This homogeneousness of the khecari
                                                                  ntly present
     of the essential nature of the anuttara which is consta
                                          the   recogn ition   of   the comple-
     and which arises from the bliss of
                                              with  Siva.”    It  is  not simply
     tion of the union of the divine §akti
                                             that  brings   about     liberation,
     the knowledge of energy qua energy
                                                       embrace with
     but the constant awareness of the energy in close
     the Divine that brings about the  miracle .
        “ Anumatramapi     avikalanuttara-svariipaparijfidnameva      cittavyttinam
     vaisamyam.    Sa eva ca samsarah.””
Abhinavagupta                                                                53

   “‘Even an iota of the ignorance of the nature of the integral
anuttara amounts to a contrary state of the mind.               It is this con-
trary state that constitutes transmigratory existence.”
   How does khecari-samya bring about liberation? The answer is
“by transformation of the mind.” Khecari-sémya does not mean
locking oneself up in a room and meditating for a few minutes.
It means awareness of the Divine every minute in the hum-drum
routine of life. When the divine Presence is felt constantly whether
one is eating, drinking, sleeping or looking into office files, when
the whole     life becomes yoga,    then    is it khecari-samya.    Then    the
mind of the aspirant is completely transformed. Khecari-sdmya is
that    wonderful    alchemy    which      transmutes   the     gross   psychic
element of the aspirant into the solid gold of divine consciousness.
There ensues the miracle of the dissolution of the human con-
sciousness into the divine consciousness. Thenceforth, it is not
he that lives, but it is his Lord that lives in him. In his L.V.,
A.G. interprets khecari-samata as avikalpatuam, piirnatvam and devi-
riipatuam, as consciousness free of thought-construct, integral
and divine.

                                  Text
       ETAD   GUHYAM       MAHAGUHYAM                KATHAYASVA
                          MAMA PRABHO

                               ‘TRANSLATION
   “Tell me this secret, this greatest secret, O Lord who are my
very Self (mama sva)” or: “Tell me (kathayasva),       O my Lord
 (mama prabho) this truth which, though largely               unhidden (maha
aguhyam), yet remains a secret.”

                                CoMMENTARY

                                   TEXT
   From guhyam aprakatatvat on p. 18, 1. 5 upto tasya Gmantranamat-
mana eva on page 20, |. 19.

                                 TRANSLATION
  This is a secret mystery, because of its not being evident for
though it abides in gukd (cavern) or maya in which the essential
nature     remains   unknown,      it is not    evident.      Moreover,     it is
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
54
                                                    as the source of
largely unhidden, for it is known to everyone
                                                          $uddhavidya*
delight. (In its ultimate analysis), it is the goddess
                                                           of knower
herself who abides undivided in the different states
                                                        three-corner-
 (subject), knowledge, and knowable (object). The
                                   in the   state of maya,        percipient   of
ed one,’ however,       becomes
                                                        Maya also,
differentiation which is excessively reflected therein.
                                                    se, is actually
being the source of the emanation of the univer
divine knowledge     (Suddhavidya or Sivavidya) itself. Therefore,
                                                   vidya or divine
according to the principle enunciated, this suddha
                                                                     mahaguha*
 knowledge, when not known in this aspect, is called
                                                                  ered in the
 (the great cavern), because of her being three-corn
                       (that   appea r  as   differ ent)   on  accoun t of her
 form of knower etc.
                                                                   from view.
 exalted state of nondifferentiation being concealed
                             alone  (viz.  Suddha vidya    maya)   is, actually
 In the Trika Sastra,® she
 the object of worship as the three-cornered divinity.
     It has been (rightly) said:
                                                                  (maha-vidya)
     “She is the three-cornered great spiritual truth
                                         and   nara),   the   abode   of all joy
  of the three aspects (Siva, Sakti
                                                          of universal ex-
     (whether external or cidananda), the substratum
                                  and object ive (visar gapada m). There-
     pansion i.e. both subjective
                                                      s of pramata
     fore, she should be worshipped in all the aspect
                                   and means   of knowl edge) and
      (knower), pramdna (knowledge
                                                 one divine Light
 prameya (objects of knowledge). Similarly, “The
     who permeates in pramana, prameya           (artha)   and pramdatd never
     sets i.e. is ever present.”
                                                         is full of pure
        Now in this great cavern of Maya whose heart
                                          the vast creati ve movement,
     divine wisdom (Suddhavidya) which is
                                                      se, the return
     the origin of the emergence of the entire univer
                                                    its own inherent
     movement in the form of ma-ha-a that occurs by
                                                                     this
     dynamism     of delight is, indeed, a great secret. By means of
                                                        turn movement
     secret it is mtended to indicate that there isare
                                                   ‘ma’   (nara) and ‘ha’
     from objective manifestation indicated by
                                                                  ends in
     (Sakti) towards the essential nature (of the Self) which
                                                       divine   Freed  om
     the repose of Self-consciousness which signifies
                                                       ousne ss    indica -
     or in other words uninterrupted Bhairava-Consci
                                                          of  the  energy
     ted by ‘a’. Of manifestation, the delightful form
                        innate mantra known      as para    oak     (the Supreme
      of the natural,
      divine utterance) is I (aham). As has been said:
                                                        Self is said
         “The repose of all manifested phenomena in the
Abhinavagupta                                                                  55

to be I-consciousness.”       (APS 22) i.e. the real I-feeling is that
                                                        objects like
in which in the process of withdrawal, all external
                                  from their manifo ldness  come to
jar, cloths etc., being withdrawn
                                                                   a
rest or final repose in their essential, uninterrupted anuttar
aspect. This anuttara aspect is the real I-feeli ng (aham-b hdva).
  This is a secret, a great mystery.
                                                            e,
  In the process of expansion, the changeless, unsurpassabl
                                                              ‘a’ which is
eternal, reposeful venerable Bhairava, is of the form
the natural, primal sound, the life    of the  entire   range     of letter-
                                          He   in   the   process    of ex-
energies (sakalakalajala-jivanabhitah).
                                              of  Sakti),  for   expans ion
pansion assumes the ‘ha’ form (the symbol
(visarga) is of the form of ‘ha’ i.e. Kundalini* Sakti, and then he
expands into a dot symbolizing objective phenomena (nara
riipena) and indicative of the identity of the entire expansion of
Sakti? (i.e. the entire manifestation) with Bhairava. (Thus the
                                                               es
expansion is in the form of aham or I. After this A.G. describ
the return movement of manifestation in the form of ma-ha-a)?
Similarly, the lowest part or the last phase of objective mani-
                                                                s
festation (m or nara) with its three powers® whose life consist
                                                                    return
of the trident of the para, pardpara and apara Sakti, in its
                                                             visarga,  viz.
movement through its union (vislesana) with that
                                                          is  the   funda-
‘ha’ Sakti, gets its entree into anuttara, i.e. ‘a’ which
                                                                   ately.
mental unalterable stage. This will be clarified proxim
   Thus there is a-ha-m in expansion and ma-ha-a in withdrawal
or return movement.
   (A.G. now sums up the mystery of mahdaguhya:)
   In the ma-ha (mahe i.e. in the great Reality) which is the
highest bliss as described earlier, that which is ‘a’ according to
the previously described principle, that ‘a’ is the mysterious secret.
                                                                 the
This is the great secret, this is the source of the emergence of
 universe. Also by the delight emanating from the union of the
 two (viz. Siva and Sakti), it is clearly manifest (aguhya) inasmuch
 as it is the delight of all.®
    (Now   A.G,    interprets soa mama prabho:)
   ‘Soa mama’ means ‘my very self’. ‘Prabho’ is a form of address
 and   means,     by   bringing    about   such wonderful       manifoldness,
 you are indeed capable of appearing in any form. A form of
 address connotes the face-to-face presence of the addressed one
 towards   the    addressor   or   his identity   with   him.   So,   it has        a
56                                                   Para-Trisikd-Vivarana

                                                       said,
greater connotation than an ordinary noun. As has been
                                                       noun.”                IT
     “An address has a greater connotation than a mere
have conclusively proved it in my ‘Sri Pairvapaficika’.1°
                                                           truth
   ‘Etat kathaya’ or ‘tell me this’ means that though this
                        in the form      of the   Primal   Creative   Sound
is undifferentiated
                                                                    the
 (paravak), yet kindly put it in a series of well-knit sentences in
stage of pasyanti, etc. As has been said earlier,
                                                     Siva and
   “The Lord Himself assuming the role of teacher as
disciple as Sadasi va  etc.”
                                                                  bet-
      It has been decisively shown earlier that there is identity
ween venerable pard and pasyanti etc.
                                                                 an
      The word ‘mine’ indicates an object (idambhava) related to
individual subject      (pratyagatma-sambandhitoasya).      The secret that
                                                                          ’.
 is implicit in this relation is that ‘m-ha-a’ is really speaking ‘a-ha-m
 In ‘this appears to me’,       the  quinte ssence  of  the idea of appear -
                                                                     avai-
 ingis I-consciousness"? (yat bhasanam tasya vimarsah ahambhd
                        ciousn ess    (a+ha  +m)   from    the   point   of
 kasdrah). The I-cons
                           ent    of the subject (bhdva -praty upa-sa mha-
 view of the return-movem
 ranamukhena) to the subject is m--ha--a as has been said earlier.
 As has been said,
    “The ascertainment of a definite object as ‘this’ amounts to its
 relational reference to (lit. resting in) the essential nature of the
 Self. This reference constitutes I-consciousness (aham-vimarsa).”
      At another place also (it has been said):
                                                                    a
      “The determinate knowledge (adhyavasdya) in the form ‘this is
                                                                        is
 jar’ transcends the limitation of name and form of the jar and
   (really speaking) a form of the jfdnasa kti of the highest Sovere ign,
  and shines as the Self (i.e. as one with the self), and not apart
  as an object denoted by the word ‘this’ (I.P.K., I, 5, 20).
      It has been rightly said by revered Somananda in his com-
     mentary   (on Paratrisika) :
       “The vowel ‘a’ is pure Siva”.
       The same idea has been described by me in detail.
       (Now A.G, gives another interpretation of ‘soa-mama’ taking
                                                     (su--a+mama).    )
     it as one word, and by analysing it into
       “Su? means susthu i.e. duly, aptly,        ‘a’ means avidyamanam ice.
     not present i.e. absent;   ‘mama’    means     vifvam i.e. the universe.
                                                                       e
     So ‘soa-mama’ means to whom full of I-consciousness the univers
                                                                     ive
     (as something apart) is simply nothing. The life of the possess
Abhinavagupta                                                            57

case consists in denoting the possessed as something different.
‘Vifoa’ or the universe which is qualified by the possessive case
‘mama’ i.e. ‘mine’ is not (denoted by ‘a’ in su+-a+-mama) any
thing apart from ‘I’.1
   Though the yogis initiated according to other systems (i.e.
Sankhya-Yoga and Buddhism) or the vijfianakala and the pralaya-
kevali (according to our own system) do not have the idea of
‘mama’ in a certain state (e.g. in the state of samadhi or absorption),
yet there is the residual impression in them which has the ten-
dency for difference; on awaking into their previous state, owing
to the residual impression becoming active, it grows into I-con-
sciousness identified with the body. In order to remove even the
residual trace, the prefix ‘su’ has been used in the sense of ‘susthu’
 (duly, aptly).
   As has been said by myself in a hymn:
   “That thought, viz. ‘Nothing is mine’ by which the senseless
creatures   are    reduced   to   wretchedness   incessantly,   that   very
thought viz. ‘Nothing is mine’ means to me ‘I am everything’.
Thus I have attained a lofty position”.
   (Another interpretation of ‘soa mama’ by means of a bahuorihi
compound from the point of view of Siva:)
   “Sua mama’ may be analysed into su--ama+ma.             ‘Su’ stands for
‘fobhana’ i.e. excellent; ‘ama’ means knowledge, ‘ma’ means maénam
or realization. Now a bahuorihi compound            is thus formed      out
of these three words, ‘su—sobhanena amena manam yasya sa soamama’.
Thus ‘svamama’ is one who, being His own Light itself, through
excellent knowledge (fobhanena amena) has realization (manam
i.e. avabodha) by means of the knowledge of non-dualism derived
from the communication of the highest truth (amena i.e. para-
marthopadesddoaydtmand jnanena), knowledge which is free from the
slightest trace of the foul stain of dualism (sobhanena doaitakalank-
ankanakdlusyalesa-Siinyena).

                  (From the point of view of Sakti:)
   Now, ‘ama’ is one who knows (amatiti). This is taken as one
word and means the goddess Parasakti who moves freely in all
fields of knowledge. This ‘amd’ is a+-mé, ‘a’ has a negative force,
meaning avidyamdna i.e. not present, and ‘ma’ means ‘ména’ i.e.
both knowledge or jfdna and its absence i.e. ajfidna, i.e. who is the
58                                                Para-Trisika-Vivarana

ever-present substratum of both!®    (nityoditatuat).   That goddess   is
known as ama.
     (From the point of view of jiva or the      empirical   individual
based on bahuorihi compound within another bahuorihi         compound,
e.g., 1. sufobhand ama yatra 2. tasyam sd_yasya:)
   She is ‘su’ i.e. excellent being ever present. (This gives the
explanation of ‘sva’+‘ma’. Now remains ‘ma’ of the phrase
‘svamama’). The remaining ‘ma’ implies maya’. Now, ‘sva mama’
means: “‘He in whom even in mayd, i.e. even in the ordinary life of
pramana    (knowledge) and prameya    (i.e. object of knowledge) su
ama i.e. the excellent amd as described is always present.” Thus
there is a bahuorihi compound within another bahuorihi. What it
means is that the Highest Lord even in the ordinary life consisting
of pramaya etc., is always endowed with His highest Sakti, being
nondual. (Since there is no difference between the Devi and the
Lord, ) addressing the Lord means addressing Herself.

Notes
   1, In his L.V., A.G. says, “‘nanu grahakariipam sarvasya hrdaye
Sphurati tatra kim pragnena. Satyam sphuritamapi na tattoato hydayan-
gamibhitam. hrdayangamibhaoena vind bhavamapyabhavena rathyagame
trnaparnadivat.””
     “Well, does not Reality shine as the perceiving Experient in
the heart of all? Then what is the relevance of a question about
it?”    “True”, says A.G. “though it shines in everyone’s heart, it
is not intimately assimilated by the heart as existent.      So though
present, it is as if non-present, just as the grass and leaves on the
path of someone who passes on in a chariot (though present
are not noticed by him).”
    2. ‘Suddhavidya’ in this context does not mean the fuddhavidya
tattoa, the fifth category in manifestation. It means the pure,
divine knowledge or Sivavidya.
   3. Suddhavidya becomes ‘trikond’ or three-cornered in manifesta-
tion. The three corners are pramdtd, pramdna and prameya, i.e.
the experient, experience and means of experience, and object
of experience. Vide the illustration of trikona or trifila:
Abhinavagupta                                                           59

  Trikona or the triangular form of manifestation

                             Siva-vidya

                               Siva
                      Pramata or
                      Experient           Iccha or Will




                                                           Prameya or
 Pramana or                                                 object of
 Experience                                                experience
 Sakti                                                      Nara
 jana                                                       kriya
                        Anuttara pervading all

                   Trisala or three-pronged      Reality

                                Siva
                           Pramata-Iccha


   Sakti                                                     Nara
 Pramana                                                     Prameya
  jfiana                                                     kriya




                       Anuttara pervading all

  4,     The triangular form of maya is symbolic of cavern in which
the secret of manifestation is hidden. It is also symbolic of the
female or generative organ. Therefore, mdydé has been called
‘jagat-janana-bhith’, “the source of the emanation of the universe.”
60                                                  Pard-Trisika-Vivarana

     5. The Sastra is called trika, because it deals with        three aspects
of Reality, viz. pramdtd-pramana-prameya or icchd-jfidna-kriya or
Siva-Sakti-nara or para-parapara-apara,
   6. In Sarada script ‘ha’ is written as s which resembles the
form of Kundalini.
   7. In the process of srsfi or manifestation, ‘a’ symbolizing Siva
expands into ‘h’ symbolizing ‘Sakti’, and terminates into m
or the anusoara or dot over ‘ha’ which completes the process of the
expansion or manifestation. The ‘bind’ (dot) or anusvdra over
‘ha’ represents the fact that though Siva is manifested right upto
the earth through Sakti, he is not divided thereby, he remains
undivided; his expansion or manifestation in the form of Sakti
 remains identical with Him.
    8. The three Saktis are icchd, jit@na and kriya. ‘Aham’ is sym-
 bolic of srsti or manifestation, ma-ha-a is symbolic of samhdara or
 retraction; ‘a’ indicates Siva, ‘ha’ indicates Sakti and m indicates
 ‘nara’ i.e. manifestation right upto the earth. The return move-
 ment is from nara to Siva or ‘a
    9. A.G. interprets mahaguhya in three ways here: (1) Maha+-a
 -+-guhyam. In the great blissful manifestation, the presence of ‘a’
 of anuttara in all its phases is a great mystery (guhya). (2) Maha+-
 guhyam: Siva-vidya in the form of Maya—the great cavern is the
 source of all manifestation. This is another great mystery. (3)
 Mahaé-+-aguhyam: Though a great mystery, it is not entirely be-
 yond experience, for the identity experienced in the union of
 male and female and in the union of the experient and the
 experienced object is well known to everybody.
    10. This book is not available now.
    11. Any experience without its relation to an experient would
 be meaningless.
       12.   Sasthi—the   possessive case denotes the possessed        as some-
     thing different from the possessor as in the word            ‘rdja-prasada’,
     the king’s palace, palace is something different from the king, but
     the universe is not anything different from Siva or I.
        13. This hints to that plane of Sakti where jfidna, ajfidna and
     their cessation—all abide in samzid or divine consciousness.

                   Introduction to the second verse (p. 20-21)
       The next verse by gathering up the substance of the                 many
Abhinavagupta                                                             61

questions raised in one and a half verses above is meant to clench
the issue.

                                Text
      HRDAYASTHA TU YA SAKTIH
             KAULIKI KULANAYIKA /
      TAM ME KATHAYA DEVESA
            YENA TRPTIM LABHAMYAHAM                             // 2 //
                           TRANSLATION
   O Lord of all the gods, tell me about that kauliki Sakti who re-
sides in the heart (i.e. in consciousness), the Sakti who is the
chief source of the entire manifestation and who is the presiding
deity of all manifestation so that I may have full satisfaction.

                             COMMENTARY
   From sarvasya on p. 21, 1. 1 upto uttaru ehu anutula on p. 23, |. 4.

                             TRANSLATION

                      (Interpretation of hydayastha)

  HArdayastha
       = hyt+-aya+stha.          Hyt is the supreme conscious        base
of all objective experiences like blue etc., and subjective experi-
ences like pleasure etc., and also of the empirical experients condi-
tioned by the body, prana and buddhi. Aya (plural of aya) means
knowledge of manifold, varied objects like jar, cloth etc., brought
about by its own freedom. Sthd means this scintillating Sakti
abiding in them. So ‘hrdayastha’ means the scintillating Energy
abiding in the knowledge of varied objects brought about by the
supreme conscious base of all objective and subjective experience
and experients by its own freedom.
                  (Interpretation of Kulandyika)
                   (On the plane of anuttara)
    Kulanayiké means who is the presiding deity (ndyik@) of kula
ice. body, prana, pleasure etc., in other words of objects, experience
and experients. She is called nayikd, because it is she who brings
into manifestation all objects of experience, experience and
experients (Sarira-prana-sukhddeh sphurattadayini), the vital    energy
62                                                 Para-Trifika-Vivarana

of the collective whole of Brahmi and other goddesses (brahmyadi-
                                                               the
devatacakrasya viryabhita). On the plane of Sakti, she is
innermost core of the entire sensory and  nervous system (nikhila-
                                                         of nara,
ksanddicakrasya madhya-madhyama-riipa), and on the plane
                                                                 of all
she is the female and male generative organ, the source
production (jananasthana-karnika-li ngatma)  .
    (The following is the interpretation of Kauliki:)
    1. Kauliki is one who though immanent in all manifestation
                                                                     avd
 (subjects and objects) is herself akula i.e. transcends it (kule-bh
akulariipa kauliki).
      2. Or one who     abides in ‘kula’ but is ‘akula’   (i.e., sheer con-
sciousness (cinmdtra) distinct from kula or manifestation) is ‘kaula’
                                                                     l
 (ie. Siva). She in whom this kaula or Siva abides in identica
form is kauliki. The entire range of manifestation      (kula) abides
                                                                  (i.e.
as such because of its being rooted in the light of akula
 Siva).
      As has been said,
    “But by coming in contact with the power of the Self,            an in-
 dividual becomes equal to that” (Sp. K. I. 8).
       Similarly:
    “Resorting to that power (of spandatattoa), the divinities
 ‘mantra’ etc. together with the sacred formulae which serve as
 their indicators, being endowed with the power of omniscience
 proceed to carry out their assigned functions towards the embo-
                                                                     to
 died ones just as the senses of the embodied ones by resorting
 the power of spanda proceed to carry out their (specific) functio ns”
  (Sp. K. II, 1).
                                                              the gods,
       Deve§a is a form of address, meaning, the Lord of
     Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, etc.
       Instead of ‘tam me kathaya’, the reading in revered Somananda’s
                                                                       re’
     commentary is ‘tan me kathaya’, and he explains ‘tat’ as ‘therefo
                                                                       the
      (tasmat) or it may mean ‘Tell me that by which I may attain
     satisfaction of the highest bliss i.e. I may enjoy the freedom deri-
     ved from the bliss of the highest non-dualism.’”’ There is also
                                                                         in
     another reading ‘brajami’ instead of ‘labhami’. (The meaning
     both readings is the same. )
        By the word ‘aham’ or Lin ‘labhdmyaham’ is always to be under-
                                                                     by
     stood ‘the life and soul of all experients’. Having understood
                                                            the satis-
     the teaching the nature of I as described, one obtains
Abhinavagupta                                                        63

faction of knowing oneself as the Divine, the satisfaction of com-
plete I-consciousness. This has already been made clear before.
The revered Somananda has also interpreted ‘hydaya’ in his com-
mentary as :
   “Aya or advancing (of the mind) i.e. jana or knowledge in the
hyt or the Supreme centre of consciousness.”
    “Abhinava has composed this commentary on the question
 (of the Devi) which elucidates the essence of Trika for cutting
asunder inevitably (hathdt) the knot of mdyd existing in the ether
of the heart, for the mind which      is engrossed   (saktam)   in des-
troying for ever the mayic ignorance which is the root of all ill
 (aSiva), the mind in which Siva has penetrated (Sivena nivesitam)
and which is a thirst for drinking the nectar of the bliss of Siva.”
   In order to open the entire treasure pertaining to the question,
Bhairava said. The sense of the past tense in ‘said’, has already
been explained. What is the use of repeating it again? Bhairava
is one who sustains and maintains the universe (indicated by
‘bha’, from the root ‘bhr’, meaning to sustain, to maintain) and
who sounds the great mantra of Self-consciousness, i.e. who has
constantly the awareness of Self (indicated by ‘rava’ or sound in
Bhairava).      Only   here the predominance   is that of Saktiman
 (i.e. Siva) from the point of view of the return movement (of
 His expansion) in the form of ma+-ha+-a which has already been
 described earlier.1 This will be made clearer further on. So, the
 following is the purport of the introductory part of the dialogue.
      The initial spanda of Samwit or divine Consciousness
   “The divine Supreme Consciousness-Power not different from
 Bhairava on the point of expansion according to Her essential
 nature, is said to be supreme icchdSakti (Voluntary Power). Her
 actual expansion as jfdnasakti (cognitive power) assumes the
parapara or pasyanti® form and as kriyaSakti (conative power) the
apara or madhyamé® form etc.*
                   The nature of the question
   Now, the inquiry about the nature of paraSakti who expands in
the form of the universe is said to be prasna or question. The
 Devi who is that very Sakti is the initiator of the question about
 Her (i.e. pardfakti).
   The consideration of the nature of this expansion is said to be
64                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana

the most excellent organ of speech          (para-vaktra) and that consists
of both question and answer.
   That very organ of speech constitutes the return movement
pertaining to absorption beginning with ‘m’ i.e. the jiva (empirical
individual) who has limited consciousness (aparasamvitterarabhya)
reaching the inner Sakti i.e.         (parapara-samoitti)    ‘ha’    (antastaram)
and finally getting absorbed in the compact mass of bliss of the
highest consciousness—anuttara or ‘a’ at once (parasamvid-ghana-
nanda-samharakaranam muhuh) .
   Bhairava in whom the entire expansion of the universe is in-
 volved inwardly abides as the perpetual responder. As the dual
 process of expansion      and retraction is beyond              time,   therefore,
 this question-answer is the truth that is of uniform nature.® This
 is para    sambandha®   associated     with   anuttara.    My      revered    guru
 §ambhunatha has already expounded it as the pith and core of
 Trika Sastra.

 Notes
    1. In srsfi or expansion, it is Sakti who has the predominance,
 in samhara, or the return movement, it is Saktiman or Siva who
 has the predominance.
    2. Pasyanti retains the truth of unity of the pard Sakti and con-
 tains the germ of diversity of the apard Sakti, Hence she is called
 pardpard i.e. paré+-apara (the supreme cum non-supreme ).
    3. Madhyamé is that stage of expression in which diversity has
 commenced in a subtle form. Hence she is called apara or non-
 supreme.
   4. ‘etc.’ includes vaikhari in which there is complete diversity.
                                                                 at
       5, There is no difference between the question and answer
 this stage. The question itself is the         answer.     In      the empirical
     level of reality, the questioner is one, the responder              is another};
 the question occupies one moment of time, the answer occupies
     another. At the empirical level, there is succession in expansion
     and retraction. At the met-empirical level, it is akrama, succession-
     less, beyond time. That level is the domain of eternity—time-
     lessness. Hence there is no dualism of a questioner and a respon-
     der, a question and an answer. It is the heartbeat of Reality
     sounding the eternal aye of creative activity.
       6. Parasambandha is the highest relationship between the ques-
Abhinavagupta                                                        65

tioner and the responder. In this, Siva Himself is both the
questioner and the responder.
   There are other five kinds of relationship between the ques-
tioner and the responder. They are given below:
   1. Mahan sambandha. In this, the questioner is Sadasiva and
the responder is Siva.
   2. Antarala sambandha.    In this, the questioner is Anantabhatta-
raka, and the responder is Sadasiva.
   3. Divya sambandha. In this, the questioner is Nandakumara
Rsi and the responder is Anantabhattaraka.
   4. Dioyadivya sambandha. In this, the questioner is Sanatkumara
Rsi and the responder is Nandi.
   5. Adivya sambandha. In this, both the questioner and the
responder are human beings.

                                   Text
   SRNU      DEVI      MAHABHAGE
      UTTARASYAPYANUTTARAM                       /3/
   KAULIKO’YAM VIDHIRDEVI
    MAMA HRDVYOMNYAVASTHITAH /
   KATHAYAMI SURESANI
     SADYAH KAULIKASIDDHIDAM / 4 /

                              TRANSLATION
    Listen, O most illustrious one, ‘the anuftara or the unsurpassable
 one is the unsurpassable even of the proximate one’ or ‘anuttara
 means even the answer amounts to no answer’. The plan of crea-
 tion in accordance with kula abides in the ether of my heart. I
 am revealing unto you, O goddess, that which brings about
 spontaneous fulfilment pertaining to kula.*

                                   CoMMENTARY

    From deoi iti...on p. 23, l.    1 upto ucpate on p. 24, |. 12.

                                   TRANSLATION
    The word ‘Devi’ has to be interpreted as has been done pre-
 viously.
66                                                             Para-Tristka-Vivarana

                      (First interpretation of mahabhaga)
      She who has the supreme one i.e. Siva as her aspect.

                      (Second interpretation of mahdbhaga)
      The word bhaga has to be derived in this context from the root
‘bhaj’ which means to partake of, to adore. Here, it is taken in
the latter sense. So mahdbhdgd means ‘she who being adored
according to the instruction described and about to be described
gives the great divine power’.

     (Third      interpretation of mahabhaga, the word                      ‘bhaga’    being
                          used in the sense of portion)
    Mahat =the great one i.e. Anasrita Siva who is known as the
 great one; bhdga=a portion, a fraction. So mahabhaga means
 she of whom the celebrated great one, i.e. Anasrita Siva is just a
 portion, for she enfolds within herself the initial one also of the
 entire thirty-six categories.

                (Fourth interpretation of mahabhaga)
    She  whose  portion is mahan i.e., buddhi category. Mahan has
 been called a portion from the distributive or analytic point of
 view (‘vibhagakalapeksi’). It is the divine Sakti herself who is a
 compact mass of consciousness that is called buddhi in the matter of
 settling in their proper forms of different objects and actions
 brought about by her own freedom.                      As has been said by revered
 Somananda:
   “In the sphere                  of differentiation      (aparasthitau)       i.e., at the
 level    of man          where      differentiation    prevails,   she        (par@Sakti)     is
 known        as buddhi which in its subtle all-pervasive condition is
 always       the    innate        (sahajam)   universal     consciousness         of Siva.”
     (S.D.I, 26-27).
                          (Fifth     interpretation of mahabhaga)
       ‘Bhaga’      may     mean      difference   or    separation.      By     the   ‘matup?
     suffix, the word ‘bhdga’ means that which has difference or sepa-
     ration i.e. a separate entity. In separate entities, ascertainment
     is made by differentiating one thing from another. Though
     pure ascertainment of objects (prasddatmaka-visaya-niscayo ) i.e.
     the indeterminate aspect (nirvikalpa) of buddhi does not touch
Abhinavagupta                                                            67

i.e. does not concern itself with the pleasant and unpleasant
aspects of the different objects present in the world, yet that
buddhi (in its determinate or savikalpaka aspect) brings about the
perception of objects as separate from one another. It is uni-
versally admitted that there is a flow of the attribute of sattvain the
case of the pleasant states of buddhi, for the pleasant states of
buddhi are of the form of dharma (righteousness), aifvarya (power
or sovereignty), jfdna (knowledge), and vairdgya (freedom from
worldly desires). If one gets entrance into the deepest layer i.e.
in the prathamabhasa or the initial, indeterminate state even in the
pleasant aspect of buddhi, then through that he will find himself
perpetually     in the domain      of supreme    bliss underlying    that
aspect.

               (Sixth interpretation of mahabhaga)
  Mahabhaga may be analyzed into maha+a+bhdga. ‘Maha’
means jagadananda i.e. that bliss which is entirely uninterrupted,
perfect, integral, independent, expression of divine Freedom; ‘a’
means ‘isat’? or slight; ‘bhaga’ means fraction. So mahabhagad
means the Devi of whose jagadananda, bliss, only a slight fraction
is available (to people), Whatever happiness there is in life, that
is possible only by entering the Universal Creative Energy
 (visargasaktau)    who   is the highest abode   of the Supreme     bliss,
 It appears in small limited measure        (in life) only because of the
visargasakti not being realized in her internal essential aspect.
   Bhattanarayana has given expression to the same idea (in his
Stavacintamani) :
    “All the delight that is noticed in all the three worlds (viz.
 bhava, abhava and atibhava) is only a drop of whose delight, to that
 God, the ocean of delight do I bow.” (St. C. Verse 61).

                   (Seventh interpretation of mahabhaga)
   Mahabhaga       may    be interpreted   as ‘ma-ha-a   bhdgah yasyah        sa
 mahdbhaga@’ i.e. she who betakes herself to that form which has
 been declared by the previous principle as ma-ha-a is mahd-
 bhagé. What is meant to be said is that the delight of the highest
 Lord which expands in the form of ‘aham’ is the essential form of
 Sakti, and that is the nature of revered pard.
68                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                              ComMENTARY
     From   ata eva on p. 24, 1.12 upto prasaktanuprasaktya on p. 25,
Lei

                               TRANSLATION
     Therefore    that highest goddess    hears everything.    Abiding    as
she does in the form of the power of hearing, she has that sover-
eign power       (svdtantrya) which consists in effecting congruous and
suitable connexion by blending all sound in a meaningful whole—
the sound which is clear to the ear but is only a succession of a
mass of confused vibrating syllables. Without this power of effect-
ing congruous connexion, an experient though hearing parti-
cular words lost in confused buzzing sound says, in common
usage ‘I am not hearing them’.
   An object of sense-perception which is merely confused buzzing
sound without its being blended in a sensible whole is also said to
be ‘heard’. This is the common           usage.   But in reality, the con-
fused sound only enters the ear; it does not enable the listener
to grasp the words denoted by the sound and therefore it remains
only a confused mass of sound (tatha bhavet), for being different
 from the words, it is merely buzzing sound. When it is intended
 to enunciate the words, then there cannot be the production of
 confused sound, for there is no ground for it. When there is the
 desire to speak sensibly, then there is the enunciation of clear
 words, and with the enunciation of clear words, there is no occa-
 sion for indistinct, confused sound of the same kind. Those very
 words when       they are not clearly enunciated and         so cannot   be
 knit into a meaningful whole are said to be mere confused sound,
 For one attentively intent on knitting the words in a sensible
 whole, there may be clear comprehension to some extent. There-
 fore in such a case, it is the congruous connexion of the words
 which can be of use. It is the goddess parafakti (the supreme
 creative power) who brings about the congruous connexion.
 It has been rightly said,
    “Mantra, Mantramahe$vara etc. resorting to that power etc.”
 (Sp. K. II, 10). In fact “hears, sees, speaks, seizes” etc. are only
 aspects of the goddess alone. As has been said by the Divine in
 Vedanta:
    “That by which one (i.e. the experient) knows colour and form
Abhinavagupta                                                       69

(rapa), taste, smell, contact, sound, the pleasure of sexual inter-
course is this Self alone. What remains in this world (which is
not known by the Self)?” (Katha U. IT, 3).
   Hearing does not mean simply lending the ear to some con-
fused, loud utterance of words.     Siva Himself thus laid down      in
Svacchanda Sastra on the occasion of the division of japa (repeat-
ing a mantra in a murmuring tone):
     “That which is heard only within oneself is known as upamsu
japa.” In this the Self alone hears in madhyamd stage, not any-
 body else.’* This is what is said.
     When the organ of utterance (sthana) and the mode of arti-
 culation (prayatna) are distinctly marked, then with the junction
 and separation of the teeth and the lips, even words uttered in
 very low tone may be audible to a person sitting very close and
 there would arise the contingency of the japa becoming saSabda
 i.e. japa with audible words. It has been said:
     “That which is audible to others is known as safabda japa”.
In upamsu japa    (atra), there is no particular advantage even to a
man      who is sitting close by, for it will be inaudible to him.
Another person may notice the movement of the tongue and the
junction ofthe lips (of the performer of the japa), yet he cannot hear
him, for the wordsare not audible externally (varnasya bahiratmala-
bhabhavat), for the japa is being performed only in the madhyama
stage.    Only the performer can hear it (@tmand eva Sravanam sydt).
   By the impact of air, clear words are effected, but the impact
is not so strong as to make it audible externally. Even the move-
ment of lips in this japa does not enter the stage of marked utter-
ance of words, but is confined to itself till that japa lasts. If the
movement of lips, hands, etc., occurring at that time      (i.e. at the
time of japa) is stopped and in its place there is distinct articula-
tion by means of the organs of utterance, and in the effectuation
of words, if there is soft or loud production of sound in succession
so as to be audible near or far, then it is, in every way, heard by
others. Then it will be sound of the level of vaikhari. Enough of
elaboration of this incidental reference.

Nores
   1. Parabhattarika is the very power of learning. She hears every-
 thing that is ever uttered in the universe.
70                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

   2. Her sovereign power (svdtantrya) consists in sankalandnu-
sandhana. Sankalana means effecting congruous and suitable
connexion of distinct sounds and anusandhdna means blending
them in a definite, meaningful whole.
      3. What is meant to be said is that in updmsu japa, even the
aspirant      carrying on the japa cannot     hear the mantra with his
physical ears. ‘He hears it within himself’? only means that he
experiences the mantra as a spanda or throb of his self-experience.

                                ExPosiTION
   The Devi is none other but the Sakti of Bhairava Himself.
 A.G. gives seven reasons why the Devi is called mahabhaga. Now
 A.G. says that there is an esoteric meaning in asking her to hear.
 She is the power of hearing itself. While others cannot make out
 anything from confused, buzzing sound even though it is heard
 by the ear, she can always make out the sense ofall sound whether
 it is clearly pronounced or is only indistinct, confused sound.
                                    ‘TEXT
       From saiva paramesvari on p. 25, 1. 22 upto srnu devi iti on p. 28,
 17h
                                TRANSLATION
       That very supreme goddess who hears everything has by the
     form of address (viz.,‘O goddess, listen’), clearly been indicated as
     Sakti. Everything in the universe is of the form of nara, Sakti
     and Siva.! Therefore everything in the universe consists of the
     triad. That, which is only confined to itself (as an object), is
     insentient and comes chiefly under      the category of nara, as for
     instance, ‘the jar is lying (on the ground).’ The above has refer-
     ence only to the third person (prathama purusa) which is left to
     be supplied after the first and second person (fesah).
       That which appears even as ‘this’, when addressed,         becomes
     completely enveloped with the I-feeling of the addressor. The
     ‘this’ which is different from the addressor, when       addressed as
     ‘you’, becomes a form of ‘Sakti’. In ‘you are standing’ this is the
     meaning of the second person, and the principle of addressing viz.
                                                                       I
     as I am standing, even so this is standing. Ordinarily, the
      (chambhdva)   of the other person is different from the ‘I’ of the
Abhinavagupta                                                              71

person who is to address, but in the process of addressing, the
addressor assimilates the delightful autonomy of the addressed
characterized by I-feeling to his own, and considering it as iden-
tical with the uninterrupted delight of his own I-feeling starts
addressing him. In this light, he is addressing him in the true
sense of the second person. This sense in which the addressor and
the addressed, though different, become one in the addressing is
indicative of the pardpard goddess (whose characteristic is identity
in diversity).
    (On the other hand) in the freedom of the uninterrupted de-
light of I-consciousness completely independent of any reference
to anything else, expressed in the form ‘I am standing’, it is in
every respect (sarvath@) the revered para (highest) Sakti? that is
at work.   In that lies the pre-eminence of the first person.          As has
been   said,    “Since    I    transcend    the   perishable   and   also the
imperishable, therefore, am I known as the highest purusa i.e. as
the first person.”’ (Bh. G. XV, 18).
   Here the verb ‘asmi’ (am) has been used with reference to ‘T’,
the first person, to indicate its pre-eminence over both the
perishing and the imperishable.
  Here in every case, it is not the limited I identified with the
body that is referred to. The limited I (identified with the body)
being an object of the senses is obviously incompatible with that
 (the real, unlimited I). Thus this (i.e. unlimited) I is of the
nature of the self-luminous Siva. Therefore of the (universal, un-
limited) Consciousness (bodha) which is self-luminous, there is
neither any diminution nor augmentation. Both diminution and
augmentation being of the nature of aprakdfa cannot be an aspect
of the Light of Consciousness         (lit., cannot enter consciousness).
The middle state which is only relative to the state of diminution
and augmentation is also nothing. Therefore the notion of I
which is inseparable from the universal consciousness of Siva (tad-
bodhdvicchedaripa) and free from all relativity is not applicable to
situations of augmentation, diminution, and the middle state bet-
ween these indicated by thisness, i.e. objectivity and absence of
objectivity (i.e. the state of Sanya or void). The notion of you i.e.
the second     person    which,    though   indicative of separateness,     is
actually similar to that of I. “Therefore both you and I are des-
cribed as genderless’’        (i.e. they are used for both genders).     The
72                                                  Para-Trigikd-Vivarana

application of number etc., i.e. dual and plural of these words
according to the usage depending on the enumeration                or differ-
ence of the body is appropriate         from the point of view of pard-
para Sakti in the dual and apara-fakti in the plural, The difference
determined by the Sakti of the Divine Freedom is considered as
one in the case of several bodies which can be traced in such
 usages as ‘we two, you two, we all, you all.”
   Augmentation etc., being associated with the body cannot
be even figuratively employed in the case of consciousness, for
diminution and augmentation cannot be reasonably applied to
consciousness.
     “Everything    is an    epitome   of all”. According     to    this   uni-
versal principle,     even    the insentient third persons         (nara@tmano
jada api) shedding their insentiency can become entitled to the
use of second and first person         (fakti-faivaripabhdjo bhavanti), for
instance, in ‘listen, O mountains’, the third person has been treat-
ed as second person, in ‘of mountains, I am Meru’, the third
person has been treated as the first person, in ‘I, Caitra am speak-
ing’ the first person has been treated as the third person. The
second person which pertains to Sakti, can by shedding its Sakti
character, acquire the aspect of the third person, for instance,
in ‘you whose fear has vanished, are fortitude (lit. the power of
fortitude) itself’, ‘you’ not being used as a form of address has
appropriately acquired the aspect of the third person. Usage like
‘bhavan’ (you) with particular, subsequent use of words like
‘padah, guravah’ (revered one) which are used only in the case of
another person, being used as third person which is characteristic
of nara is fairly recognized. The second person also which is cha-
racteristic of Sakti, shedding its particular use acquires the aspect
of first person which is characteristic of Siva, for instance, “O
dear friend (female friend), O loved one, thou art I” is an accept-
ed usage. The first person also characteristic of Siva, shedding
its aspect of first person which is cit, betakes to the aspect of the
third person characteristic of nara or second person characteristic
of Sakti. In the following expressions, “Who am I?” “This one
am I,” “O I’, “Fie to me,” ‘Oh to me” etc., the uninterrupted
autonomy of I is subdued, and it is chiefly the separate ‘this one’
that becomes predominant. In such a case, it is as if separateness
characteristic of apard Sakti, in other words, nara riipa or third
Abhinavagupta                                                           73
person that becomes prominent. In ‘OT’ etc., Siva contacts        the
throb of pardpara Sakti (i.e. enters the sphere of second person).
But in such cases, the preceding state acquires the succeeding
state without transgressing its previous nature.? Thus the third
person characteristic of nara can clearly mount to the stage of
the second (the Sakti stage) and even to the first person (i.e.
Sivastage) but the contrary course of mounting cannot be
admissible.*
   Each of this triad without giving up its nature, becomes of three
forms, viz. singular    (Siva-bhdva), dual    (Sakti-bhdva)     and plural
 (nara-bhava). It has been said,
   “One thing becomes dual, and after becoming dual, it becomes
plural.’’ Of one and the same thing, when it is only one, then it
connotes the nature of Siva, since there is no otheras counterpart.
When there is a counterpart, then it is the        nature of Sakti. In
the case of many denoting difference, there is the nature of nara.
Thus we have ‘ghafah’, one jar denoting oneness, and thus Siva-
bhava, ‘ghatau’, two jars, denoting Sakti-bhava, ‘ghafal’, many jars,
denoting the aspect of nara. In a copulative compound (dvandva
Samasa) in which the members, if uncompounded, would be in
the same case and connected by the conjunction ‘and’, we have
an example of many things forming a sort of unity, thus denoting
Siva, e.g. ‘ghatapatapdsanah’    (jar, cloth, stones).   In a verb also,
e.g. ‘tisthati’ (one is standing or sitting) denotes Siva: ‘tisthatah’
 (two are standing or sitting) denotes Sakti, ‘tisthanti’? (many are
standing or sitting) denotes nara. In fact, the entire manifesta-
tion is the expansion of kripasakti brought about by one alone (i.e.
by Siva). As has been said:
  “By    reducing    the many    (i.e. the nara-riipa and Sakti-riipa to
one (i.e. Siva-riipa) who is there who will not be liberated from
bondage?”
   Therefore, when the third person (nara), the second person
 (Sakti) and the first person (Siva) are used together, simultan-
ously there is the absorption of the lowerin the higher and higher,
because it is the higher that contains the truth of the lower, e.g.
in ‘sa ca tvam ca tisthathah (he and you are standing), the number
of the verb ‘stha’ (to stand) is used in the second person which
indicates that the third person (nara) has been absorbed in the
second   (Sakti).   In ‘sa ca toam ca aham ca tisthamah’      (he, you and
                                                        Para-Trisika-Vioarana
74
                                            is the plural              number
I are standing), the verb ‘tisthamah’ which
                                                 even for the third and
of the verb in the first person has been used
                                          of   the  fact that the third
the second person which is indicative
                                            first.  It is only this state
and second person are absorbed in the
                                         of the residual traces
of complete understanding, the essence
                                       which  is followed by the
of the innate, perfect I-consciousness
                                               arly, even in local
 grammarians in their descriptive rules. Simil
 dialects, e.g., the language        (e.g. Pali)     used by the Buddhists or
                                               er alone of speech
 used in Andhra or Dravidian region, this mann
                                                 originally follows
 and meaning (lit. expressed by words) which
                                             ys   by its delightful
 the instinctive feeling of the heart, conve
                                               Sakti            and Siva)       of
 impression this form (viz., the form of nara,
 understanding.
       As has been said by myself:
                                                         directly.”
       “That is no speech which does not reach the heart
                                                      is innate. As has
     So in every way, this kind of comprehension
                                                  and Siva (tair), there
     been said: ‘‘Without the form of nara, Sakti
                                                                  In Malini-
     is neither word, nor meaning, nor mental movement.”
     vijayatantra also, it has been said:
                                                                  ’) abides,
         “As the one Sakti of Siva (Sambhoh Saktirekaiva Sankar
                                                        first,   second  and
      presiding over the entire class (of words, in
                                                               you.”   (M.V.
      third person), even so has she been related unto
      III, 34).
         In Tantrasamuccaya also, it is said:
                                                                     way in-
          “This universe is established always and is in every
                                                                 ) and first
      volved in third person (nara), second person (Sakti
                                                 and the all-knowing.”
     person (Siva) both in the dealings of worms
                                                           and first
       Thus this universe consisting of the third, second
                                                       according to
     person (nara-fakti-siodtmakam) has been explained
                      of the’ traditional    clear    comprehension.    This all-
      the teaching
                                                                attikramah) con-
      inclusive order of experience (saroamsahah pratip
                                                                been manifested
      sisting of the third, second and first person has
                                     t Lord.   So  enoug  h  of  elaboration of a
      by the free will of the highes
                                                                people who have
      topic which can appeal to the hearts of only a few
                                              who    are  of  refine d taste, who
      received the teaching from a guru,
                                         heard    from   the   learne d people a
       are well-read (lit., who have
                                             purifi ed   by  the   descen t of the
       great deal), and who have been
                                               s’   has  been   expla ined.
       Supreme grace. So, ‘listen, O goddes
Abhinavagupta                                                       75

Notes
  1. In the context of frika or triad, viz., Siva, Sakti and nara,
‘nara’ represents all objective phenomena      from the earth upto
maya; ‘Sakti’ represents Suddhavidya,      Isvara, and Sadasiva, and
‘Siva’ represents Siva and Sakti.
   2. In the first person, it is the pard@fakti that is at work. From
the point of view of the triad, first person is the state of Siva. In
the second person, it is the pardpard Sakti that is at work. So, the
second person, from the stand-point of the triad is the state of
Sakti. In the third person, it is the apara Sakti that is at work. So
the third person from the standpoint of the triad is the state of
nara.
   3. The meaning is that the Siva-aspect abides in the Sakti-
aspect, and the Sakti-aspect abides in the nara-aspect. Thus the
Siva-aspect pervades all of them.
    4. The nara-ripa first rises to the Sakti-ripa and then to Siva-
riijpa. It cannot rise to Siva-ripa, leaving aside the intervening
Sakti-rapa.

                              EXPOSITION
   A.G. has tried to show that when Bhairava in the first person
addresses the Devi in the second person, it should be understood
that the Devi is not different from Bhairava.      In order to prove
this point, he has given a number of examples of the usage of
speech in which the second person is assimilated to the first, and
the third to the second. A.G, has been at pains to prove that these
kinds of usages in speech in all languages are not a matter of mere
accident or convention, but serve as a pointer to the metaphysical
truth, viz. that Siva and His Sakti are one, that just as in gram-
mar there is first the singular number, then the dual and finally
the plural, that just as in speech, there is firstly the first person,
then the second and finally the third, even so in manifestation,
the singular number and the first person are symbolic of Siva, the
dual number and the second person are symbolic of Sakti and the
plural number and third person are symbolic of nara or objective
phenomena. Further, just as the third person has to surrender
itself to the second, and the second to the first in order that they
may be used together, so also the prameya (object) or nara has to
surrender itself to pramaya (knowledge) or Sakti, to be known, and
76                                                           Pard-Trigika-Vivarana

pramana has to surrender itself to pramata                  (knower)    for its final
fulfilment.

                               CoMMENTARY
      From uttarasyapi on p. 28, 1. 11 upto ityuktam on p. $3, 121
                                   TRANSLATION
  That which is said, viz. how               it is the anuttara of uttara is the
answer of Bhairava.
      (Different senses of uttarasyapyanuttaram )
      1, As has been said before (viz., everything is the epitome of
 all), the proximate one (uttaramapi) is also identical with the non-
 proximate (anuttara). It cannot exist otherwise. Therefore, the
 proximate also setting aside its character as proximate becomes
                        The text reads, ‘uttarasydpi anuttaram’.           ‘Uttarasya’
 non-proximate.
 is the 6th or the genitive case, and the genitive case is (also) used
 in the sense of ‘anadara’ i.e. ignoring or setting aside i.e. absence
 of consideration or dis-regard. So ‘uttarasyapi anuttaram’ may mean
 the proximate setting aside its character as proximate becomes
                                                                      i.e.
 non-proximate. Even this difference (of the proximate one
  from the earth upto andérita Siva’  acquire s this charact er (of diff-
     erence) by resting wholly on the undifferentiated                 (i.e. anuttara).*
     As has been said in the following:
       (This is a difficult verse. The following is its prose order:)
                                                                  na atmi-
       **Paravyavasthapi pare tavat kartum na Sakyate yavat parah
     kytah : yatah parah pare buddhah.”).” “Even the ascertainment of
     difference (paravyavastha) cannot be made in the different objects
                   na   kartum   fakyate)     so   long     as the   Supreme is        not
     (pare tdvat
                                                                        the
     assimilated to oneself (yavat parah na dtmikrtah), since
                                                                         e
     different object (parak) is known (buddhah) only in the Suprem
                                                                     in the
      (pare) i.e. the different object has its raison d’étre only
     Supreme.”
         2. Uttara may mean the posterior. So ‘uttarasyapi anuttaram’ may
                        the   posterior     part   of the    book    cannot    offer    its
     mean,    “even
     answer.”?
         3. Even of my answer given in the pasyanti stage which is the
                                                                 i.e. this
     first expansion of pard, this anuttara is the highest truth
     non-answer (anuttara) or silence is the highest truth.
Abhinavagupta                                                                 77

  4.    Uttaramay also mean the phenomena—desirables, knowables,
and actions—prompted by the trident, viz. icchd-Sakti, jidna-Sakti
and kriya-Sakti.     Anuttara   is that stage where        all the above    and
utiara cease.
  What after all is that anuttara? The answer is ‘that is anuttara
from which proceeds kaulika vidhi’. Kaulika has been previously
explained as ‘that which is of the nature of kula and akula’*; vidhi
means     ‘the great manifestation’     (mahdsrsti)* or the tattoas from
anafrita Siva upto Ssuddhavidya (Suddhadhoa). ‘Vidhi’ is socalled
because of its being executed. Now anuttara is that from which
proceeds     this ‘great manifestation’       i.e. mahdsrstit which enfolds
within itself hundreds of crores of unlimited mayiya (phenomenal)
creations.    As has been said, “‘That from which proceeds every-
thing.” So, this universe consisting of cit-pramdtd i.e. Sinya pramata,
citta i.e. puryastaka pramatd, prana i.e. pranapramata, deha i.e. deha-
pramatd      (i.c. four kinds of experients), pleasure and pain i.e.
subjective experiences, senses i.e. means             of experience,   the five
elements and jar etc., i.e, subtle and gross objects of experience
abide without difference in one, supreme,               divine Consciousness
as simply form of consciousness             (bodhdtmakena riipena). Though
the divine      universal   consciousness     never    ceases   to exist, for it
ceasing, there will be the contingency of universal darkness, yet
there does not exist difference consisting of reciprocal absence
(of objects), for all objects are omnifarious in that state (vifodt-
mana eva bhavah). If all things were not situated in that universal
Bhairava Consciousness, then even the initial indeterminate
perception which is of use in urging the senses towards their ob-
jects would not be there.       Therefore, the entire multitude of exis-
tents exists there, without the appearance of appropriate objecti-
vity (lit., thisness), identically with I-consciousness only, void of
all differentiation. There is absolutely no difference there what-
soever.    In that universal Bhairava consciousness, the entire mani-
festation (kaulika vidhi) lies clearly (spastah san) at rest.
   All this (universe) consisting of thirty-six categories, though
created by Siva who being of supreme Sakti, is of the nature of
universal creative pulsation (sdémdnya spanda) rests in that consci-
ousness itself in its own form which is predominantly Sakti i.e.
characterized by particular creative pulsation (visesa spanda).®
This is what is meant by the inherence of objects in their own
                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana
78

nature which is consciousness.         As has been said “In which all
things exist.”
      This multitude of objects      (éadetat) of the nature of Siva and
Sakti, Siva whose        characteristic is universal creative pulsation
(sdmanya spanda®)        and Sakti whose characteristic is particular
                                                                      a-
creative pulsation       (visesarapam) though only of one form (ekdtm
                                                 only as an aid
mapi) has been determined separately by the Lord
                                              one, viz. anuttara who is
for teaching, but really speaking it is only
                                           viz.,  the autonomous I-
the essence of the creative energy
consciousness.
                                                        s of creation
   What is the nature of that in which this proces
                                             “It inhere s in the ether
 (kaulika vidhi) is inherent? Bhairava says,
                                                 Now   heart   (hrdaya)   in this
 of my heart”?       (mama hydaya-vyomni).
                                                nts.
 context means the receptacle of all the existe
                                             in their final analysis,
    Existents from blue etc. upto worms are,
                                               ess (cidamsa-anivista-
 simply nothing unless they rest in consciousn
                                                     ent. The essence
     nam). ‘Blue’ etc. belong really to the experi
                                                      in uninterrupted
     of blue etc. consists in its being incorporated
     I-consciousness, as in ‘Blue appears to me”.
                                                       many ways)
        (‘Mama hydayanyomnt’ may be interpreted in
                                                     ‘hrdaya’ means the
        First interpretation: In ‘mamahrdayanyoma’,
                                                     etc. ; ‘oyoma’ means
     receptacle of innumerable objects like blue
                                                    s (mamakaratmakam
     that where the universe of particular object
                                                        it manner in that
     visvam) is ‘vita’ i.e. is held wholly in an implic
                                             (Sanyariipam).
     ether which is devoid of all difference
                                                     consciousness which
        Second interpretation: ‘Mama’ means ‘of the
                               in   difference     (apara-samvitti)   and    non-
     expresses   itself both
                                                  the final resting place
     difference (para-samvitti) ; ‘hydayam’ means
                                                  , by the form of the
     i.e. L—‘aham’. The ayoma of that also means
                                                  the nara form i.e. the
     return movement of aham i.e. ma--ha-+-a,
                                                    dissolved in the
      objective phenomena represented by ‘ma’ being
                                                  kundalini Sakti represented
      dot i.e. the anusvara over ‘ha’, enters the
                                                               which represents
      by the letter ‘ha’ and finally entering the ‘a’ letter
                                                 ra, which is identified
      the integral, unimpeded delight of anutta
                                                 This is the ether of my
      with all, it becomes that (i.e. anuttara).
                                                        proceeds, that in
      heart. Therefore, that from which this universe
                                                  the one whose nature
      which it rests that one alone, the eternal,
                                                    hamanam), which can
      cannot be veiled which is self-luminous (prat
Abhinavagupta                                                        79

never be denied    (anapahnavaniyam) is the anuttara, the unsurpass-
able Absolute. As has been said:
   ‘Inasmuch as nothing can veil His nature, there cannot be the
obstruction anywhere of his in whom all this world rests and from
whom it has come forth.” (Sp. K. I, 2).
  Even if He (Siva) is supposed to be obstructed by a cover (e.g.,
maya), He still shines by His freedom in the form of that cover
itself,° and thus the Lord is always of the nature of knowledge
and activity. The particle ‘yat’? (of which yasmin saroam or yatra
and yatah sarvam or yasmat are different forms) conveys the sense
of all the cases; on account of its fitness of relation with another
sentence (e.g. idam sarvam sthitam), it stands here in a special
position i.e. it is used in the sense of the locative case (yasmin
paramasiva) i.e. the Supreme Siva in whom it rests, and on ac-
count ofits fitness with another sentence (e.g. idam sarvam nirgatam),
it is also used in the sense of the ablative case (yasmat parama-
§iodt) i.e. the Supreme Siva from whom it emanates. This is the
clear, direct sense. That which is the source of the expansion
of universal manifestation (kaulikah srsti-prasarah), in the sense
of the ablative case (yasmdt ca nirgatam or yatah sarvam), that
which abides in the ether of my heart, in the sense of the loca-
tive case (yatra sthitam or yasmin sarvam), that indeed is anuttara.
   Thus having established that the anuttara is the centre of both
the expansion and the absorption of the universe, Bhairava now
establishes the expansion,    which   is technically called kriyasakti-
visarga which means visarga or external expansion of the spanda of
kriyasakti which is of the nature of vimarfa. He begins with ‘katha-
Jami (i.e., I am telling you).
    That very aspect of expansion is a-ha-m (I), para (supreme),
anuttara (unsurpassable). Even in its regular succession of ex-
 ternal expansion consisting of pasyanti and madhyama denoting
pardpara Sakti, and vaikhari denoting apara Sakti its unbroken conti-
nuity is the highest truth.    ‘Kathayaémi’ means:   ‘I am expressing
it by the use of appropriate names the series of utterances upto
vaikhari that arise from the venerable pard Sakti and are expressed
in varied scriptural and worldly forms.      It has been said, ““Who
is everywhere’.
   Whether in the initial stage of pard or the final stage of apard i.e.
vaikhari, both of which are the expression of revered pardfakti and
80                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

also in its stage of expansion in the form of pardpard i.e. in pasyanti
and madhyamé forms, it is throughout the display of the immutable
anuttara. Venerable Somananda has also said the same thing in
his commentary on Paratrisika. “‘Kathayami” means “I (Bhai-
rava) say owing to the eagerness of the enquiry; that it is I who
being present as Consciousness in all, declare this.” It is this
explanation which my heart, purified by the reasoning of the
guru, teaching of the scripture, and personal experience, (yuktyu-
padesasamskaraik) has fully accepted.
      (Now A.G. gives different interpretations of sadyah)
     First interpretation: The nature of the highest         Lord    is said to
be ‘sadyah’. ‘Sadyak’ may be analyzed into sat+jyak meaning
‘yah paramesvarah tat sat’ ie. what the greatest Lord described
as     Bhairava,   akula,    anuttara,   dhruva is, that is all     this sat or
existence, in other words kaulikavidhi or the plan of creation. (So
sadyah means—He who is this whole universe). No object what-
soever can exist apart from the veritable Bhairava who is both
praka$a or Light and vimarSa or the consciousness of that Light
as I.
   In all matters,     there are three terms,       sattd   (existence),   sam-
bandha     (relation), and arthakriya      (purpose). Even though they
are considered to be different (parabhimatandmapi) by others, the
raison d’étre of all of them is sattd i.e. being (sattahetuta). Without
satté (being), there cannot be the possibility of even sambandha or
arthakriya (satta-ayoge tathdtva-anupapatteh). If one requires to find
out another being of being or another purpose of purpose, then
there would be the contingency of regressus ad infinitum. Sattva or
eternal being is that by which alone do other things derive their
life and the apparent form (prakasamayata) of which is brought
into being by its vimarfa. That being is Bhairava Himself full of
the    I-feeling which      is the quintessence    of the consciousness       of
His Freedom.’
   2. Or sadya may be interpreted as ‘sati-sadripe yasyati yatnam
karoti i.e. he in his nature as sat i.e. as Siva exerts, i.e. is active,
for Siva is the very life of the power of activity. This sadya may be
treated as neuter gender by adding the suffix Avip. Some elderly
teachers have adopted the reading sadyat (sat+yat) instead of
sadyah. It has been said in Siddhasantana:*
Abhinavagupta                                                        81

    “The power that shines in appearances (such as jar, cloth etc.)
is sat itself i.e. Siva.””
  In Spandakarika also it has been said:
  “That (Reality) is sat in the highest sense.” (Sp. K. I, 5)
  Venerable Somananda has also said:
  “That which is sat or Siva is the highest reality (paramdarthah).
Since the universe is pervaded by that highest Reality, therefore
the universe is also Siva. Thus His nature has been declared. It
has been rightly said, “He who is all’’.”
   (A.G, now comments on kaulikasiddhidam)
   The expansion of the power of activity of this very anuttara is
being explained by the statement kaulikasiddhidam:
   The word ‘kaulika’ has already been explained. Its siddhi or
perfect fulfilment is now being explained. That by which the
being so i.e. the true nature (tathatva) of kaulika is fixed and cor-
roborated,   is its perfect fulfilment i.e. anuttara is the true fulfil-
ment of kaulika vidhi, the creative process. In that highest ex-
perient, viz. the unsurpassable divine Consciousness, everything—
kula and akulai.e. Siva and Sakti—becomes that very Conscious-
ness where all that is perceived and known acquires the firmness
of that very nature itself (pratiyamanam sarvam tathatoadardhyam
bhajate).
  It has been said:
   “Trika is higher than the highest.’’®
   At another place also, it has been said:
   “The Saiva system is higher than the Vedic, the left-hand
doctrine is higher than Saiva, the right hand doctrine is higher
than the left; the Kula system is higher than the right-hand
doctrine; the Matam is higher than the Kula, the Trika is higher
even than that; in fact, it is the highest of all.’’®
  In Nigacara™ Sastra also, we find the following:
  “The teacher who has been initiated as dcarya in the left-hand
path and is considered to be knowing the supreme truth (accor-
ding to left-hand path) has to undergo the ceremony of con-
secration in Bhairava marga, he also has to receive fresh initiation
in the Kula marga, he wh6 has received initiation in Kula has to
82                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

receive     initiation in Kaula marga and even he who has received
initiation in Kaula mdrga has to receive fresh initiation in the
Trika marga.”"4
     In Sarvacara™ also, it has been said:
     “The teacher who has received initiation in the left hand path
and    is considered to be knowing the Supreme truth has still to
undertake the purificatory ceremony successively in the various
Bhairava systems, viz. Kula, Kaula and Trika.”
  This alone is the mode of Siva that in all the stages whether of
the common man, the Veda, the Saiva Siddhanta, the left hand
path, the right hand path, the Sakta system (Kula) and the Mata
system,     it is He   that abides as the highest experient. As has
been said:
   “He who is eternally all, to Him, the Omnifarious one do T
bow.”
   So, “all this is verily the anuttara’’—proclaiming this as the
central point of his thesis, venerable Somananda has said in his
commentary on Paratrisika: ‘“‘What occasion is there for much
talk, everything is anuttara, because of being anuttara.”
   Pointing out how others have expounded this, leaving aside
such (lucid) exposition would amount to a fault.                   Though a
dialogue carried on with those who are without any                 knowledge
of grammar,       logic,   traditional   teaching   and   have   no   personal
experience would be shameful, yet in order to bring to the know-
ledge of sensible people the sample of their exposition, I am put-
ting down here their explanation of anuttara. This is how it begins:
   “By the use of the words anuttara etc. in one and a half verses,
the question pertaining to Siva has been put. In hrdayastha tu ya
Saktih’ the question pertains to Sakti. In that part of the book
which contains the answer, viz., “‘Srnu devi...uttarasyapyanuttaram,”
the explanation offered is: “Listen about uttara, i.e. the expansion
of Sakti,    and also about anuttara, i.e. the expansion         of Siva.”   In
this case, if the explanation is from the point of view of Trika,
there arises the contingency of a third question regarding nara.
If the explanation is from the point of view of yamala, even there,
it is not two separate beings—Siva and Sakti whose connexion is
known as ydmala so that a separate question about each could be
justified.
Abhinavagupta                                                          83

  The meaning of ‘atha’ also (occurring in the subsequent verse)
would not fit in. Of two homogeneous realities, the word atha
indicates the definite priority of one and the definite immediate
sequence of the other. Without the ascertainment of the nature
of uttara (i.e. Sakti), a question about anuttara (i.e. Siva) is
unreasonable.
  In some old    books,    another    such   verse is also noticed:   “O
Lord, I have heard the description of the spiritual knowledge
pertaining to érika and so through your favour I have also acqui-
red knowledge pertaining to uttara.”
   Therefore that which the teachers have taught in accordance
with the commentary of venerable Somananda will alone do good
to all.
   “Abhinavagupta has made the blazing Sun of commentary
manifest that is bent on extirpating the darkness (t@masa) due to
misleading, wretched commentaries lacking the refinement of
good teaching and tradition, that makes the heart-lotus, purified
by the discipline of trika bloom, that, by its flashing lustre, melts
the coagulated stream of innumerable bonds.”
   So that is said to be anuttara from which this kaulika creation
emerges, in which it stays, and of which it is constituted.
   (Here ends the bimba portion of Paratrisika)
   (Now   begins the pratibimba portion of Paratrisika)
  So, what is the kaulika mode of manifestation? How does it
proceed from anuttara? How does it stay in it (i.e. anuttara) alone?
How is it (i.e. kaulika vidhi) the form of anuttara itself?
   It has been said that it is the anuttara even of the posterior part
of the book. It is for the explanation of all this that the Lord
Bhairava proposes to devote the posterior part of the book with
a desire for decisive ascertainment in detail for the sake of those
pupils who have become adroit by acquiring the understanding
of the knowledge of reality which is the essence (niskarsana) of the
well-reasoned explanation of the guru           (yjukti), teaching of the
traditional scripture     (agama)    and   personal experience   (sdasam-
vedana).
  There is the complete satisfaction of realization for those whose
manifold impression of the ideas of difference has been utterly
destroyed by so much of solid teaching in the form of the question
84                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana

beginning with ‘anuttaram katham’ and concluded with two and
a half verses and in the form of the answer beginning with ‘Srnu
devi’, and       ending with a decisive statement         in one and      a half
verses and who have attained to the state of jivanmukti (liberation
in life) by entering the stage of anuttara.
   Therefore, I proclaim with upraised arm that those who have
been purified by firm conviction may rest contented with so much
only. Now the other part of the book is begun for a thorough
deliberation of the kaulika state inherent in the spotless mirror of
 anuttara who      is the supreme Bhairava."*

 Notes
                                                               tation
      1. The ‘uttara’ or proximate one i.e. the entire manifes
 from the earth upto andsrita Siva which is full of difference cannot
                                                                  of
 exist without resting on anuttara which is abhedabhih, the stage
 non-difference        i.e.   pure   undifferentiated    Consciousness.
                                                                from
       2. It has already been said that the Devi asks questions
 the stage of madhyama and Bhairava answers from the stage of
                                                                      para.
 pasyanti, But pasyanti itself is. the first external expansion of
 How can it describe the state of pard? So         in spite of all the  ex-
                                                                  of
 planation offered by Bhairava in the pasyanti stage, the nature
 pard really remains unanswered. (anuttara).
                                                             latma’
    3, ‘Kula’ means Sakti and ‘akula’ means Siva. ‘Kulaku
 means that in which Siva and Sakti are fused into one.
                                                               Suddhavidya
        4. Mahasrsti means creation from andsrita tattoa upto
                                                                as avdntara
      (Suddhadhva), creation from mayd upto earth is known
     srsti (aSuddhadhod).
                                                                    nature
         5. ‘Sdmanya spanda’ or universal creative pulsation is the
                                                            particu lars   is
     of Siva; vigesa spanda or the creative pulsation of
     the nature of Sakti.
                                                                         the
         6. The cover, maya, mala, etc., are not anything outside
                                                           ed in Him.
     Lord. They owe their existence to Him and are dissolv
                                         of ‘sadyah’ says ‘yah sat’—He         Le
        7. The    first interpretation
                                                                     The
     Paramesoara, the Highest Lord is sat i.e. this universe itself.
                                                              the universe
     second interpretation of ‘sadyah’ says that the sat or
                                            is  meant   to be  said is that
     is He i.e. Bhairava Himself. What
     Siva is the universe and the univers  e   is Siva.
                                                                    that
       8. Trika is designated as the highest, because it teaches
                                             of (1) Siva, or (2) Sakti—
     whether it is the initial manifestation
Abhinavagupta                                                            85

ive. Energy in all her multifarious aspects, or (3) nara i.e. objec-
tive phenomena, it is throughout anuttara.
   9. Saiva is a technical term in this context. It connotes the
system of dualistic philosophy or Saiva Siddhanta prevalent in
South India. The word sama means beautiful, appealing. In this
system, the five m’s were allowed under certain conditions. They
were mdmsa      (meat), matsya   (fish), madiré (wine), mudra     (food of
parched   grain)     and   maithuna   (sexual intercourse).     Daksa    or
Daksina acéra (right hand path) is said to be superior to the Vama
or the left-hand path. It is full of vidhi and nisedha i.e. do’s and
don’ts. A.G. says in Tantraloka, “Daksinam raudrakarmadhyam,’
i.e., the ‘Daksina path is full of terrible practices.’ In Aula, a great
emphasis was laid on carya which means due observance of cer-
tain prescribed practices. Mata is said to be higher than Kula.
Not much is known about Mata. Jayaratha has mentioned eight
Agamas pertaining to Mata, but they are not available now.
  10. This is not available now.
  11, The Bhairava Sastra mentioned in this verse is the Rudra
Bhairava Sastra, not the non-dualistic Bhairava Sastra advoca-
ted by Paratrisika. There was a good deal of similarity between
Kula and Kaula, but as mentioned in note No. 9, in Kula, the
greatest emphasis was laid on carya. In Kaula marga, the greatest
emphasis was laid on universal unity consciousness. Both Kaula
and Trika are non-dualistic, but in Kaula marga, emphasis is
laid on all the methods, viz. jfdna, caryd, kriya, and yoga, whereas
in Trika emphasis is laid mostly on jfana and yoga.
   12. This book is not available now.
   13. The previous portion of Paratrisika is known as bimba
grantha, and from now onwards it is known as pratibimba grantha,
for in the previous portion, it is the nature (svariipa) of anuttara
that has been described. From now it is its external manifes-
tation or expansion that is going to be described.       On the analogy
of a mirror, the divine source of light is known         as bimba (in its
process of samhdra or withdrawal)          and its reflection in its own
mirror is known as srsfi or manifestation or expansion.

                             Expos!ITION
   In this portion of his commentary, A.G. has shown that the
raison d’ étre of the entire manifestation     (kaulika vidhi) is anuttara,
86                                                     Para-Trisika-Vioarana

the Absolute      Divine    Universal    Consciousness.     He     has adopted
the following ancient verse of Mahabharata (Santiparvan XII,
47,58) as the core of his thesis and enlivened it with his own
penetrating insight        (also Yoga Vasistha VI, 36, 18):
     “YASMINSARVAM YATAH SARVAM
       YAH SARVAM SARVATASCA YAH /
     YASCA SARVAMAYO NITYAM
       TASMAI SARVATMANE NAMAH” |/
   “To that omnifarious one do I bow, in whom lies all, from
whom all starts, who is all, who is all round, and who is always
constitutive of all.”
   First of all, he takes up ‘yatah sarvam’ i.e. from whom proceeds
all, and after elaborating the expansion of manifestation from the
Divine, concludes with the following remark:
     “Kauliko   vidhih   kulakuldtma    vidhih   mahdsystiriipo yasmdt     prasyta
etat eva anuttaram’’ ;
     “That from which proceeds Siva-Sakti, the divine insight of
creativity itself is this anuttara.”
  Next, he takes up yasmin sarvam—i.e. in whom                   resides all this,
and sums up his arguments by saying,
    “‘yasminsarvam—atra spastah sannayam vidhih kaulikah sthito vifran-
 tim praptah”’ ;
     “In whom clearly rests all this universal manifestation’ —that
 is anuttara.
    After this, he takes up ‘sarvatasca yah,’ who           is all round, and
 concludes with the following remark:
   ‘*Prathamaparyantabhuni parabhattarikatmani     tatprasardtmani               ca
paraparadevatavapusi anuttaradhruvapadavijrmbhaiva.”
     “From the first stage of para, the highest, then its expansion in
 pardpara, and finally up to the last stage of apara or manifestation
 of the gross material world, it is all round the expansion of the
 immutable anuttara.”
     Now he takes up sarvam_yah, and aptly quotes in this connexion
 a line from Sri Somananda:
     “Yatsattatparamarthohi paramarthastatah         Sivah’ ;
     “That which is Existence is the highest Reality, the universe is
 of the nature of that Reality, therefore everything is Siva.”
Abhinavagupta                                                         87

   Finally, he says that it is anuttara who is constitutive of all and
to whom we bow as the all—‘yasca sarvamayo nityam tasmai sarvat-
mane namah.’ This is the highest philosophy and at the same time
the highest religion.
                                 TEXT
  ATHADYASTITHAYAH SARVE SVARA VINDV-
         AVASANAGAH |
  TADANTAH KALAYOGENA SOMASURYAU
                PRAKIRTITAU        // 5/
  PRTHIVYADINI           TATTVANI          PURUSANTANI
                PANCASU /
   KRAMATKADISU            VARGESU         MAKARANTESU
          SUVRATE // 6/
   VAYVAGNI-SALILENDRANAM                   DHARANANAM
                CATUSTAYAM |
   TADURDHVAM            SADI-VIKHYATAM              PURASTAT
                BRAHMAPANCAKAM              #|/ 7/
   AMULA        TATKRAMAJ        JNEYA      KSANTA      SRSTIR-
                UDAHRTA /
   SARVESAM EVA MANTRANAM VIDYANAM CA
          YASASVINI |/ 8/
   IYAM YONIH SAMAKHYATA SARVATANTRESU
                SARVADA /
                             ‘TRANSLATION
   The   kaulika vidhi or the manifestation      of the Universe    is as
follows (tadyatha) :
   5. The fifteen (tithayah)} viz. ‘a’ etc. (adyah)? are all the vowels
ending in a dot, i.e. anusvara. At their end, through the connexion
of kriya Sakti (kdlayogena)* occur what are known as soma (moon)
and sirya (sun).*
    6, In the five classes of consonants beginning successively® with
‘ka’ and ending with ‘ma’ (kddisu makarantesu paficasu vargesu), there
are the categories of existence (éattvdni) beginning with the earth
and ending with purusa (prthioyadini purusantani )’, O Goddess with
 excellent pious observation (suvrate).
    7. There are the four dhdranas pertaining to vdyu (air), agni (fire),
 salila (water) and Indra. After that, there are the well-known ‘fa’
 etc.’, which further on, are known as five brahma (brahmapajicaka).
88                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

   8. Therefore, beginning with ‘a’and successively ending with ‘ksa’
                                                                    a-
it is knownas srsfi or manifestation. O glorious one, this manifest
tion consisting of ‘a’ to ‘ksa’ is always known in all the Tantras
as the source       ofall the mantras and the incantations    (vidyandm).

Notes
      1. ‘Tithayah’ isthe plural of ‘tithi’ which means alunar day.    As
there are fifteen ‘tithis’ in each fortnight of the lunar month,      the
                                                                  fifteen
word ‘tithi’ isused symbolically for fifteen. So ‘tithayah’ means
      2. Adyah = a+adyah which means ‘a’ etc.
   3. Kalayogena=“‘kdlah kaland siksma-kriyasaktih tasyah yogena
sambandhena.” The word ‘kala’ here means subtle kriyasakti and
yoga means connexion. So, ‘kalayogena’ means through the con-
 nexion of kriyafakti.
   4. Visarga means expansion. This is a two-way track: (1) the
 samharatmaka or the centripetal track or the track of withdrawal
 towards the centre, and (2) srstyatmaka or the centrifugal track,
 the track of projection or manifestation.
   Visarga is expressed with two dots—one above the other viz.
                                                             the
 Soma or moon represents the upper dot; the dot representing
 centripetal track, the track representing the return movement
 towards the centre, the samharatmaka track; Sirya or Sun repre-
                                                           track,
 sents the lower dot, the dot representing the centrifugal
 the track representing the external expansion from the centre,
 the projection or manifestation of Siva in the cosmos.
    The sixteen vowels from ‘a’ up to visarga represent the nature
 of Siva, and the consonants from ‘ka’ to ‘ha’ represent Sakti.
 ‘Soma’ represents ‘pravesa-riipa kriyasakti? (the return movement
 of kriyasakti); and Sarya represents the prasara-riipa kriyafakti (the
 expansion of kriydsakti). There are two modes of kriyagakti, viz.
  (1) Siva-vartini, and (2) pasu-vartini, Vimarsa or Divine Self-
 consciousness is Siva-vartini kriyasakti.
     5. Successively : The Sanskrit word kramat means two things :
      (i) kramat--krama+-ad (= kramat) as swallowing all succession i.e.
                                                                         to
     without any real succession, and (ii) successively. This points
     the truth that in Siva, there is really no succession and that suc-
     cession is spoken of in relation to the empirical individual.
         6. Classes of letters together with the tattoas, organs, etc., are
     given below:
Abhinavagupta                                                                    89

(1).     Letters:           ka          kha         ga           gha        na
         Tattoas or the
         grosselements      fythivi     jala        agni         vadyu      akasa
(2). Letters:               ca          cha         ja          jha         fia
     Tanmiatras             gandha      rasa        riipa       sparsa       Sabda
(3).     Letters:           ta          tha         da           dha       na
         Organs of          upastha     payu        pada     — pani        vak
          actions
(4). Letters:               ta          tha         da          dha        na
         Organs of          prana       rasana—caksus           _—toak     Srotra
         sense
(5).      Letters:          pa          pha          ba       bha          ma
          The psychic        manas       buddhi    = ahamkéra prakyti      purusa
          apparatus, the
          primal matter
          (prakrti) and
       limited experi-
       ent (purusa)
(6). The dhdrands or antahstha letters are the following four: ya,
ra, la, va. ‘Ya’ symbolizes vdyu-bija, ‘ra’ symbolizes agni-bija,
‘la’ symbolizes salila-bija, ‘va’ symbolizes Indra-bija. The word
bija indicates that these letters are to be used as mantras for odyu
etc. These are connected with maya together with her kavicukas
 (coverings). ‘Ya’ is connected with raga and niyati; ‘ra’ is con-
nected with ‘vidya’, ‘la’ is connected with ‘kéla’ and ‘kala’, and ‘va’
is connected with ‘méaya’.
   7. ‘Sa’ etc., means fa, sa, sa, ha, ksa. Of these, fa represents
mahamaya, sa represents Suddha vidya, ‘sa’ represents Iévara, ‘ha’
represents Sadasiva, and ‘ksa’ represents Sakti. This group is
known as brahmapaficaka.
                          ComMENTARY
   From tatrakulam on p. 34, l. 17 upto ifi sthitam on p. 38, 1. 22.
                                    ‘TRANSLATION
    That anuttara itself whose nature is ‘a’ is all this universal mani-
 festation (kaulikasrstiripam ). This is what is being ascertained here.
       ‘Atha’    (the first word of the above verses) is connected with
that manifestation         (tatsrsti). The     meaning      is that it is anuttara
90                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana

that constitutes the universal manifestation.                  Though according
                                                                  is
to the principle laid down earlier, in manifestation also, there
                                                                 to
no succession (of earlier and later) which is entirely related
time, yet so long as there appears the difference between the
taught and the teaching brought about by the Lord Himself
through His Free Will, so long the fact of succession (of earlier
and later) has to be admitted. So, it is with reference to this
appearance of succession, that the word ‘atha’ has been used in
the sense of immediate          sequence      (dnantarya) i.e. subsequently it
 is ‘akula’ itself that appears in the form of the manifested uni-
 verse. The word ‘atha’ (now) has not been used to indicate
 immediate       succession     of   answer     after   the     question of Devi.
 The word ‘atha’ has been used here for clear apprehension of the
 meaning of a point arising in the sequential order of a homo-
 geneous object of inquiry pertaining to the same doctrine! (ekapra-
 ghattakagata). Otherwise there can be in every case an occasion
 for the use of ‘atha’ even in the sense of immediately after silence.
 If it is said ‘Well, it may be so. What is your trouble in such use?’,
                is, ‘None     whatsoever,     except    that    such   use   is   not
 the reply
 found in experience.’
    Venerable Somananda              gives the following interpretation             of
 ‘atha’:
       “A? of ‘atha’ indicates Siva and ‘tha’ Sakti” and refers to Agama
     in support ofit. He explains ‘atha’ as anuttara. Both ‘tha’ and ‘ha’
                                                                     Thus
     are used equally in the sense of mutual perpetual pervasion.
                                                   Therefo re, ‘atha’  has
     ‘ha’ denotes Sakti, ‘tha’ also denotes Sakti.
     been used in the sense of ‘aha’ because of its being non-different
     from Sakti that manifests endless objects at the very initial ex-
     pansion of bliss and because of its depending on the highest nada
                                                              the very
     of parahanta (the Supreme I-consciousness) which is
     life of all beings. I have not examined this point in detail, for I
     am not directly aware of such an Agama. He wasdirectly acqu-
                                                                      of
     ainted with such Agamas and thus interpreted this book
                                                                          hun-
     pithy teaching (sitra granthasya) which is capable of bearing
                                                                        subtle
     dreds of reasonings and usages. He expanded in detail the
                                                                    sacrificial
     differentiation ofmeaning of powder (dhali used in the
                                                                        mean-
     rites at initiation) or symbolic scripts of mantras (i.e. ‘atha”
                      Sakti) in that sense on the  basis of  this  book    and
     ing Siva and
                                                                 who have a
     other Agamas. I who am purified by his teaching,
Abhinavagupta                                                       91

desire to purify myself by removing         the difficulties occurring
in his book,    am   indifferent   to such interpretations   as he has
arrived at. Subtle difference of meaning of the mantra depending
on imaginary and symbolic interpretation of the letters of a word
may be of use to some, but cannot be of use to pupils of all     coun-
tries and all times. Therefore I have not described it in detail.
Such an interpretation is of no use to those who have the benefit
of personal experience and the rational explanation of the tea-
cher; it is only easy to be managed by those who simply depend
on their own imagination. For others who are not acquainted
with that teaching, the impartation of that teaching will be of no
use. Enough of this which creates an interruption in the subject
under discussion.
  Now I follow the proposed topic. Adya in the verse means a+
Gdya i.e. ‘a’ which is the first of the vowels. Or ‘athddya’ may be
taken together and analyzed as ‘atha+-ddya’. In this case, the ‘tha’
of ‘atha’ is used only for the sake of ease in pronunciation.
    The meaning again would be ‘a’ which is the first of the vowels.
In this context the word ‘ddya’ has not been used merely in the
sense of the ‘foremost ofan order’, nor in the sense of ‘proximity’
etc., but rather that whose existence continues in ‘a’ etc., i. e. in
‘a’ and all other letters (a a@dau bhavah iti adyah).So it is being
decisively propounded here that ‘a’is the stage of the highest
sound (fardvagbhiimih) in which alone of these letters there is the
non-conventional, eternal, natural form consisting only of con-
sciousness. In the nature of consciousness, the omnifariousness
of everything (sarvasarvdtmakata) is always present. That highest
Divinity, viz. para (who is only the dynamic form of anutiara),
though   consisting of the highest     stage of non-differentiation is
teeming with endless variety, containing within Herself as she
does the pardpard expansion of pasyanti etc.2 The maxim ‘that
which is not there may be elsewhere’ will not hold good in her
case. Seize (mentally) that goddess, viz. consciousness, known as
the initial ever-creative activity of I-feeling (prathamam pratibha-
bhidhém), void of even a trace of the foul stain of limitation.
   Whatever mobile and immobile objects there are—all these
abide in the venerable, divine, supreme consciousness of Bhairava
(samvidi bhagavad-bhairava-bhat{arakatmani) in their truest, invari-
able form   (pdramdrthikena anapdyind ripena), in the form of the
92                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

perfect, supreme I-consciousness (lit., in the form of the quintes-
sence of sheer divine energy, viryamatrasdrdtmand), in their true
nature which is brought out by the unfoldment of endless variety
that is perceived at the time of the emergence of hundreds of
things that are about to appear in a slightly most indistinct, a
slightly more indistinct, or a slightly indistinct form (tadudbhavis-
yat-isadasphutatama-isadasphutatara-isadasphutadi-vastusatasrs tikalopal-
aksyamana-tattadananta-vaicitryaprathonniyamanatathabhavena ) a
    Parabhattarika who is the stage of omniscience (sarvajnatabhi-
 mih), the highest truth without any limitation (asankucitaparamar-
 thé) and natural is suddenly resorted to by those who are esta-
 blished in intensive awareness         of that state     (tathdvadhdndtisaya
 radhaih), who are purified by utmost grace (paranugraha-pavitri-
 taih) and those whose impurities in the form of uncertainty,
 doubt or other synonymous terms owing to non-belief in that have
 been completely ground down by grinding on the grindstone
 of continuous spiritual discipline (abhydsakramasananigharsanispesi-
 tattadapratyayariipakampadyanantaparaparyayavicikitsamalath).  Even
 in the case of those who-are assailed by doubt, the omniscient
 stage of consciousness appears, on certain occasions* when they
 are able to view Reality, in a slightly limited form, though not
 in its full, natural form.
       Venerable Kallata has rightly said:
       “By the gradual elimination of tuft from the movement                  of
 exhalation and inhalation, there is the acquisition of omniscience
 and ominipotence.”
    Now this matter (the omniscience of Parabhattarika) which is
     to be known only by one’s own experience is being explained by
     reasoning.
       (A.G. uses at first anvaya tarka, i.e. reasoning by positive means. )
       Indeterminate consciousness       (nirvikalpa samvid) is that which
     by its efficacy (sémarthya) brings something within comprehension
     which by its    subsequent     suitability for   a particular purpose
     (arthakriyayogyatadivasa)   finally acquires confirmation      as a   state
     of the Self and thus receives firm concurrence which precedes
     all successive determinate perceptions like blue etc., which are
     considered to be mutually incompatible (virodhdvabhdsisammata-
     kramikavikalpyamananiladinis tha-vikalpa-pirva-bhavi) and pervades
Abhinavagupta                                                                      93

undivided all those blue, yellow perceptions etc. which are admit-
tedly     incompatible      ( tattadvikalpaniyaviruddhabhimata-nilapitadyd-
bhdsavibhagi bhavati), as for example in the integral perception of a
picture (in which the difference of the various parts is not mar-
ked), or the integral perception of one standing on the top of a
hill (Skharastha) or the integral perception of a peacock’s tail (in
which the different colours like blue etc., are not separately
noticed).
   (Now A.G.       uses    yyatireka     tarka,   i.e.   reasoning    by    negative
means. )
  That indeterminate consciousness (nirvikalpa samvid), however,
which does not pervade undivided the various incompatible
percepts    like blue,    yellow,      etc., cannot      be   (considered    to   be)
prior also to the endless determinate percepts such as blue, yellow,
etc., brought about by its own efficacy, as for instance, a percep-
tion pinned totally to the blue. But it, known by different names
such as unmesa, pratibhd etc., does occur in the interval between
two different determinate ideas or percepts, one that has just
terminated and the other that is about to arise (astamitodesyat).
This is what is extolled as the indeterminate consciousness in the
Tantras     (Sabd@gama-gitam        nirvikalpakam),       precedent    to what     in
conversation are considered to be mutually incompatible deter-
minate percepts or ideas, such as blue, yellow, etc.
   Therefore it (the nirvikalpa samvit or indeterminate conscious-
ness) abides undivided among the endless determinate percepts.
The interval between the two determinate ideas can by no means
be denied because of the difference between the two ideas. That
interval consists of consciousness only, otherwise (i.e., if conscious-
ness is not present in the interval), on account of the extirpation
of the residual traces of consciousness caused by that interval or
gap (devoid of consciousness), memory, congruous link, etc. bet-
ween the consciousness preceding the gap and the consciousness
succeeding it would become impossible.
   Since there is no disagreement among all the teachers regarding
pratibha or indeterminate consciousness having the above charac-
teristic, therefore it is free from the fallacy of asiddhi or the non-
probative reason. Since it does not depend on the understand-
ing of any conventional sign, it is sheer indeterminate conscious-
ness (avikalpatva).
94                                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

     In   the    matter        of natural,          non-conventional     indeterminate
                                                                     is
consciousness which is identical with pure consciousness which
quite differen t from the insentie nt, there cannot be any similari ty
with determinate               consciousness, for in it differentiation has not
appeared. Objects are known only when their characteristic
difference is marked. Determinate perceptions do not arise with-
out the indeterminate consciousness because they lack the freedom
                                                            to in-
for emerging by themselves. This freedom belongs only
determinate consciousness, for it is only indeterminate conscious-
ness that serves as means for the recollection of the conventional
 signs etc.      How      can the recollection of conventional signs etc. be
 possible without the experience of indeterminate consciousness?
                                                                        there
 In such consciousness, according to the previous principle,
                                     of time,  etc.  Thus   the  one   divine
 is the absence of the limitation
                                                                     weighty
 indeterminate consciousness (pratibha) defined by my
                                  of   unlimit ed   nature,  the  very    Self
 statement is of this kind i.e.
 of all. Not only in the beginning and the end but in the                          inter-
 vening state          also,     she    is the      origin   of the   emergence of the
 other present, past and future determinate apprehensions. Those
 who are adept in discrimination have experienced dlaya-vijftdna
 i.e. unified or integral knowledge                     in this very way     (i.e. in the
 way of indeterminate consciousness ).
   Agreement of the determinate apprehensions occurring im-
 mediately after the indeterminate one has already been shown.
                                                                for the
 Therefore, there is no non-probative reason (asiddha hetu)
                                     proved   viz., the  determi native
 probandum (i.e. that which is to be
                                        the pratibha  jidna is confine d
 perceptions), nor can it be said that
     to only indeterminate consciousness which remains uniformally
     the same,    which         allots separate positions to the various deter-
     minate     perceptions            (vikalpas)     and    which    is not opposed     to
     pratibha jftana or which is usually concerned with bringing about
     determinate perceptions and only appears in pure indeterminate
     form now and then (kadacit), nor is there complete exclusion or
     separation of the determinate consciousness (asya) from the
     indeterminate co-sciousness (tatak). Therefore, there is no con-
     tradiction (na viruddho) between the indeterminate consciousness
                                                               usness
     and any other apprehension, nor is indeterminate conscio
     simply an occasional and not uniform ground (of the determinate
     consciousness) (ndnaikantiko), nor is there an exclusion {from it
Abhinavagupta                                                                95

of even any dubious, opposite thing (i.e. even opposite things have
their raison d’étre in the indeterminate consciousness).            In similar
examples     also,   e.g., the integral       perception    of a picture   etc.,
faults like the non-provability etc., of the reason (viz. the indeter-
minate consciousness) stand rejected. When the faults concern-
ing the main reason are rejected, there remains no occasion
for finding faults in examples similar to the main                  reason. By
others also it (i.e. the indeterminate consciousness being the
ground or reason of the determinate one) has been practically
settled. Therefore, why take the trouble of repeating it!                  This
matter has been finally settled:
   ‘““That which moves in the prior, intervening, and posterior state
of the apprehension of all the objects of sense (nikhilavaisayika-
vabodha-pirodparantaracaram), which is universal (nikhilatmakam),
whichis endowed with the splendour of the highest Sakti (parasakti-
bhasi), that indeed is the divine creative consciousness (prdtibham).
To one who is absorbed         in that    consciousness (tasyam      pralinava-
pusah), how can depression (glanih)              brought about by the lack
of this divine consciousness         (abhavavasopaklrptya) ever occur?”
  “The ignorant man          does not observe the magnitude of the
delightful    enjoyment     of the     most    precious    wealth   (paradhana-
sukhasvada) lying in the body, praya etc.* and feels overwhelming
depression’ in his heart. If the Supreme goddess who feels parti-
cular relish in bringing into being the entire universe (nikhilajaga-
tisiitisarasa) enters his heart, then oh ! she sportively functions as
the full and final oblation          (in reducing to ashes the depression
that had been plagueing him).”
   A similar idea has been expressed in Spandakarika: “Just as a
plunderer carries away the valuables of the house, even so de-
pression saps away the vitality of the body. This depression pro-
ceeds from ignorance. If that ignorance disappears by unmesa
how can that depression last in the absence of its cause?’’® (Sp.
K. III, 8).
  Also in the following verse:
   “That should be known as unmesa whence the rise of another
thought takes place in the mind of a man who is already engaged
in one thought. One should               experience it introspectively for
oneself.” (Sp. K. III, 9),
96                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

     Further:
   ‘The wise ones describe ignorance or in other words the primal
limiting condition (arava mala) as the root cause of the mayiya and
karma mala. That very seed (viz., dnava mala) even of the worn-
out tree® of transmigratory existence is consumed instantly in the
supreme blazing fire of supreme consciousness (pardsamvit).”
   As has been (rightly) said:
   “Mala, they say, is nothing but ajfdna or ignorance of one’s
real nature. This ignorance is the cause of samsdra or mayiya mala
which again serves as the cause of kdrmamala’’. (M.V. I, 23)
    So also, (it has been said):
    “Tf that ignorance disappears by unmesa, how can depression
last in the absence of its cause?”
   Thus has been described the nature of indeterminate consci-
ousness (which also pervades the determinate consciousness).
If it were otherwise than this i.e. if the indeterminate conscious-
ness did not pervade the determinate consciousness            also     in   all
its phases, then which and by what could the following be so
closely linked, viz. the destruction of depression, the emergence
of depression from ignorance (of one’s essential nature), and the
destruction of ignorance by means of unmesa. In that case, all
this would be like an investigation into ‘ny’ and ‘pa’? i.e. would
be merely futile.
   So, the goddess, the highest power of creative word (pardvak)
is of the form of all the letters, beginning with ‘a’ and ending
with ‘ksa’, expands by enfolding within herself the venerable
pardpara form etc., inherent in pasyanti etc., that are about to
arise by her free will, has the essence of the creative delight which
is identical with the consciousness of diverse manifestation con-
sisting of all the elements, worlds and objects that have been
undisputedly brought about by being included in her progressive
expansion (tadgarbhikaravasavivadaghatita-sakalabhita-bhuvanabhava-
diprapaiicaprabodhaikyacamatkarasara), is of the nature of the highest
Reality consisting of astonishing facts brought to light by the pre-
sence     of    Lord   Bhairava   (paramefvarabhairavabhattdrakavirbhdva-
prathitatathavidhadbhutabhiitaparamarthasvaripa),      is   the      Supreme
Creative Power that reveals within her pure mirror of Self end-
less    manifestation, maintenance and absorption (svdtmavimaladar-
Abhinavagupta                                                            97

pananirbhasitanantasrstisthitisamharaikyamayamahasrstifaktir),      It    is
established that this is what has been decisively proved completely
by Lord     Bhairava by means of the verse ‘athddya’ etc.

                                   Nores
   1. The question of the Devi and the answer of Bhairava refer
to the state of Reality i.e. svaripa-vimarfa. Therefore, both are
homogeneous objects of the same doctrine.
   2. See   the charts    for clarity.
    3. Vide verse 75 of Vijfiana-Bhairava.
   4. ‘Et cetera’ refers to puryastaka and Sinya pramata.
    5. The depression is due to the lack of recognition of the essen-
tial nature of the Self.
    6. The ‘worn out’ (jira) tree suggests that the mdyiya and
karma mala have been eliminated, but since the arava mala is still
lingering, it supplies sustenance to the tree and so, although it
is worn out, it does not fall.
   7. If ‘ny’ and ‘pa’ are pronounced together, then it means a
king, but if ‘ny’? and ‘pa’ are disjoined and are uttered after an
interval, they would mean nothing. Even so if gldni is connected
with ajfidna, and ajfiana is removed immediately by unmesa, then
the sequence is understandable, otherwise not.

                           EXPosITION
    This long commentary of A.G. serves only as an introduction
 to the eight verses by means of which Bhairava answers the ques-
 tion of the Devi, viz.    ‘How does anuttara bestow kaulika siddhi?”’
    The actual interpretation of the verses will follow later. In
 this introductory portion A.G. has stressed the following two
 points:
    1. Kaulika srsti or the universal manifestation is not something
 different from anuttara. It is anuttara itself that appears as kaulika
 srsti. As he putsit ‘tadeva anuttarapadam, srstirityarthah—it is anuttara
 itself that is this vast manifestation.
    2. The entire manifestation abides in the creative energy of the
 Divine. This creative energy is pardoak, the energy that sounds
 forth the universe. The pardvak is the parandda, the creative throb
 of the Divine Mind which at a lower level takes the form of
 sound. The energy of the paravak flows into various letters from
98                                                Para-Trisika-Vivarana

‘@ to ‘ksa’ which as conscious forms of energy bring about             the
manifestation of the universe.     The letters in their original form
are not merely conventional as they are at the human level.
   The pardoak is dynamic, creative consciousness. The nature of
this consciousness is nirvikalpa, indeterminate, undifferentiated.
According to A.G., paravak, pratibha, unmesa, nirvikalpa samvid are
almost synonymous; they refer to the same creative energy of the
I-consciousness of anuttara. All determinate objects, perceptions,
ideas covered by the blanket term savikalpaka inhere in the nirvi-
kalpa samvid and emanate from it. The entire kauliki srsti or uni-
versal manifestation is simply an expression of nirvikalpa samvid.
A.G. has used nirvikalpa samvid in a very wide sense, in the sense
of the divine creative consciousness, the very life of all manifesta-
tion.

                               CoMMENTARY

     From   tadevam sthite on p. 38, 1. 22 upto iti on p. 51, lL.     22.

                             TRANSLATION
     It being so, the meaning of the verse is now      being decisively
fixed. The letters from ‘a’ to visarga denote Siva tattva; those from
ka to na denote the five elements from the earth up to the ether;
those from ca upto to fia denote the five tanmdatras from smell up
 to sound; those from fa to na denote the five karmendriyas (organs
 of action) from the feet upto the tongue; those from éa to na de-
 note five jfdnendriyas from the nose up to the ears; those from pa
 to ma denote the group of five i.e., manas, ahamkara, buddhi, prakrti,
 and purusa; those from ya to va denote through odyu bija, agni bija,
jala bija and indrabija, raga, vidya, kala and maya tattoas. These
 are also known as dhdrands, because they make the ayu or the
 empirical individual think of the universal powers of Bhairava
 differently (prthagbhitataya). There are two causatives involved
here, owing to the causer and the caused being of two               forms:*
So, in one’s own self which is light, highest and perfect state,
identical with Bhairava, and universal are held the states of
kala, vidya, etc., as has been said in Sivadrsti: ‘Self alone who
shines as bliss (ananda), and consciousness (cit), whose advance
of will-power     (icch@) is un-impeded, moves forward in all the
Abhinavagupta                                                        99

objects as Siva whose knowledge (jfdna) and activity (Kriya) are
ever prevalent” (S.D.I. 2).
   In Spandakarika also, the same idea has been expressed: “In
whom resides all this”.
  So also, the Lord assumes these states (of raga, vidya, kala, niyatt)
which are held in His shining Self by His own light by veiling
Himself, that is to say, He manifests by adopting the state of
thisness (i.e. objectivity) whose nature is insentiency. Then
again He encompasses all this objectivity with I-feeling. So this
state of the Lord as Sadasiva and Isvara which is pure Siva-
consciousness   (suddhavidyamayi) has been hinted at by one causa-
tive form ‘of the verb ‘dhr’. In this case also the encompassing of
thisness with I-ness can happen only when that “which is to be
encompassed (viz., thisness) has already been effected. And
from the point of view of the pure Lord who is all consciousness,
thisness denoting difference cannot remain in that state (i.e., as
something different or separate from consciousness), and so in
the event of the non-occurrence of that which is to be encom-
passed, the encompassing of this with I-ness cannot properly be
upheld. In that case, there cannot be any propriety in considering
Siva in the capacity of an encompasser. And without his encom-
passing activity, nothing whatsoever can appear, because of the
absence of a proper cause. This has been declared by me many a
time.   The   ‘this’ or external appearance,   however,    does occur.
This only means that the ‘this’ or external appearance, though
now different from the (divine) light does appear externally
through the power of the Lord Himself, for any other cause
(than the Lord)     is impossible.   In one’s consciousness also, one
can bear witness to the fact that it is the (divine) consciousness
that appears in all forms. Thus it is clear that while the universe
is the Self itself, i.e. identical with the Self (in its transcendental
aspect), it appears differently as ‘this’ (in its immanent aspect).
The ‘this’ appears only appositionally in the I which is all light
 (as in the case of Sadasiva or Isvara).
    So from the above, this is what is most certainly indicated,
viz., it is the Lord Himself who knows all the different knowables
 (e.g., kala, raga, etc.) of any knower whatsoever in the manner
of ‘I’, i.e. in the manner   of Saktis identical with Himself.    Who-
ever may be the knower       (i.e. the limited, empirical experient),
100                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

he too, because of his appearing as a knower, is the Self itself.
So he relies on such limited faktis (i.e. kala, raga, etc.) and through
these (i.e. limited kala, raga, etc.) he experiences the state of the
knower (vedaka) and knowables (objects) as (totally) different.
Through raga (passionate desire) etc., only He (Siva) has been
reduced to the status of a pasu (an empirical individual) etc. So
raga etc. assume, according to the principle stated previously, the
position of the inciter (lit., the causer) of Siva to regard in a
limited way those states which otherwise He regards as His Saktis.
   Therefore, the second causative verb (nic) having come into
operation, those   (i.e. raga, kala, etc.) becoming the sole cause of
Siva being designated as jiva (empirical individual) are spoken
of as dharand. Even if a causative form of a verb is in operation,
the connexion with the meaning of the root of the verb is never
lost (prakrtyarthanvayanapdyo), so in this case also, the causative
force of the root dkr can be applied only to that which has prakasa
 (i.e. is conscious) i.e., it can be applied to raga, vidya, kala because
they are Saktis as they, being conscious are dhriyamdna i.e. can be
caused to operate and they in their own turn become operators.
   As has been said by myself in Sivadrstyalocana! (a commen-
tary on Siva Drsti):
   “He alone can be impelled who has the competence for being
impelled.” Bhartrhari has also said (in Vakyapadiya) :
   ‘In the case of one who has not yet commenced to act (but has
the capacity to act), verbs with reference to question (frcchd)
etc. are used in the imperative form (lof) when a direction or
command is to be given (praise). But when a direction or com-
mand is to be given to one who has commenced to act, then it is
a matter of the use of the causative form (ric).””
   What is known as kaficuka (covering) in other Sastras has
been designated as ‘dhdrand’. As has been said in Tantrasara:
   “Vidya, maya, niyati etc., use their own states as bonds for the
pasu (the limited, empirical individual). Therefore, they have to
be purified with effort.”    (‘To be purified’ means ‘to unite with
anuttara by anusandhéna and to dissolve in it.’) Somananda has
explained the word ‘dhdrand’ in the sense of limbs or constituents
from another point of view (viz. the adoaita or nondualistic point
of view). In his commentary, he means to say that in the case
of limited empirical individual (parapaksa), all states like raga,
Abhinavagupta                                                           101

kala, vidya should be taken as objective    (drSyatva) with reference
to the Self.
   Such is his particular manner of interpretation: ‘He who does
not know fully the standpoint of the supreme experient (svapaksa)*
and that of the limited, empirical individual (parapaksa) himself
sinks in the ocean of doubts.     How can he enable others to cross
iv?”
    The letters from ‘fa’ to ‘ksa’ denote the group of five categories
viz. Mahamaya, Suddhavidya, Ivara, Sadasiva and Sakti.
Above the category of mdyd, and below the category of Suddha-
vidya, there must be another category as the abode of the Vijiia-
nakalas. As has been said “Above mdyd and below Suddhavidya
are the Vijiianakevalas.” If Mahamaya is not accepted as a
category (lit. in the absence of the category of Mahamaya),
then the abode of pralayakevalis being in maya category, and that
of the Vidyegvaras in Suddhavidya, which would be the abode
of the Vijiianakalas? Therefore, it has been declared in Pirva-
éastra (ie. Malinivijayottara) that the Vijfianakalas have only
one mala (limitation), for though they are below the stage of
Suddhavidya, there does not appear in them the limitation
 (mala) known as mdyiya, because in their case, the display of
different objects caused by differentiation does not occur. So
they have only dpava mala which is ignorance          (of one’s essential
nature). They alone being enlightened through the grace of
Suddhavidya become entitled to the status of Mantra, Mantre-
évara and Mantramaheégvara. In Malinivijaya itself (tatraiva)
it is said,    Anantabhattaraka    enlightened   (lit. awakened)         the
limited experients, viz., the eight Rudras (jisan) who have attained
the status of Vijfianakala (p. 3. v. 19),
and also :
   “Having united them to Suddhavidya, Igvara and Sadasiva,
he      (Anantabhattaraka)   similarly   manifested    seven   crores         of
Mantras together with their regions of administration.”
       In some Sastras (other than Trika) Mahamaya, on the assump-
tion of the absence of mala (limitation) pertaining to difference
i.e., absence of mdyiya and karma mala, is accepted as the last
part of Suddhavidya category. At some places, because of its
being an impediment in the form of dénava-mala which is ignorance
of the essential Self, the state is considered to be the last or
102                                                         Pard-Trisika-Vivarana

extreme end of mdyd, just as in some Sastras, the rdga category
is supposed to be adhering to the empirical individual, there-
fore, it is not considered separately, just as here itself, niyati and
kala are not described separately (from raga and kala) in the
Trika Agama. According to this view, the five brahmas as denoted
by Sa, sa, sa, ha and ksa are Suddhavidya, Isvara, Sadasiva, Sakti
and Anasgrita Siva, respectively. This will be clarified later.
They are known as ‘brahma’ because the root ‘brh’ from which the
word ‘brahma’ is derived means ‘to grow great’ and ‘to make
grow’.     These   categories are called ‘brahma’            firstly because     they
transcend difference (bhedasamuttirnatuat) (from the point of view
of brhatva ‘growing         great’)    and     secondly      because     they   bring
about the production of the universe of differentiation (samsdra-
            from the pointof view of brmhakatua—‘making grow’).
sitikartrtoat)
           thirty-four    categories    having     been     settled    according     to
These
 the procedure of the Sastra resort to ‘a’ only, as that is the initial
 and primal letter.
    In this connection, this is what is to be examined. Firstly there
 is the Siva tattva assigned to the ‘a’ class (i.e. ‘a’ to visarga), then
                                                                        is
 there are the five elements (in kavarga) etc., and finally there
 ‘fakti’   (assigned to ‘ksa’). What is this particular order in the
                                                                  sthiti?®
 descent of the mantras pertaining to srsfi, samhara and
                            Malinivi jayottar a,  Siddhat antra,   Svac-
 In all the Sastras e.g. in
                                      of letters denoting   the  various
 chanda Tantra, the arrangement
 tattoas or categories of existence from ‘ksa’ upto ‘a’, from the
 tattvas—the earth (prthivi) upto Siva is given in the same manner.
      It is said in MAlini-Vijayottara:
      “The initial one i.e. prthivi anda is pervaded by dharika;4 in that,
 only one tattva i.e. prthivi (earth) is acknowledged.                  While consi-
                                                                 mantra,
 dering the succession of varna* (letters), pada (word), and
                       ksa pada, and ksa mantra that should be regarde d
 it is only ksa varna,
 separately in succession.”            (M.V.     II, 50).
      In the same book        (i.e. in the same Malinivijayottara Tantra)
  according to Malini in which there is a mixed arrangement of the
  vowels and the consonants consisting of the letters ‘pha’ etc., the
  arrangement of the categories earth (pythivi) etc. begins with the
                                                                 (Continued on page 104)
  SS
     *In this system, any vara or   letter is called ama    or mantra,   for soteriologi-
  cally, it protects one who reflects on it (manandttrayate) .
Abhinavagupta
                                                                                    103




                                                   Cuart            |

                      THE     VARIOUS ANDA OR ELLIPSES
                            CONTAINED IN ANUTTARA


  Anuttara is all-pervasive. The name of theAald is Avakasada
kalé according to Trika. In other Saivagamas it is called Santya-
tita-kald. Its presiding deity is Anuttara itself. It is beyond all
the ¢attvas, but contains all the éattvas in itself. It is beyond all the
mala or limitations, but comprehends all the malas. Its state is
one of abheda or non-difference, and it is beyond all the adhvas.


                                                         Sakti anda
                                                   contained in anuttara


                                                       Maya anda
                                               Contained in Sakti ellipse

                                                   Prakrtiianda
                                                 pele
                                       >      contained   in maya anda
                                   3                                     :
   ds                                               Prthivi anda
  8g    g   3Co
                                            contained inin Prakpti
                                                                               3
   aa]       23 3                                              Prakpti anda
                                    name ace. to Trika: Dhariké kala            S
                                                                              meq
  23]         F FH               name ace. to other Agamas: Nivrtti           Ea
  3 2)                                                               kala     ee
            225                        presiding deity: Brahma
  PF |      3 is, =                            Tattva: only prthivi
  5 a\ae                               mala: Sava, maylya and karma
  aed                                      state: complete difference
   Ts




                                                 Atuddha adhva



                            “3
                             %,            Containing within
                                           Prakrti and Prthivi itself
                                                               anda
                                                 contains maya
                                                           ,
                                           Prakrtiand prthivi anda
104                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana

last letter ‘pha’. In Matrka, in which there is no mixed arrange-
ment of the vowels and the consonants and though in it the assign-
ment of the tattvas to various letters is different, there is the same
assignment of the category earth (prthivi) to the last letter in
both. The relevant verse regarding Malini* is as follows:
   “The earth category has been mentioned in ‘pha’ and from
‘da’ up to ‘jha’ ice., from water up to pradhdna or prakrti, one
should mark twenty-three categories successively” (M.V.IV, 15):
      Again in the same book, it is said according to the three vidyas.5
There is the mantra of one letter (i.e. aum) in Siva tattoa (niskale)
and the other two, viz., one of three letters i.e. aghore and the
other of one letter i.e. hrim (tryarnaikdrnadvayam) are in the other
two (dvaye) i.e., in Sakti and Sadagiva” (M.V. IV, 19).
   According to parapara devi, ‘aum’ refers to Siva tattva, and ‘ag-
 hore’ refers to Sakti ¢attva. It is in this way that the order of the
 successive tattvas has been fixed.®
    From the point of view of apara devi also it is said: “With the
 mantra of one and a half letters are pervaded the two ellipses
 (viz. prthivi ellipsis i.e. prthivyanda and prakyti ellipsis i.e., praky-
 tyanda), with the mantra of one letter are pervaded two ellipses
 separately      (viz., maya ellipsis i.e. mdayanda        and Sakti ellipsis i.e.
 Saktyanda. This pervasion of apara mantra has been described in
 the reverse       order?   (M.V.IV,      24),    So the arrangement       of the
 tativas is as follows. The mantra ‘phat’          refers to two ellipses prthivi
 and prakyti, ‘hum’ refers to mapa ellipsis, and              the mantra      ‘hrim’
 refers to Sakti ellipsis. So far as the pervasion of the para mantra
 is concerned, a different order has been laid down as given below:
    “Three ellipses (viz. prthivi, prakrti and maya) are pervaded
  by the phoneme, ‘sa’, the fourth one (viz., the Sakti ellipsis)
  is pervaded by the trident i.e., au, and the one that transcends
  all, viz., Siva is indicated by the visarga i.e., ah. This is how the
  pervasion of para is described.*”            (M.V. IV, 25).
       In the mantras Matrkasadbhava,            Ratiéekhara, and Kulesvara,
  different arrangements (i.e., different from Paratrisika) also are
  noticed.® In other Tantras also, usually opposite arrangements

       *The arrangement of letters according to Malini is the following:
                                                                      thjha     jrt
  nrrl{thedhinuadbkkhgghniavbh y ddh
  pchlasahhs            ks m4    amte    aio     aud ph,
Abhinavagupta                                                            105

are given in many ways. But in this i.e. Paratrisika, an altogether
different arrangement is noticed. So to one proficient in Agama,
this appears as destructive of one’s own principles, as sometimes
a bangle of glass or shells gets shattered by the clash of its own
components. Nor can it be merely conventional so that it could
be considered to be opposite even if determined in varied ways
according to the fabrications of a man’s fancy, as for instance, the
southerners designate ‘boiled rice’ with the word ‘caura’ and the
inhabitants of Sindha designate ‘thief’ with the same word, and
‘boiled rice’, they designate with the word ‘krira’. The Kash-
miris, however, indicate with that word (i.e. krira) husked barley,
wheat and rice.    Ifit is to be treated as conventional, it cannot be
definitely determined because of its being unsettled, because of
its being unconcerned with the highest truth and because of its
uselessness concerning the relation between that which is to be
purified and the purifier (fodhya-Sodhaka-bhaoa). If it is said that
even a conventional word derives its existence from the Will of
God, that it cannot be anything whatsoever without the Will of
the ‘Highest    Lord,   and   that it is well known     that convention
comes forth by the will of God, for peace is gained by the apya-
yana" ceremony that is performed for the welfare and prosperity
(of a particular individual) and that ceremony depends entirely
on the name, word, script etc., which are entirely conventional,
then my reply is that everything can be acquired only by one
conventional word (for all countries, all times and all men), why
should there be the necessity to resort to other conventions             (for
different countries, times etc.)? If one has to depend on conven-
tion only, then will arise the problem of endless conventions
coming down from one’s own Sastra, from another Sastra, popu-
lar conventions, conventions of particular assemblies, conventions
coming down from a host of teachers, convention particular for
each different person and soon. This problem will also have to
be examined. It may be said that there is no use going into these
details.   “The relation between the purifier and that which is to
be purified will be the same in any case and this is enough                to
achieve our object’; this also uttered by and heard from illiterate
people is indeed becoming to themselves.
   If it is said that God’s will is perfect, it is not open to dis-
                                                      (Continued on page 108)
106                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                 Cuart 2A

        THE IDENTITY OF THE ORIGINAL SOURCE
        (BIMBA) AND ITS REFLECTION (PRATIBIMBA)
      ka |       Prthivi
      khal        Jala
      ga          Agni
      gha}        Vayu
      ha    Akaga
      ca | Gandha
      cha         Rasa
      ja          Ropa
      jha]        Sparsa
      fa}         Sabda
      ta         Upastha
      tha         Payu
      da          Pada
      dhi         Pani
      na          Vak
      ta         Ghrana
      tha]       Rasana
      da          Caksu     »)
      dh          Tvaca
      na          Srotra
      pa|        Manas
      pha}      Ahamkara
      ba |        _Buddhi
      bha}      — Prakrti
      ma          Purusa
      ya           Raga
      Ta          Vidya
       la          Kala
       va         Maya
       ga | Mahaméaya 7
       sa |Suddhavidya
      sa          Igvara
       ha |      Sadasiva
       ksa]__      Sakti
Abhinavagupta                                                                                       107

                                             CHart       2B

THE TRANSPOSITION OF THE TATTVAS       (CATE-
GORIES OF EXISTENCE) IN REFLECTION (PRATIBIMBA)

                                 BIMBA                            PRATIBIMBA


                                                                        sakti
                                                                          sadasiva
                                                                           isvara
                 vayu                                                        suddhavidya
                                                                              mahamaya
              Akasa
        Gandha                                                                   mee
          Rasa
        Ropa                                                                      =vidya

      Sparsa                                                                         oe
      Sabda                                                                           ee                          |
    Upastha
       ov                                                                             Leste
                                                                                      buddhi                          !
      faa                                                                             ahamkara                        |
      wal                                                                                 manas
       nae                                                                                 srotra
    aul                                                                                    tvak
    aaah                                                                                   caksu

    Caksu                                                                                  aes
     Tvacd                                      Z    /                                     wae
     $rotra                                                   \                            a
     Manas                                      /                                         Leap
  Ahamkara                                                                                pee
     Buddhi                                                                               Lath
       Prakrti             bha                                                         Da                     |
       Purusa              ma                                                         sey
            Raga            ya                                                        lee
              Vidya       \ ra                                                       kite
                 Kala                                                                ar
                 Maya       \ va                                                  peck
           Mahamaya               sac                                            ae
         Suddhavidya             \ s@                                         ue                          |
                        livara          sa                                   ogni
                      Sadasiva                                              in
                             Sakti                                        pitas
108                                             Para-Trisika-Vivarana

cussion, then enough of useless efforts like reading and concen-
trating on books, exposition, discussion etc. This heavy burden
should certainly be abandoned. One should then sit quietly.
God’s will alone would save one who is to be saved. It is His
merciful will that makes one depend on such thought.
   By no means should people remain stretching their legs and
lying with ease, indulging in enjoyment, without deliberating
for themselves, nor should people sit idle, averse to the constant
application of the competent intellect for the subtlest delibera-
tion, brought   about   by the intenser and    intenser grace   of the
Lord which appears in accordance with one’s sdédhand (spiritual
praxis).   Therefore the question raised by me has to be examined
in all respects; I am not going to give it up in this way.
   Therefore, thinking carefully on this matter, stay quiet, while
I remove the difficulties involved.
   This question-answer in its entirety—not partially—resides really
in the divine paravak (the cosmic Ideation) whose quintessence
is autonomy (sodtantrya) which is independent of everything,
which is unsurpassable    and is able to bring about     what is most
difficult to accomplish, and which is not affected even by an iota
of dependence on others. This point has been practically satis-
factorily settled even before. Even then, it is being explained
again in extenso in order to remove all doubts.   The doubt has
been raised that after Siva tattoa, prthivi (solidity) tattva has been
mentioned (by you). What is this (peculiar) order? I say it is
no order. It is orderless, the highest autonomy of the Lord
which includes within itself endless variety. This is the teaching
of the Trika system. So, that which is the highest divine Ens
 (para) pertaining to Bhairava and includes within itself the
differentiating (apara) and the differentiating-cum-non-differen-
tiating powers, (pardpara) abides superior even to Sadasiva and
Anaésrita Siva, having made even the latter one her seat (i.e. presid-
ing over even the latter one). (Pard is the orb or bimba, and
everything else is the pratibimba i.e. reflected or represented form. )
   For instance Pirvaéastra i.e. MaAlinivijaya at first refers to
Sadasiva in the following words: “Sadasiva who is the gigantic
departed one, smiling and both conscious and unconscious should
be meditated upon as the seat of pard or the Supreme divine
Sakti” (M.V. VIII, 68), and concludes by saying that Sadafiva
Abhinavagupta                                                                   109

who has entered the nddanta™ state is her seat, and then having
said that “‘all this is her seat,”’ declares: ‘From his (i.e. Sadasiva’s)
navel rises the trident of Sakti (divine Energy) with three prongs
which should be meditated upon” (M.V. VIII 69). The three
prongs referred to are “Sakti, Vyapini, and Samana”. There
also (i.e. higher above the Saktis), the Supreme abode of unmana
i.e. the state of ardhvakundalini, in the form of three white lotuses
has been described, in the words “‘this is the most distinct seat”
 (M.V., p. 48, v. 70). So far as the three lotuses on the prongs
of the trident are concerned, they form the seats of the goddesses
 (para-pasyanti, para-madhyamd, and paré vaikhari).*             Though this is
known as supreme fasyanti and is the ultimate limit of jadnasakti
known as ndda (i.e. as the state of Sadasiva), yet this has only
to be passed over, for the state of Para is higher than this (see
the picture introducing the Paratrisika Vivarana). As has been
said in Sivadrsti: ‘‘What according to us is jAdnagakti and is really
the level of pard-pafyanti as expressive of Sadasiva state is to the
duffers, the grammarian’s          the highest state.’
   The buddhi that is introverted towards the inner spiritual Self
is the level of pard-pasyanti. Its presiding deity is Rudra i.e. Para-
 (supreme) Sadasiva. The para-pasyanti comes to an end in jitdna-
Sakti which is a state of Para-Sadasiva, and this state of Para-
Sadasiva is the Sakti of Anasrita-Siva.
   The presiding deities of manas and ahamkara introverted towards
the Self are respectively Para-Brahma and Para-Visnu. Their
field of activity is limited respectively to pard-vaikhari and para
madhyama.     Therefore,     their final resting       abode    (pratistha-bhih)
is the kriyaSakti of Para-Isvara and Para-Sadafiva. This is pro-
ved by Agama and supported by personal experience.
   Therefore, over pard-pasyanti is the stage of goddess para where
everything appears and is also apprehended as identical with
Herself.

    *In Saiva philosophy, there is the bimba-pratibimbavada i.e, the principle that
the main factors that exist in the lower sphere have their original source in the
higher sphere. The fafyanti, madhyama, vaikhari that exist in manifestation have
their original forms at the higher level of pard, Therefore, the original forms of
these at the higher level are called pard pasyantt, pard madhyama and paré vaikhari.
   They are seated in the following order: The Para is seated on the middle
lotus, the Parapara on the right and the Apara on the left.
110                                                Para-Trisika-Vivarana

   Though in the stage of Suddhavidya and also of Maya or
the state of pralayakala, bhasand (i.e., the existence of prakdfa and
vimarsa) abides in identity, yet in that stage, the apprehension
of ‘this’ (i.e. objectivity) is different. In Suddhavidya, the entire
multitude of subjects and objects is reflected in the sole ‘I’. It is
apprehended only as fully dominated by the I-consciousness,
such as “I am this’.
   Thus both of these (etat ubhayam i.e. both J and this) being
reflected in the common substratum of the supreme consciousness
appear as identical and so are said to have a common substratum
 (samanddhikaranyam).
   Therefore all existents share the pardpard state (i.e. the state
of identity in diversity) in the stage of Isvara, and in the stage of
Maya      (and also of pralayakala) they share the state of apard (i.e.
the state of differentiation).
   One should not understand from this that the Igvara state and
Maya state are themselves pardpara and apard. (It is only their
prameyas or objects at their stage that are the pardpard and apard
states.) Therefore, there is no room for doubting that what the
Agama (viz. Rudrayamala) has affirmed is contrary to what the
venerable Utpaladeva has said about pardpard with reference to
Isvara.
      In the case of Mantramahesvara,      the I-feeling though having
knowledge as its highest truth, is however, different from the
I-feeling of ISvara and Suddhavidya which is apard i.e. of a lower
order.    My experience (samvit) tells me that ‘this’ i.e. the I-fecling
of Igvara and Suddhavidya is only this i.e. of a lower order than
the I-feeling of Sadasiva, Sakti and Siva.

though of the order of knowledge (bodhaikaparamarthe api riipena)
is devoid of the experience of ‘this’ i.e. objectivity. Because of
their non-awareness of objective reality, they have only an aware-
ness of ‘I’ and, therefore, they are in the category of aprabuddha
i.e. unawakened. The pralayakevalis are non-aware of both ‘I’ and
‘this’. Therefore they are decidedly unawakened.
      In the stage of pralayakevali and Sanyapramata (mayapade—which
is the abode of Sanyapramata) though by means of the light of in-
determinate consciousness        (nirvikalpakatabhdsena), there is an un-
derlying sensibility of that sort (i.e, indeterminate consciousness),
Abhinavagupta                                                       111

which is the very life (of determinate consciousness), though they
owe their very existence to the grace of the indeterminate consci-
ousness only and cannot be in any way separate from it,’ yet the
later dealing and judgement of such experients (i.e. when they
have risen from the state of the experience of the void) are deter-
mined by consciousness of difference and are only of the nature
of determinate consciousness (vikalpdtmaiva), as for example,
“This is body etc., I am only I, i.e. the one who is the knower,
this is a jar, what is ‘this’ is only an object of knowledge etc.”’.
   In the case of the condition of such an experient (i.e. pralaya-
kala or Siinyapramata), it is only the indeterminate consciousness
that has the capacity of bringing about a consciousness of that
sort (tasyaiva avikalpasamoidatmanah tatha samarthyam). For though
none other than the niraikalpa one is known to be the cause of that
kind of consciousness (i.e. the determinate consciousness), even
if any other cause is supposed to be its origin, it will ultimately
end only in that kind of undivided universal consciousness          (i.e.
nirvikalpaka or indeterminate I-consciousness). It is because of this
capacity of the indeterminate I-consciousness that its power of
bringing about endless variety      (in manifestation) is proved to be
invariable.
  In the being of this indeterminate I-consciousness, its sovere-
ignty of the creativity never ceases. In vaikhari stage or in madhyama
stage in which there is subtle mdyiya objectivity (i.e. where there
isa subtle difference through the force of maya), this kind of
apprehension of difference (bheda-vimarfa) is not possible if it is
completely      excluded   from   the   indeterminate   I-consciousness
(bhasandtireki).
   In the supreme consciousness, however, as is the prakdfa so is the
vimarsa for carrying it out in practice. Therefore in that, all
things appear completely identical with consciousness, justas
water is in water, or flame is in flame, not simply like a reflected
image. Whenever this supreme goddess (para) is described for
the purpose of teaching, she is brought within the sphere of
cognizance only by being considered from an inferior point of
view.
   Similarly Bhairava who is of the nature of light (i.e. spiritual
light of consciousness) is self-proved, beginningless, primal, the
ultimate in all respects, and present in everything. What else
112                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                    Light identically
is to be said regarding Him?* He displays His
                           in the expans ion of all  the categories of
 (soaprakasam prakdfayati)
                                                             mena (bha-
existence (e.g. the 36 tattvas), all the objective pheno
                           as  Himsel f  (tathai va ca vimarsa ti) in His
vas), and views them all
                                                     (anapeta). That
self-delight (camatkaratve) which never vanishes
                             that way  (i.e. as identi cal with Him-
which is this perception in
                                                        lakhs, crores,
self), makes His self-revelation (bhasana) evident in
                                 '® of  endles s future (bhdvi) mani-
ten crores (arbuda), ten arbudas
                                               by maya and thus
festations and absorptions to be brought about
                                                       ).
he appears in those very forms (tathdripam eva bhavati
                                                      not considered
    Even while appearing in various forms, if he had
                                       rise and  expans ion of objec-
 the initial and intervening, i.e. the
                                                         lity of the
 tivity as being based only on prakasa, then the possibi
                                                             (ie. the Bhairava
 doubt regarding the deviation of the initial
                                                   expansion or
 consciousness) and the succeeding state (ie. the
                                            been  remov ed, and
 dissolution of objectivity) could not have
                                                   been unknown,
 consequently the entities of the world would have
                                                          tion of full
 owing to which there would have been the disrup
                                                 state   of   Supreme
 identity and non-establishment of the real
                                                     close  adher ence
 Bhairava. This would have led to the breach of the
                                                        Bhaira va.   So
 of the lower pasyanti vant etc. which depend on
                                                   of such states
 the venerable pard, owing to the continuation
                                                 consciousness or
 would remain pard only in name. If Bhairava
                                                   consideration,
 prakasa had by its very nature not taken to such
                                                        neither have
  then the would-be objective universe would
                                                         multitude of
  appeared, nor would have expanded. “Let the
                                                            imperfect;
  objects not be based ona solid foundation; let it remain
                                                 Bhairava as the
  down with this talk of non-difference; let
                                                  ved; let the so-
  foundational support of everything remain unpro
                                                    ence”, all such
  called supremacy of para bear the stain of differ
  talk is not proper.
                                                            that the
     So this alone is possible and appears appropriate also
                                                       al manifestation,
  light of Bhairava, at the very first stage of extern
                                                         h vimarfa-Sakti
  having its objective the earth category, throug
                                                              of descent.
  continues to move towards carth only in its march

                                                            everything. He is the ulti-
     *Bhairava is primal, because He is the Source of
                  everyth ing finally rests in Him.  He   is present in everything, be-
  mate, because
                                                     ing.
  cause it is His energy that is manifest in everyth
Abhinavagupta                                                           113
Completeness of every tattva according to the       theory   that    every
tattva is an epitome:

   Thus that very last tattva, viz prthivi (earth) while maintaining
its character as earth    (sa hi caramo bhagah tathatavat sodtmariipam
bibhrat)   and holding within itself all the innumerable            earlier
tattoas (e.g., water—jala, fire—agni, etc. ) as inseparable from itself,
appearing in that form (bhdsamdno) and viewed in that aspect
(vimySyamanah) is complete in itself. Its precedent tattva also (i.e.
jala or water) having the posterior tattva (i.e. prthivi or earth) as
its background, being identical with the appearance and percep-
tibility present in the earth category (urtta-pirvaparipiirnabhasa-
Sdravimarsa-tadatmyat) and not renouncing the completeness of its
posterior fattva (i.e. the prthivi tattoa) inevitably brings within its
compass the fulness of all the preceding tattoas also (svayam ca
svariipanantariya katahathakys tasvapiirva-piirvataradi bhagantara-bhogo)
and appearing and being carefully considered in that way is inte-
gral in the same way (as the pythivitattva). Thus one by one, all
the preceding ¢ativas (agni—fire, etc.) not being separated from
their posterior two or three ones, including within themselves the
delightful existence of their antecedent ¢attvas in accordance with
the non-divergence from the nature of Bhairava which has accrued
to them, are perfectly integral. Thus that category becomes a
form very proximate to its chosen self-luminous Bhairava and that
form becoming a self-chosen abode of rest is designated Bhairava.
You, who are proficient in thinking of Bhairava, become engross-
ed in meditating on Him. An undivided sight from a distance of
a wilderness without limitation of associated objects like pond,
mountain, tree etc. or even with these limitations (tadvatyapi) pro-
viding a wholeness of vision offers a well-known means of entree
into Bhairava-consciousness.     As Vijfianabhairava puts it: “One
should cast one’s gaze on a region in which there are no trees, or
mountain, or even wall. His mental state being without any sup-
port will then dissolve and the fluctuations of his mind will cease.””
 (V. Bhairava, verse 60). Otherwise if there is partial perception,
then if the perception beginning with the first part of the same is
only of parts (i.e., is not an integral perception), then what is the
difference of Bhairava-consciousness from the other lower states
of consciousness which are full of difference and are avowedly
114                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

fragmentary?      The difference lies in the fact that Bhairava-consci-
ousness expressing as it does the delight of the unity of endless
variety of existence is considered to be integral as compared with
other states of consciousness which are fragmentary. Those who
have received proper training and have penetrated into the divine
consciousness know this difference themselves. If the heart-lotus
of some animal-like men has not blown under the ray of grace
falling from the highest Lord, then hundreds of words of mine,
even though their hearts be pierced with sharp needle-like words
can neither make the heart-lotus blow nor make it accomplish
 (the objective). On a (thing like) jar also, one similarly casts
an integral look. In this case also, the indeterminate conscious-
ness instantly (jhagiti) takes in a view of the jar as a whole (not
of its constituent parts), and then forms all kinds of determinate
ideas about it and they starting from the bearest ultimate part
enter into the interior and the interiormost aspect and finally
dissolve again in the indeterminate state. Therefore, there is no
use in referring to other similar cases. Similarly in this matter
also, the Siva principle is inherent in all cases (i.e. even in the
earth category) as an indeterminate reality, and having the ele-
gant autonomy of generating determinate states is, though itself
beginningless, decidedly the prius of all reality. There is no differ-
ence of opinion in this matter. This Siva principle can be consid-
ered complete only if it abides also in the ultimate earth cate-
gory. So also, the consciousness of earth (dhard-samvit) can dis-
play it as identical with central Reality in spite of its appearance
as an object only when it is able to display the awareness of all the
categories as inherent in the earth category.

      [The completeness of prthivi tattva according to vamana-yukti i.e.
      the principle of projection. ]
   It is the essential nature of Siva which is the real state of the
earth category (svariipa-satattvam ca asyah avasthinam dharayah).
How?      By the process of projecting downwards       (adhara-vrttitaya)
i.e. by the process of Siva’s projecting His manifestation down to
the earth (vamanayuktya). [The process of downward projection
i.e. vamanayukti is described in the following words. |
  Siva tattoa expands into Sakti tattoa (paripirna prasara). By His
autonomy is effected a state (i.e. the state of Sadasiva) in
Abhinavagupta                                                       115

which the sense of non-difference (with manifestation) is not so
fully established (as in Siva tattoa) (tatsodtantrya klrpta aprariidha-
abheda) ; with this as the preceding tattva comes into being a tattva
in which the appearance of difference (i.e., the appearance of
manifestation) is homogeneous with the fativa (i.e. the state of
Igvara) (tatpitroaka-eka-rasabheda) and there is the tattoa fuddha-
vidya in which there is the appearance of difference (bhedavabhasa)
 (which, however, isdominated by I-consciousness) ; again through
His power, there comes into being a state in which the auto-
nomy of consciousness is gradually contracting, i.e. Maya (tativa,
vaSodita sankucat-citsodtantrya-sattdmaya) ; then appears the experient
dominated by maya      (mdayd-grahaka or mdya-pramata) of which the
group of five i.e., the group of the five kaficukas or coverings is
his sphere of experience (tadgrahyacakra), then comes into being
undifferentiated pradhana or prakyti (avibhedatmaka pradhana i.e.
prakyti in the state of equipoise of the three constituents), then its
evolute buddhi tattva (dhitattva) and the evolute of buddhi tattva,
viz. ahamkdra (the I-making principle) which is the origin of
manas, the organs of sense (jfdnendriyas) and the organs of action
 (karmendriyas) and the tanmdatras or the primary elements of
perception   (tanmilakarana-piirvaka   tanmatra) which    expand into
the gross elements, viz. ether, water, etc., and finally into     dhard
or earth. (Thus the real state of the earth category is the essential
nature of Siva.)
   [The paripirnata or completeness of prthivi (earth category
according to grasana-yukti or the process of dissolution. ]
  As long as the earth-category remains by dksepai.e. (aksepenaiva)
 by the process of grasana or gradual dissolution in the previous
categories, it indicates the own-being (svariipa) of Siva. As it
points to the (five) tanmatras by means of the five objects of sense,
so they being suggested by it, in order to substantiate their own
form (nijasvariipopaklyptaye) point to their earlier well-established
origins (samdksiptapraktanapratisthika-mila) which again have a
series of uninterrupted preceding origins of their own (antaraparam-
pardnubandhisvakapiroaka-milani). It is not at all right to say that
what is accepted as a material cause does not continue in its effect.
It may be said in certain cases that the instrumental causes etc.
are somehow not connected with the effect        (but this cannot    be
116                                              Para-Trisika-Vivarana

said with regard to the material cause). This has been discussed
by me threadbare elsewhere in another treatise dealing with
causation. A discussion of it here will only disturb the smooth
progress of the present topic (prakyta-vighdtakam). Therefore, it
is not being discussed in detail here.
    [The following describes the series of the categories of existence
by grasana-yukti i.e. by means of the order of absorption into
Siva. ]
  Thus     (according to the reverse order), it is at first the earth
which     has completeness. Then     it is water which    also having
absorbed within itself the characteristics of all the tattuas appears
and is apprehended in completeness. It having absorbed within
itself the wondrous, prakdsa-vimarsa present in the earth category
(tadbhasdvimarSa-camatkaram antahkytya) becomes complete by the
transmission of the samskara (residual traces) of the completeness
of the earth category. Finally, the earth itselfis but the integral
divine consciousness i.e. the very Self of Siva. Thus even a limit-
ed space (pradefamatram api) contains the entire form of Brahman.
The Sastras (scriptural texts) have declared it as their finding
that, “Each tattva (category of existence) has the characteristics
of all the thirty-six /attvas.’’ Such is also the teaching of Spanda
Sastra (as in the following verse): ‘When the yogi wishing to see
all objects by pervading them all i.e., infusing them all with the
light of his consciousness, then what is the use of saying much, he
will experience for himself (the splendour ofthat vision)”. (Sp. K.
III. 11). One should lay this to one’s heart. By the last quarter
of this verse, the same fact has been indicated. So what else is
to be said?

(Establishment of the dependence of all the ¢atévas on Siva-tattva
by logical argument. )
      When a   thing cannot exist without a particular characteristic,
then that particular characteristic is its very nature       (svariipa),
just as being a Sifama     (Simsipa) means having the nature of tree
(i.e. there cannot be a Simsipd without its being a tree). When
the expansion of the fixed order of things is set aside through the
autonomy of the supreme Lord, then a thing may happen even
without that which is its nature. The succeeding tattvas, earth,
Abhinavagupta                                                                117

etc, cannot come into existence without the preceding tattoas, viz.
water etc. Therefore, they i.e. the preceding tattvas are the charac-
teristics of the succeeding.     The     category of earth cannot exist
without the category of water, for it is in the medium of firm sup-
port   (dhyti) only that solidity is found           (and there is solidity in
earth because of the presence of water ).* In this way, in a regu-
lar order, the (five) gross elements (bhitdni) cannot exist without
the five tanmatras. These senses also cannot exist without the inner
psychic apparatus consisting of buddhi, the ascertaining intellect,
ahamkara,   the   I-consciousness      and   manas     (the idea   and   image
making faculty). All these cannot exist without the primal, un-
differentiated, compact subtle root-cause i.e. prakrti. How can
prakyti exist without the limited experient i.e. Purusa (samvidat-
makam ca antarena) who is fettered by the snare of time (kédla),
limited efficacy etc. (kaladi) which are the characteristics of
experience (samvidatmakam) which he has imposed upon himself
only by his own limitation (sankocavasadeva ca svatmarohita). How
can there be limitation of the unlimited consciousness (i.e. how
can there be a limited purusa) without                the autonomy       (of the
Divine) which is the cause of that limitation and of which maya
is another name (i.e. this limitation comes about by mapasakti
which is only another name for the svatantrya or autonomy of
the Divine)? This state of limitation by the divine autonomy in
the form of maya       does not come about without the slightly
unlimited reality      (jsat-asankucita i.e. Suddha-vidy@), unlimited
reality (asankucita i.e. Ivara), slightly expanding (isad-vikdsi i.e.
Sadasiva) and fully expanded reality (vikasvara-riipam i.e. Sakti),
standing as it does in opposition to the gradually proportionate
shrinkage of that whose very essence is limitlessness (asankucitatd-
saratdratamyapeksi). All these realities are simply nothing without
Bhairava who is absolutely autonomous and the very quintes-
sence of perfect Light. This regular order of the categories is
admitted to be true according to one’s own experience. Sruti
 (scriptural text) also says, where can the earth category which is
inclusive of water be found without its solidity? (i.e. the solidity
of the earth is due to         adhesiveness and adhesiveness is not
possible without liquid).      So if we say that the earth has in it also
its preceding category, the water, how does it perturb us? On
the contrary, it will only be in support of the supreme            conscious-
118                                              Para-Trisika-Vivarana

ness (pard samvit)     which   is the perfect, omnifarious,      revered
Bhairava Himself.
                The Form of Time in the Bimba area of Para
      On the occasion of coming into existence of parapara (supreme-
cum-non supreme) vani which is pasyanti and apara (non-supreme)
which is vaikhari, in other words, on the occasion of future and past
times, the entire corpus of Time appearing in the three forms
 (present, past and future) in accordance with the difference of
the categories of existence (tattvas) which are slightly distinct
 (isat-sphuta in pasyanti), more distinct (sphutatara in madhyama)
and fully distinct (sphufatama in oaikhari) abides in the splendour
of revered para (the supreme transcendental consciousness ) in the
form appropriate to pard.!® That which is to arise (i.¢. the future
parapara state) and also that which is the last (apara state) deci-
 dedly sparkles in the initial light    (i.e. in the ever-present para-
 state). Futurity is posited only with reference to clear difference
 that is to arise in what is undifferentiated. For instance “The
 kalki (incarnation) will appear and will destroy those who are
 intent on vice’—if this statement referring to the future had         not
 been experienced in an earlier present, then how could this state-
 ment be made in the Puranas? If it is said that in some previous
 creation, there was kalki who destroyed the wicked as described,
 then the question arises, ‘Is the kalki referred to the same or an-
 other one?     If it is said that he is another one, then how is one to
 know that he is really another one (lit. how will it be evident to
 consciousness? ).’ If it is the same kalki, why is there a difference
 in the time of his appearance? Ifit is said ‘that he is not bound
  by time’, how is it to be proved?    If it is said that he is not bound
                                                                   is
  by time because he, being the very nature of consciousness,
  omnifarious (citoad-visvaripat oat) then why is not the stateme nt
  made      by me,   viz., that there is every thing in      the venerable
  Bhairava who is invariably present on the tip of my tongue and in
                                                               time,
  my heart, who is consciousness transcending the sphere of
                              ble from the universa l Energy, who  is
  who is perpetually insepara
  identical with the universally acknowledged hundreds of mani-
                                                               ion
  festations and absorptions which appear through the contract
                                    d  by  His absolute autonom  y
  and expansion of Energy exercise
                                  honoura bly  accepted with open
  and who is the supreme Lord,
Abhinavagupta                                                      119

eyes, or why does not one describe it in an open-throated          way
after having ascertained the truth for oneself?
   Therefore, this fact is perfectly established that so long as Siva
who is beginningless and endless, who is self-luminous, whose
essence is autonomy which is integral and inherently indepen-
dent, who enfolds within Himself the entire multitude of cate-
gories, whose highest truth is His own Self, who, because of His
being eternally present, who, because of His being in harmony
with everything, because of His conferring grace on all, abides as
Bhairava beyond the sphere of time, in pard or supreme con-
sciousness which would not tolerate even the very word of ‘a
particular state’ (avasthdsabda ayapadesa-asahisnau), so long accord-
ing to the doctrine of this Sastra He abides in the form of total
manifestation (mahdsrsti) , not in a succession of particular limited
manifestations. This is perfectly in harmony with the view of
this Sastra. Because of Hisenclosing all the categories one by one
and the entire multitude of categories collectively in one hemisphe-
rical whole (samputikaranat), He abides in the manner of a hemis-
pherical bowl (sampufayoga)—this is the tradition of our revered
teachers.   It will be said that ‘beginning with the stage of pasyanti,
there is the play of partial bondage (pasamsolldsak) on account of
the commencement of difference. Therefore up to pasyanti the
principle of the relationship of that which is to be purified and the
purifier (sodhya-fodhaka-bhdva) is undeniable. As has been said:
   “QO virtuous one, beginning with the earth up to Sadasiva, all
the categories are to be known as usual being connected with
production and destruction.” (Sv.T. V, 548).
                    The Principle of Bimba-pratibimba
   Pasyanti who has the nature of pardpard Sakti (i.e. the nature of
supreme cum non-supreme Energy) is like a mirror, constitut-
ing the energy of parasakti herself, in which para shines as a
reflection. That form, which is always the same both in its ori-
ginal condition and reflection, is not called reflection, as the mere
reference to the face (mukhapardmarsa-matramiva) is not reflection,
because of its nature being merely the original face. That, how-
 ever, which, though being the same, appears in another way,
as for instance, the image of the face, in a reverse order, the front
as the rear, the left as the right, this also and that also (i.e. as
120                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                      the reflection )
similar )—that alone is called reflection. That (i.e.
                                                                      para-
is only similar (to the original) not dissimilar. Therefore,
                                                 casting    in the   trans-
bhattarika (the supreme consciousness ) while
                                                                   i, her
parent mirror of pardpara who has as her essence pasyant
                                                    in   their    separat e
 reflection full of the categories, earth etc.,
                                                       and   thus   having
 forms (apirna-prthivyadi tattoa-sdmagri nirbharam)
                                                               ramam.) is
 a succession of separate categories (tattattathavidhoktak
                                                  of her enclosing
present even in the separate categories because
                                                       ely true and
inwardly within herself the natural, integral, absolut
                                                           athavidha-
invariable apprehension of ‘ka’ and other letters (antast
                                                             a) and
sahajakrtrima-paramarthikanapayikadi-paramarsa-krodikdrenaiv
                                                    different from
displays those letters ‘ka’ etc. in an integral way
their nature.
                                                       transparent
   Therefore, when para casts, in the homogeneous,
 mirror     (of parapard whose essential nature is pagyanti), the reflec-
                                                   as earth, water,
 tion of the categories which are apprehended
                                                ng about differen-
 etc. and are identical with herself, by bringi
                                               lasadbhedasittranaya) ,
 tiation by means of her autonomy (tathol
                                                     is produced.
 then a reverse order of the categories—earth etc.,
                                                      is Sakti tattoa
 That which in the supreme consciousness (i.e. para)
                                  in pardpara prthivitattoa,   that which     is
 becomes       (by reflection)
                                                          n of prthivi etc.
 prthivi tattoa becomes Sakti-tattoa. This is the positio
 in paraparda from ‘ksa’ upwards.
                                                      there cannot be
     It has been declared by me many a time that
                                                   infinite, and auto-
  any change in Bhairava who is always integral,
                                                 (or diminution) in
  nomous, for there can never be any excess
  consciousness (which is Bhairava).*°
                                                        (paramatmani
     In the apprehension of the highest consciousness
                                                       of the nature
  pardmarse), all the categories of existence are only
                       (i.e. they are all Siva).     The supreme     truth of
  of consciousness
                                                   ka to ksa. There-
  that apprehension is the expansion of Sakti from
                                                  is complete absence
  fore, in the highest consciousness (para) there
  of difference.    In pardapara, there is non-difference in difference
                                                   When    the pardpard state
  according to the principle of reflection.
                                                    ka to ksa holds as
  which has the form of a garland of letters from
                                                       is situated at a
  reflection the categories existing in para which
                                                     inaudible (to the
  level higher than itself, then of the non-mdyiya,
                                 k to ksa letters, the categories    (tattoani )
      gross sense), supreme
                                                         s lower and the
      acquire a reversal of order i.e., the upper become
Abhinavagupta                                                                    121

lower upper.  The sense is that this happens through the power of
the nature of the original (bimba) which is in the upper level,
acquiring a lower level in reflection.              So in the statement that
‘there    is prthivi tattva in ksa,’    there     is no       contradiction,    from
the point of view of that which is to be purified and the purifier,
Because of the invariable continuity of the pard state, even in
that i.e. even in pardparé state there is the continuous succession
of ka and other letters (kddivarnasantanah).
   Because of the appearance of pasyanti in the bosom of pard, be-
cause of the emergence of madhyama state within pasfyanti, and
because of the propensity of vaikhari present in her (i.e. madhyama)
nature,    varna (letter), mantra (word)        and pada (sentence) success-
ively arise, but these (not being purifier) remain at the level of
Sodhya (that which is to be purified).?1 However, let this matter
alone.    This is not germane to        my      thesis.   I     have   conclusively
discussed this point in Sripirva (Malinivijaya) and Paficika.
                   Clarification of the State of Malini etc.
    Though it has been declared that according to venerable Ma-
lini, there is a different arrangement of the letters etc., still let
those     who   are devoted    to the Lord         (paramesvarak)       and    whose
knots of ignorance have been shorn asunder by the teaching of
Trika, understand the subject under discussion after complete
ascertainment.      That   which     has been       said viz., that      there are
divinities, in the highest consciousness or pard Sakti surpassing the
highest point®® of pasyanti viz., the Sakti of Anaérita-Siva, should
not be forgotten by the noble selves.
   Thus the state of madhyama Sakti (i.e. paramadhyama) is being
described which abides in the areaof pardsamoit, but has descend-
ed to the level of pardpara. Madhyama (para madhyamé) within
Her own sphere of authority which is the sphere of kriya-Sakti of
Isvara being of the nature of containing clear objectivity (like
jar, cloth, etc.) in a veiled form at every step superimposes the
word in the object or referent, or object in the word.
    If the referent is universal, its denotative word has to be uni-
versal. It is in such a state that the superimposition of each other
which are of a swinging or oscillating nature (lolibhdva)* is pos-

   *Lolibhava in this system is a technical word. This means that both word
(vdcaka) and its referent (vdcya) are so intimately associated that the one signi-
122                                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana

sible, not otherwise. A piece of cloth even if it is shorter by three
or four fingers than another piece of cloth cannot cover it com-
pletely. Word and its referent can become universal if they are
associated together by nature. Vowels which are of the nature of
germ (bija) and consonants which are of the nature of their
receptacle (yoni) denote Siva and Sakti respectively and, there-
fore, the former is denotative and the latter is the denotated.
   As has been said: “In this realm of letter, Siva i.e. the group
of vowels is said to be bija ie. germ or semen, and Sakti or the
group of consonants is said to be the womb or receptacle”. (M.V.
III, 12). ‘The realm of letters has two aspects—(1) bija and                        (2)
yoni.   Of these, the vowels are considered to be bija (germ)                       and
the consonants beginning with ‘k’ are considered to be yoni (their
receptacles)” (M.V. III, 10). Being thus described in Pirva
Sastra (i.e. Malinivijaya), Siva, not abandoning His nature of
the experient, is the vdcaka or the designator, and Sakti who
abides in objectivity is the vdcya or designated. In the (common)
world of difference also, every odcaka or significant word is success-
ful only when it is identified with the state of the subject in its
two aspects of vowel (pratipadaka) and consonant (pratipadya).
We shall explain presently that the coagulation of the germ (bija)
in the form of the vowel denotative of Siva is the yoni or womb
denotative of the consonant in the form of Sakti, for it is because
of the bija-letter or vowel that there is an expansion of the yoni-
 letter or consonant.
    Therefore, if there is union of bija (germ) in the form of vowels
 with the womb in the form of consonants, in other words, if there
 is the homogeneous union of Siva and Sakti, then what a plea-
 sant surprise; without any effort, without tilling and sowing will
 be generated both bhoga (enjoyment) and moksa (liberation).
    The bija-vama or vowel is adequate in itself and the poni-varna
 or the consonant is equally so. Therefore, which is the cause and
 which the effect?         Such argument          does not disturb         us who    are
 making a statement about consciousness which is teeming with
 infinite variety.       Even    in worldly      dealings    dominated       by méya,
 speech which imparts clarity to the successive letters and words

 fies the other.   At the level of madhyama,   they are so identified   with each   other
 that one can denote the other. This is what is meant by         adhydsa    in the Trika
 system.
Abhinavagupta                                                          123
and being of the nature of light, brings about thinking and has
the nature of bringing about a unified sense (ekapardmarfasvabha-
vaiva). By others (the followers of other doctrines and the gram-
marians) this i.e., the supreme consciousness (pardsamvid) has
been proved by laboured deliberation. In this system, it is esta-
blished effortlessly to those who earnestly take to its teaching.
Therefore, we do not insist on one’s going to the house of a tea-
cher of grammar, the only gain of which will be a little refine-
ment of speech (body of words). So, (by following this Trika
system)   questions   or doubts     pertaining   to succession    or non-
succession or priority and posteriority (of letters) or words in
respect of pindamantra® consisting of nine letters and maha-man-
tras*4 are solved by themselves.

                Description of the Pattern of Malini
  So, revered Malini mantra alone is of the chief, supreme state of
Sakti at the level of the intermediate state ie. at the level of
pasyanti situated at pardpara level. Therefore, it has been said in
Pirvasastra (Malinivijaya) :
   “The knowers of mantra, in order to achieve the desired object
of the followers of mantra and tantra should practise in matters of
nyasa, the nydsa™ of Malini which is free of particular prescription
(of rites ) and has a mixed arrangement of vowels and consonants,
for the sake of sakta body.”      By this statement, it has also been
declared that Malini has a mixed arrangement of vowels and con-
sonants. At another place also, it has been said: “One should
direct the mantra neither towards nara (i.e. limited beings and
objective phenomena) nor to Siva, the supreme fattva, but to
Sakti. They ie. nara and Siva cannot bestow enjoyment and
liberation, for nara is insentient, and Siva is powerless (for power
resides only in Sakti).””

                                  Notes
   1. This book is not available now.
   2. Svapaksa means ‘parapramatr-paksa’, the supreme experient;
parapaksa means mitapramatr-paksa, i.e. the limited empirical
individual.
   3. Systi pertains to kriya, sthiti to jane, samhara to iccha.     Srsti
is the avatéra of apard Sakti which is predominantly             governed
124                                                    Pard-Trisika-Vivarana

by jadna-sakti and samhara of para Sakti which is predominantly
governed by iccha-Sakti.
   4. Dharika pervades prthivi tattoa, apyadyini pervades jala tattoa,
bodhini pervades agnitativa, pavitri pervades vdyutattva and avakasada
pervades dkdSa tattva.
  5. The three vidyas refer to pard, parapara and apard. Pard is that
which rests in the Absolute only as Will to manifest. It is only
icché Sakti. When with jfdna Sakti, the form of manifestation is
determined, then this mixed state of iccha and jiéna Sakti is pard-
para vidya. When by means of kriyd Sakti manifestation is finally
 brought about, then the vidya is known as apard. This is the em-
pirical condition consisting of pramdiy (the experient, the subject),
pramana (experience and means of experience) and prameya (ob-
ject of experience).
      6.   In Siva   tattva, there is the mantra   of one letter, viz. aum in
Sakti tattva, there is the mantra of three letters, viz. aghore; in
Sadagiva fattva there is the mantra of one letter, viz. hrim. The
full mantra referred to is: om aghore hrih paramaghore hum ghoraripe
hah ghoramukhi bhime bhisane vama piba he ru ru ra ra phat hum hah
phat.
   7. The mantra of apara devi is hrim hum phat. The mantra phat
is of one and a half letters. This covers the prthioi anda and prakrti
anda. The mantra hrim is also of one letter. It covers Sakti anda.
The entire cosmos consists of the evolution of Sakti anda in anut-
tara, mayiya anda in Sakti, prakyti anda in maya, and prthivi anda
 in prakrti. See diagram (Chart 1).
    8. This refers to the mantra Sauh. ‘Sa’ represents the three cos-
 mic spheres (prthivi, prakrti and maya) i.e. the 31 tattoas of Saiva
 philosophy from pythivi upto mdyd. ‘Aw’ represents Suddhavidya,
 Isvara and Sadasiva together with iccha, jfana and kriya. The
 visarga (the two dots—one above the other) represents Siva and
 Sakti. This is the pervasion of para.
    9, Matrsadbhava or Matrkasadbhava mantra is h, s, h, phrem
 (Tantra 30, 47-49), Ratisekhara mantra: r, l, y, u (Tantra 30,
 10), Kulesvara mantra:jh, ks, him (Tantra 30, 16).
       10. In Agama, various ceremonies are performed for mental
 peace, physical health etc. These are known as ‘apydyana’ cere-
 monies.
    11. By ‘preta’ or ‘departed’ is meant one who is not a being of
Abhinavagupta                                                          125

the terrestrial world. Sadasiva has been called ‘mahdpreta’—the
gigantic one who is not a being of the terrestrial world, because
other pretas i.e. other souls who have departed from this world
(after death) still retain their sense of difference, but Sadasiva
has absolutely no sense of difference.       He is, therefore, mahdapreta.
The use of mahdpreta for Sadasiva is figurative, the word ‘praha-
santam’ (smiling) has been used for Sadasiva in order to show
his joy in serving as a seat for pard (the transcendental Sakti).
The   word   ‘Iévara’   in the quotation     refers to Sadagiva,   not to
Isvara-tattva.
   Sadasiva has been designated as simultaneously both ‘sacetana’
 (conscious) and ‘acetana’ (unconscious). He is ‘sacetana’ (con-
scious) with reference to his identity with the transcendental
Sakti, and acetana (unconscious) with reference to the sense of
difference that prevails in the world.
  12, All the categories of existence have two aspects, viz.            (i)
the original orb and      (ii) its reflection.   Their original orb is in
the parasakti. No reflection has any existence unless its original
orb (bimba) is present in para. The supreme original orb is deci-
dedly para; the bimbas or original orbs of the remaining odnis,
viz., pasyanti, madhyamd and vaikhari are also present in pard. In
the quotation borrowed from Malinivijaya, it has been indicated
that even the three goddesses, in the form of energy, viz. pard
pasyanti, para madhyamd, and para vaikhari abide on the three lotuses
that blossom on the three prongs which emerge from the navel
of Sadasiva. The venerable pardsakti, however, presides over even
the above three.
   There are the following matras (morae) of pranava, viz. a, u, m,
bindu, ardhacandra, nirodhi, nada, nadanta, Sakti, oyapini, and samana.
The eighth one, viz. nddanta is a state of Sadasiva. There is also
the twelvth mdétré, viz. unmana which        constitutes the seat of the
venerable pard that transcends all these. The three white lotuses
with reference to pard indicate srsti, sthiti and samhara. Venerable
para is above even the ardhvakundalini. She is there in the form of
divine Energy. Therefore, her sea* is described as parama dsana
i.e. as the most distinct seat, for this seat stretches as far as pard
Herself (pardparyantatoat).
   Né€adanta is indication of the 8th métra (e.g. a, u, m, bindu, ardha-
candra, nirodhi, nada, nadanta, Sakti, opapini, and samana). Nadanta
126                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana

points to the state of Sadasiva. The yogi experiences the 12th
mdtra i.e. unmana of pranava when he has succeeded at first in dis-
solving the first eleven mdirds in cidakdfa. Unmana is also called
airdhoakundali pada which is the special seat of para.
      13. The grammarians believe that there are only three stages
of vak, viz. pasyanti, madhyamé and vaikhari and consider pasyanti
to be the highest stage. The Trika philosophers, on the other
hand, maintain that there are four stages of oak, viz., pard, pasyanti
madhyamé and vaikhari and consider para to be the highest stage.
   14, The statement made in this paragraph will be clear from
the following table:
                    Levels of the Three Bimba Vanis
No.     Antahkarana     The bimba    vanis   Presiding      State of crea-
        introverted                          deity         tive categories
        towards the                                        according      to
        inner self                                         Trika
1.      Buddhi or       Para-pasyanti        Para-         Jiiana-sakti as-
        Prajfia                              Sadasiva      pect of Para-
                                                           Sadasiva.
2.      Ahamkara          Para-madhyama      Para-          Kriya-sakti as-
                                             Visnu         pect of Para-
                                                           Sadasiva.
3.      Manas           Para-vaikhari        Para-         Kriya-sakti as-
                                             Brahma        pect of Para-
                                                           Isvara.
    15. Pralayakala and Sinya-pramata are states in which the soul
lies unconscious in sleep due to moha for a long time. There is,
however, one difference between them. The movement of prana
and apdna goes on in a subtle way in the Sinya-pramdata till they lie
unconscious in pralaya i.e. the dissolution of the world. The
satcita karmas of both are, however, present as samskdras in this state.
    16. A laksa=100,000; a kofi=ten laksas, an arbuda=ten kotis,
a parardha=two arbudas.
    17. The category of earth (prthivi tattoa) is the ultimate aspect
of manifestation. It contains all the preceding tattvas from jala
 (water) upto Siva-tattva according to the principle ‘everything is
an epitome of everything else.’
Abhinavagupta                                                         127

   18. By kathinya or solidity is meant ‘compactness of being firmly
or densely united’. There cannot be solidity in the earth, unless
the earth elements are densely united with the water atoms-
element.
   19. The pard state is ever present, the Eternal Now; pardpard
state is future; the apard state is past. The sense of ‘abiding in
para in the form appropriate to pard’ is the following:
   In the bimba of para, the future and past are present inthis form
of bimba i.e. as ever-present whichis the appropriate characteristic
of pard, because in para Time is not based on the sense of relativity
which is the characteristic of the empirical consciousness.
Summary of the completeness of the earth category according to the prin-
ciple of Siva’s projection upto the earth i.e. Vamana-yukti (Involution) :
  1. Complete equipoise of Aham (I) and          =   Siva tattva
     Idam (this i.e. objectivity )
 2. Expansion of Siva into A-ha-m                =   Sakti tattva
 3. By means of Svatantrya Sakti                 =   Sadasiva tattva
     (autonomy of Siva), loss of abheda or
     non-difference, the emergence of idam
     (this ) in aham (1)
 4, The incipience of subtle difference          =   Ikvara tattva
    by a breach in non-difference
 5. Bheda (difference) and abheda (non-          = Suddhavidya
    difference) equally balanced                   tattva
 6. Shrinkage of abheda (non-difference)         = Mahamaya tattva
    and appearance of bheda (difference)
 7. Complete bheda or difference                 =   Maya tattva
 8. The empirical individual abiding             =   Purusa tattva
    in maya
 9. The progeny of Maya by which the             =   Kala, Vidya, Ra-
    empirical individual is completely               ga, Kala and Ni-
     affected                                        yati tattva
10. The homogeneous state of sattva,             =   Prakrti tattva
    rajas, and iamas
11. The first aspect or modifications            =   Buddhi tattva
    of prakrti
       128                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana

       12. Two aspects or modifications of                  =    manas tattva and
              buddhi                                             ahamkara tattoa
       13. Modification of ahamkara tattva                  = The five jidnendri-
                                                                 yas, and the       five
                                                                 karmendriyas
       14. The primary general object of                    =    Sabda, sparsa, rapa,
            perception                                           rasa and      gandha
                                                                 tanmdtras
       15. Modifications of the subtle tanma-               =     akafa,  vayu, tejas
           tras into concrete elements                            and jala tattva
       16. The ultimate limit of the entire                 =    Prthivi tattoa
           manifestation                                          (earth category)

             20. Bhairava Consciousness which is anuttara transcends both
  ——
——_




       bimba and pratibimba.         That   consciousness   is represented     by the
       vowels which are not amenable to the doctrine of bimba-pratibimba.
       The vowels always represent Siva on every level whether pri-
       mordial-para or the ultimate vaikhari.
         21. Varna or letter starts in para and pasyanti; manira or word
       starts in madhyamd or pardpard and pada or sentence starts in vai-
       khari, or apard. Purification means that in sddhana or spiritual
a




       discipline, pada which is in vaikhari has to be raised to the level of
       varna in pasyanti and para.
             22. The paramakofi or the highest point refers to the antakoti
       of pagyanti. The adi or initial kofi of pasyanti is Isvara tattva; the
       madhya or middle kofi of pagyanti is SadaSiva tattva; its antakoti is
       andgrita Siva.
          23. Pindamantra of nine letters is the following: h, s, r, ks, m, l,
       v, y, nim. This is a mantra without the interruption of vowels in
       between.
             24.   Mala mantras are those like ““Om namah Sivaya” in which the
       words are syntactically connected.
          25. Nyasa is a technical term. It means mental assignment of
       the various parts of the body to different deities accompanied with
       mantra or prayer with particular gesticulations.
             26.   Sakta-Sarira:   body charged with Sakti or divine energy.
Abhinavagupta                                                            129

                               Pardpard-samvitti

The pervasion of tattvas in Malini on the basis of MAlinivijayot-
tara Tantra.

                                na, r, i], |, tha, ca, dha, i, na, u, G, ba,
                                ka, kha, ga—the first sixteen letters are
                                pervaded by Siva-Sakti tattva.

Serial          Varna or arma                      Tattva
 No.              ie, letter

  1                  gha                        Sadafiva
 2;                 na                          Igyvara
 S.                 i                           Suddhavidya
 4.                  a                          Maya
 De                 va                          Niyati
 6.                  bha                        Kala
 ils                 ya                         Raga
  8.                 da                         Vidya
  9.                dha                         Kala
10.                 tha                         Purusa
ll                  jha                         Prakrti
12:                  fia                        Buddhi
13,                 ja                          Ahamkara
14.                  ra                            Manas
15.                  ta                         Srotra
16                   pa                         Tvak
17:                  cha                        Caksu
18.                  la                         Rasana
19.                  a                          Ghrana
20.                 sa                          Vak
21.                  ah                         Pani
22.                  ha                         Pada
23:                  sa                         Upastha
24.                  ksa                        Payu
25:                 ma                          Sabda
26.                  Sa                         Sparsa
27.                  am                         Ripa
28.                  ta                         Rasa
                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana
130

                           e                    Gandha
29.
30.                        ai                   Akasa
KE                         te                    Vayu
32.                        au                    Tejas
 33,                       da                    Jala
 34.                       pha                   Prthivi

                                 Parapara Samvitti

       The pervasion of tattvas in Matrka (from a to ksa)

                                   a, 4,i,i, u, a, 7,       |, J, €, ai, 0, au,

                                                             ion of
 i.e. all the vowels are pervaded by Siva tattva. The pervas
  the tativas by other letters of Matrka is given below:

 Serial No.          Letters                   Tattvas

                    ka                       Sakti
                    kha                      Sadafsiva
ape




                    ga                       Igvara
                    gha                      Suddhavidya
                    na                       Mahamaya
                    ca                       Maya
                    cha                      Kala
   £0?




                    ja                       Vidya
                    jha                       Raga
                    na                        Purusa
                    ta                       Prakrti
                    tha                      Buddhi
                    da                       Ahamkara
                     dha                     Manas
                     na                      Srotra
                     ta                      Tvak
                     tha                     Caksu
                     da                      Rasana
                     dha                     Ghrana
                     na                      Vak
                     pa                      Upastha
                     pha                      Payu
Abhinavagupta                                                           131
23.                ba                       Pani
24.                bha                      Pada
25.                ma                       Sabda
26,                ya                       Sparsa
27.                ra                       Ripa
28.                la                       Rasa
29.                va                       Gandha
30.                ga                       Akasa
Bde                sa                       Vayu
32.                sa                       Agni
33.                ha                      Jala
34.                ksa                     Prthivi
                                    EXPosITION
   In this section, four important points deserve attention, via. 1.
Phonematic manifestation, 2. The principle of evolution in
Saivagama, 3. The principle of everything being an epitome of
everything else, 4. The state of bimba-pratibimba or the original
orb and its manifestation.
      1. Phonematic manifestation
   According to Saivagama, vimarfa--sakti or the self-verbalising
and the self-revelatory aspect of the anuttara or the Supreme
consists of the eternal awareness of ‘I’ or Aham (in Sanskrit).
The Supreme is not simply prakdfa or light of consciousness, but
prakd$a-vimarsamaya or light and energy of awareness simultane-
ously which is potentially the germ and source of all manifesta-
tion. Thus the Supreme is a biune principle.
    This Aham of the Supreme contains all the letters of the Sans-
krit alphabet which consists of 50 letters. The 16 vowels from
‘a’ to ‘al’ are forms of Energy representing the Supreme that is
transcendent to manifestation. The remaining 34 phonemes
which are consonants are also forms of Energy manifesting the
various tativas or categories of existence. So the phonemes are not
merely inert letters, they are creative powers of the universe. The
universe is not simply visible phenomenon of the Divine; it is the
utterance of Pardvak, the verbal Power of the Divine. Manifes-
tation is known as varpa-srsti, phonematic creation in Saivagama.
      The phonemes are known as Matrkd, the little mothers who are
                                                     (Continued on page 134)
132                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana




                               Cuart 3

 THE ARRANGEMENT   OF LETTERS ACCORDING
 TO MATRKA IN PARA-SAMVITTI IN SARVAGRA-
 ROPATA

                                 a       ey
                            a




                            SIVA-TATTVA
                                AAI!
                               UORR
                               LLEAI
                                         aay
                                 ry
                           P




      In this scheme, every varna or phoueme is complete in itself
a—=eit          i—inata               e—asphuta        _ ou——sphutatama
a—ananda        y—ampta bija          ao                     eniyasakt
i—iccha        jt—amyta bija           kriyagakti        on—Sivabindu
i—igana         l—amrta bija          o—sphutatara
u—unmesa        |—amrta bija              kriyasakti     ah—Sivavisarga
Abhinavagupta                                                            133




                                        Cuart   4

 ARRANGEMENT   OF LETTERS   ACCORDING    TO
 MATRKA  IN  PARAPARA-SAMVITTI   IN  SARVA
 MADHYARUPATA




         thamays                                          AKAs
      Mayg                                                  Gancha
    Kay                                                          figs


 Vidya                                                            Ropa
 ba                                                               Sparsa
Purusa                                                            Subda
Prakrti                                                          Upastha.
 Buddhi                                                     Payy

 Ahamkara                                                 Pidy

           Manas

                   Srotra
                            auc!
                                   oo               Rey
134                                              Paré-Trisikaé-Vivarana

busy creating the universe and in effecting everyday activity of
life. Matrka when realized by the soul also becomes mantra that
saves the soul and brings about its liberation.

  2. The Principle of Evolution in Saivagama
   This section also contains the philosophy of Evolution accor-
ding to Saivagama. There is in manifestation first of all the arc of
descent of the Divine right up to the solid earth. This is the pro-
cess of involution known as vamana yukti, the process of projection
of the Divine Energy in the manifestation in which there is svari-
pagopana, the veiling of His essential nature.    This vamana yukti is
given in detail in Note No. 19 in this section. This is also known
as srsti-krama. Every spark (jiva or soul) of the Divine Flame has
to go into exile.
   Evolution is the reverse of involution. In this section, it has
 been called the grasana yukti. It is the arc of ascent, the arc of
 svariipa-prakasana, the path of return of the exile, It is the sam-
 hara krama or layakrama, the return of Odyssey.       The ratio essendi
 of srsfi and sthiti is anugraha, the Divine grace by which every spark
 becomes conscious of the flame from which it was separated.

   3. The Principle of everything being an epitome of everything else
   According to this system, everything in manifestation is an
 epitome of everything else. Even such a thing as earth contains
 water, fire, etc., right up to Siva category. So also water contains
                                                                      .
  all the preceding and succeeding tattvas or categories of existence

      4. Bimba-pratibimba-bhava
      According to this philosophy, everything in its essence is anut-
                                                               prati-
  tara i.e. has the nature of the Supreme, but is polarised in
  bimba or reflection i.e. it becomes the reverse of the original, as
  right becomes left and left right in the reflection of the face in the
  mirror. For instance Sakti-tattva in para becomes prthivi tattva
  in its reflection in parapara. This is achieved by the svdtantrya-
  Sakti or power of autonomy of pard. This principle of reflection
  does not apply to vowels which are always of the form of Siva.
  The diagram Pratibimba or reflection in bimba shows that prthivi
  or earth category     represented   by the letter ‘ka’ is reflected as
  Sakti represented by the letter ‘ksa’ and vice-versa.
Abhinavagupta                                                            135

    For further details, see the diagrams (Charts No. 1, 2, 3, 4).
    Malini and Matrkdin relation to Siva tattva in the aspect of para.

                                     TExt

    From evam ca sthite on p. 51, 1. 22 to samavistam on Dp: S25h         8.

                                TRANSLATION
    Such being the case, since      everything     is in everything     else,
let us, first of all, see how the first sixteen letters of Malini (Ihatya),
viz. ‘na, 7, F, 1, tha, ca, dha, i, na, u, a, ba, ka, kha, ga’ give anidea of
Siva seriatim in relation to the supreme or transcendental con-
sciousness.
    (parasamvidam apeksya) [The pervasion of Siva in the first six-
teen letters of Malini in the pardé or Supreme Consciousness on the
basis of sarvagrariipata |
   1. ‘Na’ which symbolizes Srotra (hearing) in Matrké cakra and
is a consonant appears in the supreme consciousness in Malini
as nada which, in other words,         is aham-paramarsa     or the divine
T-consciousness in this context.
   2. It enters the group of four phonemes (i.e. 7, 7 J, 1) which are
the ambrosial seeds inasmuch as they are the womb of immorta-
lity being the essential nature of Siva. The I-consciousness in
the form of nada thrives here and attains         maturity    (vrmhitattoam
avapya),.
   3. Tha in Malini symbolizes rasan@ or flavour in the group
of Matrka letters. So immediately entering this stage, the I-
consciousness enjoys the flavour of its own nature as ‘I’.
   4. The phoneme ‘ca’ in Malini symbolizes gandha or smell in
Matrka cakra. Gandha (as is well known) is the attribute of earth.
In the para or transcendental consciousness, gandha is symbolic of
pratyabhijfia or recognition in the form ‘I have always been like
this’.
  5. The phoneme ‘dha’ in Malini symbolizes ‘tuak’ or touch in
Matrka cakra. In its very state of self-recognition (datraiva) the
I enjoys the consciousness of contact with Sakti, or Spiritual
Energy and recognizes its identity with it.
  6. The above state is known as Saktam yaunam               dhama’ or the
136                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                    in the procrea-
state of procreative Energy. Now it is established
                                 or  Siva bija repres ented by the
tive Energy through Sana bija
phoneme ‘i in Malini.
                                                       Matrka cakra
    7, ‘Na’ in Malini symbolizes that sense-power in
                                                or in other words
which is known as vdk. This is the karana-Sakti
                                                      reflected in
mayasakti which is non-different from anuttara. Being
this.
                                                           of efflorescence
      8. Further than the karana-Sakti, there is the state
 (unmesa)        indicated by the phoneme       ‘w’ in Malini. This is the
introvertive state.
                                                         or extension
   This is followed by the tendency towards prasdra
                                              indica ted  by the pho-
 (ardhvdsrayana) i.e. a state of extroversion
 neme       @ in Malini.
                                                        in Mairka cakra.
    The phoneme ‘ba’ in Malini symbolizes ‘buddhi’
                                        t.    So  it resorts     to perfect
 The function of buddhi is ascertainmen
                                                repres ented      by buddhi
 ascertainment of its self-existence in Sakti
                                              ng   that    it is   not only
  (buddhiriipam Sakta yonim adhifayya) (hinti
                                           imman  ent     in  it).
 transcendent to manifestation but also
                           ‘ka’ in Malini symbolizes    ‘prthivi’ or solidity
       9. The phoneme
                                                        ya’ or firmness.
 in Matrka cakra. Prthivi or solidity indicates ‘sthair
                                               s  firmne  ss in its own
 ‘This means that the I-consciousness attain
 nature as Siva.
                                                     or liquidity in
    The phoneme ‘kha’ in Malini symbolizes jala
                                            (water )   is rasa which
  Matrké cakra. The characteristic of jala
                                                the  I-cons ciousness
  symbolizes savour or delight. This means that
  is immersed in its own bliss as Siva.
                                             agni or fire in Matrka
     The phoneme ‘ga’ in Malini symbolizes
                                                 means that the I-
  cakra which indicates prakasa or light. This
                                                 in its own nature
  consciousness knows itself as prakdfa or Light
      as Siva.
                                                          Supreme State)
         (This is known as Siva-tattva in parasamvitti or
                                   EXPosiTION
                                                       or transcendental
         In this relationship of Malini to the para
                                                       points:
      state, Abhinavagupta brings out the following
                                                             of everything
          1. ‘Sarvam sarvdtmakam’—‘Everything consists
                                                   immanent in manifes-
      else’. This is the basic principle. Siva is
                                                               element, but
      tation. Since Siva is not confined to any particular
                                                           in  the universe
      is the all-of-Reality, therefore, there is nothing
Abhinavagupta                                                                137

which does not contain the all-of-Reality. When it is said for
instance, that prthivi is solidity and has the attribute of gandha or
smell, it does not mean that solidity is the only thing that is
represented by prthivi.   It only means that solidity is predominant
in prthivi, but it contains the other elements also in miniature.
   Trika philosophy maintains that the entire manifestation is an
expression of pard Sakti or paré vak or transcendental logos. This
para vak is creative energy.     Every letter of the alphabet represents
energy in some form. The letters of the alphabet are arranged in
two schemes in Trika, viz., Matrkd and Malini.         Matrka means the
little mother or phonematic creative energy. Malini literally
means the Devi who wears a mala or garland of fifty letters of the
Sanskrit alphabet. Matrka also wears a garland of fifty letters.
That is why sometimes Matykd is called as parvamdlini and Malini
is called as uttara-mdlini. But the word Malini is rarely used for
Maitrka. Another etymology of Malini is ‘malate vifvam iti Malini’,
i.e. the fakti of letters which holds the entire universe within itself
 (the root ‘mal’ meaning ‘to hold’).
  The main difference between Matyka and Malini consists in the
arrangement of letters. In Matrka, they are arranged in a regular
order, i.e. the vowels    come    first, and   the consonants        come   next
in a serial order. In Malini, they are arranged in an irregular
way i.e. the vowels and consonants are mixed and no serial order
is observed.
   On the principle of ‘sarvam sarvatmakam’, Abhinavagupta has
tried to show that the first sixteen letters of the Malini order
represent Siva fattva just as the first sixteen vowels of the Matrka
order do. Out of the sixteen letters of the Malini order seven, viz.,
Petoks ip i, uand @ are vowels and as such, they are the constituents
of Size tattva itself. Therefore, they do not represent any out-
going movement. They have only an intrinsic significance. R,
fe i are called ampta bija, immortal germs or vowels, because
they are the resting place of I-consciousness; they do not pro-
duce anything; they do not change. I connotes ifand bija or the
power of mastery. U connotes ‘unmesa’ or introvertive effloresence
of knowledge, and @ connotes ardhvdsrayana           or the     tendency to
extroversion.   All   these    vowels   are    concerned      only    with the
inner life of Siva.
  So far as the other nine letters of Malini are concerned viz.,
138                                                        Para-Trisika-Vivarana

na, tha, ca, dha, na, ba, ka, kha, ga, Abhinavagupta            shows,   as given
in the translation above, that they denote, on the principle of
‘sarvam sarvatmakam’, certain aspects of Matrkd order as well.
   The whole role of these sixteen letters (of Malini) vis-a-vis
Mairka with reference to para samvid or supreme consciousness
can be seen in Chart 5.

                                      Chart 5
    Letters   of Malini    together   with    their representation        with re-
ference to Supreme         Consciousness or parasamvitti:
                                 Sivatattva
Letters of Malini         Symbolic of            Symbolic of aspects in
                          aspects in             Siva
                          Maitrka scheme

Na                        Srotra-Hearing         Nada      as I-consciousness
    [r, 7, /, Amrtabija as a mass of Cidananda of Siva ]
Tha                       Rasana—Flavour         The joy of Siva’s realiza-
                                                   tion as I
Ca                        Gandha—Smell           Pratyabhijfia     or    Recogni-
                                                 tion of I-consciousness
Dha                       Sparsa—Touch           Identity of I-consciousness
                                                 with Sakti
I  [sana bija indicating Siva’s autonomous staying in His
                            nature ]
Na                Vak-Speech         Siva’s reflection as Lin vak
U__[Unmesa          indicating introvertive        state    of knowledge      and
                              bliss in Siva ]
U = [ardhvasrayana or tendency to extroversion in Siva ]
Ba                Buddhi              Confirmation of I-
                                                   consciousness
Ka                        Prthivi—sclidity          Firmness in I-con-
                                                    sciousness
Kha                       Ap—Liquidity              Taste of the bliss of I-
                                                   consciousness
Ga                        Agni—Light               Primordial Light       of
                                                   Consciousness as Siva
Abhinavagupta                                                                         139

     Malini and Matrka in Relation to Parapara                        i.e.,    Supreme-
     Cum-Non-Supreme Consciousness:

                                     TExt

     From pasyantiripanusrtya to bhavati on p. 52, 1. 10 to 1. 20

                     TRANSLATION       AND         EXPOSITION

     In accordance with pasyanti,           that     is   to   say,   in      pardpara or
supreme-cum-non-supreme state,
   1. Wa of Malini which represented Srotra or hearing in Matrka
in the para or supreme state and ndda in Siva tattva in the same
state is reflected as na in Malrkd in the pardpara or supreme-
cum-non-supreme state. Va in the Matrka scheme represents
vak (speech or sound), the faculty of intuitive comprehension
 (grahandtmaka-riipam), symbol of I-feeling in Siva tattva.
   Now this I-feeling expands, i.e. gets strengthened in the amrta-
bija or the ambrosial vowels 1, f, J, / (tattraiva bijesu prasrtya).                   Of
this, there is no reflection or transformation.
   2 Tha of Malini which represented rasand or taste in Matrka
in the supreme state and dnanda rasa or the rapture of bliss in Siva
tativa in the same state is reflected as da in Matrkda in the pardpara
state. Dain the Matrka scheme in this state represents the faculty
of seeing      (caksusydm   bhuvi)   and     saksatkara        or self-awareness       in
Siva tattva.
     3. Ca of Malini which represented gandha in Matrka in the
supreme state and self-recollection in Siva tattva in the same state
is reflected as ‘va’ in Matrkd in the pardpara state. Va in the
Matrka scheme in this state represents maya which here means
pure mdyd-Sakti united with Siva (tatsdmanyasuddhavidya karane).
In Siva tattva, it represents svdtantrya Sakti, the autonomous power
of    Siva.    (It should be borne in mind that Suddhavidya in this
context does not mean fuddha-vidyd-tattva but maya, not maya in
the ordinary sense of médyd-tattva, but as the mdy4-Sakti or svdtan-
trya of Siva. It is in this sense that the word maya has been used
in the following verse by Utpaladeva in Iévara-Pratyabhijfia-
Karika:
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
140

                                              kriyd ca ya méaydtrtiye te   eva
      “Svangriipesu   bhdvesu patyurjfianam
  pasoh sattvam rajas-tamah’? (IV. 1.4).
                                                     of the Lord in
      “What are admitted to be knowledge and action
                                                   Him,    the same
      relation to objects which are identical with
                                                                gunas of the
      together with the third, the mayd are the three
      limited subject, viz. sativa, rajas, and tamas.’’)
                                                     d toak or touch in
      4, The letter ‘dha’ in Malini which represente
                                                 self-contact in
Matrka in the supreme state and svaripasparsa or
                                              ‘t@ in Matrké            in the
Siva-tativa in the same state is reflected as
                                                     represents the
pardpara state. ‘Ta’ in Matrkaé scheme in this state
                                                   or the faculty of
 last in order of the external senses viz., ghrana
                                                      or self-recogni-
 smelling. In Siva tattva, it represents pratyabhijna
 tion.
                                                        (vowel) repre-
     5. Tin Malini symbolizes Isana bija or the svara
                                            there is  no  reflection or
 senting autonomy of Siva (here also,
                                                holding the pre-
 transformation). The aham-vimarsa or I-feeling
 vious state fast with the power of autonomy            (ifanabijam akramya)
 proceeds to the next step.
                                                     d ‘oak’ in Matrka
       6. The letter ‘na’ in Malini which represente
                                                        in Siva tattva is
 in the para or supreme state and svariipa nada dasa
                                               y of heari ng in Matrka
 reflected as ‘na’ or Srotra Sakti, the facult
                                               and represents angikyta
 in the parapara state (Srotrasaktim dlambya)
                                              Siva tattva.
 nada-dasa or acceptance of ndda state in
                                                              efflorescence
     7. ‘U’ in Malini only represents unmesa or inner
                                                    or trans    formation).
  as in para state (of this, there is no reflection
                                                        frayan  a or the
     Similarly @ in Malini only indicates ardhvd
                                                       is  no   reflec tion.)
  tendency to exteriorization. (Of this also, there
                                                        ‘a’,  aham-  vimar sa
   (unmesordhvabija-yogena). With the aid of ‘wv’ and
  proceeds to the next step.
                                                             i’ in Matrka
      The letter ‘ba’ in Malini which represented ‘buddh
                                                        ertain   ty or self-
  in the para state, and svaripa-niscaya ice. Self-c
                                           ‘tha’ in Matrka in pardpara
  assurance in Siva fattva is reflected as
  state. ‘Tha’ in the Matrka scheme             in pardpara state represents
                                                                          the
  pau or rectum         (anandendriya-yoni), the seat of sexual pleasure,
                                                       or ingress and
  symbol of satikoca-vikasa, contraction and expansion
      egress (dnandendriyayonigam).
                                                                 or solidity
         8. The letter ‘ka’ in Malini which represented prthivi
                                                         tativa is reflected
      in Matrka in the pard state and firmness in Siva
Abhinavagupta                                                                141

as ksain Mdtrkdin the pardpara state. ‘Ksa’ here represents Sakti-
cum-sadaSiva (SadaSiva-maya-Sakti), according to sarvantyaripata.
   The letter ‘kha’ in Malini which represented water in Matrka
in the para state and delight in Siva tattva is reflected as ‘ha’ in
Maitrka in the pardapara state. ‘Ha’ here represents Sadasiva cum
Isvara (Isvara-maya-Sadasiva) (according to sarvdntyariipata).
   The letter ‘ga’ in Malini which represented fire in Matrka in
para state and prakééa or light in Siva tattva is reflected as ‘sa’ in
Mairkd in the pardpara state. ‘Sa’ here represents suddhavidya-
cum-Isvara    (Suddhavidyd-maya       Isvara)   (according     to     sarvantya-
ripata).
  The last three steps denote what is meant by “‘sad@fivefvesvara-
Suddhavidyamayam bhavati” in the text.
  Thus it has been said here that Siva tattva is of infinite power
 (ananta-Sakti) inasmuch as it is unlimited, appearing as it does in
Sarvagra, sarvamadhya, and sarvanta-gdmi phases.

                                ExposiTion
  In the previous description, Abhinavagupta has shown how
the various phases of nddatmaka I-consciousness represented by the
first sixteen letters of Malini are represented in the Maitrka order
with reference to para or supreme state of Siva tattva.
  In this, he has shown how the various phases of aham-vimarsa
of Siva tattva represented by the first sixteen letters of Malini
are represented in the Matrka order with reference to pardpara-
samvitti or supreme-cum-non supreme state of Siva tattva.
  Of the sixteen letters, seven viz. 7, 7, J, Z, i, uand @are bia letters
or vowels. As such, they are aspects of Siva both in Malini and
Maitrké and     therefore   undergo   no change.    They     have     the same
function in pardpara as in para.
   The phonemes, according to Trika              philosophy,        have   three
aspects: Sarvdgrariipatd, sarvamadhyariipata and sarvantagamita. Sarva-
graripata refers to a phoneme as it is in itself. Sarvamadhyata refers
to phonemes undergoing transformation, and sarvantagdmita re-
fers to phonemes reaching finally the state of Suddhavidya, Isvara,
Sadafiva and Sakti.
   Six consonants of Malini, viz. na, tha, ca, dha, na and ba are
reflected in Matrka in different phonemes in pardpara state under
the law of sarvamadhya-ripata as shown in the chart.
142                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

   Three consonants of Malini, viz. ka, kha and ga after under-
going the changes into kya, ha, and sa respectively under the law
of sarva-madhya-ripata point to the final destiny, viz., of passing
into suddhavidya, Isvara, Sadasiva, and Sakti. They, therefore,
refer to sarvantagamitd state. Ka which represents prthivi in Mairka
is reflected into ksa which symbolizes Sakti, but in the parapara
                                                                    a
state, it is not simply Sakti but sadasivamaya-Sakti. The pardmars
 or comprehension of Sadasiva        is aham   idam  (1 am   this, the
unity of subject and object); the pardmarsa of Sakti is only
aham or I, for in para state, there is no idam or objectivity sepa-
rately; everything      is only I or aham.    Since this is a description of
parapara state, therefore, ksa or Sakti is described as Saddsiva-
maya-Sakti. Similarly, ‘ha’ which represents Sadasiva is in pard-
para state Isvara-maya-sadasiva. Similarly ‘sa’ which represents
 Tévara is in pardpara state Suddhavidyamaya-Isvara.
    Thus the pervasion of Siva full of invariable and infinite Sakti
 is described through the first sixteen letters in the order of the
 letters of the Malini group from the point of view of sarvdgrariipata
 (pardsamvitti)   and    sarvamadhyariipata     and sarvantyariipata    (pard-
 parasamvitti).

  The mixture of the remaining tattvas of Malini in apara samvitti
                                    Text
      From malinydmihatya     on   p. 52, 1. 22   up to prthivi    ca pha on
 p. 53, L. 10.
                               TRANSLATION
    Now the phonemes are described with reference to apara (non-
  supreme) state in Malini and their reflections with reference to
  pasyantii.e. pardpara (supreme-cum-non-supreme )state.‘Gha’ which
  represents Sadakhya or Sadasivain Maliniin the apara state appears
  as vayu (the element of air) in Matykd in the pardpara state. (The
  same process should be understood successively in the case of all
  the letters. The description of each letter is given in Malini in
  apara samuitti and of the corresponding letter in Matrka in pardpara
  samvitti or pasyanti). Na which represents Ivara in the apara
  state in Malini is reflected as nabha i.e., akaSa or ether in Matrka
  in the pardpara state. ‘I’ which represents Suddhavidya of the apara
                                                          (Continued on page 144)
Abhinavagupta                                                                                                                  143

                                                                 Cuart     6
     PARASAMVITTI   (SUPREME                                                           CONSCIOUSNESS)-
     SARVAGRARUPATA
     In this every tattva or category of Existence is                                       complete          in itself.
     Letters in order of matrka
                                                                   sarvagrardpata


                                 Sakti                  kga
                      sadisiva                     ha                                                 ka     prthivi
                       isvara                 sa                                                       kha     jala
           suddhavidya                   sq                                                                ga agni
            mahdmaya                 4                                                                       gha        vayu
     svatantrya-                                                                                              fla akasa
           i oe faye)           Va                                   Sivatattva                                ca gandha
           kali-kdla       la                                                                                     ‘chalntse

         5     aE
        raga-niyati      yate                                        aaii
                                                                     ware                                          ja_ ropa ;
                                                                                                                  jha sparia
             aks oe                                                   local                                       hadi
             aes                                                    © au am       ah                              {4     upastha
             buddhi        ba                                                                                 tha payu
           ahamkara        pha                                                                               da         pada
                manas            pa                                                                    oh              pla
                  Srotra                 na
                         tvak                 dha                                                 ta         ghrana
                          caksu                     da                                          tha        rasand




       Explanation of the vowels which, are of the nature of Siva:
        denotes cit or consciousness
        denotes ananda or bliss
as




          denotes iccha or will to manifest, but still unaffected by ob-
         jectivity
         denotes igana or mastery.                                  This is the state in iccha or will
~~




          which is coloured by objectivity
          denotes unmesa or jfianasakti (power of knowledge)
as




          denotes iinata or deficiency of knowledge, the cause of ob-
         jective appearance
,         denotes               amrtabija,                    imperishable         letter, not subject                 to      any
1         change
 e       denotes asphuta kriyasakti or indistinct power of activity
 ai      sphuta kriyasakti or distinct power of activity
 o       sphutatara kriyasakti or more distinct power of activity
 au sphutatama kriyasakti or most distinct power of activity
 am denotes Siva-bindu or undivided knowledge of the universe
 ah denotes visarga represented by two perpendicular dots. The
          lower dot, symbolizing Sakti, means that there is an expansion
          of an objective world. The upper dot, symbolizing Siva, means
          that the entire universe rests in the I-consciousness of Siva
                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana
144
                                                ara state. ‘A’ which
state in Malini appears as iccha Sakti in pardp                  (the
                                            i represents anuttara
represents maya in the apard state in Malin
                                             is niyati in Malini be-
unsurpassable Absolute) in Matrka.‘Va’ which                  prakrti
                                         in Malini becomes
comes mayain Matrka. ‘Bha’ which is kala
                                              es niyati in Matrka.
in Matrka. ‘Ya’ which is raga in Malini becom
                                      becomes pada in Matrka.
‘Da’ which represents vidya in Malini
                                          becomes pani in Matrka.
   “Dha’ in Malini which represents kala
                                               me pdyu in Maityka.
Tha which represents purusa in Malini beco
                                               es  sparsa in Matyka.
‘Fha’ which represents prakyti in Malini becom
                                           Malin i becom es Sabda in
   ‘Na’ which represents dhi or buddhi in
                                           in Malini becomes riipa
Matrka. ‘Ja’ which represents ahamkara
                                        in Malini becomes vidyd in
in Matrka. Ra which represents manas
                                          Malini becomes upastha in
Matrka. ‘Ta’ which represents frotra in
                                                      es         manas in
 Matrké.     Pa which represents twak in Malini becom
                                      in Malini becomes             rasa in
 Matrka. ‘Cha’ which represents caksu
                                             i becomes kala in
 Matrka. La which represents rasand in Malin
                                                  Siva in Matrka     repre-
 Matrka.     A which    connotes dnandaSaktiin
                                               vk in Malini re-
 sents ghrana in Malini. ‘Sa’ which represents              and
                                       visarga Sakti of Siva
 presents lgvara in Matrka. Ah is the
                                      represents pada in Malini
 represents pani in Malini. Ha which                          i
                                        represents pdyu in Malin
 becomes Sadasiva in Matrka. Sa which
                                      which represents upastha in
 becomes suddhavidya in Mairka. ‘Ksa’
                                               represents Sabda in
 Malini becomes Sakti in Matyka. ‘Ma’ which
                                                   represents sparsa in
  Malini becomes purusa in Maitrka. Sa which
                                         Am is Siva’s bindu Sakti and
  Malini becomes mahdmayd in Matrka.
                                              rasa in Malini and ap-
  represents ripa in Malini. Ta represents
                                                is the satvika kriyaSakti
  pears as ghrana (nasika@) in Matrka. E which
                                             same in its long form
  of Siva represents gandha in Malini. The                    O re-
  ive., as Ai representsnabha or ether in Malini. Similarly,
                                           agni in Malini. (In Matrka
  presents vayu and Au represents tejas or
                                           e of Siva cannot undergo
  e, ai, o and au being of the very natur
  any modification).       ‘Da’ in Malini represents ap or water and
                                          prthivi in Malini               and
  becomes caksu in Matrka. Pha represents
  becomes ahamkara in Matrka.
                                   ExposITION
                                                          reference to para
        In the first two descriptions of Malini with
                                              nava gupt a  has selected only
      and pardpara state of Siva tattva, Abhi                 nued
                                                        (Conti     on page 147)
Abhinavagupta                                                        145




                             Cuart   7

  IN PARAPARA SAMVITTI—SUPREME-CUM-NON-
   SUPREME CONSCIOUSNESS    SARVAMADHYA-
   RUPATA IN THE ORDER OF MATRKA-LETTERS.




                  mahamaya

            maya                                        gandha

          kala                                               rasa

          vidya                                              Opi
      raga         pa                                       sparia

          purusa     dnt
                                                           Sabda
           prakyti
            buddhi

    pha




 In this, the categories are related mutually in the middle state
                                              Pard-Trisika-Vivarana
146




                              Cart        8


                                      G                      TO
      ARRANGEMENT OF LETTERS ACCORDIN
         MATRKA IN PARAPARA SAMV ITTI IN
                SARVANTYA-RUPATA




                                   =B
                                   <
                                    iEs

                                               rbs within itself
        In this every succeeding category abso
                           the preceding one.
Abhinavagupta                                                          147

the first sixteen letters which in the Malini phase are        concerned
with Siva.
      In the para state, the seven vowels, viz. 7, 7, /,/,i,wand a undergo
no change. The first four vowels are the resting place of I-
consciousness. I connotes Siva’s power of autonomy, and u and @
indicate His introvertive and extrovertive states. The other nine
letters which are consonants show the relationship of Malini and
Matrké and the expansion of I-consciousness in various phases.
   In pardpara state, Abhinavagupta shows how the nine con-
sonants of Malini are reflected in different letters of Matrka which
point to different aspects of I-consciousness. Both have to do with
the I-consciousness of Siva. Only they show the expansion of I-
consciousness in different ways. So both are concerned with Siva
tattva, In the aparadasa of Malini, it is the modification of the
remaining thirty-four letters of Malini which has been depicted.
In the para-dasd, it is only the expansion of Siva’s I-consciousness
that has been described. There the phonemes are concerned only
with Siva’s inner life, not with manifestation.        That is where it is
known as para-dasa. In the apara-dasa of Malini, the phonemes are
concerned with the tattvas and their modification. In other words,
they are concerned with manifestation. That is why this state is
known      as apara or non-supreme.         Their corresponding modifi-
cation is shown in the pardpara state in Matrka. In the apara state
in Malini, the seven vowels i.e. a, ah. am, e, ai, 0, au represent
tattvas or elements of manifestation but they represent only diff-
erent faktis of Siva in Matrka; they do not represent elements of
objectivity there. So there is no question of their corresponding
modification in Matrka. (See chart 9 for details.)

                                     Cuart 9

Malini in apara samvitti                Matrka in pasyanti or pardpara
                                       samvittt

 1,      Gha—Sadasiva                  1.   Gha—Vayu
 2.      Na—Isvara                    2.    Na—Nabha or Akasa
                                             (ether)
 3.      I—Suddhavidya                3,    I—Iccha of Siva
 4.      A—Maya                       4,    A—Anuttara
                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana

      Va—Niyati                         Va—Maya
      Bha—Kala                          Bha—Prakrti
      Ya—Raga                           Ya—Niyati
      Da—Vidya                          Da—Pada
      Dha—Kala                          Dha—Pani
      Tha—Purusa                        Tha—Payu
      Jha—Prakrti                       Jha—Sparsa
      Na—Dhi or Buddhi                  Na—Sabda
      Ja—Ahamkrta                       Ja—Ripa
      Ra—Manas                          Ra—Vidya
      Ta—Srotra                         Ta—Upastha
       Pa—Tvak                          Pa—Manas
       Cha—Caksu                        Cha—Rasa
      La—Rasana                         La—Kala or Kala
      A—Ghrana                          A—Anandaiakti of Siva
       Sa—Vak                           Sa—livara
      Ah—Pani                           Ah—Visarga Sakti of Siva
      Ha—Pada                           Ha—Sadasiva
      Sa—Payu                           Sa—Suddhavidya
      Ksa—Upastha                       Ksa—Sakti
      Ma—Sabda                          Ma—Purusa
      Sa—Sparéa                         Sa—Mahamaya
      Am—Ripa                           Am—Siva’s Binduéakti
      Ta—Rasa                           Ta—Ghrana
      E—Gandha                          E—Asphuta-kriyasakti of
                                        Siva
      Ai—Nabha      or ether            Ai—S,     huta-kriyagakti of
                                        Siva
aL;   O—Vayu                     31.    O—Sphutatara-kriyasakti of
                                        Siva
32;   Au—Tejas or, fire          o2.    Au—Sphutatama-kriyasakti
                                        of Siva
oy    Da—Jala                    38.    Da—Caksu

34.   Pha—Prthivi                34,    Pha—Ahamkara

                                ‘Text

   From atraiva ca yathoktam on p. 53, |.      1 upto iti after Sesd varna-
stukevalah on p. 54, |. 11.
Abhinavagupta                                                        149

                              ‘TRANSLATION

  In these very letters of Malini, the structure of the Sakta-Sarira
has been described (in Malini-vijaya) for the purpose of nydsa
 (mental assignment of the various parts of the body to tutelary
deities by placing one’s fingers on them). Thus           the principle
that ‘everything else is in everything’ has been completely demon-
strated. It is the venerable supreme verbum (fara vdk) which,
according to the principle enunciated, casting its reflection in
pasyanti, simultaneously      attains in madhyamd     established as
identical with itself a form of letters in which consonants are
intermingled with vowels in an irregular order, and thus becomes
Malini itself which is characterized by difference in the reckoning
of the various vowels (kula-purusa) and the various consonants
 (i.e, kulafakti indicated by the word ddi) in innumerable ways
owing to the endless diversity of intermixture of consonants ( yoni)
and vowels (bija). As has been said:
   “One should worship Malini whose corpus is constituted by a
group of many vowels (kuladeha)! and consonants (kulafakti).”
    By adopting this practice, the yogi who is engrossed in the
practice of repeated meditation acquires supernormal power in
respect of various bhuvanas, tattvas, centres of energy in the body
 (Sariresu cakresu)* everywhere in respect of body and prana.
    As certain medicines produced by the mixture of certain ingre-
dients bring about certain result, even so bhdvand (religious dis-
cipline) by intermingling certain religious practices, e.g. mantra
 (repetition of a sacred word of power), nyasa (mental assign-
ment of various parts of the body), homa (oblation) etc., brings
about the attainment of certain spiritual power. Even here the
success comes about by the non-transgression of the working of
niyati-Sakti.
   In every sacred literature, the assemblage of letters (in a
mantra) has been brought about differently by placing the letters
in different arrangements. This has been done in accordance with
certain fixed succession (niyataparipafi) determined by the pre-
dominance of certain letters considered as appropriate according
to the vijfidna* of each Sastra (nijanija vijtdna-samucita-tattad-varna-
bhattaraka pradhanyena). It is in this way that a mantra is selected
and presented, to show how para (inclusive of Matrka and
                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana
150
                                                      by   its creative
Malini)      imparts radiance to a mantra invigorated
                                                   opabrmhita mantra-
energy (fdmeva méatrka-riapam tathavidhaviryada-an
sphurattadayinim darSayitum).
                                                gement of letters in
   ‘As has been said in Nityatantra, the arran
                                               ‘pha’ has been deter-
Malini beginning with ‘na’ and ending with
                                                  state in para ndda,
mined principally in accordance with their
                                                 placing the vowels
ie. pardpagyanti.© In Malini, the aim of
                                                  intermixed form is
 (kulapurusa) and consonants (kulasakti) in this
                                         pard-pasyanti. It is not
this very penetration into parandda or
                                       letters and mantras that
simply the mystery-mongering of the
                                                   tantra, after plac-
constitutes their advantage. As in Vajasaneya
ing the letters in their proper order, it is said:
                                                  a, which has reached
    “This is the divine order of letters of Matrk
                                                 ra which has reached
 the abode of Visnu i.e. this is the Matrka-cak
                                                      stood from the
 the infinite space of Malini. When it is fully under
                                                    cuts asunder the
 teaching of the guru (the spiritual director), it
 noose of the limited, empirical man.””
                                                        power of the
    Similarly, it is said in Trikahrdaya: “It is the
                                               So also, it is not only
 weapons or of anything else, that matters.
                                              the power of creative
 the position of the letters of a mantra, but
                                                   by being preserved
 energy that is inherent in it that matters. It is
 with that creative energy,      that the mantras are really preserved,
                                                              ns con-
  otherwise     (i.e. without the creative energy) what remai
  stitutes merely a number of letters.”

                                    Notes
                                                       i.e., vowels and
        1.   The difference of kulabheda or kulapurusa
                                                   :— (a) Varnabheda
  kulafakti i.e. consonants appears in three ways
                                              conso nants, (b) Man-
  je. difference in letters ie., vowels and
                                              no  vowel s and mantras
  trabheda, i.e. difference of mantras having
                                               rence   of kulapurusa as
  having vowels, (c) Avasthabheda i.e. diffe
  siddhas and kulaSakti as _yoginis.
                                                       once a yogi has
     2. Siddhi in bhuvanas or spheres means that
                                                he is no longer born in
      acquired power over a particular bhuvana,
                                                     particular tattva or
      that particular bhuvana. So also siddhi over a
                                              arisen above that cate-
      category of existence means that he has
                                                        that if a yogi has
      gory of existence. Siddhi over the cakras means
                                                  he  will  no longer be
      acquired control over a particular cakra,
      governed by the forces of the cakras below it.
Abhinavagupta                                                          151

  3. Niyati-sakti. It is a technical term which means that the
success in a certain supernormal power depends on the controlling
power of the Divine.
   4. Vijftana is a technical term here meaning the name of the
mantras and their structure.
  5. According to tradition, Matrkarapam means matrkd-mdliniril-
pam pard, i.e. para inclusive of Matrka and Malini.
   6. According to tradition, parandda means pard-pasyanti in its
aspect of bimba or matrix, pardparandda denotes paramadhyama in
its aspect of matrix,   and    aparandda   denotes   para vaikhari   in its
aspect of matrix.

                                 TEXT

  From tathd hi mantranam on p. 54,1. 11 upto vidhiranantya-vedane
on p. 54. 1. 25.

                              TRANSLATION
  1. Even when the letters of the mantras are considered by them-
selves, and not in any other aspect, those very mantras have diff-
erences (anyathdtvam) in the Sastras in accordance with the
division of dnava, Sakta and Sambhava upaya.t
   2. There is a difference in the seminal mantra of maya, viz.:
hrim delineated in Saiva Sastra, of pranava or ‘om’ delineated in
Vaisnava Sastra, of the immortal germ of the heart (amrtabija)
which includes all the tattvas, viz. ‘sauh’ delineated in the Sastras
of the left-hand path,? or there is a difference in the pranava mantra
(lit. the four aspected mantra) in the Vedic scripture (where it
is OM), and in Kaulottara etc. ice., the Sakta Tantras (where
it is krim), and in the Ucchusma or Bhairava Sastra          (where it is
hiim).®
   Here is recorded the rule of the use of the mantras for the worthy
practitioners of yoga in respect of the manifold differences of vowels
 (kulapurusa) and consonants (kulafakti). “All the vowels (pirve)
should be placed before (apare) the consonants (paresém) and
the consonants (pare) should be placed after (pystha) the vowels,
and the vowels (pirve’pica) should be placed in regular succession.
This is considered to be the rule of the use of Métrka mantra.”
  Thus also should be made the form (of the other i.e., Malini)
152                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                            consonants.
with an inter-mixture (bhinna-yoni) of vowels and
                          the  combi natio n   of variou s   consonants
This goddess Malini with
                             erabl e  (asamk hy@).   It  is still known
etc. (saktadi) becomes innum
as Para or Anuttara Malini.
                                                            halanta letters
    Further, “In the mantras (dhdmasu) consisting of
                              vowel      (bheda samkhy esu)   , placed one
i.e. consonants without any
                                  tesu),  there  is only  one   dot (bindw)
below the other (adho’dho vinivis
                                                            which      consist of
on the final letter. In the others i.e., the mantras
                                                        letter (anyesu
letters with vowels, there is a dot on each previous
                                ,  each mantra  (ekatah )   should be
prak). In such kind of mantras
                                                      letter (svaprstha-
 cast by placing a dot (samkhyd) on the top of each
                                    and  the final  one   (praktanantya-
 gam) both on the previous letters
                                    the case of mantra  s  the letters of
 gam). Thus the dot will differ in
                                                         are with a
 which are without a vowel (isfaihi) and those which
                                 order of such mantras . This is the
 vowel (asprstaihi). This is the
                                           of vowels   (kulapurusa)    and con-
 rule        (vidhi) of the combination
                                                       (yathoktah) in
 sonants (kulasakti) as has been described above
                                         mantra s (Gnant yavedane ).’**
 order to point out the infinity of such

                                   EXxPosITION
                                                                      tant points
       In this, Abhinavagupta mentions the following impor
 about the mantras:
                                                                        ent
        1.    In spite of the similarity of letters, they become differ
  when        used for different updyas.   When    a mantra is used as dnava
                                                                   t. When
  updya, it is praéna-apana or kriyasakti that is predominan
                                        akti that is predo minan t.  When it
  it is used as Saktopaya, it is jidnas
                                                        es predominant.
  used as Sambhavopdya, it is iccha Sakti that becom
                              in the  semina l  mantra s.  In the Vaisnava
     2, There is a difference
                                  astras ,  it is  hrim;  in  the left-hand
  Sastras, it is OM; in Saivas
  Sastras, it is sauh.
                                                       different Sastras.
     3. There is a difference in pranava itself in the
                                              Sakta Tantras it is
  In the Vedic scriptures, it is ‘OM’; in the
  hrim; in the Bhairavasastra, it is hiim.
                                                                     and the
         4, Again, there are differences in the formation
                                      partic ular   order.   The  first  verse
      arrangement of the letters in a
                                           etc.   shows    the differ ence   of
      cited, beginning with pirveparesdm
                                                     . In this verse, the
      arrangement of letters in Matrka and Malini
                                     vowel,   and   the   word ‘para’ has
      word ‘parva’ has been used for
                                            says  that  in  Mairka, all the
      been used for consonant. The verse
Abhinavagupta                                                    153

vowels should be placed in regular succession. In Malini there is
an inter-mixture of vowels and consonants.
   The second verse cited, beginning with ‘adho’dho’ contains very
archaic Sanskrit words in a technical sense. Bhedasamkhyd has been
used for halant letters, dhdma has been used for mantra, samkhya
for bindu or a dot etc. For details, see the translation. In this
quotation, Abhinavagupta gives an example of two kinds of
mantras. The first is that in which (i) Aalanta letters i.e. conso-
nants without any vowel are placed one below the other, and
(ii) in which there is a bindu or dot only on the final letter which
has a vowel. The following navatma mantra is an instance of this
kind of mantra.   Such mantras are known as samyuktaksari mantras.
For instance:        h         or: h, s, r, ks, m, 1, v, », nim
                     s

                     r
                     ks
                     m
                     l
                     v

                     #
                      num
   The other is that kind of mantra in which each consonant has a
vowel and there is a dot (bindu) on each letter, e.g. yam, ram, lam,
vam. Such mantras are known as asamyuktaksari mantras.

                              TExtT

  From   tadetena on p. 55, |. | upto padamandmayam, on p.55, 1. 6.

                       ‘TRANSLATION
  Thus, in accordance with this precept, those spiritual practi-
tioners who are devoted to the right rules of vowels    (kulapurusa)
and consonants (kulaakti) of the mantras, e.g. Mantramahegvaras
 (beings always steeped in the essential nature of Siva) become
unqualified (to impart mantra to others); they cannot impart
mantra for deliverance, for a mantra from them cannot bear fruit.
This does not apply to Mantras, for even when they are completely
absorbed in meditation, they do not reach the extreme state of
andmaya in which one loses one’s personality in Siva
  It has been rightly said:
154                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

  “Tn this world in which beings come into existence right from
Brahma upto a tuft of grass, three and a half crores of mantras
appointed by Siva (for helping creatures) are quite enough.
After conferring grace on the entire lot of creatures, they have
reached the andmaya state i.e. the state of being completely im-
mersed in Siva. In other words, they have become Mantramahe-
$varas.” (M.V.T. I, 40-41)

                                    Notes
    1. Mantramaheévaras are the divinities who abide in Sadasiva
tattva, Mantreévaras abide in Ivara tativa, and Mantras are the
divinities who abide in Suddhavidya. Mantra                in this context
means a divinity, not a sacred word of power.
                                    TExtT

   From tadevam bhagavati on p. 55, 1. 7 upto evam yo vetti tattvena
ityadi on p. 57, l. 22.

                                  TRANSLATION
      The goddess para vak who assumes different states (i.e, the state
of pagyanti, madhyamé etc. ) becomes in her chief mode i.e. madhyama
 (i.e. pardpard state) goddess Malini herself. At this stage, She
becomes so infinite, that considering the varied forms which
She assumes she appears omnifarious, and thus being of all forms,
She assumes the state of letter (varna), a word          (mantra) and sen-
tence      (pada)   through    the predominance     of three aspects viz.
para (supreme), pardpara (i.e. subtle or sitksma) and apara (gross
or sthiila) i.e. even in pardpara state, She appears as para, pardpara
 (stiksma)    and   apara     (gross).1 This threefold aspect should be
regarded from the standpoint of effecting purification. The
sources of bondage appearing in pafyanti are indeed subtle. They
have to be purified in their subtle aspect, for the sources of bon-
dage are lying within. The sources of bondage at the pasyanti level
 are subtle; therefore their purification has to be effected at the
 subtle level, for     a bondage    is bondage    when   it lies within the
 subtle aspect. At the level of madhyamé in which the external
 expansion of Sakti becomes more and more perceptible, pasyanti
 appears as an instrument of purification (Sodhana-karana-tayaiva
 bhavati).
Abhinavagupta                                                       155

  Just as by washing the dirt or impurity lying in the inner fold
of a cloth, the dirt lying on the upper portion gets automatically
washed, even so by the removal of dirt lying at the subtle level,
the dirt lying at the madhyamé level gets automatically removed.?
   So, the stage of vatkhari as lying within the para-samvid is being
considered. The     state of vaikhari in the pard   (supreme)   state is
not impossible.*
   Though the development of speech-organs (sthdna) and arti-
culation (karana) becomes manifest in children in two or three
years, yet it is an established fact that their proficiency of the
language increases day after day and month after month. If in
madhyama (which is inherent in paravak) there were no appearance
of the lineaments of the letters in accordance with the speech
organs and articulation that become distinct with the expansion
of vaikhari, then there would be no difference in the development
of language between a child a day old, a month old, or a year old.
The proficiency (vyutpatti) in the development of language in a
child increases as the impressions of words heard and objects
seen are associated in his mind. Pardémarfa or mental association
is not possible without word (gross or subtle). Word whether
expressed externally in a manifest or gross form or implied inter-
nally in an unmanifest subtle form is an aspect of vaikhari.
   In a new-born child even when the vocal organs are not yet
developed, the subtle form of vaikhari inheres in madhyama by which
he is able to associate heard word and seen object by means of an
inner, subtle, unmanifest implicit proto-language.
   It has also to be admitted that the constituent elements of
vaikhari are present in his mind in an implicit form for without
these, he could not have been able to have even an implicit form
of language and without this he could not have been able to
associate the seen object and the heard word.
  If it be said that it is madhyamd itself that becomes distinguished
by the difference resulting from such development, we may ask
how? Let us discuss this point carefully.
  The child hears the words and sees the objects and thus develops
his acquisition of language. He mentally lays hold on the words
heard.     The words heard are of the level of vaikhari     (articulate
speech).     In regard to these words, he is like one born blind in
regard to forms.     (He hears the sounds but does not know what
156                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana

they refer to). Therefore, vaikhari constituted by speech organs
and articulation certainly inheres in madhyama.
   Similar is the condition even in the dumb. It has already been
said that the consciousness of the goddess pard is all-containing
 (sarvatmaka).
  Thus vaikhari herself, who has acquired development through
madhyamd, so long as she remains in herself with words and their
referents perfectly manifest, expressing mutual diversity and
having the net-work of the categories of existence within herself,
so long she is apara. The development of the madhyamd stage
                                                                of
which inheres in para is known as pardpara, and also the growth
pasyanti (is known as pardpard). In her own self, pard is the divine
goddess.

      Sodhaka, Sodhana and Sodhya


      Thus in the state of purified and purifier, there is a threefold
 position.   The      purifier    (Sodhaka)   is the Universal   Divine    whose
 expansion is universal. It has already been said that the expansion
 occurs in this very way (i.e. in the way of triad).* In the matter
 of the means of purification (sodhana) the action is that of the
 Divine Being Himself who assumes self-imposed limitation through
                                                             of His
 His own autonomy and reposes in the state of the glory
                                             is to be purified  (f0-
 Sakti. (Saktamahimavisrantasya). That which
  dhya) is the network of bondage of the limited empirical being
                                                                    inci-
   (nardtmanah) who is full of a sense of difference which is first
  pient in the pafyanti vak stage, which is a Sakti   of limited  beings
                                                           pafyanti of
  expanded by the parapara goddess who is the pulsating
                                                  develop ed   by the
  the form of pati-Sakti, who is also pasu-Sakti®
                                                              le para
  jfidnagakti of Sadasiva, who is similar in rank to venerab
                                                       is the  unified
  that is nondifferent from venerable Bhairava who
  form of the triad        (sun, fire and moon)® and who transcends the
  thirty-seven categories.’ This is a settled fact.
                                   revered    Somananda   in Sivadrsti:     “May
       ‘As has been     said by
                                                            (as Sodhaka)    make
  Siva who has entered into us as the Subject
                                                          , to Siva
  obeisance by Himself (in the form of mantra as fodhana)
                                                       who    is His
  who is extended as the universe, by means of para
                                                                               .”
  own Sakti in order to remove all obstacles which are but Himself
      (SD: 1;.1)
Abhinavagupta                                                            157

  The   entire   group   of activities   (whether   fodhaka,   Sodhana    or
Sodhya) indicates this form of Siva in Siva-Drsti.
   In the matter of purification, the succeeding state has to be
dissolved in the preceding.®
   “Leave both (fodhya) dharma and adharma, both truth and false-
hood (i.e. dissolve them in the true Self). Having left both truth
and falsehood (i.e. the fodhya), leave also that by which you leave
everything (i.e. give up also the mantra in the form of sodhana by
which you give up the Sodhya).
   This is the eminence of Trika Sastra, this is the glory that even
the purifier,® and the means of purification has to be purified.
All the three (ie. sodhaka, fodhana, and fodhya, in other words,
pasyanti, madhyama and vaikhari) exist simultaneously in pard (the
supreme vdk).
   Man speaks something through vaikhari, ideates through ma-
dhyama, experiences some indeterminate state through paspanti
and experiences inwardly some truth through para.
   It is Lord Bhairava only who abides completely full in all the
three states (tdvati). By closely investigating the traditional
teaching of the primordial experience, it will be established that
it is the met-empirical     consciousness of oneself.     This is a fact
that cannot be controverted.
   This is not simultaneous in a temporal sense. Owing to its
being subtle, it is not marked. So there is only a presumption of
simultaneity. Just as the piercing of a hundred flowers and buds
together appears to be simultaneous, so is that. If it be said that
simultaneous means occuring at the same time, what does it
really mean? According to the principle enunciated by me earlier,
viz. that time is only a thought-construct, what is time in the
introverted consciousness? The essence of time consists in the
experience of successive appearance and disappearance of objects.
Its essence consists in the non-presence of the awareness of intro-
verted consciousness which is time-less.
  The objection that though time is experienced in juxtaposition
with successive objects (as praéna-apana, change of season etc.), it
can overpower the non-temporal consciousness, is not valid, for
the successive object is in itself known through the underlying
consciousness which is not successive. Otherwise how could time
itself be known as a distinct object? The rise of the fallacy of
                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana
158
                                        ation of a thing from the
mutual dependence is due to the separ
                                         in one’s own self. Every
light of consciousness which’ is found
                                        back upon indeterminate
thing that can be uttered has to fall
                                       same fallacy of mutual de-
consciousness (nirvikalpa jfiana). The
                                         ing of many flowers and.
pendence lies in saying that the pierc
                                        . A whole atom does not
twigs together means piercing the many
                                  last one with the others, for
come about by the addition of the
                                                on).
this phenomenon is not a karma (operati
                  conn exio n cann ot be estab lishe d in the absence of
   A congruous
                                                 Investigation of con-
indeterminate knowledge (jfdnabhavena).
                                                is a break in memory
gruous connexion is not possible if there
                                            indeterminate knowledge
 (smytibhede), and memory depends on
                                                 connexion cannot be
 (jfiana). So investigation of congruous
                                        ledge.         I have examined
 carried out without indeterminate know
                                                on ‘Padarthapravesa-
 this problem in detail in my commentary
                                            fruitless tangle of words
 nirnaya’.!? So what is the use of this
                                               in the teaching of the
 which only ends in creating an obstacle
  subject under discussion?
                                                  pardpara also acts as
     Thus the goddess pard abides as purifier;
                                              etc. with whose aid, the
  purifier where abide the powers ‘aghora’¥*
                                              become Mantramahesa
  spiritual practitioners Vijnanakalas have
                                                  goddesses, the minor
  etc. Through the grace of Brahmi and other
                                      Brahma, Visnu and others.
  spiritual practitioners have become                      ugh
                                           rava who being, thro
  Indeed, it is the Lord, venerable Bhai
                                            whole in Himself, infuses
  the multitude of His powers, perfect and
                                             Brahma and others and
  by His autonomy, His own power into
                                            own spheres). What else
  thus makes them autonomous (in their
  can there be other than this?
                                                   , viz., that even the
        Thus   this is another excellence of Trika
                                            been rightly said, ““Trika is
      purifier has to be purified.!* It has
                                              the triadic nature of puri-
      higher even than Kula”. So, owing to
                                                 to be purified Trika is
      fier, agency of purification and the one
      invariable.
                                           of my hymns: ‘‘When there
        ‘As has been said by myself in one                        sus
                                               (trika)” there is no regres
      are three aspects of the group of three
                                                this teaching is of a piece
      ad infinitum in this, for every thing of
                                                        “Leave that Sodhana
      with the highest consciousness of the Lord.
                                                      fodhya (the one to be
      also through which you do away with the                              the
                           should consider   it in this way.   Finally,
      purified )”——one
Abhinavagupta                                                       159

purifier has also to be purified, inasmuch as the idea of difference
that arises in him is also a bondage. Purification is also in its
highest sense that fire which is non-different from the conscious-
ness of Bhairava which is proficient in burning away all impurities.
When every thing viz., that which is to be purified (fodhya), the
means of purification (fodhana), and the purifier (fodhaka) enters
into Bhairava, then it is perfection itself. As will be said, ‘“Thus
who truly knows etc.”? (Verse 25 of this book).

                                Nores
   1. In the para or supreme state, she is the repository of varna
or letters, in the pardpara or supreme-cum-non-supreme state (i.e.
siiksma state) she is the repository of mantra or words; in the apara
state (sthila state) she is the repository of pada or sentences.
Malini is symbolic of pardpara state, but even in pardpara state,
she appears as para, parapara (siiksma), and apara (sthila).
   2. The sense is that the gross form is fodhya (to be purified),
and the subtle form is the fodhaka or purifier; the subtle form is
Sodhya (to be purified) and the para (Supreme) form is its fodhaka
 (purifier). This chain goes on until anuttara or the Highest.
   3. In the womb of parasakti lies paravak, in pardvak lies pasyanti,
in pasyanti lies madhyama and in madhyama     lies   vaikhari. Consequ-
ently vaikhari is inherent in pardsamvit.
   4. The triad refers to Siva-Sakti-nara, varna-mantra-pada, para=
parapara-apara, Sodhaka-Sodhana-Sodhya.
   5. In this context, pardpara goddess signifies the original bimba
pasyanti (or pati-Sakti) and pasu-Sakti signifies the pratibimba or re-
flected pasyanti-vak. The first is without ksobha, the second is with
ksobha.
   6. The triad consists of the sun, fire and moon. The sun or
siirya symbolizes pramana or knowledge, the fire or agni symbolizes
pramata or the experient or subject; the moon or soma symbolizes
prameya or object. Again sirya or the sun is the symbol of jidna
or knowledge; agni or fire is the symbol of iccha or will, and soma
or the moon     is the symbol of kripa or activity.    Bhairava is the
unified form of all these triads.
   7. Anuttara has three eyes, agni (fire), soma (moon), and sarya
 (sun). These three have 10-+16+412, i.e. 38 kala@s or phases.
37 kalds being vedya or objects are not svabhdva or essential nature
160                                                Pard-Trifikd-Vivarana

of Anuttara. The 38th kald is the Bhairava-svabhava or the essential
nature of anutiara.
   8. Sodhya or that which has to be purified has to be dissolved
in godhana or the means of purification and fodhana has to be dis-
solved in fodhaka or the purifier.
      9. This means that finally both fodhya and fodhana have to be
given up. Be established in your real Self, and then nothing else
would be required.
      10.   What Abhinavagupta is trying to express means that what
is a ‘whole’, an integral fact is above time.     It is not constituted by
the sum of the parts what becomes a ‘whole’ by the addition of
parts, it is the result of karma or operation which is temporal,
 but a real whole or paripirna is not the result of karma or operation.
 It is an expression of kriyd Sakti which is beyond time.
      11. This book is untraced.
      12. ‘Aghora’ are those Saktis who help the spiritual practi-
 tioners in the realization of Siva-nature.
      13. This sodhaka or purifier refers to such Sodhakas as Mantra-
 maheévara etc. The idea in the purifier, viz. ‘I am purifier’ is
 also a stain. This has also to be given up.
                                   Text

    From tat parasamvidekamaya etc. on p. 57, |. 22 up to hydayam-
 gamikrtam on p. 63, 1.6.

                                ‘TRANSLATION
       Thus Pardpara divinities being identical with the highest con-
  sciousness are omnifarious       (sarvdtmaka)   and   therefore include
  infinite variety of secular and sacred words and their referents,
  as has been said in Malinivijaya III, verses 59-60.
     The very powerful yoginis which are like limbs of pardpara
  mantra’ are eight.? They include successively five, six, five, four,
  and two, three letters twice.? They are constituted by the nomi-
  natives of address amounting to seven, eleven, one and one-and-
  half letter twice, i.e. twenty-two letters.*
     Thus this relation of the purifier and the one to be purified is
  constituted by the inclusion of endless pre-concerted signs (sam-
  keta) pertaining to mantras already composed or to be composed
  in future.     This does not amount to regressus ad infinitum     (anavas-
Abhinavagupta                                                               161
tha), nor to irrelevance (ati prasanga) nor to too wide pervasion
 (ativyapti).    Nor can it be said that a conventional sign cannot
indicate spiritual knowledge.          This is accepted.      This being the
Position, we are now pursuing the topic under discussion.
   The syntactical connexion of the words in the fifth verse indi-
cates that at first there are ‘a’ and other vowels (upto au). At
their end, through the connexion of kriyaSakti             (kalayogena) occur
what are known as soma (moon) and sarya (sun). By the word
‘tat’ in the phrase ‘tadantah’ is to be understood ‘akula’ i.e. anuttara
or Bhairava referred to in a previous verse. Therefore ‘akula’
is that which includes within itself the effectuating power           (kalana),
for the kulasakti (the cosmic creative power) inheres in it.’ It
is the vimarfasakti (the energy of the creative I-consciousness
                                                                   )
that is the effectuating power (kalanatmika). Without this vimarga-
Sakti even akula which transcends the fourth state, is mere
                                                            noth-
ing, for it is only inherent in the deep sleep state.
                                                       The states
that      come    immediately     after turya     (i.e. Susupti,   svapna   and
Jagrat)    are also similar     to turya   (ie.   they are also mere noth-
ing without vimarsa Sakti). Vimarsasakti           abides as the     supreme,
divine, unsurpassed (niratifaya), autonomous Sakti of venerabl
                                                                 e
Bhairava, full (pina), emaciated (krSa), both full and
                                                        emaciated,
neither full nor emaciated.”
   In the vimarfafakti of Bhairava, this is no stain either
                                                            of the
appearance of succession or simultaneity. According to the
precept referred to previously, viz., that time is only a thought
construct, succession should be deliberated upon               (kramo vicarani-
yah) in accordance with the fact that the very nature of the
                                                             mas-
sive creative Self-consciousness (vimarSaikaghana) of the supreme
 (parabhattarika) gives rise to infinite, future absorption and
                                                                 emana-
tion and that there is an appearance of succession
                                                               and non-
succession (kramakramdvabhasak) in that nature of
                                                             the Divine
which is above both succession and simultaneity (kramaya
                                                               ugapadya-
sahisnu). As has been said: ‘Lord Bhairava is autonom
                                                              ous, per-
fect, whole and omnipresent. That which does not appear in the
mirror of His Self does not exist.”           Non-succession can have its
existence only in consciousness in which there is an appeara
                                                             nce
of both succession and non-succession (akramasya
                                                        tatpirvakena
Samwidyeva bhdvat) so succession has to be accepted for
                                                         the sake of
exposition. Since succession has its ratio essendi in consciou
                                                               sness
162                                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                             succession
only, all this mental grip in the form of speech is only
                                                            grip which
 (sarva evdyam vagriipah pardmarsah kramika eva). That
                         ousnes s is non-su ccessi ve only.   Thus the
is of the inner consci
                                                              i.e.
divine supreme Sakti (pardbhattarika) is always of this kind,
                                                                           in accor-
multifarious and variegated (vicitra). Therefore it is
                          i.e. in  order    to  indica  te     succes sion   in non-
dance with succession
                                s   have    formed      ‘at’   by  placin g   ‘t’ after
succession, the grammarian
a
                                                                                       of
    Thus the autonomy (svdtantryasakti) of the Lord in the form
Will in which the manife       statio n    of  existen ts     has   not  yet   started
                                                                                      an
  (anumilita-bhava-vikds@) and the essence of which consists in
                         ciousn  ess   is  design  ated      ‘a’.  That    svdtant rya-
 inner massive I-cons
                                                                                    ra)
 fakti (power of autonomy ) abiding inthe Transcendent (anutta
 is designated Will in which       that   which    is to   be   willed  has   not    yet
                                                            ousness of
become prominent. This will is only a state of consci
                          (anutta ra-satt a). The   highest    Lord is
the transcendental being
                               nature.     He is akulasa kti.  Thoug h
always conscious of His own
 in being aware of His form, He makes use of kulafakti, yet there
 isa distinction in the concept of akulafakti from that of kulasakti.
 ‘Akula is the creative I-consciousness (vimarfasatta) of Bhairava.®
 That svatantryasakti expanding further is known as ‘@ which
                                                                        g
 denotes dnandagakti. Perfect icché or Will is ‘i’. Iecha itself wishin
                                               or  knowle dge    throug h
  to perceive (lit. to seize) the future jfdna
  its autonomy becomes ‘i’ which denotes ifand or sovereignty.
 U is the unmesa or appearance of jfdnasakti which is the source of
  all objective existents desired to be known.
     When unmesa or the arising of knowledge (unmisatta) has, in
  consciousness, the desire for further objectivity (unmimisatdyam),
                                                                   tta
  the transcendental consciousness becomes diminished (dnibhi
  anuttarasamvit) owing to contraction (sarkoc avasena ) which is due
  to all forms lying within or tending to assume subsequent objec-
  tivity (antahprana sarvasvariipa-unmesottaraika-riipairapi) and to the
  multitude of existents which lie within as nearly objective, in
  which the aspect of difference is almost indistinct and which are
                                                                     ta-
  tending to appear objectively (antahkarana-vedyadesiya-asphu
  prayabhedamSa-bhasananabhavarasibhih) . This reduced consciousness,
   because of its retention within itself of all objectivity (sarvabha-
  ——            ee
      *According to Panini’s Sutra ‘taparastatakdlasya’,
Abhinavagupta                                                            163

vagarbhikdrena), is like the udder of the wish-fulfilling celestial cow,
viz. the pardsakti (ananga-dhainaviriipa-paradevatayah-adhorapa), and
upholding the multitude of entire objectivity, becomes manifest
 (sphuta), wide-spreading jftana Sakti, i.e. “a.
   These viz., i, i, and u, @ are the two powers (viz., icchafakti and
jfianafakti) of Lord Bhairava. The first (viz. i, i) being the
 completely full nature of Bhairava is perfect and being non-
 different from the Somagakti abides as soma in accordance with
 the etymological interpretation ‘one who abides with Umd, (uma
saha)   i.e. transcendental     iccha or Will    is soma. Thus    svdtantrya
Sakti (the power of autonomy) in the form of icchd (will) resting
in its own dnanda (bliss) is designated mahdsrsti (transcendental
emanation).!° As will be said (in verse 29 in this book): “The
heroic sddhaka (virah) should thereafter worship srsfi (emana-
 tion).”” The second one (viz., u, 2 or unmesga, tinatdmayi jfidnaSsakti)
becomes prominent by being engaged in the separation (recana)
i.e. external expansion of the multitude of objects which abide
identically with the icchdfakti of Bhairava and by being engaged
in the anupravefa i.e. in withdrawing them and effecting their
 entrance in andsrita Siva.
    By the separation of the multitude of objects, she becomes
 emaciated, as she is engaged in the manifestation and expansion
 of objects. Thus she is like the sun. Being identical with the
 essential nature of Bhairava, by the desire to withdraw the crea-
tive    consciousness   into   andSrita   Siva   (kulasamvitsamyihisatmika),
 she is known as jfidnafakti who has the tremendous power of with-
 drawal. Again, reviewing her former expanding form, she, within
 herself/ looks for the previous state of her own transcendental
 consciousness, symbolized by moon (soma) with the disposition
 of the retention of the successive form of the sun and the moon,
 In an inverse state she looks for the aspect of the moon, the sym-
 bol of manifestation (srsfi) and the sun, the symbol of withdrawal
  (samhara).
   In this changing state, now wishing samhdra and now wishing
 srsti, jfiana and icchéd sometimes tending towards expansion and
 sometimes not, one should not attribute the fallacy of non-finality
  (na ca atranavastha iti vdcyam), for the expansion (prasara) and
 non-expansion (aprasara) go on changing their position. Some~-
 times there may be expansion (prasara) of icchd (will), and non-
164                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                            may be
expansion (aprasara) of jfidna, and sometimes there
                                     dge)    and  non-ex pansio n of
expansion (prasara) of jnana (knowle
                                          of  externa l appeara nce.
iccha. Desist from wandering in the error
Set out on the path of subtle reflection.
                                                                   of
   When there is the knowledge of the round shape, colour etc.
a jar, at that very time, the self-shining indeter minate knowle dge
 (svayampratham jitanam) i.e. nirvikalpaka knowledge mingled with
the knowledge       of the object, viz., the jar or savikalpaka jitdna
 (determinate knowledge) also displays itself. In the knowledge
of the jar, that is also communicated (samvedya) which displays
the initial, subtle appearance         of the variegated form of the jar
                                                              the
(tadrapakarburibhdve ghatadi) the origin of the appearance is
                                                    viz.,   the   nirvikalpa    or
same      (ekabhdvodgamasya prathamanatvat)
indeterminate consciousness, there being the complete absence
of any other agency       (anyatah kutascit abhavasya).
      It is the autonomy of this indeterminate consciousness only
which desirous of projecting objects is known as iSand or soverei-
                                                            nce.
gnty. This is known by the testimony of one’s own experie

Eternal Pervasion of Anuttara and Ananda in Iccha and Jiana

                                                                  is not
   That indeterminate consciousness (nirvikalpa) which
                           of objects,  which  is   massive  conscio us-
yet limited by the cluster
                           whose   very  being   is  autono my   is  per-
ness, perfect and whole,
                                                             mass
fectly autonomous only because of its having within itself a
of beatitude. Therefore the presenc e of ananda (beatit ude)  in it
cannot be gainsaid.        Anuttara(a), the unsurpassable, the possessor
of Sakti or creative energy, who is beyond all appellation or des-
                                                                               who
cription, whose essence is supreme amazement of beatitude,
is venerable Bhairava, of course, shines everywhere (i.e. both as
                                                                          as the
 Siva from ‘a’ to ‘ah’ and as jagat (world from ka to ksa)
 autonomous active agent.
     If one reflects on the essential nature of anuttara (a) dnanda
                                                                                i.e.
  (a), (aksubdha or calm) iccha (i), (ksubdha or perturbed icch@)
                           calm  jrana),   unmesa   (w)   (ksubdha    or  pertur-
 igana (i), (aksubdha or
 bed jfidna), anata (7)—one will find that the above six phonemes
                                                                                 ‘a’
 rest in the indivisible plane of consciousness i.e. anultara or
 phase as their base   and  that  these  diviniti es,   the   (six)   energie s   of
 consciousness (though      appeari ng    separat  ely)     are   not    separa   te
Abhinavagupta                                                            165
from their basic essential nature (ananyd eva sva-samvidah),  for
being perfect, there is no difference in their nature.!*
   These Saktis appear to be different because of the objects of
experience with which they are associated (samvedyopadesca).
This difference lasts only so long as the objects of experience are
due to the physical limitation (tasyd-upddhih dehasamvedya matra-
tayaiva bhavat). Therefore in Tantrasara, it has been said that
reality has to be understood through the example of the shadow
of the best part of the body i.e. the head. ‘Just as (when) one
tries to jump over the shadow of one’s head with one’s foot, the
head will never be at the place of one’s foot, so (also) is it with
baindavi kald.”’* Thus this group of six faktis (from ‘a’ to ‘a)
which has been determined covers the powers upto jfdna.
   Now we are going to deliberate on kriyasakti, the power of
activity that has begun to move forward. Iccha (will) and jnana
themselves      by   heterogenous    intermixture’,    by   admitting    the
succession of the preceding and following which are full of mar-
vellous strangeness are termed kriyd. Impetuous eagerness is the
essence    of Kriya.   Whatever     intermixture   occurs   owing   to   the
expansion of kriydfakti with something else, is due to the fact that
anuttara   (the Absolute)     enters suddenly      in a sphere   of reality
which is beyond mental grasp (andmarfaniya), and void (i.e. the
state of andsrita Siva) just as a frog by a simple leap reaches ano-
ther place from one place. The consciousness that is anuttara (a)
and dnanda (a) does not expand in the first four spheres (i.e. 7,
F;, hj D) (na prasarati), of kriyafakti, for that is an unnamable
(andkhyd) state, not being the object of name and form (ndma-
riipa).
   Anuttara and dnanda being the final support of everything
(paryantabhittiriipatvat) and after having been the foundation of the
entire activity in every kind of knowledge cease (from expansion),
aksubdha iccha ends in ksubdha ifana.       So far as its relation to im-
petuous eagerness is concerned, it is capable of expanding both
in its own field and also in anutlara and dnanda because of its capa-
city for succession.
   Then that kriyaSakti full of impetuous eagerness, penetrating
into its own form (denoted by r, 7, /,/) which is void (i.e. devoid
ofall manifestation ), immerges at first into a luminous form which
is tejas or fire (denoted by the experience of 7). Thus arise y and
166                                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                       energy of tc-
7. How can it be denied that in these letters, the
                                                     ated   with the
chasakti(i) and that of ifandsakti (i) are associ
                                                    7   This  is what
sound of ‘R’ whose essential nature is luminosity.’
                                                        ty   found  in
the glorious Puspadanta says: “The tejas and mobili
1,7 are established with the general sound of spot
                                                    the                       state of
   When iccha-ifand desires to enter the void, i.e.
                                                              first to
andérita Siva who is free of any manifestation, they have
                                                          the  stages
pass through the stages of luminosity (bhdsvararipa) i.e.
                                                           follow  ing
ry and 7 united with the r sound. After this, icchd-ifand
                                                indicates immo-
the sound ‘/’ assumes the form of / and ] which
                                                                  attva)1°
bility, the essential nature of the earth (parthivariipa-sat
                                                           the  states     of
Finally, it is the energy of ifand, which passing over all
                                                                 plutod)   ,
objectivity, jumping over the longer state (dirghataram
                                                                    to   the
after reaching the immobile state of vacuity i.e. /, attains
                                                                         ple
prolated state (plutatvameti) i.e. lin accordance with the princi
                                                                the     long
of Sanskrit grammar that phoneme ‘/ does not have
                                                                   is only
form (dirgha) of the phonemes ‘a’ etc., the prolated state
                                                             rule    stated
 a longer form of the long one. In accordance with the
                                                                      tely.
 already,}® one should not search for the long form of / separa
                                                                t     of its
 Enough of this. This group of four letters on accoun
                                                                      to   be
 penetration into vacuity is like burnt seed and is said
                                                                 the    state
 eunuch. There is in them no total absence of germ ie.
                                                                     womb.
 of a vowel. Nothing can exist which is neither germ nor
                                                                       other
 which symbolize Siva and Sakti, for the existence of any
                                                                     (Mali-
  thing has not been mentioned either in Parva Sastra
  nivijaya) or any other Sastra.             Even in worldly pleasures, there
                                                                                 of four
  is felicity in repose of this kind. That is why this group
  letters is said to be the germ of immortality.
                                                                                  dnanda
       When iccha (i) and ifand (i) penetrate the aspect of
                                                                                    never
  and the sphere of anutiara which are anterior to all and
                                                                              ra) or 4@
  lapse from their essential nature, we have ‘a’ (anutta
                                                                                with the
    (ananda) plus i or i as e as is said, the letter ‘a’ combined
   letter ‘i’ becomes ¢.
                                                                                       ‘i’)
        In the inverse state (i.e., if ‘a’ and ‘a’ come after ‘“? and
                              of ‘a’ and     ‘@   there      will    arise  a   differ ent
   with the penetration
                                                                                   a long
   letter. If ‘i? or ‘i’ penetrates dnanda i.e. ‘a’, there will be
                              vowel  ‘e’.  If‘?    or  ‘i’  penetr    ates  anuttar  a i.e.
   state (sphufatd) of the
                         a short state    (sitksm ata)     of  ‘e’.*2   Simila rly,   glo-
    ‘a’, there will be
   rious Patafijali says:
Abhinavagupta                                                           167

  “Among those who recite the Vedas             (chandogdndm) the follo-
wers of the sub-branch satyamugri of the branch Ranayaniya enun-
ciate also as half i.e. short e and short 0” [Here satya is symbolic
of ‘short’ and ugri is symbolic of long].
   Among the common folk also, this practice is quite manifest.
In the Saivasastras also (pdramesvaresu api) the short aspect of ‘e”
and ‘o’ in comparison to ‘ai’ and ‘au’ which is noticed in the
application of argavaktra i.e. in connexion with limbs or mouth,
should be considered in this light viz., ‘e’ becomes ‘aya’ in place
of long ai and ‘o’ becomes ‘ava’ in place of long au. Thus the posi-
tion with regard to the vowels ‘e’ and ‘o’ is settled.
  Now when ‘e’ combines with ‘a’ and ‘a’ (tatha Sabalibhiitam), it
becomes ‘ai’. Similarly in the case of unmesa i.e., ‘u’, when it
coalesces with ‘a’ or ‘a’ we have ‘0’. So also when a coalesces with
‘a’ or ‘@ we have ‘o’. When ‘o’ combines with a or ‘a’ we have
‘au’ [e is the fifth stage of kriyasakti, ai is the sixth, o is the seventh,
and au is the eighth and final stage of kriyasakti ].
   Though unmesai.e., jfanasakti expanding can penetrate into the
void, yet it can do so only when it enters at first iccha and ifana
(asya ifanecchatmakobhayariipa pravesa eva finyata). It is only thus
that there can be an entry in the void.         In the case of iccha and
ifand, there is no question of change of their essential nature.™*
So, their position remains as before. Thus iccha and jftdna (i.e.
i, i, u,@) by entering the essential nature of anuttara (i.e. a) be-
come developed, i.e. reach au which is symbolic of full develop-
ment of kriyafakti. After this, they abandon the variation of those
Saktis, and mounting to the state of non-difference, get immersed
in the remaining form of a bindu i.e. am, a dot which represents
awareness (vedand) of the very nature of the Reality that is pure
consciousness (cinmayapurusatativasatattva), and get immersed in
the anuttara state. So they get dissolved in the state of anuttara.
The vibration of kriyafakti ends in au. The vibration of iccha
and jfidna comes to a stop here, for icchd and jfidna are included in
kriyasakti.8 In the Trika Sastra, the nature of au is determin-
ed asatrident™ in the enunciation of topics, in the following
verse:
   “The venerable para vak pervades the three spheres (anda)
viz. prthivi, prakrti and maya with the letter ‘sa’, with the trident
168                                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                           With ‘ah’
i.e., ‘au’, she pervades the fourth (i.e. the Sakti anda).
she pervades that     which  transc ends all.”*5*
                                                           awareness
      The dot (bindu) represents the remainder, viz., pure
                                                      ing of
only. [The twofold nature of expansion and the beginn
                                                   Lord emana-
Saktaprasara or Sakta expansion]. When the highest
                                                         ess in
tes within Himself the entire cosmos as only pure awaren
                                                        inantly
order to express unity (ekagamandya) at first as predom
                                                            ataya ) , and
the possessor of Sakti, i.e., as Siva (Saktimat-rapapradhan
                                                                  with the
next as predominantly Sakti (Sakta-visargapradhanataya )
                                                               and kriyd).
creative means of that (tannirmdnena i.e. icchd, jiana
The visarga ‘ah’ is   symbol ic®   of  sakta visarga.
                                                                   (etdvati )
   In respect of fully developed kriyaSakti of such an extent
                                                              of icchd, the
upto the end of au, it is the aspects of the pulsation
                           ,   and    kriya, the  final appear ing first as
initial, jana, the middle
                                                                       n of mani-
 the desire to manifest (icchd), then the comprehensio
                           finally    the    actual    manife   statio   n (kriya)
 festation (jfdna) and
                               nature     of   venera ble      Bhaira   va     or the
 that constitute the very
                       ra)   who    has  penetr   ated    into   all  these.    These
 unsurpassable (anutta
                           by yogis    who    are  engage   d   in   subtles t  medi-
 are clearly experienced
                         bed     by    Svacch   anda      and     other    practic  al
  tation and are descri
                                ing     tcchd,   prasara na,    connot   ing    jidna,
  Sastras as prabuddha connot
                                                                 been said in the
  and dvarana, connoting kriya.*” Therefore, it has
                                                             e Self
  seventh chapter in Sivadrsti: “By meditating on the suprem
                                                           ), fullfledged
  (pardtmani ) who is cit (sunirbharatara), dnanda (ahldda
                                   ipini)  and  in  whom    all the three
  ‘a’ ice. anuttara (bharitakdra-r
                                    kriyd) are fused  (one   acquires the
  faktis (viz. iccha, jana and
                                                                  acquired the
  nature of Siva).” Again, “It is His Sakti that has
                             as   a mass   of  clay   acquire s  the  form of a
  form of the cosmos, just
                                                                 that ‘There is
  jar.” (SD, VII, 28). And finally having described
                                                               nce in Him on
   only one principle (viz. Siva), there is no differe
                                                             spheres of prthivi,
   account of the number of phases (like the four
                                three  Saktis,   five states  etc.), it declares
  prakrti, maya and Sakti or,
      ————
         *Two points in this verse are noteworthy:
                                                                to transcendent state ( visvoltirna-
         1. The earlier aspect of kriya with iccha refers
                           aspect   refers  to  immane  nce    of   Siva (visvamayatd) .
      mayata): the latter
                                                       which    ‘sa’   represents the three spheres
         2. Sa+-au+ :make the mantra sauh of
                          and  mdyd    i.e. the  31 tattoas, au   represen  ts Suddhavidya, ivara and
      of prthivi, prakrti
                                                           and     Sakti,    Thus sau} represents the
      sadagiva and the visarga represents Siva
      entire divine manife  statio n.
Abhinavagupta                                                          169

that it is Siva only who having assumed plentitude (bharitata ) of
wondrous delight the effect of pulsating energy which is only an
expression of the expansion          of autonomy   that is infinite and
wonderful, has acquired the aspect of Bhairava.
   In Siva-Dysti, this is the position which has been described in
the first chapter which lays down the tradition of Trika: ‘‘When
anuttara abides only in the experience of its consciousness and bliss
 (cidénanda), at that time its iccha-Sakti (as known of the form of
 abhyupagama), jndnagakti (of the form of prakaSa or light) also
 abide in the same consciousness and bliss (cidénanda). Thus Siva
 abides with perfect fusion of the three subtle Saktis (viz. iccha,
jitana and kriya) in Himself. That supreme Reality is then the
highest cit (consciousness) and dnanda (beatitude) without any
 differentiation (nirvibhdgah).” (SD I, 3-4)
    Referring to the knowledge of an object, such as a jar, the same
 text says:
  “Even at the time of the knowledge of an object, such as a
jar etc. (these five aspects viz. icchd, jidna,    kriyd, Gnanda and    cit
are present) ; ‘one knows the jar’—this indicates kriyaSakti, ‘knows’
this fact indicates jfdna-fakti and if one does not have icchd,
knowledge would not be possible (lit., there would be destruction
of knowledge). When a thing has been known (i.e. after pramiti)
the absence of inclination towards that thing (aunmukhyabhava)
indicates his abstention   (nivytti) from that thing, but this is
not possible without the experience of dnanda (nirvytti); that is
why one does not advance towards that which one dislikes;
and knowledge is not possible without cit.” (SD I, 24-25).
  Similarly:
  “Because one desires, therefore one proceeds to know            or do.
Activity takes place only with desire. Of this (i.e., of activity
with desire), two aspects have to be assumed, viz. the earlier and
the later     (SD I, 19). The earlier consists of the acquisition of
dnanda      (beatitude)   accruing   from   accomplishing   a deed;    the
later consists of its inclination towards manifestation which is its
expansion.      Siva does not at all become gross by this inclination
towards manifestation”        (SD I, 17).
   This treasure of Agama has been accepted on account of its
reasonableness as one’s very life.
170                                             Pard-Trisikd-Vivarana

                                Notes

      1. The pardpara mantra   consists of 19 padas. They      are the
following:
1. Om 2. aghore 3. hrih 4. paramaghore 5. hum 6. ghorariipe 7. hah
8. ghoramukhi 9. bhime 10. bhisane 11. vama 12. piba 13. he 14. ru ru
15. ra ra 16. phat 17. hum 18. hah 19. phat
   In this mantra, ru ru ra ra phat hum hah phat pertain to Siva, so
we are not concerned with these in this context. The remaining
padas pertain to Sakti with which we are concerned here.
   2. The eight yoginis like limbs of pardpara mantra are the follow-
ing:
   1. Brahmi 2. Maheégvari 3. Kaumari 4. Vaisnavi             5. Varahi
6. Indrani 7. Camunda 8. Yogesvari.
   3. They include 30 letters as shown below:

           Divinities             Mantras               No. of letters

  1.       Brahmi                  Om aghore hyih              5
  2.       Mahesvari              Parama ghore hum             6
  3.       Kaumari                Ghora ripe hah               5
  4.       Vaisnavi               Ghoramukhe                   4
  5.       Varahi                 Bhime                         2
  6.       Indrani                Bhisane                       3
  7.       Camunda                Vama                          2
  8.       Yogesvari              piba he                       3
                                                     Total:   30

   4. The nominatives of address amounting to 22 letters are the
following:
         . Aghore
                                  foo




         . Paramaghore
NOOhON




         . Ghoraripe
         . Ghoramukhi
         . Bhime
                                  KON




         . Bhisane
         . He
Abhinavagupta                                                       171

   5. See the note on Soma and Siva on the verse 5 earlier.
   6. Akula-kula:   Akula is Bhairava,     the transcendental   energy;
kula is the Sakti that brings about manifestation. Akula contains
kula as ‘a’ contains all the other phonemes.
   7. Pirna-kySa-vimar$a-Sakti: the Divine Creative Energy is said
to be full or parpd because it is she who goes on projecting things
out of herself which indicates that she is perfectly full and rich.
She is said to be parnd from the point of view of systi or emanation.
   She is said to be ky§a or emaciated, because she reabsorbs all
that she has emanated which indicates that she is depleted and
must take back the manifested objects to make up her loss. She is
said to be kya from the point of view of samhara or withdrawal.
She is said to be both, tadubhayatd, because she both emanates and
withdraws.
    She is said to be none of these—tadubhaya-rahita—because in
herself, she transcends all these conditions, All the adjectives
which are applied to her only point to the limitations of human
speech. In reality, she is inexpressible in any human language.
    8. Icchd is different from icchaSakti.
    9. A is the state of sdmarasya (identity) of akula, anuttara and
kulafakti. This is known as ‘bhairavasaktimadvimarsasatta?
    10. There is triple sysfi: (i) that which is only transcendental
emanation at the level of pard vak or Supreme Verbum is mahd=
srstt. This is undifferentiated. (ii) When it is reflected in para-
para Sakti i.e., at the level of pasyanti and madhyamé it is known as
parapara srs{i. (iii) When it is fully differentiated in apard Sakti at
the level of vaikhari, it is known as apard srsti.
   11. Siyaripa: She is compared to the Sun, because the sun
projects his energy outwards.
   12. Soma here represents the vifvottirga or the transcendental
state and sirya or the sun represents the vifvamaya or the imma-
nent state. In an inverse state, soma or moon is the symbol of
manifestation and sirya or sun is the symbol of withdrawal.
   13, Just as ‘a’ pervades all the phonemes from ‘a’ to ‘@’, even
so these also rest in the anuttara ‘a’, So is the base both from the
point of view of expansion from @ to @ and contraction from @
to 4,
   14. On the basis of sarvdtmaka-bhava (each is the epitome ofall),
the other five are inherent in each.
                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana
172
                                                     to bindu. Bindu
   15. Baindavi kala: Baindavi means pertaining
                                            sents the  parah pramata,
or vindu which ordinarily means a dot repre
                                              for one   to catch the
the Highest Self. Just as it is impossible
                                             the shadow of the head
shadow of one’s head with one’s feet, for
                                               to know the knower by
always eludes them, even so it is impossible
                                          owe their own existence to
the various means of knowing, for these
                                            is meant to be said is
the knower. In this particular context what
                                            of the objects of iccha
that iccha Sakti cannot be grasped by means
                                                  s owe their very
 (desire) with which it is associated, for object
existence to icchd or desire.
                                               as p=r+i, F=r+4,
   16. Heterogenous intermixture is such
                                       u, au=a-+o. There is no
 j=14i, [= (+i, e=at+i, ai=ate, o=a+
                                             enous. Eight vowels
 intermixture from 4 to @as they are homog
                                       akti.
 fromy upto au are the field of kriyaf
                                                     of ‘r which to-
       17. In that void is experienced a faint sound             be-
                                          ‘? and with i of ifandSakti
 gether with ‘i? of icchafakti becomes
                                                   of tejas or fire.
 comes 7. Thus ‘’ is the seed letter (bija svara)
                                                   fire) is symbolic of
    18. R which is agnibija (the seed letter of
                                                      (the seed letter of
 heat and mobility and / which is prthivibija
                                                  s.
 earth) is symbolic of solidity and compactnes
                                             that the transcendental
       19. The reference to the rule implies
                                                 at first being averse
  anuttara-tattva prone to spreading externally
                                              state of vacuity known
  to external appearance suddenly enters a                           be
                                             the phoneme /, it may
  as the state of andsrita-Siva. In terms of
                                             of J, it comes to cessation
  said that transcending the long aspect
                                                   -
  in the pluta or prolated aspect of l.
                                               L, Lissaidtobe eunuch,
     20. This group of four letters ie. R, R,
                                              vowels nor purely conso-
  because these letters are neither purely
                                                just as a eunuch has a
  nants. They have a semblance of both,
                                                        are called eunuch
      semblance of both male and female. They
                                              any other letter, just as a
      also because they are unable to produce
                                                    called germless only
      eunuch cannot produce a child. They are
                                                      they are like burnt
      because having entered into the state of void,
                                                           Being vowels,
      seed unable to proceed into further expansion.
      they are not totally germless.
                                                         after ‘i’ and ‘i’,
        21, In the inverse state i.e. if ‘a’ and ‘@ come
                                                   d of ‘e’ according to
      and not before, there will be ‘ya’ instea
      Panini’s rule of sandhi—‘iko yanaci”’.
                                                       of classical Sanskrit,
         92. Though according to the grammar
Abhinavagupta                                                                    173

both ¢, ai and o are long, yet in the aspect of mantra in Saiva-
Sastra and the Vedas ‘e’ and ‘o’ are short also. So a+i or i=e
(short) and @=i or i=e (long). In the Trika, the short vowel
symbolizes Siva and the long one symbolizes the union of Siva-
Sakti.
   23. Iccha and ifand do not have any other element in them.
Unmesa or jfiana has the elements of both icché and jana in it.
      24, Au is called trifala or Silabija i.e. trident because all the
Saktis, iccha, jtana, and kriyd are present in it in the clearest form.
   25. The internal expansion of manifestation within anuttara
itself comes to a stop at au, for this letter indicates the termination
of kriydsakti within anuttara itself. After this, the expansion                    of
manifestation        is withdrawn       into   the unity of anuttara.      The   dot
 (bindu) in ‘am’ is symbolic of the dissolution of the inner mani-
festation in anuttara.
      This inner manifestation is the bimba or origin of its pratibimba
or reflection       in the   external     manifestation    in the       world.   The
inward manifestation is accomplished inwardly in anuttara itself
and     is known      as svardpa-srsti or the manifestation             within   the
inward nature itself.
   The vowels from ‘a’ to ‘aw’ represent the inner manifestation
within anuttara, and the vowel am represents the dissolution (sam-
hara) of the inner manifestation within anuttara itself and identi-
fication with ‘cinmaya-purusa-tattva’ i.e., with Sambhava-tattva.
      The developed form of icchd-Sakti is jfdna-Sakti, and the deve-
loped form of jfana-fakti is kriyd-Sakti.          So kriya-fakti includes both
iccha and jitana.
      Abhinavagupta says in Tantraloka III, Verse 111:
         uditayam kriyasaktau somasiiryagni dhamani                 /
         avibhagah prakaso yah sa binduh paramo hi nah //
      “When kriyaSakti is accomplished in the phases represented by
soma or icchd-Sakti, siirya or jfanasakti and agni or kriydsakti i.e. in
the     entire   svaripa-srsti   or   inner    manifestation   of anuttara,      the
experience at the bottom of all this that flashes forth is the dot
known as Siva-bindu (or vindu) i.e. that which is undivided light,
that which, in spite of all differentiation, does not change, remains
unaffected and does not deviate from its inherent oneness is
vindu     (the dot expressed by am=.)”
174                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                               truth that though
  26. The two dots of visarga (:) indicate the
                                                                dot, there
from the point of view of Sakti symbolized by the lower
                                       yet from   the   point   of  view of
is an expansion of an outer world,
                                      upper  dot,   the   entire   univer se
Siva or saktimat symbolized by the
rests in the I-consciousness of Siva.
                                                                 change in
   27. In manifesting the world, there is no vikéra or
                                                             he is not
Siva.     All manifestation is the outcome of his Sakti, but
                                                not believe in
changed in the gross physical world. Trika does
                    Its doctrine    is that of ‘svdtantryavada.   Siva    brings
parindmavada.
                                                  his svdtantrya
 about the manifestation of the world by means of
 or absolute autonomy         by which he effects all changes without
                                                       by the dot
 undergoing any change in himself. This is represented
 in am     (.).
                                       TExt
                                                                   a uktametat
   From sa esa paramesvaro visrjation p. 63, 1.6 upto pragev
 on p. 69, 1. 3.

              [The nature of Sakti-visarga and activity }
                                   TRANSLATION
                                                                    ) emae
    The Lord (always coupled with His emanatory Energy
                             energy   of  emana tion     (visarg asakti)   ex
 nates the universe. That
                                                        of view of     tattva)
 tends from the earth to ‘Sakti’ (from the point
 or from ‘ka’ to ‘ksa’ (from   the  point  of view   of   letter). This is
                                                           in the following
 declared as the ‘sixteenth kala’! (also as ama kala)
                                                            kalds, the
  verse:     ‘In the cinmaya purusa, i.e. Siva who is of 16
                                                       or ‘changeless
  16th kala is known as amrtakald (the immortal
                             oint neithe r of Samkh ya   nor of Veda-
  kala’). This is the standp
                                                     the supreme
  nta, but only of Saiva Sastra. The visargasakti of
      Lord is the seed of the highest beatitude.
        Thus ‘a’ and other letters (i.e. d, i, u,     rand !) having acquired
      compactness     (ghanata)    and assuming the form of Saktayoni or
                                                    nature.              All these,
      consonant do not deviate from their essential
                                                       which are how-
      by their transmission in consonants (yoni rapa)
                                       , are known as having acquired
      ever, their own essential nature
                                                     has been said, ‘‘O great
      the position of visarga i.e. expansion. As
                                          finally  reach  their state of repose
      goddess, that, where the vowels
                                       to be   the   face of the guru (guru-
      i.e., the consonants, is said
Abhinavagupta                                                              175

vaktra) or visarga pada, and the collective whole of the Saktis
 (Sakti-cakra).”?
   The condensation of ‘a’ itself makes the class ‘ka’, all of them
being guttural; the condensation of ‘i? makes the ‘ca’ class, all of
them being palatal. The condensation of ‘u’ gives rise to ‘pa’
class, all of them being labial.     The condensation of 7 brings about
the ‘fa’ class, all of them being cerebral. The condensation of ‘?
bring about the ‘ta’ class, all of them being dental, ‘ya’ and ‘fa’
go along with ‘ca’ class; ‘ra’ and ‘sa’ go along with ‘ta’ class being
cerebral. ‘La’ and ‘sa’ go along with ‘ta’ class, being dental.
‘Va’ issues from ‘ta’ and ‘pa’ class i.e., it is labio-dental. Even in
Vijfianakala who has either svdtantrya or Sakti, but lacks bodha or
awareness, or has merely bodha         (cinmatrasyapi) but not svdtantrya,
there is the kriyafakti (i.e., even his cinmatrata or bodha is a subtle
form of kriyaSakti). That compactness (ghanata) accruing at vis-
arga-pada, according to the mode as described earlier (uktanitya)
is produced by the group of six Saktis, viz., a, d, i, i, u, @; or anut-
tara, Gnanda, icchd, ifand, unmesa, and iinata. Thus the five classes
of cit, dnanda, iccha, jftdna, and kriya multiplied by six faktis (anut-
tara etc.) referred to above become thirty. With the addition of
the six referred to above,the total becomes thirty-six tativas.
   Thus Siva-bija ice. svara (vowel) becoming condensed through
its autonomy     and   abiding     in the Sakta-ripa in a Sakti form        as
kusuma    (blood) is called yoni i.e. a consonant.?          (By the combi-
nation of Siva-bija and Sakta-yoni, there is universal manifestation),
   That red sperm of Sakti or female principle according to the
principle referred to before, consisting of three angles viz., grahya
 (object), grahana (knowledge), grahaka (subject) when mingled
with the semen of Siva or male principle becomes the place of
procreation     (visargapada)    or external    expansion.    It is only    by
the meeting of both Siva and Sakti that there is the activity of
puspa or the female creative red sperm, i.e. in the female aspect,
it is known as yoni or female organ of generation because of its
fitness for mating by the Siva aspect or male. Therefore, that red
sperm (kusumam eva) itself being three-angled represents the yoni
or female organ of generation. At this stage, the triad of grahya


                                                                                 |
or prameya    (object), grahana or pramdna       (knowledge), grahaka or
pramata    (subject)   symbolizes     clearly   the three forms      of soma
 (moon), siya     (sun), agni    (fire), srsti, sthiti, samhara, ida, pingala,
                                                                                 |
176                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

susumna, dharma, adharma, and mixed form of the two i.e. dharma-
dharma. The triadic Sakti of the Supreme is known as Bhairavi.
The meeting point or union of Siva and Sakti now appears in the
form of a hexagonal (satkona) mudrd and being the spot and basis
of the generation of manifestation is designated as yoni or the
female organ of generation. (While both Siva and Sakti are
separately triadic, their union is hexagonal).®
   In the chapter on khandacakravicara in Kubjikamata, it is with
reference to this matter that it has been declared:          ‘There is
mahamaya above maya who is the very embodiment of bliss because
of her being of a triangular aspect.” Therefore, the union of Siva
and Sakti which is represented by semen (bia) and ovum (kusu-
ma) being fused into one compactness should be worshipped by
oneselfin the form of his Self. This is what has been advised in
Trikatantrasara:
   “The spiritual aspirant who experiences his identity with the
incipient unity of Siva-Sakti found in icchd-sakti and with their
compact unity found in jfdna-Sakti should worship the highest
triad of the union of the triangular aspect of Siva and the triangu-
lar aspect of Sakti.”
      Therefore,   though the condensation of the phonemes     becomes
distinct only in the vatkhari or gross aspect, yet it abides primarily
in the supreme verbum (paravak) which is all inclusive (sarvasarva-
tmaka).
   In that (i.e. in para), even the organs of speech (sthdna) such
as throat, lips and manner of articulation (karana) are all-inclu-
sive.    This is the special point to be noted.    Even   inwardly   one
mutters and envisions. This is a matter of distinct experience.
Their difference is due to the various organs of utterance, for
audition is the very life of the letters. Moreover, even a child,
when he is being taught the use of words, learns the names of
various objects by muttering the words within. Even while he
thinks in the opposite way or in an uncertain way, so long as he
uses his mind, he does know something. All understanding is
due to use of words. So letters which are produced by contrac-
tion of the throat (samvdra), expansion of the throat (vivdra),
which are unaspirated      (alpaprana) and which are aspirated
 (mahdprana) with the aid of breath and sound are present, ac-
cording to their appropriate nature, inwardly (in madhyama and
Abhinavagupta                                                        177

pasyanti,) as they are in vatkhari). Otherwise      (i.e., ifit were not
so) then on account of there being no difference in the letters
produced by the same organ of articulation, the powers of the
senses uttering the letters separately would disappear even in
vaikhari. Besides diversity of ideas like ‘I hear’ (in vatkhari) and
‘I heard’ (in madhyamd and pasyanti) ; ‘I see’ (in vaikhari) and ‘T
saw’ (in madhyama and pasyanti); ‘I ideate’ (in vaikhari) and ‘I
ideated’ (in madhyama and pagyanti) would otherwise be impos-
sible (i.e., if these diversities were not present in the inner states).
  So by this repeatedly thought-out reasoning, entering more and
more in the interior, cherish that consciousness which is a mass of
awareness and is all-inclusive,® and therefore the abode of guttural
and labial energies (also), and in which inheres that creative
I-consciousness, viz. aham which is the very quintessence of auto-
nomy, which is the venerable phoneme, the highest mantra, and
is (always) inherent within. If one were to object, ‘“‘in that undiff-
erentiated mass of consciousness, how can there be a division like:
this is the organ of utterance, this the articulation, this the letter
etc.?”” my reply would be: “that unbounded, absolute freedom
brings about in the supreme Self of every one different apprehen-
sions like ‘this is a jar’ (external object); ‘this is happiness’
 (internal object); ‘this is knowledge’ (pramana); ‘I am the kno-
wer’ (pramata or subject).” In this diversity of experiences what
and how much is the exertion??
   Therefore one and the same venerable supreme verbum (ekaiva
parabhattarika), being all inclusive, abides as the highest Lord in
all, whether stone, tree, animal, man, god, Rudra, pralayakala or
vyndnakala (kevali), Mantra, Mantresvara, Mantramahesvara
and others. Therefore, Mdtrké whose body consists of letters
 (and sounds) which reside in various stations as their very soul
either in indistinct (asphufa) or imperceptible (avyakia) way as
in madhyamé or in distinct (sphuta) or perceptible (wyakta) way
as in   vaikhari   is declared as the efficacious potency of mantra
 (mantravirya).
   Similarly it is said that the same note produced at different
places in different instruments like the vind, vipafci (a vind with
 nine strings), kacchapi (another vind with a tortoise-shaped sound-
 board), muraja (a kind of drum) is said to be belonging to the
 same register (ekasthana).®
                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana
178
                                                            svara) in diff-
   Similarly, the basic or the starting note (sthdyi
                               (mandr a),  middl  e   (madhy a) and upper
erent registers, such as bass
                             same.   Simila rly   the   same    phoneme is
 (tara) is said to be the
                                from   differ ent  organs .   For  instance,
produced in some creatures
                                                   and ‘ra’ are pro-
it is found that in crows, the sounds ‘ka’, ‘ta’
                            organs , such as stoma ch, anus, throat,
duced jointly by so many
                             (ka, ta, ra etc. of crows)         are indistinct,
palate. Though they
                                                 and a phoneme
they are all right in themselves, being phoneme,
                                                           n phone-
apart from Matrka is impossible. If it is said that certai
                                                 inct and meaning-
mes are separate from Matrka, and being indist
                                   they should not  be accepted, we
less, they are useless, therefore,
                                                       of an indi-
say that this is not correct. There is usefulness even
                                                   (a kind of drum)
stinct phoneme, such as the sound of a muraja
                             it is helpfu l in bringi ng about joy or
or of an ocean in as much as
                    other   utility is desired? In         Saiva    Sastra    also,
sorrow. What
                                chosen    as mantra whose          phonemes    are
 mostly   those have been
                                                                   in) ardhacan-
indistinct, for instance (indistinct sound of pranava
                                   essenc  e    of  a mantra .    It  is also said
 dra etc. are said to be the very
                                         ni   makes    only    a hissin  g sound.
 that the mantra at the stage of nirodhi
                                    cymba   l    etc.  which     strikes   the ear
 The (indistinct) sound of bell,
                                     ted     in   the  teachi   ng   about    ndda-
has also been (agreeably) indica
                                      i    Tantr   a:   “As   the   horse  neighs ,
yoga. Ithasbeensaidin Guhyayogin
                                            as the camel produces a
 as the tame ox bellows, as the lion roars,
                                                            by mutt-
 guttural sound, even so the powerful yoginis (baladhikah)
                                       draw   down  the  very  life of
 ering a mantra (of indistinct sound)
 pasus    (empirical beings).      This is the application of mahdmantra
                                                    which cannot
 which is used in drawing towards oneself even that
 be overpowered”. This is only an expedi ent.
                                                     ’.              Mahdmantras
      In fact, “It is the inner sound that is mantra
                                                     easily used
  which have distinct and meaningful phonemes can be
  both by you and us.
     Therefore, the indistinct        sound also is definitely of the form
                                                    ce is jar all the
  of phoneme, just as a jar placed even at a distan
                                             thoug  h produced in
  same. This is settled. That a phoneme,
  different places, through         the difference of prdna, like that of a
                                                         is also settled.
  bird or kettle-drum etc., is the same phoneme--this
                                                   “Ther   e can be a
  Therefore what the sage Patafijali says, viz.
                                                      is  fully realized
  knowledge of the sound of all beings to the yogi,”
                                                   is a   commi  ngling
  by me now. Otherwise how can that which
Abhinavagupta                                                    179

of word, object and idea (Sabdarthapratyayandém) by mutual im-
position (itaretarddhydso), and that acquisition of Supreme Genius
which can distinguish them in their minutest detail by means of a
combined operation (samyama) of dhérand (concentration), dhyana
 (meditation) and samadhi (entranced attention) on each of them
separately and in the knowledge of the cooing of birds etc. without
their distinct phoneme (asphufa varna)? When those indistinct
phonemes also (i.e. the asphuta or indistinct phonemes like those
of birds etc.) acquire the status of words which have perfectly
clear meaning (lit., whose meanings are really identical with
those words) like distinct phonemes (varpanamiva), then according
to the principle mentioned, the cooing of birds and even the
sounds of kettle drum etc. become full of meaning.     Then as the
cooing of birds has some meaning, even so the sound of drum may
be indicative of either conquest or defeat (in battle). It is from
that point of view only that the different Sitras of Siksa (the sci-
ence of proper articulation and pronunciation of words) etc.,
accordingto some ‘ha’ and     visarga are   to be pronounced   ‘from
the chest’, according to others, they are to be pronounced ‘from
the root of the teeth’, can have some sense, not at all other-
wise. This is the reason why on the basis of slight difference,
grammarians being in doubt about the different forms of pho-
nemes have increased the list of phonemes to sixty-four by con-
sidering the following as different phonemes:
   1. Fihvdmilliya and upadhmaniya from visarjaniya.
  2. The five yama aksaras: num, flum, num, num, mum as different
     from the five nasal phonemes sia, fia, na, na, ma though they
     are only varied forms of the latter.
   3. By taking the varied form of da, dha, ya, ra, la, va, ksa by
      means of a short form of articulation as different from those
     letters.

In this division of phonemes, there is the same difference between
r and r as between vowel and consonant. It has been said in
Trikaratnakula also: ‘“The Matrka whose variety has been deter-
mined by multiplying eight by eight (8 x8=64) alone should
be considered as kulacakra (i.e. Sakti cakra).1* That kulacakra per-
vades the entire universe. The difference of these 64 phonemes
has been determined in detail in the work ‘Matrkajfianabheda’.
180                                           Para-Trisika-Vivarana

Here   (i.e. in Trika), there is no fondness for that procedure for
integral wholeness or perfection is the essence of this system. So,
there is such method of the entrance into the supreme conscious-
ness everywhere. Whether in jiidnagakti (sankalpyamanah) or in
kriyasakti (kriyamanah), every object rests on the superb splendour
of the mantra of supreme verbum, viz. the pure, creative I-con-
sciousness (vimarsatma) which is one’s essential nature (svariipa-
bhata) and which is non-mdayiya (non-empirical) and unconven-
tional (asa#ketika). It is that state which is lauded by all the
schools of philosophy as indeterminate (nirvikalpa). That splen-
dour of the supreme mantra (paramantramahah) is present in earth
category etc. both in unmixed or mixed state in the form of vowels
(bija) and consonants   (pinda) in phonemes like ‘ka’ etc. Other-
wise there would have been no difference between the deter-
minate different pairs of knowledge, such as Meru-mountain
and Jujube fruit, water and fire, jar (an external experience) and
pleasure (an inner experience) and their indeterminate know-
ledge. Even determinate knowledge (vikalpa) which arises only
from the heedlessness   (of the indeterminate state) would have
followed the same path (i.e. in that also there would not have been
mutual distinction). On the contrary, it could not have been
able to make the distinction-less indeterminate state as the basis
of all distinctions. The fact is that the mantra (of I-consciousness
or paravak) which transcends all conventionality is taught as the
object of worship by the all-knowing teachers even when they
know that that mantra is the source of all the mutually distinctive
conventions. It is, indeed, in that non-conventional splendour of
the supreme verbum (vdzimahasi) i.e. into aham (1) that all em-
pirical (mayiya) conventional symbols so terminate that they i.e.,
the mayiya (empirical) symbols attain identity with that trans-
cendental, non-conventional mantra, viz., aham. The only signi-
fication of those empirical (mdyiya) conventional symbols con-
sists in the attainment of the experience of the essential nature of
the non-conventional, there is no other signification of these sym-
bols. By constant repetition when one enters the sphere of the
non-conventional, one recollects clearly that the consciousness
of the word ‘go’ (cow) attained in a remote past (or ina previous
life) and later, on the occasion of conventional use, the conscious-
ness attainable ofa visible cow—both merge ultimately in a higher
Abhinavagupta                                                               181

sphere of another kind of consciousness transcending conventiona-
lity and beyond the pale of maya. Even in a child, there is at
first, the predominance of only cit (pure, unconditioned consci-
ousness). Therefore, even in the present life after a previous one,
there exists in him a consciousness which transcends          conventiona-~
lity. Otherwise there would be no support for his conventionality
to stay. So it is on the basis of the non-conventional that there can
be the possibility of the comprehension of the conventional, not
otherwise. This is what was ascertained by venerable Utpala-
deva in his commentary on Iévara-pratyabhijiia.
   The means for entrance into the non-conventional                 state     is
described    in   the    following    words    by   revered   Kanthapada:
“Where one sees something else, hears something else, does
something else, talks something else, thinks something else, eats
something else--in all such conditions, there is the stance of the
non-conventional reality (i.e. it is the non-conventional that
controls all these functions). The attention is cast elsewhere,
the eye is directed elsewhere. That is how praya always proceeds
effortlessly.” (Sv. T. VII, 58).
   So, the conventional sign i.e., the determinate knowledge
(savikalpaka jfidna) pursuing its source terminates in the anuttara
or the transcendental state. That transcendental state whose very
nature is an eagerness always to exhibit that kind of multitudinous
variety, always goes on expanding from the point of view of mani-
festation (visarga).
  It is that impulsion to manifest that brings about expansion
upto ‘ha’   aspect.     Of   that, viz., of   that impulsion to   manifest
 (visargasya) there is the aspect of fakti-kundalini designated as half
of ‘ha’ (in Trika) which assuming the shape of a dot (bindu) that
is a means of identity with the essential nature of Siva, passes
back again into the anuttara (transcendental) state, and thus rests
in the essential nature.
   The consciousness symbolized by one phoneme, viz. ‘a’ i.e., the
anuttara or transcendental consciousness indeed by its very nature
transcends all concept of space, time and causality and which,
according to the previously stated principle, is wholly perfect,
resorts instantly to the stage of para visarga, i.e., the supreme
stage of manifestation.
   It is only after connexion         with the stage of para-visarga        i.e.
182                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

the supreme creative elan, that there is the stance of ananda,
iccha, ifand, unmesa, its expansion, i.e. dnatd or a, its diversity i.e.,
7, 7, 1, 1and the product of kripasakti viz. e, ai, 0, au.
  That supreme, energy of manifestation (para or §4mbhava visarga)
becomes      supreme-cum-non-supreme         energy   (pardpara)   which
expands because of its excessive plentitude and because of its
being inseparably connected with that supreme energy (svasatta-
ndntarikataya) and instantly becomes the aspect of ‘ha’ i.e., apara
visarga or external manifestation. It is the acquisition of the state
of ‘ha’, i.e. external manifestation that actually brings about the
existence of a network of innumerable categories symbolized by
‘ka’ etc. It is again this very ‘ha kala’ or external manifestation
which entering the bindu i.e., am of ‘aham’ terminates into the
anuttara state.
      Thus it is that supreme venerable Goddess, the supreme ver-
bum who is only one, non-dual, wholly integral and perfect and
who is present as samvedanasatté, i.e. as vimarSamayi-kriyaSakti or
conscious Creative Energy. There is no question of succession (of
space, time and form) in this act of manifestation. In the aspect of
manifestation, this is known as ‘aham’ (a-ha-m) or Siva-Sakti-nara;
inversely in the aspect of withdrawal this is known as ‘ma-ha-a’
or nara-Sakti-Siva.   Though appearing as two, this is really one
consciousness.
   Thus, everywhere, even in the consciousness of jar (external),
or pleasure (internal) etc., it is the I-consciousness whose whole
treasure consists in calm repose within itself. As has been said by
Utpaladeva: “The resting of all objective andsubjective ex-
perience within oneself is what is meant by I-feeling” (Ajada-
pramatr-siddhi, verse 22). In reality, that I-consciousness is all-
inclusive according to the principle already enunciated             (viz.,
sarvam sarvatmakam-everything is in everything). That I-con-
sciousness is Bhairava Himself pervaded by the Supreme Energy.
As has been said by myself in the following hymn of praise:
   “J make an obeisance, through my own joy, to that highest
reality which is wondrous delight (paramartha-camatkrti) which
blossoms forth everywhere in the multitude of objects without
cessation (bhdva-patale parijiabhamdna viccheda-Sinya), which is
the I in the perfect mode of existence (pirnavrtti aham iti), which
is full of lustre (devim), whose nature it is to shed light all round
Abhinavagupta                                                           183

(prathanasvabhavam) and who abides in one’s own self (svdtmasthi-
tim)’’. One should understand that this is the doctrine that has
been taught in the Advayasampattivartika composed by Vamana.
So it is settled that the phoneme ‘a’ only is endowed with fullest
richness i.e., is perfect in every way. In words like ‘harsa’, ‘ghata’,
‘nila’, the letters ‘ha’ etc. have to be combined together with
the preceding and the following letters (in order to make a com-
plete word). Otherwise (i.e., if the letters are not combined in
a synthetic whole), if only the last letter is added to the group of
letters such as ‘ha’, etc., it would not form a complete whole, the
word would be concealed within and would be unable to give
rise to a concept.’4
    Thus in all kinds of knowledge, all the divinities of letters
 (devatah i.e., varna-devatah) arising together simultaneously, would
bring about concepts of strange kinds. It is with this idea in view
that in the chapter on fala (time) in Svacchanda Tantra it has
been described that in the duration of one breath, even in the
sixteenth part or one tufi or space covered by 23 fingers of one
breath (of a yogi), there are, along with an explanation of the
passage of sixty or its double number of years, the rise and dis-
solution of eight Matrkas, eleven Rudras, ten guardians of quar-
ters   (lokapdlas),   twenty-seven    constellations,   eight   Nagas   and
other divinities. Thus, timelessness is the highest truth of reality.
If the highest Reality is what is to be decidedly the empirical
(mayiya) measure of truth, it would only lead to atheism (in as
much as it is beyond the empirical understanding).              But in the
supreme or transcendental consciousness, it appears immediately
in that state    (of timelessness).   Therefore,    what   has been said,
by way of teaching viz., ‘he sees something else, thinks something
else’, etc., refers to one anuttara consciousness (ekasydmeva jfana-
kalandyém) that anuttara or transcendental consciousness being
the substratum (simultaneously) of the three divinities, viz. para
 (para vak), parapara (pasyanti and madhyama), and aparé (vaikhari)
is certainly invariable truth. Really speaking, the highest truth
of all kinds of knowledge is I-consciousness.
   So this is established, viz., the supreme divine impulse to mani-
festation (visarga in its aspect of prasdra or expansion) in its pleni-
tude of beatitude (@nanda-saktibharitah) goes on ejecting the entire
cosmos which is lying within it first as para visarga and then in its
184                                            Para-Trisikd-Vivarana

progressive congealment, it becomes external manifestation (‘ha’
i.e., apara visarga) (hakaratmatdm pratipadya) and the visarga simul-
taneously goes on reabsorbing its manifestation in its aspect of
samhara or withdrawal and after diverse combinations finally it
becomes ‘ksa’.1® This very emanation (sa eva esa visargo) whose
nature it is to give rise to a multitude of innumerable objects
which spring up from the middle susumnd stage (madhyamasau-
sumna padocchalat-tattadanantabhdvapatalatma), now making a com-
bination of two consonants!® (diityatmakasaktayoni-samghatta), viz.
of the appropriate consonants (ka and sa) which       in active state
resorts to a state in which there is no actual impact (andhata-
ndda-dasasrayanena) (and thus) putting an end to all combination
(vislisyan) enters the transcendental stage which is constant
(dhruvadhaémni anuttarapade). This has been said even before.18

                                 Nores
    1. From ‘a’ to ‘am’, there are 15 kalds (energies of letter) and
‘ah’ is the sixteenth kala. This is the essential nature of the Lord.
This sixteenth kala of ah is known as visarga-kala. From ‘ka’ to
‘ks’ which represents external manifestation, there is always
prasara-sankoca (expansion-contraction), but the visarga-kala re-
mains changeless in its nature. In pranayama also, fifteen tufis goon
increasing or decreasing but the 16th tufi remains unchanged.
In the moon also, 15 digits go on increasing or decreasing, but
the 16th digit, the background of all and hidden from view,
remains unchanged.
  The visarga Sakti or the emanative Energy of Siva is called
amyta kala, because in spite of all the changes brought about by the
energy of Siva, Siva or His energy does not undergo any change
whatsoever.
    (a) Pard visarga Sakti: There are three phases of visargasakti-
para, parapard and apara. Para is also known as Sambhava or Saiva
visarga. It is transcendental emanation, an interior emanation
within the divine consciousness. It is the source and primary
principle of dnanda or the highest divine beatitude. It is represen-
ted by the phoneme ‘a’. That is why it has been said to be para-
mdnanda-bhimi.
   (b) Pardpard visarga-Sakti or pardpara visarga:
  This is known also as Sakti visarga. This is intermediate bet-
Abhinavagupta                                                                                     185

ween the para or supreme visarga and the apard or non-supreme
visarga. Itis, at the same time, in unity with the non-dual supreme
consciousness, and contains in a subtle way the potentiality of the
empirical diversity. It is represented by the phoneme ‘af’. It
is known as Sdkta visarga.
    (c) Apard visarga-Sakti or apara visarga:
  This brings about the diversity of empirical manifestation, the
manifestation of limited beings. This is why it is also known as
dnava visarga.    It is represented by the phoneme ‘ha’.
  2. Saktiis said to be mouth (vaktra) of Siva because it is through
Sakti that one can get entry in Siva.                              The guru is also like Siva.
Visarga-Sakti is also like guru-mukha. Therefore                                      in this context
visarga-Sakti is also called ‘guru vaktra.’
  3. It is difficult to bring out the double entendre used in this
passage. Siva represents the male-principle and Sakti the female
principle. Siva-bija is the white semen of the male, and kusuma
the red menstruation of the female. In the present context the
bija is the svara or vowel and yoni, the female organ, is the conso-
nant. Just as the combination of the male semen and the female
sperm gives rise to fetus, so the bija of Siva and yoni of Sakti brings
about the full consonant.
   4. Kusuma and puspa (lit. flower) are symbols of procreative
energy.
   5. The union of Siva-trikona which is bija and Sakti-trikona
which is yoni is known as Satkona mudra.                             This is illustrated in the
following diagram:

                                            Siva-trikoga
                                    Prainits (subjest)indiatiner




                 Prameya jobject)                                         Frtediga'
                      eines                                                      itinct




                 Prameya (obyet)                                          Pramipa
                    rostine!                                                   ndatinst



                                           Sulri-trikoga
                                    Pram (subyet) = detingy
186                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana

The three angles expressive of pramdtd, pramana and prameya in
Siva are indistinct, while the three angles expressive of the same
in Sakti are distinct.
  6. This refers to para vak or supreme Verbum which is only the
product of ‘aham vimarsa’ or the creative I-consciousness of Siva.
   7. A.G.’s reply means that the diversity of experience is not
due to the effort of any individual but to the autonomous will
of the Lord who has brought about manifestation in this fashion.
  8, Sthdna in this context is a technical word        of music which
in Western music is known as register. There are three sthdnas
in music, viz. mandra (low and deep sound), madhya (middle) and
tdra (high), known as bass (low), middle and upper register. A.G.
means to say that a note struck in a particular register in diff-
erent instruments, though differing in the position of produc-
tion in the different instruments, is always the same.
  9. The mantras pertaining to ardhacandra, nirodhi, nada, nadanta,
Sakti, vydpini, samand, and unmand are avyakta (indistinct).
    10. Jihvdmiliya: uttered from the root of the tongue, especially
the visarga before ‘k’ and kh, written as < %, @, upadhmdniya:
the visarga as pronounced before ‘p’ and ‘ph’, written      as <        4, &.
   11. The five yamas are num, fium, num, num, mum.
      12. This is how sixty-four phonemes are arrived at:

         a, i, u, y--pronounced   short, long   and prolated—(4
                                                             x3)
                                                               =12
         |-short and prolated
                                                                        ND




         é, ai, 0, au--long and prolated
                                                                    OnNnN OO




         Sparsa varnas from ka to ma                               2.
         Antahstha varnas i.e. ya, ra, la, va
                                                                       ££




         sma varnas or spirants fa, sa, sa, ha
         Anusvdra and visarga
         Fihodmiliya and upadhmaniya
         Yamas

                                                                   64
      13. The Iévara-pratyabhijiia-tika of Utpaladeva is now lost.
It is said to have contained six or eight thousand verses.
   14, Each word is a ‘gestalt’, an organized whole, in which the
letters are synthetically combined in a unitary configuration.
Abhinavagupta                                                      187

   15. The phoneme ‘ksa’ being a combination of k, s and ‘a’,
denotes the union of Siva and Sakti. It is known as kiifa-bija.
Ki{a is a technical name for a letter which results from the com-
bination of two halanta letters. The two halanta letters are k and
§. The combination of ‘a’ makes it ksa.
   The phoneme ‘a’ itself descending at the level of ‘ha’ becomes
‘ka’. The phonemes ‘a’, ‘ka’, ‘ha’ and the visarga belong to the
same organ of articulation (akuhavisarjaniyanam kanthah). ‘Sa’
is only another form of visarga. Ka is the external symbol of Siva
and Sakti.
    16. Ditydtmaka-sakta yoni is a technical term for consonant.

                                TEXT

  From amicakaradyah on p. 69, |. 3 upto svato rasat on p. 74, |. 27.

                         TRANSLATION
  In accordance with the principle that there are sixteen tufist
in one movement of prana, the ‘a’ etc., viz. the 16 vowels while
inhering within as phonemes divide the éwtis into half and half
and including the cessation in the first half and the rise of prana
into the second half, represent the fortnight of time (15 tithis) in
the external world.* These fithis are also said to be kalas or digits
of the moon. When the sixteenth digit, which has the Sakti or
power to expand (visargakala or amd kala) remains apart i.e., does
not expand, it is designated the seventeenth digit in Sri Vadya
and other scriptures in the following words:*
    “That 16th or visargatmikd kala by itself becomes half of ‘ha’
ice. visarga (:) and further half of visarga, i.e. bindu (.) Then it is
known as the seventeenth goddess or kald.’’ Because of visarga
being half of ‘ha’ and further half of this being bindu, which is
viglesa, i.e. apart, not taking part in expansion is known as the
 17th kala.*
    If it is objected, ‘‘How can there be division of one phoneme
‘a’ (into 16th and 17th kalas), for ‘a’ which is anuttara is partless?”
We reply, “In our system, every thing is partless, being non-
different from the light of consciousness.” Just as, through the
unimpeded autonomy of Siva, even when parts appear, partless-
ness of Reality is invariable, even so is the case with ‘a’. Where
                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana
188
                                                  the development of
is the inconsistency? Thus the propriety of
                                            appearance of partless-
phonemes is maintained, because of the
                                                 of utterance), how
 ness in parts. Otherwise (on the occasion
                                                  impact successively
 can the air whose nature it is to produce
                                                 al phonemes strike
 through the dental, labial, guttural, palat
                                                  If it were to spread
 the palate after having struck the throat?
                                                on, then there would
 simultaneously in all the organs of articulati
                         in the utterance    of all the sounds.    Conse-
ensue     simultaneity
                                         impact of the air in the
quently, the sound that is produced by
                                             that is produced by
throat would become similar to the sound
                                               d after breath and
impact in the palate. That which is experience
                                           letters having two or three
 resonance is called ‘anupraddnam’.® In
                                               inclusion of one or two
 matras, i.e. in dirgha or pluta letters the
                                              also, the inclusion of half
 matras is implied. Similarly, in one matra
                                              said by Bhattanarayana:
 a matra is to be understood. As has been
                                            above the three genetic
 “T bow to Siva (sthdnw) who is citprakdsa
                                                even half the matra
 constituents of prakrti, who is subtler than
                                                even a cosmic egg”.
 indicated on the top of ‘om’ and greater than
  (St. C. verse 7)
                                                 rse is one without
     Here the fifty phonemes or even the unive
                                            Sastra, etc., there is assu-
  succession. At some places in the Mata
                                          state resting on anuttara or
  med to be 18th kala or phase in the
                                      vislesa or separation of visarga,
  the transcendental by means of the
                                                  of visarga (:). So the
  ive. by means of the second dot, viz. the half
                                                 words the entire uni-
  phenomena of fifty phonemes or in other
  verse is ‘one’ without succession.
                                             etc. of anuttara are called
       So these Kalas, i.e., the phonemes ‘@
                                            delightful mental state.
  svara on account of their revealing the
                                            is as follows. The root
  The etymological explanation of svara
                                                (fabdayanti) i.e. indi-
  ‘sur? means (i) those which utter a sound
                                              cittam) and (ii) which
  cate a delightful mental mode (siicayanti
                                                   ial nature to Siva,
   (in the state of withdrawal) yield their essent
                                               am ranti),’’ i.e. which
  the highest subject (svam ca svariipam atman
                                                 word ‘svarah’ means
  dissolve completely in anuttara.6 Thus the
                                               ial nature to the highest
      “those which transmitting their essent
                                                     i.e. get dissolved in
      experient (ie. anuttara) offer themselves
                                             samhara or withdrawal) and
      anuttara (as vowels) (in the aspect of
                                                    i.e., display (existents)
      offer their form as consonants like ‘ka’ etc.
                                                    sion). These svaras as
      externally (in the aspect of prasara or expan
Abhinavagupta                                                           189

mere sound       (nddatmakah)        are indicative of mental    mode   like
pathos     (karuna), the amatory        sentiment   (srigdra), contentment
 (Santa) by means of lamentation, pleasing words, laudatory ex-
pressions respectively either merely by themselves or by pene-
trating consonants. They display mental modes even of animals,
a day-old creatures by appearing suddenly, without the slightest
trace of any hindrance of conventional sign etc., and by acqui-
ring the form of exclamatory enunciation (svarakakvddiriipatam
asnuvanadh), since they are so close to direct feeling. Thus uddtta
etc., have been taught as having the characteristic of expressi-
veness. They are indicative of mental mode by means of musical
notes, such as sadja etc. -Thus everywhere in all kinds of know-
ledge, these phonemes from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’, ingenious in bringing
about varied acts, coming together in their several, distinctive
forms (samdpatantyo’ham ahamikaya), (fundamentally) appearing
without succession (akramam eva bhasamanah) displaying the transi-
tion of forms one after the other by their effectuating powers
 (kalandmayatayaiva miirtikramasamkramanam eva difyamanam) bring
about spatial distinctions.
   Otherwise (i.e. in the absence of spatial distinction of forms),
there would have been no difference between the Meru moun-
tain and an atom.
   Thus these phonematic divinities enclose within themselves
the varied activity of forms (kriydvaicitryatmakam) expressive of
spatial distinctions and (also) time expressive of succession, bring
into prominence (ulldsayantyak) within (antar i.e. in pranacdra)
and externally (in manifestation) devour i.e. absorb within the
essential nature (the entire universe of objects). (From prollasa-
Samaye upto bhagavati srstik, several ideas are telescoped into one
another.    Therefore,     it is better    to translate   the sentence into
parts. )
In the process of interiorization:
   It enters the anuttara stage when udyoga, avabhdsa, carvana and
vildpana are seized by pramiti kala (state of awareness) and by
residing in the awareness state and developing and gradually
being impregnated with 16 forms® of manifestation reach the
perfect state.    ‘Tadamytdnanda’ refers to 7, 7, !, £ They are known
as amrta varna inasmuch as they are not productive of any external
190                                              Para-Trisika-Vivarana

manifestation. So ‘tadamytdnanda vifrantirapam’ means           the im-
mortal, essential, restful nature indicated by 7, 7, /, a
   Having the state of this restful nature, and being of the es-
sence of camatkdra, i.e. the Divine I-consciousness, projecting the
external manifestation of the four kalds (aspects) of udyoga etc.
 (with reference to the limited empirical subjects, means of know-
ledge, and objects), enjoying the swing of pina and krSa, i.e. intro-
                                                               ng
vertive and extrovertive emanation, expert in grasa or devouri
                                          manifes tation  and  va-
i.e. in samhara or withdrawal of external
mana (emitting) i.e. prasdra or projection of external manifes-
tation and weaving the network of soma (the moon), symbolic of
pramdna or means of knowledge of 16 kalas and sirya (the sun),
symbolic of prameya or the universe of objects of 12 kalas, upholding
in the beginning ‘a’, in the middle the group of consonants from
 ‘ka’ to ksa i.e. the ‘ha’ kala and the dot (i.e. anusvara) at the end,
 i.e. in the form of ‘aham’, the divine Matrka      (from ‘a to ‘ksa’) is
 the creative goddess.®
    So it has been said by Somananda in his commentary:
                                                                  ’!°
       “Ahand amare the modified and unmodified forms of Matrka.’
       He maintains that the vowel ‘a’ denotes ‘anuttara’ (the Abso-
                                                              lunar
  lute), and the 15 vowels from 4 to ‘ah’ denote 15 fithis or
  days. Alternatively he has given another interpretation of the
                                                                          y,
  verse “‘athddyah...tadantah”’, viz. ‘am’ is symbolic of binduseparatel
  the remaining fifteen vowels from ‘a’ to ‘af’ are denotative of
  fifteen lunar days (tithis), but the final ‘ah’ should be taken as
  denotative of visarga. At the same time, he has taught that the
  visargais ‘spanda’, i.e. theessentialnature of Consciousness. ‘Spanda’
  is defined as slight movement. If there is a going forth from one-
   self to another object (i.e. other than the self) it won’t be ‘slight
                                                                    (i.e.,
  movement’, it would connote full movement. Otherwise
   if there is no ‘going forth’ or movement from oneself)     , the  very
      idea of ‘movement’ would become meaningless.        Therefore, it is
      only because of a slight pulsation within the essential nature (of
      the Self) consisting of succession-less wondrous delight (not be-
      cause of moving from oneself to another object) that it has been
      indicated in the Agamas by words, such as ‘ucchalatta’ (jerking
      up), ‘armi’ (billow), ‘matsyodar?’ (throbbing in the stomach ofa
       fish). This is what is said to be ‘spanda’ (because of slight pul-
       sation within the essential nature of the Divine). This ‘spanda’
Abhinavagupta                                                         191

is of the nature of the union of Siva-Sakti. It is of two kinds--
sdmanya (general) and vifesa (particular).! This has been ex-
plained already.
    The fifteen ‘a’ etc. are all the vowels ending in a dot, i.e. anu-
svara (or am, the nasal ‘a’). They are the fifteen tithis or lunar
days. At their end, through the connexion of kriydfakti (kala-
Jogena) occur what are known as soma (moon) and sirya (sun)
 which constitute the terminal point of akula or anuttara (verse 5)
ie. the last vowel is ah of which the upper dot is symbolized by
the moon and the lower is symbolized by the sun.
   The earth and other categories of existence right upto quin-
tuple brahma (brahmapaficaka) i.e., $a, sa, sa, ha, and ksa (the symbol
of Sakti) repose in the vowels. How? The answer is ‘kramdt?
 (verse 6).
   The etymological meaning of kramat is the following: “Krama+.
at which is derived from the root ‘ad’ ‘to devour’ means devouring
of succession   (kramasya adanam-bhaksanam)     i.e., swallowing up of
time (kdla-grasah)”. Kramdt is used here in an adverbial sense
i.e. ‘by swallowing up time’,
    “Suvrate’ in verse 6 means the following: su =Sobhana or magni-
ficent. Vrata=holy practice. Suvrata, therefore, means one who
has two holy practices, viz. (1) bhogai.e.,   enjoyment   which   consists
in emptying her energy in manifestation (riktatve), and (2) bhoga-
nivytti i.e., abstention from manifestation or withdrawal of mani-
festation in herself, thus making up the loss and becoming full
(parnatve). ‘Suvrate’ which is the vocative case of suvraté should be
explained as above.
  Amid in verse 8 means ‘who is rooted in ‘a’, and one who            has
no beginning or origin’ (avidyamanamila), for she has no begin-
ning (i.e. she is timeless, eternal).!2 (Now A.G. explains amala
tatkrama.)
  She is kauliki Sakti whose course (krama) is this i.e., whose course
consists of identity (praslesana), distinction (atadrapo), identity
cum-distinction (anyathdripo). In spite of all these activities, she
remains amild--one whose origin has no beginning, one whose
origin is unknown.
   (Now A.G, explains amald-+-dtat+-kramah)

  ‘Atat’ means extension or expansion of the one who is rooted in
192                                             Para-Trigika-Vivarana

‘a’ (amiilasya yaddtananamatat).   She is the one whose course or
method is this extension (tadeva ca kramo_yasyah).¥
  She is unknown (ajfeyd) for she is the knower          of all   (and,
therefore, cannot be reduced to the status of the known), (from
another point of view), she is the only one to be known, i.e.
worth knowing (esaiva ca jneyd), for anything other than she does
not exist (anyasya abhdvat).
     (Now A.G. gives the meaning of ‘aksdntd’ in the following
words:) ‘Aksdnta’ means ‘a’ i.e., avidyamanam ksantam i.e., tisnim
dsanam yasyah i.e. one who has no quiet seat or one who does not
stay quiet; in other words ‘in whom there is no cessation of acti-
vity by way of manifestation etc.’ (aviratam srstyadi-riipatvena).
     (Now A.G., interprets the word dksant@in the following way:).
    ‘Aksanta: ‘aksa’ means pertaining to ‘aksa’ or the senses. So
 ‘aksaénta@ would mean ‘one who does not end with the sensuous
perception from before’ (aindriyakandmante samipe pragaparyavasana
ya). This dksdntd is the adjective of srsfi. Figuratively, this means
 that this is manifestation in which there is an unparalleled taking
away or seizure (apirvam dharanam), that is to say, in which there
is the withdrawal of manifestation by way of entrance within the
Self (svdtmdnupravesatma-svariipam samhara-riipam yasyam).
      This creative goddess, viz., Matrka is the source of all vidya
or knowledge assuming the form of vedand or inward feeling, indi-
cative of the throb of Sakti, and as a product of germinal energy
in the form of Siva-bija or vowels and prasara or consonants, of the
attribute of protection or reflection of the mantras in the form of
vdcya i.e. the devatas or inherent goddesses and their vdcakas or
wordings. This creative goddess is the same everywhere i.e.
by nature she is neither less nor more (anywhere). She is said to
be the bestower of success in all the Tantras, in all the spiritual
disciplines, in all activities and at all times. ‘Akhyata’ (is said to
be) has to be interpreted in another form also, i.e. d-akhyatd i.e.
in the external state, she is evident (prakafa) in her state of
akhyati i.e. in the state of self-forgetfulness, for in the stage of
vaikhari or empirical utterance, the difference in the phonemes
is due to maya. Thus, those very phonemes existing in the mind
as pure mantra’ at first (i.e. under the influence of mad),
having reached the state of intellectual creation (bhavasys{i) of
the form of pratyayas i.e., thought-constructs like the fivefold
Abhinavagupta                                                     193

viparyaya,! asakti*® etc., cast a pall over the essential nature (of
the soul).
   “There are five varieties of viparyaya i.e., wrong knowledge.
ASakti or inefficacy due to the impairment of the senses has twenty-
eight varieties, There are nine kinds of tusfi” or contentment.
Siddhi!® or fulfilment is of eight kinds.’’? These creations of the
intellect (pratyayah) (Sp. K. Verse 47) are primarily bonds
 (pasah) which pertain to the class of bound souls. As has been
said in Spanda Karika:
  *“The powers are ever in readiness to conceal his real nature,
for without the association of words, ideas cannot arise.” Simi-
larly, ‘‘The rise, in the bound soul, of all sorts of ideas marks the
disappearance of the bliss of supreme immortality.      On account
of this, he loses his independence.   The appearance of the ideas
has its sphere in sense-objects”. (Sp. K. III, 14) etc. Therefore
by setting aside the sphere which is the creation of the intellect,
non-mdyiya sphere of phonemes has been designated which is dis-
tinctly audible, which is appreciable by means of the ear, which
is the embodiment of the primal, highest purity of Siva, and which
bestows the reward of various spiritual practices. In Pirvasastra
or Malinivijayottara Sastra also, it has been said: “The Lord, of
His own accord thus illuminated Aghora with this method teeming
with the sense of all the Sastras.” “Thus being awakened with
the Lord’s teaching, exciting the vimarfa yoni with the Lord’s
powers, created innumerable mantras (i.e. inner phonemes) with
suitable sounds for being employed by creatures of various cate-
gories” (M.V.T. III, 27).
    “These mantras (inner phonemes) only being embraced by
Aghora etc., the various mantra experients bestow on the main
users of them the fruits of all desires, not otherwise”. (M. V. III,
28).
   Thus described, the mantras, though manifest from the point of
view of phonematic creativity are unmanifest to those who are
blinded by maya.
   (Now A.G. takes the word khydtéh as noun and explains it in
the following manner: ).
   ‘Sarvadaiva khyatah’--““They are always shining or manifest in
the form of pure knowledge”’ orit may mean: “whose expansion
is unimpeded according to the power of the nature of each”’.
                                                          Para-Trisika-Vivarana
       194
                                                           in a concise
          The following is the sense of the whole teaching
       form:
                                                        characteristic is
             “The Supreme Power, who is Bhairavi, whose
                                                           omy, shines ex-
       wondrous delight issuing from her unique auton
                                                          union    with Her
       ternally by herself. He (i.e. Siva) who is in
                                                        is  alway s   present,
       nature, who is unimpeded in His activity and
                                                               onscio  usness.
       always shines as consciousness, whose essence is self-c
                                                        s, blue, yellow,
       He shines in the form of Sadasiva, earth, animal
                                                        nature (ie. He
       and pleasure that are an expression of His own
                                                     every   thing in its
       shines without any external aid). Knowing
                                                          of proof. This
       own form! (svasvasamvedanam) is called means
                                                    a child or an animal.
        appears as common to all experients whether
                                                        knowledge:             (1)
             The following are the pramanas or means of
                                  or perception by means      of the senses;   (2)
        sensuous knowledge
                                                                  the word ofa
        three kinds of inference (trirapam ca lingam),* (3)
                                                                   by analogy”
        great, credible person*? (paravacahkramahk), proof
                                                                  )**, cessation
         (svaripya), inference from circumstance (anyathdyoga
                                                                  on the basis of
        ofa further desire to know (pratityanudaya),** proof
                                                               simply as means
        non-existence (yama)®5— all these are described
                                                                   upted, which
         to that self-consciousness whose light is never interr
                                                                 etc., which do
         shines equally even in lower creatures like birds
                                                                  name.
         not know perceptual or inferential proof even by
                                  iousn ess (bhasa@ ) is by natur e   reflective of
            So the light of consc
                                                     Self-consciousness is
         Self (svaripamarsandtmika). That which is
                                                    Itis its very nature to
         itself the supreme Verbum (paravdg-vapuh).
                                                            it shines as the
         appear in diverse forms of existence. Therefore,
                                                         goes the state of
         cosmos of variegated existence. It never under
                                                        on anything (out-
         dependence on others. As it is not dependent
                                                        exist in it? There-
         side itself), how can any impediment possibly
                                                             ntion transcends all
             fore, self-consciousness which is void of conve
                                                                activity. It is per-
             space, time, kala, maya, limitation of place or
                                                              from all forms and
             fect in itself, it is the all and yet different
                                                                ess characterized
             figures. It is the natural, supreme consciousn
                                                             of Suddhavidya®®, it is
             by excellent refinement, of the pure form
                                                      Siva and Sakti,       both as
             the aham or I in both ways, i.e. both as
——




                                                               ‘aham’ (1) itself
             consciousness and its expression as Energy., That
                                                             etc. In the highest
             as Matrka, is the very essential nature ofearth
                                                                  and the solid
             sense, its fluid form is said to be the vowel (bia)
Itai




             form the consonant (yoni), the very nature of Siva and Sakti.
a
|
Abhinavagupta                                                         195

  By the union of Siva and Sakti (i.e. vowel and consonant),           by
their mutual union crops up the delight of the visible universe.
The virile energy (of anuttara or I-consciousness) which is the
highest reality (paramarthika-sadvapuh) and which is present in the
universe inherent within up to its extreme limit is designated as
visarga both in its aspect of ‘viflesa’ i.e. external expansion or
prasara and its aspect of ‘yojand’ i.e. inward withdrawal or sam-
hara. This visarga is the invariable domain         (of the aspirants),
this the easy means of attaining to anuttara. In Sri-Pirva (i.e.
Malini-vijayottara), a phonematic creation from na to pha has
been described which is different from this non-mdyiya multitude
of phonemes i.e. the Matrka group from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’. That is
known as Malini which is bhinna, i.e. mingled with vowels and
consonants and is formed with reference to médpd.
                 Khecari-vaisamya or the State of Pasu

   The Malini being divided into fifty phonemes at the stage of
maya gives rise to vikalpas or thought-constructs. In this form,
it is by nature such that it casts a pall over the essential nature
of the Self and leads to bondage of the empirical selves. Involved
in this phonematic creation, the various khecari Saktis lead to vai-
samya or dis-similarity of the essential nature, and carry out the
recurrence of the variegated cycle of temporal existence full of
the karmika, mayiya, and dnava limitations.
                   Khecavi-sdmya or the State of Pati
  Khecari,   by nature,   has   the sameness    or identity   with   pure
Bhairava. This has already been said. In khecari sdmya, it is the
highest state i.e. the state of Siva** or pati both in life and libera-
tion. The highest aspect of non-differentiation in the phonematic
creation of difference is the virility of the mantra by the preserva-
tion of which the mantra is preserved. This sdmya is ‘aham’ (1)
itselfor which is the visarga status of anuttara.   When the awakened       |
one realizes it as his supreme nature, he is forthwith liberated in
life itself. The yogis who desire supernormal power etc., by means
of this I-consciousness meditate on aham ina limited way in the
 navel or the heart-centre.     I have briefly concluded it according
to (the teaching of) my guru and the Agamas. As to what hap-
pens by resorting to this I-consciousness, ask your personal ex-
                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana
196
                                                path. One should
perience. I have only shown a little bit of the
not rest contented with this much.
                                                  is all’ regarding the
    Who can say with certainty ‘this much
                                            has been vouchsafed to
divine consciousness? The divine grace
                                                      been privileged to
me only to this extent. By that (grace), I have
                                                samya or identity with
disclose this much (as means) (viz., khecari
                                                     this (i.e. sat-tarka)
the divine consciousness). Subtler tarka then
                                                 (in the present) or at
may occur to other experients either today
                                             tarka?’ either may occur
some other time (past or future) i.e., the
                                            the past (abhat), or will
in the present (bhavati), or occurred in
                                               the lights of the com-
occur in the future (bhavitd). Among all
                                             has been determined in
 ponent parts"® of yoga, this (i.e., tarka)
                                             the brilliant sun (gabha-
 Sri Parva Sastra (ic. Malini-vijaya) as
                                                 liberates others. This
 stiman) by which one gets liberated and
                                                      in every way and
  (i.e., tarka) should be clearly understood
                                                     sanaih) desirous of
 reflected on by the clear-sighted ones (vicak
                                               doning for a moment
 the supreme state (parepsubhih) by aban
                                                aspirant is established
 jealousy common to mortal beings. The
                                                iately after sat-tarka
 in the essential nature of the Self immed
                                                  *® that cover the sun
   (alocana) and, therefore, the specks of cloud
                                                lly by the savour of
  of consciousness are dissolved automatica
                                                     moment,
  delight that the aspirant experiences at this
                                 Notes
                                                    an extension of 2}
     1. Tuti is a division of breath. It covers
                                             one round of breath (in-
  fingers. Normally, there are 16 tutis in
                                                   round of breath thus
  cluding inspiration and expiration). One
  covers an extension of 36 fingers.
                                                 is known as prdnacara,
     2, Breath rising within and going out
                                     within is  known   as apanacara. In
  and rising outside and entering
                                               prana arises is known as
  pranacéra, the point within from which
                                         it ceases externally is known
  antah-dvadasanta, and the point where
                                             in apdanacara, the external
  as bahyadvadasanta. On the other hand,
                              known  as bahyadvddasanta    and the point
  point where prana arises is
  where it ceases internally is known     as antahdvadasanta. The space
                                           fingers or 16 tufis. These 16
  between these two doddasantas is 36
                                           ‘ah’, The vowels from ‘a’ to
  tutis cover the 16 vowels from ‘a’ to
                                             days in the external world.
  am represent the fifteen tithis or lunar
                                              of the dark fortnight, and
  The prdnacara represents the 15 tithis
Abhinavagupta                                                        197                            }

apdnacara represents the bright fortnight. The vowel ah is change-                             ii
less. It represents the 16th digit of the moon which is changeless                         |
and is known as ama kala.                                                                       1
    3. The visargatmika kala is said to be divided into two by itself
of which the successive kald is known as the 17th.                                                  |
    4, When visarga kala is involved in manifestation or expansion,                            H)
it is known as visarga (:); when it ceases from manifestation, it
is known as vindu or bindu (.). In Trika philosophy, ordinarily                            |
both visarga and vindu are known as visarga, for in the aspect of
Samhara, visarga becomes vindu and in the aspect of srsti, vindu is
visarga. Visarga-vindu is in all conditions eternal and immutable.
   5. ‘Anupradénam’: This is a technical word of Sanskrit Gram-
mar. It is an effort outside the mouth in the production of sound
at the different vocal organs which is looked        upon    as external                   ]
effort or bahyaprayatna,
    There are three main factors in the production of sound, viz.                      |
 (1) sthana, (2) karana or abhyantara prayatna, (3) anupradana or
bahyaprayatna. There are two main varieties of anupradana, known
as (i) (Svdsdnupradana (emission of breath) and (ii) nédénupradina
 (resonance), [vide, ‘A Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar’ by K.U.                        :
Abhyankar, p. 23 ].
  6. So long as ‘a’ etc. are only an inner apprehension, they are
known as kala and when they assume an external sound, they                         ]
 are known as vowels or svara.                                                 i
    7. The anuttara principle accepting the limited condition of
pramata (knower), pramana (knowledge) and prameya, (the known),
manifests the universe as something external. There are four
aspects of this manifestation,    viz. udyoga, avabhdsa,    carvana, and
vildpana.

      (1) Udyoga is the initial preparation in the form of Will.
      (2) Avabhasa is the appearance of a mental experience, e.g.,
           blue as something external.                                     |
      (3) Carvana i.e. relishing the above experience for some
          time as a form of the I-consciousness.
      (4) Vila@pana i.e. withdrawal or re-absorption of the ex-
          panse in the essential nature of the Self.
  Even in the work-a-day pragmatic experience, these aspects are
at play, for instance at first there is will to perceive a jar (udyoga),
                                                           Para-Trisika-Vivarana
198
                                                 (avabhdsa), relishing
then there is the actual perception of the jar
                                              finall y assimilating the
of the perceptive experience (carvana), and
                                               ial  natur e of the Self.
perceptive experience of the jar to the essent
                                                   ut   bring ing about
   When the above (udyoga, avabhasa, etc.) witho
                                            , etc., reside in the
the limited experience of the knower, known
                                                  akti of 17 kalas. It is
pure state of awareness, it is the perfect pard-S
                                                          of experience.
a state of pure awareness in which inhere 16 forms
                                                   and  maya  multiplied
   The four forms of praméatd, pramana, prameya
                                              a and vildpana make up
by the four forms of udyoga, avabhasa, carvan
 16 forms.
                                                     of the pure
   The perfect form of pramiti, therefore, is 1 kala
                                         16 kalds inherent        in it, ie. of 17
pramiti itself plus the above
                                                  trya or autonomy,
kalds. This perfect pramiti (awareness) is svdtan
                                                dra.
the third eye of Siva, symbolic of samhara-mu
                                                                does not
    8. This is the form of 16 kalas of the goddess. This
                                                      soman etra   or the
include the perfect pramiti kala. This is called the
                                                     drd,   the   state of
 lunar eye of Siva. This is expressive of prasdra-mu
 external expansion.
      9. Thus there are three states, viz.:
                                                                         is known as
          (1) Pramiti which is signified by Agni, which
               the bhala netra or the centra l   eye    of   Siva.    It   is a state of
                                          or   pima,       which      inclu    ding the
               pure awareness, perfect
               16 vowels from ‘a’ to ‘ah’   is  of   17   kalas.    This     is only an
               inner state without any    extern   al   manif   estat  ion.
                                                                                  is also
           (2) The Right Eye (daksina netra of Siva). This
                                                 a-kald    .    This     indica  tes  the
                known as soma kala or praman
                                                        inner      16    vowels  .   The
                external manifestation of the
                                                               by udyoga,
                 pramata, pramana, prameya and maya multiplied
                              carvana and      vildpana     (4 x 4) work         out to
                 avabhdsa,
                 sixteen.
                                                                      Sirya
           (3    The Left Eye (vamanetra) of Siva—also known as
            LS




                                                      manif estat ion  of 12
                 kala or prameya kala is the external
                                                                      phone-
                 kalas without the play of y, 7, /, ‘Li.e. when these
                                                                    Pramata,
                 mes are in a state of visranti or rest in pramiti.
                                                       by  udyoga , avabha sa,
                 pramana, and prameya multiplied
                 etc. (3 x 4) work out to 12.
                                                       modified form
        10, Somananda has designated ‘ah’ as vikyta or
                                                   estation, and ‘am’ as
      of Matrka, because it denotes external manif
Abhinavagupta                                                              199

avikrta, because it denotes introversion. ‘Af’ is centrifugal, there-
fore, vikrta or modified; ‘am’ is centripetal and therefore, avikrta
or unmodified. There is satkoca (contraction) and vistdra (diffu-
sion) simultaneously in the heart of Siva. Both are denoted by
the common        word    ‘visarga’.   There is no such common       word in
English.
   11. Movement (calanam) in this context is not to be taken in
the sense of physical movement. It isan inward pulsation or throb
in Consciousness denoting the ever-present activity of the delight
of Self-consciousness of the Divine. It is the dynamic activity of
Consciousness. It is motionless movement so to speak. Just as a
wave in the ocean rises up only in the ocean itself but does not
move out, even so ‘spanda’ is a throb in the divine consciousness
of Siva-Sakti.
   Spanda is of two kinds, sémanya (general) and vifesa (particular).
 Samanya spanda is the foundational spanda of Siva-Sakti, on which
is based the working of the gunas of prakrti which are the vifesa
spanda, leading to particular experiences of psychic and physical
phenomena. The particular              experiences    are   popularly known
as the spanda of Sakti.
   12. ‘Amiila’ has also been used in two senses, viz. (1) ‘a milam
Jasyah’ which means that ‘a’ is the origin of the entire phonematic
manifestation and        (2) ‘avidyamanam miilam yasyah’ which means
that ‘being beginningless (anddi), it has no origin other than the
essential nature of anuttara’.
   13. The sense of this is that the entire phonematic manifestation
is only dtat or expansion of ‘a’.
   14. So long as vargas or phonemes exist only in the mind, they
are known as mantra. Usually, it is only when they are uttered
by the vocal organs that they are known as varna.
   15. ‘Sva-sva-samvedana’ is    of two kinds—(i)        sivatmaka-
samvedana born out of pratibha-jiana i.e., knowledge born of spon-
taneous divine influx which ensures a knowledge of Siva in
every   object,   (2)    perceptive knowledge        through   the senses, as
that of a jar.
   16. The five kinds of viparyaya are (1) Tamas or darkness, (2)
Moha    (delusion),      (3) Mahamoha      (great delusion),     (4) Tamisra
(gloom), (3 ) Andhatamisra (blinding gloom).
  17. Asakti or inefficacy due to the impairment of the senses is
                                                        Para-Trisikd-Vivarana
200
                                          s and 17 due to imper-
of 28 kinds—11 due to defect in the sense
fection in buddhi.
                                             ti, (ii) Upadana, (iii)
   18, The nine kinds of tusti are (i) Prakr
                                            na, (vii) Kysaya, (viii)
Kala, (iv) Bhagya, (v) Arjana, (vi) Raksa
Sanga, (ix) Himsa.
                                             (2) Sabda, (3) Adhya-
   The eight kinds of siddhi are (1) Uha,
                                     of duhkha, viz. (4) Adhyatmika
_yana; prevention of three kinds
                                         Adhidaivika duhkha (7) Suh-
 duhkha, (5) Adhibhautika duhkha, (6)
                                          hya Karika, Verses 47-51.
 rtprapti, (8) Dana. For details see Samk
                                            a.
     19, ‘Aghora’ is Anantabhattarakanath
                                           (1) Parvavat,            (2) Sesavat
      20. The three kinds of inference are
 and     (3)   Sdmdnyato-drstam.
                                                 It has been noticed
       (1) Parvavat literally means ‘as before’.               when
                                      there is rain.             So, now
 before that whenever there is cloud,
                                            is that it will rain. It is
 cloud is noticed in the sky, the inference
 an inference from cause to effect.                                               If a
                                         part to the whole.
    (2) Sesavat is an inference from the
                                       appears to be saltish, the
 little water of the ocean when tasted                         be          also
                            is that   the   remaining    water    must
  obvious      conclusion
  saltish.
                                              is now seen in Prayaga
      (3) Sadméanyato-drstam: As Caitra who
                                           that he moves about, even
  js later seen in Kasi leads one to infer                       that
                                          ions lead one to infer
  so planets when seen in different posit
  they move about.
                                               on dptavacana i.e., on the
        21. This is known as inference based
                            credible perso n. It is also known as fabda-
  word of a reliable and
  pramana.
                                             or inference by analogy,
        29. This is known as upamdna pramaya
      such as a gavaya is like a cow.                                        an in-
                                            n       as    arthdpatti, or
         93. Anyathayoga: This is also know
                                              does not eat during the
      ference from circumstance. Devadatta
                                           inference is that he must be
      day and yet he is stout. The obvious
      eating at night.
                                               n as uparama pramdna.
        24. Pratityanudaya: This is also know
                                         curiosity ceases. There is no
      When one has known a thing, his
      further desire to know about it.
                                               a or non-existence of a
         95, This inference is based on abhdav
                                                   must be cats in this
      thing.   Since there are no mice here, there
      place.
Abhinavagupta                                                            201

  26. Suddhavidya refers to Siva-vidya or Sahaja-vidya, not to
Suddhavidya tattva. This is khecari in the primal form, not the
consciousness of the empirical individual, but the consciousness
of Siva. It is the universal activity of the supreme energy of Siva.
It is the identity with this khecari (khecari-samata or khecari-sdmya)
which is the object of Devi’s enquiry and the aim of every
aspirant.
   27. '‘Tarka means reasoning.           This is known   as sat-tarka or the
true reasoning.     It is reasoning in conformity to the teaching of the
Agama. It does not mean logic-chopping.
    28. The component parts of yoga are, according to Saivagama,
six, known as sadazga. These six limbs or component parts are:
     (1) Pranayama, (2) Dhyana, (3) Pratyahara, (4)      Dharand,
(5)   (Sat)-Tarka, and 6. Samadhi.
   29. The specks of cloud refer to the dnava mala of the soul that
is automatically dissolved        now.

                                     TEXT

   From evamuttarasyapyanuttaramiti on p. 75, 1. 14 upto kriyasakti-
samarpanamuktam on p. 79, 1. 9.

                               TRANSLATION

Introduction to the succeeding Siitras:
   Thus it has been said earlier (in verse 3) viz. “that is anuttara
even of uttara’”’. From the portion ‘it is anuttara even of uttara’
it has been described in detail that the expansion of manifestation
(consisting of 36 tattvas) is due to kula or Sakti. It has been deter-
mined that even the subsequent one i.e. expansion of the universe
has the anuttara or the transcendental as its precedent. Now
it is the nature of the transcendental which requires a detailed
consideration. So while considering both prescriptive rule (vidhi)
and explanatory reiteration         (anuvdda),    the nature of both vidhi
and anuvdda has to be characterized. In the mental recitation of
the name of Siva (which is vidhi), and the appearance of all
happiness (which is anuvada) both are discernible. Though in
this system, anuttara or the transcendental is nothing different
from the uftara or the posterior—for if it were something other,
that would also fall within the category of the uttara, even then
202                                            Para-Trisika-Vivarana

there is this difference brought about by the autonomy of the
Lord from the point of view of the disciple and the teacher.
Therefore, a quotation of further verses is given in order to deter-
mine the nature of the transcendental in detail. This is what it
describes:

      CATURDASAYUTAM BHADRE
           TITHISANTASAMANVITAM// 9/
      TRTIYAM BRAHMA SUSRONI
           HRDAYAM BHAIRAVATMANAH /
      ETANNAYOGINIJATO
           NARUDRO LABHATE SPHUTAM//                         10/
      HRDAYAM DEVADEVASYA
           SADYO YOGAVIMUKTIDAM/
      ASYOCCARE KRTE SAMYAN
           MANTRAMUDRAGANO MAHAN//                           11;
      SADYASTANMUKHATAMETI
           SVADEHAVESALAKSANAM /
      MUHURTAM SMARATE YASTU
           CUMBAKENA ABHIMUDRITAH//     12/
      SA BADHNATI TADA SARVAM
           MANTRAMUDRAGANAM NARAH/
      ATITANAGATANARTHAN
           PRSTO’SAU KATHAYATYAPI// 13/
      PRAHARADYADABHIPRETAM
           DEVATARUPAM UCCARAN /
      SAKSAT PASYATYASANDIGDHAM
           AKRSTAM RUDRASAKTIBHIH//    14/
      PRAHARADVAYAMATRENA
           VYOMASTHO JAYATE SMARAN /
      TRAYENA MATARAH SARVA
           YOGISVARYO MAHABALAH//   15/
      VIRA VIRESVARAH SIDDHA
           BALAVAN CHAKINIGANAH /
      AGATYA  SAMAYAM  DATVA
           BHAIRAVENA PRACODITAH//                     16/
Abhinavagupta                                                                 203

    YACCHANTI PARAMAM SIDDHIM
          PHALAM YADVA SAMIHITAM |
    ANENA SIDDHAH SETSYANTI
          SADHAYANTI CA MANTRINAH//                                     17/
    YATKINCID BHAIRAVE TANTRE
           SARVAMASMAT PRASIDDHYATI/
    ADRSTAMANDALO’ PYEVAM....// 18 /

                                TRANSLATION

The Description of Amrtabija or Sauh mantra

    “O thou gracious one, thou with beautiful thighs, it is the third
brahma’ (i.e. sat or rather ‘sa’) united with the fourteenth vowel
 (ie. az) and well-joined with that which comes at the end of the
lord of the vowels? (i.e. visarga), (Sa--au-+visarga=sauk). This
is the heart® of Bhairava. Or this sawh or amrtabija is the bhairaviya
hrdaya of the narabhdva or phenomenal aspect which is only of the
essence of Sakti (értiyam brahmabhairavatmanah nah bhairavatma
hydayam: nah in this syntax means asmakam               i.e. of our system).
9-10.
    He who is not born of yogini* or is not united with Rudra’
cannot clearly obtain this (i-e., sauk). This is the (very) heart
 (i.e. Ardaya-bija, the mantra sauh) of the God of gods i.e., parama
Siva, and bestows immediately (both) yoga® and liberation. 10-11.
    When this mantra (i.e. sauh) is perfectly well recited*? the
grand multitude of mantras and mudrds immediately appears be-
fore him (i.e. they become favourable to him) being characteri-
zed by their absorption in his body (svadehavesalaksanam). 11-12.
    The man i.e. the yogi (i.e., in this context) who has a mindful-
ness® of this mantra even for a muhirta® or forty-eight minutes is
sealed with cumbaka’® and binds i.e., brings under his control the
entire multitude of mantras and mudrds. He also narrates past and
future events, when interrogated.          12-13.


   *The word uccdra which literally means ‘to recite or to sound’ is used here in
a technical sense, viz. (1) full realization of sauf in the form of vimarfa or (2)
joining sauh with the current of prdya and apdna according to the instruction of
the guru.
                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana
204
                                                     that he desires, for a
   If he calls up the form of any divinity
                                        his eyes, without doubt, drawn
praharai.e., 3 hours, he sees it with
                                                 14.
near to himself by the powers of Rudra.
                              s   of  a  divin ity    for two praharas, i.e.
    If he has the mindfulnes
                                      the expanse (lit. sky) of pure
six hours, he becomes established in
consciousness. 15a.
    If he continues the above  practice for three praharas i.e. nine
                                             ly powerful yogisvaris,*
 hours, then all the mothers," all the great                powerful
                              the siddhas,    the multitudes of
 the viras,® viresvaras,
                                             to him after making an
 fakinis® impelled by Bhairava, come
                                               eme felicity viz. moksa
 appointment!” and offer to him the supr
                                  desir ed by  him. By this bijamantra,
 supernormal power or the fruit
                                                practising yoga in the
 i.e. sauh, the practisers of the mantra are
                                                became perfect in the
 present (sddhayanti), by its practice they
                                            gain perfection in future
  past (siddhati) and by this they will
  (setsyanti). 15-17.
                                                     Tantra are accom-
     All the perfections described in Bhairava
                                                 amytabija removes enti-
  plished by this bijamantra (i.e, sauh). This
                                          in the mayiya anda (the sphere
  rely the sense of difference prevalent
                                          the  heart  of every object and
  of maya). On the other hand, being
                                         the limitation prevalent in
  state, it also abides, having accepted
  all the four andas. 18.

                                  CoMMENTARY

                                        hrdayam etc.
      The Explanation of Bhairavatmanah
                                                      h is simply a form of
         The essential nature of the universe whic
                                              expe rien ce (pradarsita), rea-
      Bhairava, which by demonstrated
                                            the  teac hing   of the gurz), and
      soning (yukti) (in accordance with
                                           is  ascer taine d   to be venerable
      Agama (the traditional teaching)                               aining to
                                         n is sakta i.e., pert
      apard or non-supreme manifestatio
                                         that fakta nature is Siva who
      Sakti. The heart or the essence of
                                      divin Sakti, viz. the venerable
                                            e
      is held in firm embrace by the
      supreme power (para).
                                          understood Sakti, the Divine
         By the word ‘Bhairava’ is to be                          every-
                                            to the principle that.
       Energy, of the universe according
                                             (sarvasarvatmakata vapuh).
       thing is the form of everything else                     al reality
                                                the      phenomen
         The   heart or the essential nature of
                                              is Siva who is identified
       (nara ripasya) permeated by that Sakti
Abhinavagupta                                                       205

with the supreme non-differentiation (parena abhedena) by the
above principle, for without this even differentiation would not
be possible i.e. if Siva and Sakti were not prevalent in phenomenal
reality, its state of difference would not have been possible. This
has been stated before. Susrone (O with beautiful hip and thighs),
is the vocative case. (A.G. by splitting bhairavétmanah into two
i.e. bhairavdtma and ‘nah’ and by adding hydayam with susroni and
turning it into a compound word, viz. susropi-hrdayam gives the
following explanation:)
   That which is irremovably involved even in repugnant maya
and consists of pure consciousness is the core between the two
thighs, viz., the female organ (yoniriipam). The Sakti in the form
of yoni (female organ) is the state of Bhairava that indicates the
wholeness (pimata) of the nara-bhdva or phenomenal reality
which includes within itself the entire host of experients from
sakalas (i.e. limited experients), (divinities like) Mantra, Mantra-
maheSvara down to immobile beings (like plants etc.) whose very
life consists of empirical I-feeling and which is rightly designated
as ‘ours’   (nah).
The Explanation of trtiyam brahma
   Brahman (accepted in Trika) isthat in whom the virility of the
universe is inherent and who is full of the mass of bliss (dnanda-
Saktighanam) that is surging forward for visarga-vislesana i.e. visarga
or separation from Siva and vislesana or union with Sakti.        Such
Brahman is vast (byhat), all-pervading (uydpaka) and fully nurtu-
red with the union of Sakti. This Brahman is certainly not like
that which is accepted by the readers of Vedanta and which is
not far removed from absolute nihilism. This is called the third
Brahman,     because   it is more   identical with Siva than   nara or
Sakti. Therefore, in Tantras and particularly in Paratrisika
(atra), this i.e. the union of the male principle and the female
principle is the very core which has been taught as the object of
worship. Even in the case of ordinary people whose mind has
not penetrated into the core of that sort of virility, by the mere
pursuit of external ritual, the bonds that govern the state of pasul8
 (limited empirical being) become at first gradually slack and
finally completely loosened, at first slowly splitting and then
finally completely split asunder and then they automatically
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
206
                                   into that core (which is the union
attain to the state of penetrating
                                      ion into the core is not like a
of Siva and Sakti). This penetrat
                                      red the heart, it is the supreme
literal statement as in “I have ente
                                     inside the heart. This has been
goddess”’, rather it is the search
                                      the restrictions of Sastras (reli-
already said in detail. “Neither
                                    t within narrow limits, nor can
 gious texts) can confine the hear
                                   ciousness. That alone is the state
 popular views contaminate cons
                                        the joyful condition of absorp-
 of plenitude which is infused with
                                        letely replete with the attri-
 tion or khecari sémya which is comp
                                         Divine’. As has been said by
 pute of the essential nature of the
                                    those whose mind has been made
  myself in one of my hymns: “In
                                      by devotion unto you, this state
  purer by being fully dominated
                                     t in a moment.” Therefore on
  is clearly established in the hear                             Sakti,
                                 and apara) of the triangular
 the angles (i.e. para, parapara                          al   godd ess
                                  centre the transcendent
 the three goddesses and in the                    ment    of supr eme
                                     rava, the embodi
  who is the churning Sakti of Bhai
                                    ed.      In the tradition of the deities,
  peatitude!® have to be worshipp
                                        visarga which is due to the inces-
  there is bliss through ksobhatmaka
                                         itude.”® In yamala or vira-yogini
  sant flow of bliss of the eternal beat
                                        ical union (samghatta) between
  or vira-diti tradition, there is phys
                                           is only to stimulate the nityd-
   the vira and yogint. The purpose
                                          s of the contact of sex-organs.
   nanda or eternal beatitude by mean                       It gives intense
                                 hatmaka visarga.
  By this contact, there is ksob                            by con-
                             (ekaviratayamapi ) occurs also
  delight. Ina single person                                Self the
                             the essential delight of the
  centration of the mind on                            run  of man-
      same    (sexual) delight.     In the case of the ordinary
                                                      on account   of the close
      kind,   on   the   occasion   of intercourse,
                                         sexual organs of the man and the
      compactness of the union of the
                                        part upto the foremost part, the
      woman right from the deepest
                                          supreme Sakti), and the delight
      mind of both is dissolved (in the
                                            of the sexual organ of man and
      that resides in the ejaculatory part                        the female
                                        ar region i.e. the yoni or
      the nether aspect of the triangul                          In this
                                                        generated.”
                                       exceedingly
      sexual organ is consequently                                     d
                                     the intercourse has been expresse
      connexion, the mystic sense of
      in the following verse:
                                            ate) the delightful mind in
         “One should throw (i.e concentr
                                          of contraction) and visa (the
      the middle of vahni (the region
                                         whether by itself or permeated
      region of expansion) both ways,                                    s
                                       would then be joined to the blis
       by vdyu (pranic breath). One
Abhinavagupta                                                       207

of sexual union’? (V. Bh. verse 68). Thus it is the association of
beatitude which is the worship of the ‘heart’ i.e., the essential
nature of parddevi.
   As has been said in Trikatantrasara:**
   “The expansion of beatitude is ‘worship’. One should per-
form this worship on the Trikona (triangle)?> with sweet smell
like that of flowers, incense   etc., which   give satisfaction to the
heart.” Everything is pervaded with two mudras which are essen-
tially jadna and kriya Sakti. Only among deities, the display:of
jiidna-mudra or Siva-trikona is prominent internally and that of the
display of kriyd-mudra or Sakti-trikona is external, whereas among
the viras, it is just the reverse. So far as the entrance in the region
of delight or madhya-dhama i.e. susumnd is concerned, there is both
similarity and difference. It is from this point of view that it
has been mentioned that the kriyafakti or the symbol of the female
organ should be offered to jdnagakti or the symbol of the male
sexual organ.

                                Notes
   1. Trtiyam brahma: The usual nomenclature of brahma is
‘aum tat sat; Sat is the third brahma. ‘Sa’ with which begins the
third brahma, viz. ‘sat’ is symbolically designated as the third
brahma.
   2. Tithifa or the lord of the vowels is ‘am’. At the end of this
comes ah or visarga. So sauh is the mantra that indicates anuttara
or the transcendental.
   3. Heart or hrdayam is the centre of Bhairava.       It is the prati-
Sthasthanam—the place of repose of the Lord. In his commen-
tary on verse 2 in P.T.V., A.G. says “param pratisthasthanam
samvidatmahyt’’--the heart is the very consciousness of anuttara; it is
its most interior place of repose, the very centre of consciousness.
In his commentary, L.V., A.G. explains it as “‘Bhairavatmano
bhagavatah Sabdaraseh visvasarirasya hrdayam sarabhiitam’’. If we take
the universe as a body, it would be its very heart, i.e., the very
essence of the universe which in other words, is a mass of sound
 (congealed). Commenting on the word ‘hrdayam’ occurring in
verse 9, A,G, says in P.T.V. that it is yonirapam, the source of all
creative energy.
   4. Ordinarily, yoginis are those initiated ones who have acquired
                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana
208
                                         seems to be used for those
supernatural powers. Here the word
                                   tified with Siva.
deities who are liberated and iden              be a liberated soul,
                                  appears to
   5, Rudra in this context, also
                           .
identified with Rudra Siva
                                    for supernatural powers and
  6. The word ‘yoga’ stands here
union with Siva.
                                      does not mean mere vocal
   7. Samyak uccdra in this context                        mantra
                             ous, subtle movement of the
recitation, but silent, spontane
                                 breath that leads to realization.
within. It is its union with the                     a bijasyoccare
                                                    “Asy
 Commenting         on this in his L.V., A.G. says:                    ra
                                    hrtamatra eva jidnakriyaSakti-Sari
 pranariipatayamn saméavesena tavat                       mukh yam prati -
                                    tam uccdrayitu r abhi
 mantramudrah sadya eva sammukha
 padyante’’.
                                        ra, the yogi becomes totally
     “When by the uccdra of this mant
                                     alone, the mantras and mudras
  absorbed in prana, then by that
                                         ledge (jfdna) and activity
  which are the embodiment of know
                                         reciting the mantra and offer
   (kriya) turn towards the yogi who is
  him all that he desires.””
                                           memorizing but constant
      8, Smarate does not simply mean
                                     why it has been translated as
   attention on the mantra. That is
   ‘has a mindfulness’.                                              -
                                    One ghatika   =24 minutes. So muhi
       9, Muhirta=two ghatikas.
  rta=48 minutes.
                                           ace of Sakti cakra occurring
     10. Cumbaka is sakta sparsa, the embr                    Just as a
                                    aka means magnet.
  in susumna or madhya nadi. Cumb                                  arsa
                                  rds itself, even so the Sakta-sp
  magnet draws iron-fillings towa
                                        .
      draws the aspirants toward itself
                                         eight deities Yogisvari, Brahmi,
         11. The ‘mothers’ refers to the                                a
                                      , Varahi, Aindri and Camund
      Maheévari, Kaumari, Vaisnavi
                                       ps of phonemes.
      presiding over the various grou
        12. They are chiefs of the poginis.
                                            the viras are Aghora etc. In
         13. A.G. says in his L.V. that
                                        the buddhi (intellect), and organs
      P.T.V. he says that the viras are
                                          when they are introverted to-
      of action (kriyendriyakhyah etc.)
      wards Siva.
                                              that these are the deities
         14, Virefvaras: In L.V., A.G. says
      associated with navdtmda mantra.
                                             “taccakrabhyasjata-vibhityasca
         15. Siddhas: A.G. says in L.V.
                                          has who acquire supernatural
      siddha jayante”’--those become sidd
Abhinavagupta                                                              209

powers by their mastery of Sakti-cakra i.e., the wheel or group of
energies.
   16. Sakini: A.G., in his L.V. says “‘Sakinindm Saktindm khecarya-
dibhedabhinnandm’’, i.e. they are Saktis different           from khecari etc.
Laksmirama, in his Vivrti says that they are a group of yoginis.
Svami Lakshmanjee thinks that they are a group of yoginis. They
seem to be female yoginis who have acquired supernatural powers.
   17.    ‘Samayam datva’-- Monier     Williams in his       Sanskrit-English
Dictionary says that ‘samayam da’ means             “to propose an agree-
ment”,     and     “‘samayam kr’? means       ‘‘to make   an   agreement    or
engagement”. The expression has been used here in the sense
of “having made an engagement or appointment.”
  18. These bonds are arava, mayiya and karma malas.
  19. The three recommended to be worshipped are the pard
(supreme), pardpard   (supreme-cum-non-supreme)      and apard
(non-supreme ) faktis. The transcendental or paratita devi is in the
centre.
                                       para




                         apara                    pardpara
  20.     In the tradition of the deities, there is no physical contact
with any female. Those aspirants who have attained to this
level feel the influx of an internal delight owing to the awakening
of the kundalini. Ksobhatmaka visarga refers to the process of the
flow of fabda (sound), sparfa (contact), rapa (form and colour),
rasa (flavour), and gandha (smell) that well up out of sheer delight.
  This     union     is jfdnamudrd,   an internal spiritual       union,   not
kriyamudra, not an actual intercourse.
    21. Only those men and women were entitled to be designated
vira and yogini who had attained khecari simya. They could have
the union of kriyamudra (actual intercourse). They develop such
capacity as enables them to enter sakta stage suddenly without
                                                    Pard-Trisika-Vivarana
210
                                       They have intercourse not
ejaculation on the occasion of orgasm.
                                       for the transformation of
for momentary sexual pleasure but
                                       ht.
consciousness by an inward Sakta delig
                    kinds of inter cours e        described,   there is the
   22, In  the four
                                     the first, of pardpara in the
pervasion of para aspect of Sakti in
                                           h.
second and third and of apard in the fourt
                                            ct of kunda-golaka and in
   In the first three, there is the conta
                                           -Sonita’ in the intercourse.
the fourth, there is the contact of ‘fukra                              y
                                              is’ is called technicall
    The intercourse of the ‘viras’ and ‘yogin
                                           ‘primal sacrifice’.
 the ‘adi-yaga’ which literally means the
                                                 by recollection. There
    923. Smarananda--the bliss of sexual union
                                             ‘inverted kama’ or sexual
 js no actual intercourse here. It is only
 delight.
    24. This book is not available now.
                                              lizes both Siva-trikona
    25. Trikona is a technical word. It symbo
                                                 is predominant and
 in which jadnagakti or the male sexual organ                       is
  Sakti-trikona in which      kriya-Sakti or the female sexual organ
                                                                     is Sakti-
 predominant.        The trikona referred to in Trikatantrasara
  trikona.
                                                 y trikona-mudra or as
     26. Separately, they are known as simpl
                                              two triangles are known
  Siva-trikona or Sakti-trikona. Jointly, the
  as sat-kona-mudra.
                                    ‘TEXT
                                                  9 upto       etadbhairavatma
       From evametat caturdasasuyutam on p. 79,1.
   hrdayam on p. 82, 1.20:
                                TRANSLATION
                                            tithifantasamanvitam,        trtiya-
   Explanation of the terms caturdasayutam,
   brahma, and hydayam
                                             the text from verse 9 on-
       (Now A.G. is giving an explanation of
      wards).
      st interpretation +
                                                 ya-‘sa’ (or amyta-bija) joined
         This i.e., the third brahma, viz. ‘hyda
                                                 is linked with the sixteenth
      with the fourteenth vowel i.e., ‘qu’,
                                                    end of tithifa, the soul of
      i.e., visarga, ‘ah’, which occurs at the
                                               al’ =sauh.)
      fifteen kalas. (Thus it becomes ‘sa-au--
                                             am’   or a pair. With the
         ‘Yuta’ may be interpreted as “yugm
Abhinavagupta                                                       211
fourteenth, the pair makes sixteenth which is the ‘ifa’ or the
presiding deity of the fifteen vowels, viz. visarga (ah).
   Its (i.e. of the visarga) end is the seventeenth, viz., the anu-
tara or the transcendental aspect (of Reality). Hyrdaya or heart
is that which is linked with it (i.e. with anuttara). It has already
been stated in detail that all things whether external such as ajar,
or internal, such as pleasure, take hold of that germ (the source of
all existence) as the highest Reality. Therefore that (anuttara) is
the heart or core (of Reality).
2nd interpretation
    (A.G. gives this interpretation by splitting caturdaga into ‘catur’
 (four) and dasa (states). ) This is an interpretation with reference
to the phoneme ‘a’. That which is brahma, i.e., sdmarasya or equi-
poise, in other words, which is the conjunction of the four states
 (caturdasa) i.e., ‘udyoga’, ‘avabhdsa’, ‘carvana’ and ‘vilapana’ of the
subject and the object is the primal undifferentiated state. Being
linked with that means ‘inseparable from that’.
  The vowels which are up to the end of ‘i are known as tithifa,
because out of them, the other remaining phonemes are born.
The last ones of the vowels coming at the end of the above tithifa
vowels are the four immortal phonemes viz., 7, 7, J, [. Brahma is
well connected with these vowels. From the point of view of
ascent, Siva who is higher than nara and Sakti is the third. There-
fore, the third brahma is identical with supreme Siva.
   The subject (vedaka), moving forward by means of the four
states of udyoga, avabhasana, carvana and vilapana, with his eagerness
increased by those states, dissolving the amytakalas (i.e. 7, 7 hb)
within his Self, unifies the entire objectivity with his Self. Thus,
by accomplishing the fusion of the stir of the state of the subject
and object within the Self, he enters the state of anuttara, the very
heart of the universe which can be accessible only to jitana (gnosis)
characterized by identity, or yoga characterized by activity. As
has been said in Bhagavadgita: “One who is established in yoga
regards everything as the same (divine) in all cases. He sees the
Self (in all beings®) and all beings in the Self”’* (VI, 30).
3rd interpretation: (from the point of view of dnanda i.e., with re-
ference to the phoneme ‘@’.)
   It is GnandaSakti (the power of beatitude) which is the base of
212                                                 Para-Trisika-Vivarana

the rise of pure’ icchdfakti (will), ie. pure icchdsakti is implicit
in dnanda.    In a reverse order, iccha is the third with reference to
kriya Sakti (e.g. 1. kriyd, 2. jana, 3. iccha). This iccha (will) in its
initial aspect, being untainted with desired objects is brahman
 (tadeva prak-kotau-isyamanadi-akalusam brahma).
     Caturdafa may be interpreted as forty by analyzing the word
into ‘Catur ye dasa’ i.e., four times ten, Bhairava together with his
three faktis (viz. pard or supreme, pardpard or supreme-cum-non-
supreme and apard or non-supreme) plus the thirty-six categories
(tattvdni) would make forty. As has been (rightly) said, “The
thirty-six fativas are to be purifed. The purifier is the supreme
Bhairava. The means (of purification) is the supreme triad (viz.
para, parapara, apard). This initiation is the highest one’.
   ‘Caturdaga yutam’    means   ‘connected   with   these forty.’ Ananda
Sakti is already supreme and being perfect, united with all the
vowels and their subsequent phonemes i.e., the consonants which
indicate     earth   etc.   (tadantaih-yoniriipadharadibhih samanvitam).
‘Samanvitam’ is to be taken as an adverb in the sense of ‘having
been unified’.
  This brahma is the hrdaya or heart i.e., the centre.          This is ap-
prehended immediately (sakyd-vibhatam) everywhere (in the form
of vowels and consonants and subjects and objects) and is reali-
zed mainly by intuition (prasamkhyana-gamyam mukhyatah).
   It should be borne in mind that for those who, purified by the
supreme grace, are competent for this realization, the practice of
yoga is useless like sham illusion (vrthaindrajalika-kaland-sadyso )
 4th interpretation: (from the point of view of icch@® i.e. with re-
 ference to the phoneme ‘i’. )
   Now interpretation is being given from the point of view of
iccha (aspect of Siva.). The third is iccha. That is brahma; ‘brahma’
is one who is ‘brmhita’ (grown, swollen, evolved). In this context,
it is brakman, because being identified with the objects of desire,
it is fully grown and is thus full brahma (brmhitam isyamdnena
abhinnena piirnam brahma).
   ‘Caturdasayuta’   may be interpreted as that with which forty
are united. The      word ‘yuta’ coming after caturdasa can also be
taken in the sense of ‘unseparated’, i.e. the forty inhere only in
brahma     as iccha; they are not separate from       brahma.    Tithisanta-
samanvitam may be interpreted as follows. ‘Tithifa’ means of the
Abhinavagupta                                                                      213

lord of vowels,           i.e. anuttara or ‘a’. Tithifanta means ‘at the end
of ‘a’ or ‘a’ of dnanda Sakti’. ‘Samanvitam’ may be analysed into
sam-+-anu--itam. ‘Anu’ means ‘after’ (pascat). ‘Sam’ means well
 (samyak), ‘itam’ means ‘known’. So ‘samanvitam’ means well
known after dnanda. (Siva is well known after dnanda as iccha.
That is the hydaya or core of Bhairava). This icchatmaka brahma is
bodhamaya i.e. pure consciousness.
Sth interpretation: (from the point of view of ifana, i.e. with re-
ference to the phoneme ‘i’.)
    Now the interpretation is being given with reference to ifana,
i.e, the phoneme ‘i’ (ifandpeksaya). ‘Tytiyam brahma’ may be inter-
preted     thus:        The   third i.e.,   icché is brahma.       This    means   that
owing to expansion (prasdra-vasat), it has become great (brhatbha-
tam which is the etymological meaning of brahma) i.e., it has
acquired ifanatd or rulership (isanatém dpannam). Caturdasayutam’
means ‘in which the forty taftvas or categories have mingled with
one another’,
   Tithifa may be interpreted as follows: Of akula or anuttara who
is the lord of the vowels (tithifvarasya akulamaya anuttardtmanah).
Antah means samkytih i.e., absorption i.e., absorption in anuttara,
i.e. the initial pulsation of kulasakti that is absorbed in akula or
anuttara. So tithifantasamanvitam means ‘joined with the primal
pulsation of kulafakti that is absorbed in akula the lord of the
vowels.’ (That is the hydaya or core of Bhairava).
6th interpretation: (from the point of view of unmesa or the phoneme
‘w’.)
   Now the interpretation is given from the point of view of un-
mesa or jiéna-Sakti (the energy of knowledge).
   The third brahma is ifana or ruler.
  When the forty categories are just separating from unmesa, i.e.,
when there is the first pulsation for an external manifestation,
then that state is known as caturdasayutam (yutam meaning separa-
tion in this context).            TithiSdntena means         with the initial pul-
sation.    The     whole      thing     means   with    the desire to shoot forth
(praruruksutaya) ; it is well linked with the initial pulsation of
kulasakti that is absorbed in akula, ‘the lord of the vowels’.                     The
word      ‘sam’    in    ‘samanvitam’     connotes     ‘bharana’   or     maintenance,
i.e. nourishing the state of objectivity.
                                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana
214
                                                      i.e., from the
7th interpretation: (from the point of view of iinatd
point of view of the phoneme ‘a’.
                                                            akti and
   Unata i.e., 7 is the intermediate point between jidnas
               This has been indicated before.            Its nature is adhata,
kriyaSakti.
                                                                nce prior to
ie. to hold the division of the categories of existe
                              itself.   In  accor   dance   with   this estab-
manifestation in jidnasakti
                                   third    brahma    at  this  stage   is that
lished practice (radhya), the
                                         immob ile    manife  statio n  within .
which holds the entire mobile and
                                    (the  entire ly  differ entiat ed  order   of
 In contrast to the afuddha srsti
 manifestation),        and    suddhasuddha   srsti.   (the differentiated-cum-
                                                         undifferentiated
 undifferentiated order of existence), it is a purely
                                      yatmak am).    Hence    it is the third
 order of manifestation (suddha-srst
                                           with   the  tithifas   which are
 brahma. Phonematically, it is joined
                                      vowels   and  with   the   conson ants,
 the very heart of Reality, i.e. the
                                    with ‘ksa’  comin g   after   the  vowels
 beginning with ‘ka’ and ending
  (tadantaih).
  8th interpretation:
                                                       the four void
       The interpretations are given with reference to
  vowels      (finya-catuska),    viz. 1, T, 1, 1. First of all the interpre-
                                                  is the void or
  tation is being given with reference to r. That
                                                   which the condition
  empty dkdsa (ether) symbolized by 7 in
                                                       fire and air either
   (dasa) of the four (catur), viz. the earth, water,
                                                   withdrawal of the
  disappears in the gross form in samhara or
                                                   as void ether. The
  world-process or in the subtle form remains
                                                    in a reverse order
  iccha (i) inhering in 7 (r+i= r), considered
                                                    kriyd) is the third
  with reference to kriyé (dnanda, icchd, jftdna,
                                                       the third brahma
   brahma. Linked (yutam) with that void ether,
                                                  the external glow of
   may be termed icchd. This brahma is full of
                                                    the symbol of pramana
      tithiévara, i.e. the sun.® Arka or the sun is
                                                         joined with the
      or knowledge. So tithiganta-samanvitam means
      tejas or glow of pramana or knowledge.
                                                           7.)
      9th interpretation: (with reference to the phoneme
                                                     ce with the explana-
          This also is to be interpreted in accordan
                                                                         ction
      tion given above.       Trtiyam brahma is now to be taken in conne
                                                   appears in 7 (r-+i.).
      with isana, the symbol of long ‘i’ which
                                                  ous  one ice., as joined
      This also is to be interpreted as the previ
      with the glow of pramana or knowledge.
Abhinavagupta                                                           215

10th interpretation: (with reference to the phoneme /.)
  The third brahma is known as icchd inasmuch as i inheres              in /
(L+i=1).      It is yyoma or Sanya    (ether) which is the inner state
(antaradasa)    of four viz., earth, water,    fire and air, is its base
 (ddhara). Therefore, it is linked with that. This brakma being
connected with some reality which follows the tithifdnta i.e. the
glow of fire (vahni), known as pramatr-tejas is of the nature of the
void (vyomdtma).
11th   interpretation:   (the   interpretation with   reference    to   the
phoneme /)
   As in 7 phoneme, the third brahma inherent in the phoneme / is
ifana (1+i=[) itself. This also is connected, on the one hand,
with the ether, the inner void, the base of the four categories of
earth, water, fire and air (caturdafa-yutam) and on the other,
with something indefinable that follows the pramdtr-tejas (tithi-
Santa).
   Only this one plunges with tremendous momentum into the
fullest form of the void (paripirna Sanya) which is Bhairava itself,
   What this means is the following: When icché together with
ifana which is its own nature, reaches the vyoma plane            (i.e., the
 plane. of the void) of objective experience (vedya), then it rests
 in slight luminosity for a while, suddenly enters the plane of the
void (vyomebhiimim) which is unbounded (aparyantatdm), invari«
 ably steady (nifcalém) almost like wood or stone. About such
Jogis as have entered the state of the void which is like deep sleep
 without the awareness of any object whatsoever (apavedya-susupta),
 it has been said: “Even the sound of a kettle drum or bronze
 cymbal cannot awaken him from his state of absorption”.
12th interpretation: (with reference to e.)
   Now in accordance with the process explained before, when the
six vowels     (a, 4, 7, i, u, 2) enter another, there occurs diversity of
forms. Keeping this in view, the nature of the third brahma is as
follows:     When   iccha (will)   together with ifdna (i, i) is oriented
towards entering anuttara (a, d), thenit experiences the joy of the
emotional excitement generated          by the union of fakti-ksobha or
iccha-Sakti and anuttara, and this is what is said with regard to that
state.
                                                      Paré-Trisika-Vivarana
216
                                            of the particular (visesa)
   Samdanya spanda? is the fourth state
                                         s flowing externally in the
spandas of the qualities of consciousnes
                                         ominantly of the nature of
form of a vowel of slow tempo, pred
                                       predominantly of the nature
sativa, or a vowel of middle tempo,
                                          ominantly of the nature of
of rajas, or a vowel of fast tempo, pred
                                           catuh (four). That is akula
tamas. This is indicated by the word
                                        present. Iccha with ifana (i)
 when the state of sdmanya spanda is
                                         words anutiara is the third
joined with that akula or in other
                                          also joined with 4 occurring
 brahma in this context. This brahma is                             (tithisasya
                                     eme ‘@ i.e., tithifa
 after the termination of the phon
                                    anvitam).
 akdrasya antyena anandagaktyatmand

 13th interpretation: (with reference to ai)
    (In this connexion,          A.G.   splits bhairavatmanah into two, viz.;
 bhairavatma and nah.)
                                              s the highest state, i.e.
    Similarly when that phoneme ¢ enter
                                          acquiring the long state i.e;
 anuttara with dnanda-Sakti (a, @), then
                                           ct form of Bhairava, and is
 ai (dirghibhitam), it abides in the perfe
 our (Saivas’) brahma.
                                            ai (bijayugmam) by entering
       Thus this pair of vowels, viz. e and                  ada® |samar-
                                                            ‘acch
  the vowels, viz.,          aand din various ways®, become
                                            stated to be of the nature
  tha’ and ‘prasava-samartha’?® which are
                                           is supported by such lines
  of ‘kamatattva’ and ‘vak-tattva. This
                                           ld be accomplished with
  as: “All desired objects (kdman) shou
                                             ld be willingly (kémam)
  kama (power of desire). This Sakti shou
   applied to all objects of desire”.
                                                o i.e. anuttara state is
      “The bija or vowel inhering in e and
                                         a (inhering in ai and au).”
   meant to give utterance to kama-tattv
      14th interpretation:    (with reference to o and au)
                                              phonemes i.e. u (unmesa)
        With reference to the fifth and sixth            earlier, viz.,
                                         that has been given
      and a (inatad), the explanation
                                              ed with the distributed form
      that is the third brakma which is join
                                          of vowels and consonants will be
      of forty categories and the group
                                            the anuétara state, it becomes
      helpful here. When this enters                                       0
                                         equal to au. So in the context
      a, d—u, a, equal to 0; a, 4—o
                                          identical with Bhairava.
       and au, this is the third brahma,
                                           to the phoneme ‘am’ or bindu
       5th interpretation: (With reference
      kala.)
Abhinavagupta                                                               217             }
   In accordance with what has been said earlier, brahma joined                                 |
with the distributed form of the forty categories and the group
of vowel-consonants, i.e. brakma appearing in the innumerable                                           .
form of the external world is the bindu or dot (anusvara). It is the                        f
                                                                                                        |
hrdaya or the very core of Reality, viz., Bhairava in his aspect of                                     }

knowledge. Consequently, this core or bindu is the nature of the
third brahma.
                                                                                       i} |
16th interpretation: (with reference to the phoneme ah)                                                 il
   (i) From the point of view of external visarga                                           ' {
  All this multitude of categories darts forth as Bhairava and                              |
being emitted outside and expanding, it is known as brahma
inasmuch as it is of the nature of expansion and abides externally.
   (ii) From the point of view of internal visarga
  It is the stage of visarga which is identified with Bhairava,          which
by setting aside all exclusion indicative of difference and having                          |
acquired ‘the state of everything being all things’ has grown and                                       | Jl
is thus present also as an internal visarga. (Consequently there                                        |
                                                                                            ’
are with reference     to visarga two        aspects of the third brahma—
external and internal). This has been determined                 with atten-                        |
tiveness.                                                                                           \ |
  Thus the pervasion of the third brahma of sixteen                kinds has
been    described    with   reference   to     vowels.   Its pervasion    with     |                .
reference to each consonant has already been described.
   Now the expressions ‘caturdasayutam, tithifanta-samanvitam, tri-
tiyam brahma, and hrdayam Bhairavatma’ have to be explained with                                    |
reference to the various stages of life.
Third brahma with reference to the classification of bodily states                                  }
  CaturdaSayutam: taking the word dasa as dasa, caturdasayutam                                      ;
means joined with the four states. The four states are (i) child-
hood,   (2) youth,    (3) old age, and        (4) taking on another body                                    ;
 (after death). Being an aggregation of these four states (catu-
Stayasamahdramayam), having a gross body composed of the five
gross elements (paficabhautikam) and inwardly united with tithi-                       '
Santa, i.e. préna and apana which are breaths going out (expira-                       I                    :
tion) and coming in (inspiration) respectively (antah tithifantan                      '                    |
pravesanirgamatmand     prandpdna-ripena       yutam),    the puryastaka™     is       |}
                                                          Para-Trisika-Vivarana
218
                                            (brhattvat), it is void, and
also the third brahma. Being pervasive
                                                ca hrdayam Saktyatma) 1
the heart abiding in it is that of Sakti (atra
                                               all  existence) who is all
In fact, it is Siva-bija (bija i.e. source of
                                                 essiv e compactness or
awareness (bodhatmaka) and who in progr
                                                   body,    (2) prana, (3)
solidification having adopted (1) physical
                                                   d   of any  object, and
puryastaka, (4) Siinya or consciousness devoi
                                             ess or the metaphysical
 (5) turya or the fourth state of consciousn
                                                ients with particular
 Self has expanded into five kinds of exper
                                            ctively (1) external self
 kinds of vehicles. These are called respe
                                               , (3) the subtle body
  (bahydtma), (2) prana as the self (bhatdtma)
                                             one state of existence to
 as the self which carries the soul from
                                                  (antaratma), and (5)
 another (dtivahikatmad), (4) the inner self
                                            the hrdaya (centre) i.e.,
  the supreme self (paramdtma). This is
  Bhairava Himself.
                              Notes
                                                 (a) or cit, dnanda
    1. The five main powers of Siva are anuttara
                                         (represented by the pho-
  (represented by the phoneme 4), iccha
                                            by the phoneme ‘w),
  neme ‘i’), jadna or unmesa (represented
                                          ¢, ai, 0, au). Icché comes
  and kriya (represented by the phonemes,
  after dnanda.
                                                                               identity of
      2. This experience is known as vedaka-tadatmya--the
  the subject with all.
                                                                               identity of
      3. This experience is known as vedya-tadatmya--the
   all manifestation with the Self.
                                                              aspect, it is not tain-
       4, Iccha is implicit in dnanda. But in this
                                                               pure.
   ted by any desired object. Hence it is called
                               va’ : The   root     ‘yw’   connotes       both mingling
       5. *Yu misrane amisrane
                                                                 mingling.
    and separation. In this context it connotes
                                        iccha     mentioned            earlier and iccha
        6. The difference between
                                                         parva kofi i.e. of the first
    mentioned now is that the earlier is of
                                                            of the desired object;
    aspect where there is not even a trace
                                       now     is   of   the    second aspect where
    whereas the icchd mentioned
                                                              object.
    there is a subtle incipience of the desired
                                                   towards         external expansion
         7, As soon as anuttara oriented
                                            is  a   lapse     of   its  essential nature.
     begins to throb as vimarSa, there
                                          the     state    of jfidna     and reached the
     But it has not yet emerged from
                                                    itself    as   the    external world.
     state of kriyd by which it manifests
                                            Sanydtisinya.          This     state is called
     This is an intermediate state of
Abhinavagupta                                                        219             |

wyomasamadhi by the mystics. R symbolizes the initial stage of this
samadhi (ecstasy) and / the final.
   The following indicates the four stages of this samadhi:
1—    Unsteady wyomasamadhi followed by pramdana-tejas or glow of
      knowledge.
i       slightly steady yyomasamadhi followed by pramdna-tejas.
/—      Semi-steady vyomasamadhi followed by pramatr-tejas or glow of       }
       the subject.
=       Fully steady wyomasaméadhi followed by praméatr-tejas.
     8. Samadnya spanda: This is the universal vimarsa-Sakti of the         |
Divine, the universal creative pulsation. When        it is exteriorized
and flows in the form of different objects, when it becomes the
manifestation of the gunas of prakrti, it is known as vifesa spanda.         |
   9. “Various ways” (vaicitrydnupravefat) is to be understood              )
thus:
      1, e=a-+i, i, ie. mingling of anuttara, icchd and ifana                    |
      2. e=4@+i, i, i.e. mingling of dnanda, iccha and ifana
      3. ai=a+e, i.e. mingling of anuttara or trikonabija i.e. e
      4. ai=d-+4, i.e. mingling of dnanda and trikonabija, i.e. e                |
In Sarada script e is written as IV. Hence it is called trikonabija,             l| H
i.e. a vowel having three angles.
     10. Acchdda-samartha literally means ‘with the virility covered’       hee
i.e. in-operative. It is also called ‘aksubhdha-samartha’, i.e. with        i}                       ;
inoperative vitality. In the state in which the male principle and                       |
the female principle or in other words the vowel and the con-                    | /
sonant are not in actual union or in the case in which voweland                   il
consonant     do not mingle     with each other, in that there is no        1)
external    manifestation    or expression. This    state is known     as
‘dcchada-samartha’. Kamatattva so long as it is not manifest, so long                        ;
as it is not operative in kdma-vak, it is not of practical use.                                  |
   The mystery of kdéma-vak lies in the actual union of the male                             }
and the female principle or vowel and consonant. The kdmaas-                                 }
pect of Siva-Sakti lies in their samghatta or union.
  The vowel ‘e’ is short (hrasva) which symbolizes only Siva
without the union of Sakti. Hence it is only ‘acchada-samartha.’            |
     11. Prasava-samartha: Literally, it means capable     of begetting     |!
or procreation.       Ai is always long (dirgha), hence it is symbolic
220                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                           prasava-
of the eternal union of Siva-Sakti, and therefore, it is
samartha. This means that both kama-ta ttva and kéma-v ak or  kdma-
                                                      ic of com-
vani are present in it. The phoneme ai is thus symbol
                                                              akti
plete or entire (paripirna) Bhairava, for the union of Siva-S
is whole Bhairava according to Trika.
   12. Kama-tattva and (kdma)-vak-tattva:
   Kama-tattva refers only to the potency of procreation. Hence
                                                                 refers
it is indicative only of dcchdda-samartha. (Kama)-vak-tattva
                                            y   in creativ ity.    It is
to the actual manifestation of the potenc
prasava-samartha,
    Phonetically, a pure vowel uncombined with consonant is re-
                                                                  ttva,
 presentative only of Siva who is dcchdda-samartha, or kdma-ta
                                                           ve   of   the
 but a vowel combined with consonant is representati
                                                     a-sama  rtha     or
 union of Siva-Sakti. Hence it symbolizes prasav
 vak-tattva.
                                                            symbo-
     In the present context, ¢ symbolizes the former and ai
 lizes the latter.
                                                        five tanmatras
      13. Puryastaka is the subtle body composed of the
                                                         sparfa—
 (fabda—sound, riijpa—form and colour, rasa—flavour,
                                                        a.   This
 touch, and gandha—smell) and manas, buddhi and ahamkar
 is also ativahika deha.       It is called dtivahika, because it carries the
                                                     resides in
 Self from one birth to another. Till death the Self
                                deha. According       to Abhinavagupta,          this
 puryastaka     or dtivahika
 is also brahma.
      14.   Saktyatma and the five kinds of experients +
                                                                              ication
     The liquid Siva-bija itself in its progressive solidif
                               Sdkta-Sa rira, puryast   aka-Sar ira,    prana-S arira,
  becomes spanda-farira,
                                gross   body   ) . Since  they  are  all express  ions
  sthiila-Sarira (the external
                                                  vagupta,                    a kind
  of Siva’s energy, they are, according to Abhina
                                                        viz., (1) the
  of self. Thus there are five different kinds of self,
                                                  hitatma, (3) the
  external self—bdahydtma, (2) the pranika self—b
                                                    of existence to
  subtle body that carries the Self from one form
                                              ntardtma, (5) the
  another—ativahikdtma, (4) the inner Self—a
  supreme Self--paramatma.          All this is brahma.

                                           Text

                                      p. 82, 1.20      upto    bhavana     samvedana
       From pravesopayo’tra on
  yuktya niyama eva on p. 89,1. 23.
Abhinavagupta                                                       221

The means for entry into this brahma

                           ‘TRANSLATION
   The means of entering this (which is the heart of Bhairava) is
the following: One should constantly contemplate the various
stages of the experients as integrally Bhairava.    What this means
is the following:
‘Caturdasa-catvadrimSat-yutam-dvigunam-asitil’ means ten (dasa) multi-
plied by four =catudrimsat i.e. forty. Catvdrimfat-yuta forty twice
ihe,                                                             80
Tithayah paficadasa means the lunar fortnight i.e.                15
Ish i.e. Rudrah                                                       11
Antah samanvita yukta dvigunita kalastrayah means double
the three times (present, past, future)...                                6

                                                                    112

The word ‘marma’ in this context means ‘measure of fingers’.
Therefore, ‘dvddafottarasatamarmagata’ means ‘stretching up to
the dimension of 112 fingers.’
   The whole sentence means: ‘One should (constantly) con-
template on the very corporeal existence (farirasattam eva) integ-
rally (anavacchedena) of all the stages of experients stretching
upto the dimension of 112 fingers,! viz., sthilla Sarira, the gross
body, sitksma Sarira, the subtle body, para farira, the causal body,
Sakta Sarira, and spanda Sarira, throbbing with the    expansion      of
the energy of I-sense (mantra-virya-vikasa-sphurikrta), full of the
excitement brought about by visarga-vislesa i.e. the emission of
the semen   of the male state and visarga-samghatta i.e. the       spot
of the union of the emission or the female state         as Bhairava
himself.
   In accordance with the tradition of simultaneous entrance         or
caryakrama, caturdasayutam is to be explained as follows:
  Catasro dasa yasya (tat caturdasayutam) i.e., that which has four
aspects, viz. sweet, astringent, bitter and sour i.e., various kinds
of wine such as madya, surd, dsava etc.
   TithiSanta in this context means the substance that issues forth
from both, viz. vira, and yogini or kunda-golaka.
                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana
222
                                                       their generative
   Samanvitam means the secretion existing within
                                                      ‘Trtiy am brahma’
organs and denoted by the word ‘kusuma’.
                                                 the  form  of  the world
means the ashes that remain after the fuel in
                                                         .   Bhair  avatma
is completely burnt out (ice. pramiti or awareness)
                                                     heart   signif ies  the
means full and satiating liquid. ‘Hrdayam’ or
                                                         existi ng   within
seminal fluid of vira and the thick secretion of yogini
                                                     ances (wine etc.)
the generative organs of the two. These subst
                                           y all taint of difference.
in as much measure as is obtainable destro
                                                      which brings
 The following process is generally observed. Doubt
                                                first sprout of the
 about narrowness of mind is generative of the                    y
                                          es mature, and finall
 mundane tree, and then it expands, becom
                                                   vement) of mun-
 brings about the very fruit (i.e., complete invol
                                                  awakened ones in
 dane existence. It has been fabricated by the
                                                the case of the un-
 such a way that it may become stationary in
                                                                   ained,
 awakened ones.       In the case of fools, once a doubt is entert
                                                       e ways for them,
 it gets rooted in their mind, it fructifies in divers
 according to their peculiar nature.
                                                      n doubts assume
     Therefore, on account of diverse imaginatio
                                                     (unrighteous) etc.
 different forms and are described as adharma
                                                      each country. As
 They vary according to each scripture, and
                                                         the valuables of
  has been said, “Just as a plunderer carries away
                                                  vitality of the body.”
  the house, even so depression saps away the
   (Sp. K. II, 8).
                                                       the stain of the
       When    that doubt is instantly dissolved, then
                                                      of the aspirant is cast
  trouble of the psycho-physical limitations
                                                     he enters the heart of
  out (nirasta-paSava-yantrana kalanko) and
                                                           way, practise the
  Bhairava. Therefore, one should in every
                                                              This is the sense
  discipline that leads to the heart of Bhairava.
                                 tra.   It  has   also  been     said in Bharga~
  of the teaching of Tilaka-Sas
                                                        life of the viras? and
  kha: “One should welcome the mode of
                                                               also, it has been
  should practise it in due order.” In Sarvacara
   said:
                                                             to ignorance, and
      “It is the fool who is subject to doubt owing
                                    All   the   mantra s   are   of the nature of
   thence arise birth and death.
                                                        e of Siva. All
      phonemes,   and all the phonemes are of the natur
                                                           ble is (after all)
      that is considered as drinkable or non-drinka
                                      dered  to be   eatabl e or not eatable
      simply water; all that is consi
                                                             nt earth. Whe-
      is (after all) simply what comes from the eleme
                                     thing  is  (after  all)   the product of
       ther beautiful or ugly, every
Abhinavagupta                                                            223

the element fire. Touchable and untouchable are consideredto
be only a matter of the element air. The hole (whether of the
male organ or the female organ) is only a matter of space.
   Sweets offered (to the deity), the person who offers, and one
who accepts     the offer they are all,   O goddess,    amass of the five
elements. There is nothing which is not a product of the five
elements. For what is one to entertain a desire (as desirable)?
And regarding what one is to hesitate as undesirable?”
   In Viravali Sastra also, this is the opinion.
  In Kramastotra also, it has been said:
  “T bow to Kali who, for regulating the affairs of the world
(jagato yamdya)     portrays the form     of those who        carry out the
option of doing this or that (yamasya yantuh), the option charac-
terized by intentness in accepting one object by keeping off
other   ones    (sarvarthasamkarsana   samyamasya),     and    to Kali   who
simultaneously assimilates (lit. swallows up) in her inner being
the advanced souls above vikalpas and enjoys the grand play of
involving limited experients in vikalpas (mahdgrasavildsa-ragat)
i.e., who carries out savkoca and vikdsa at the same time.”
   This has been explained by me in detail in the gloss on it, viz.
Kramakeli. Therefore, in Trika Sastra, this very activity almost
without any curb is worship. All things are available for the
fulfilment of this worship. The course of knowledge has been
described in detail.    Of the castes—Brahmanas, etc., there is no
fixed principle, for the caste distinction is artificial. The speci-
fication that Brahmanas        alone are entitled for instruction can
convince only the silly herd. This has been conclusively clarified
in detail by the Lord in ‘Mukutasamhita’.             In Trika, it is esta-
blished without any effort at proving.
   (Now another interpretation of the text is taken up)
The treatment of amytabija
   The fourteenth vowel, i.e. the middle one between 0 and am is
au. Tithisania i.e., the final of the vowels is visargai.e. ak. Trtiyam
brahma is that which comes in between ‘sa’ and ‘ha’ i.e. ‘sa’.
This is really the mantra (i.e. sauh) which is the generating seed
of the universe. Whatever existent (sat) represented by that ‘sa’
appears whether in the sphere of earth, prakyti or mdyd that
falling within iccha, jAdna or kriydis a triad (represented by au) and
                                                        Para-Trisika-Vivarana
224
                                             by Siva (represented
being an epitome of all, is delivered in and
                                                    kalpaka) conti-
by the visarga, ah). Thus this indeterminate (nirvi
nuum of manifestation   goes  on ceasel essly.
                                                    it is meant to
   ‘A determinate thought-construct is used when
                                                   cted as it may
express predominantly a sense of difference, conne
                                                ce, ‘this was done in
be with the three series of time, as for instan
                                            is being done in such
 such a manner by women, friend, etc., this
                                                                a manner       (by
 a manner          (by them), this will be done in such
                                                    which is plain
 them). On the contrary, even the stage of Siva
                            is for the unfor tunat e  ones always
 liberation (and amrtabija)
                                                            a desert or a vast
 (ie., in both nirvikalpa and savikalpa states)
                                                      ‘(For the un-
 forest owing to the fear of transmigratory state.
                                to  be  a heap  of tangle d flames in
 fortunate ones) there appears
                                   ng  forth from  water.   From the
 the form of submarine fire bursti
                                                 there appears to be
 full moon, the very abode of nectar-like light,
                                                                  ht-construct,
 splitting of thunderbolt from fear. Through thoug
                                          nce    even     from    the expansion
 there is fear of transmigratory existe
                                                  e   things     extend    in diff-
 of sovereignty (of anuttara). What strang
                                         t    of  evil    fate  !”
 erent ways through the developmen
                                                                     who knows
     In Iévarapratyabhijfia also, it has been said: “He
                                           is  mine      (i.e.  belong s to the
  that all this glory (of manifestation)
                                           cosmo   s   is   his  Self    possesses
  Self), who realizes that the entire
                                                   ing     thoug   ht-co nstru cts
  mahe§ata (lordship) even when dichotomis
                                                  12).     As   among      figures ,
  have their play” (Agamadhikara IIA,
                                              Siva   etc.,    among    spirit  uous
   the four-armed Visnu, the three-eyed
                                                as it were to the state
  liquors, surd, dsava, etc. lead one forcibly
                                                 mes, ‘sa’ leads to the
  of Bhairava, even so, among all the phone
  state of Bhairava.
                                                   of the highest beati-
     ‘Sa’, the nature of which is the ambrosia
                                              mes   within itself, shines
  tude, casting the host of all other phone
                                                           t nature of satya
      forth in manifestation. That which is the highes
                                                 sition ),  satta (existence),
       (truth), sukha (happiness), sampat (acqui
                                                     time ofthe appearance
      all beginning with ‘sa’, is experienced at the
                                                   sensat ion when there is
      of the sound ‘si’ to express pleasurable
                                                      actio n-cum-expansion
      the quivering of the male organ and contr
                                              non-mayiya nature of
      of the female organ. That is really the
      satya etc.
                                                the supreme core i.¢.,
         Those who by means of the grasp of
                                             ng a thing by a mere hint
      amrtabija, have become versed in knowi
Abhinavagupta                                                       225

or gesture can, by penetration into truth through ‘sa’ (tdvati
satyapade anupravesat), know the desired object of others only by
means of the phoneme ‘ga’ etc., out of the innumerable words
such as ‘gagana’,   ‘gavaya’ and   ‘gava’, occurring   initially, in the
middle or at the end. Thus even one phoneme can express the
real sense. As has been said “There is an intermixture of word,
the object denoted and the knowledge (indicated by the word)
by mutual imposition.    If one practises samyama* on each of them
separately, he can acquire the knowledge of the sound of all
creatures.” (Yogasitra III, 17).
   Therefore, for the most part even phonemes ‘a’, ‘ca’ which
are mere ‘particles’ and    affixes etc., even in the state of maya
 (i.e. even in the work-a-day world), as in the highest state ex-
press such a sense of negation and totality (nisedhasamuccayadika-
martham abhidadhati) as are absorbed in the state of the subject and
have not yet acquired objectivity and being destitute of external
gender and number have not yet acquired the status of ‘sattva’ or a
definite word of declension and are non-different from things that
are yet to become the objects of negation and totality. This is the
sense also of what respected Bhartrhari says in the following lines
in Vakyavicara i.e. Vakyapadiya:
   “Every word is initially complete in itself separately but (in a
reciprocal relation of word, sense and knowledge   ) that same word
becomes a correlative”’.
   In Vedic grammar and divine Sastras like Siva-Siitras, an
etymological explanation of words occurring as mantra (sacred
formula) or in initiation, im accordance with the intent of each
letter of the word is considered to be perfectly appropriate. That
is not conventional;   the etymological explanation of every word,
owing to unforeseen destiny has not reached the common people.
So the nature of the phoneme ‘sa’ is also like this. The explanation
of au and the visarga (of the mantra sauh) has already been given.
It has been said in Piirva-Sastra (Malinivijaya):
   “Three spheres (viz. prthivi, prakrti and maya) are pervaded       by
the phoneme ‘sa’, the fourth one (viz. the Sakti sphere) is per-
vaded by the trident i.e. ‘au’ and the one that transcends all,
viz. Siva is indicated by visarga i.e. ah. This is how the pervasion
of pard is described.” (M.V. IV, v. 25).
   “The mystery of this can be understood only when the spiritual
                                                   Para-Trisika-Vivarana
226
                                                monetary position,
director (guru) is satisfied with the physique,
                                                  morals and good
knowledge of the Sastras, good caste, good
                                                 the viras itis only
qualities of the pupil. O goddess, venerated by
                                                    (bhedita) by the
when the mystery (of this mantra) is unravelled
                                             it should be considered
guru, pleased in heart, it is only then that
                                                          not otherwise.”
as bringing about fulfilment (siddhi i.e. liberation),
                                                      said:
 (M.V. III, 57-58.) Elsewhere also it has been
                      srsfi-b ija (i.e. amytab ija or  sauh), one mudra
   “There is only one
                                                     dered is situated
viz. khecari. One in whom both of these are engen
in a stage of surpassing peace.”
                                                       or this mantra is
    Therefore, the rule is that mystic knowledge
                                                           -Sastra (i.e.
not to be recorded (clearly) in a book. In Parva
                                                       disguised way in
Malinivijaya) also ‘sawh’ has been described in a
                                                             creature has
 the following form: “United with the left thigh, the
                                                           the left thigh’
 come according to tradition” in which ‘united with
                                                             the creature
  (vdmajanghanvitah) really means ‘united with au’,
                                                            ion’ (param-
  (jiva) really means ‘sa’, “has come according to tradit
                                                       the whole thing
 paryakramagatah) really means visarga, i.e. (so
                              i.e. sauh). In this book   also, it will be
  really means sa-au-++:
  said “As lying in the seed of a banyan tree”.
  Explanation of etannah.. yogavimuktidam
      [Nah=na--a-+ah    i.e. na, the first letter of Malini, a, the first
                                                    of visarga-Sakti
  letter of Matrkd, symbol of vira, and ah, symbol
                                                       is known as
 yogint. The person born from the union of these
                                                         of the heart
 yogini-jata|. Only such a person can have realization
                                                   whom:
  of Bhairava i.e. amrtabija or the mantra sauh in
                                                           pradurbhita-
      1. The state of an experiencer has arisen (jatah
                                                           be    cognized
  pramatrbhavah) from the union of Siva-vira who is to
                                                               first  letter
  by means of ‘na’ (the first letter of Malini) and ‘a’ (the
   of Matyka) and visargasakti (i.e. yogini).*
                                                                     sfully
      2, Orin him who is Rudra. Rudra is one who can succes
                                                                ble    man.
   keep off or destroy the bonds of maya. He is the verita
                                                             nor    born   of
   He alone can clearly realize it. He who is not Rudra,
                                                             can     bestow
  yogini cannot realize it. The realization of amrtabija
                                                         ained as libera-
      sadyoga or identity with Bhairava, which is ascert

                                  as yoginibhiif. Abhinavagupta   himself   was a
     *Such a person was known
  yoginibhiih,
Abhinavagupta                                                              227

tion (in Trika). The word ‘sadyah’ denotes immediately. This
suggests that he who realizes it is of this kind i.e., Rudra or born
of yogini; no one else can obtain it. He who is of the above kind
realizes it clearly, Thus he realizes the heart i.e., ‘sauh’ which
offers liberation immediately.
Explanation of ‘asya uccara kyte...svadehavesalaksanam’
   Mantras are the sacred phonemes both worldly and divine.
They save by reflection (mananatranaripah). For worldly purposes,
they are of the form of thought-construct i.e., vikalpa; as divine or
transcendental, they are full of samvit-fakti (the power of higher
consciousness). The mudras are the particular dispositions of the
hands and feet of the nature of kriyafakti. Mantramudragana, there-
fore, means a host of great powers brought into being by mantra
and mudra, which in the collective form is identical with parasakti
 (the supreme Sakti). *
 [A.G. explains svadehdvesalaksanam in the following ways: ]
    (1) ‘Sva’ means ‘of one’s own’ (svasya-dtmanah) dehasya—of the
body means ‘of prana, puryastaka, Sanya etc.’ Avefah means imme-
diately by the entrance (in oneself) of the highest nature, there
is the disappearance of the stupefaction which connotes depen-
dence on others and the emergence of the stage of the conscious
subject permeated by autonomy. (2) svadehdvefah may be ana-
lysed into svada@-+-ihd+-dvesah. ‘Svada’ means ‘that which imparts
its own nature     (of prakdsa and vimar$a) to all objects’.        [hd means
expansion of intial icchd up to kriyé. Tayd dveSak means penetra-
tion by such ihd. So the whole phrase (svadehdveSalaksanam) means
in a manner characterized by the penetration in him of the ex-
pansion of iha which has the divine nature of prakafa and vimarsa.
The supreme state of the Experient characterized by such ihd is
svadehavesah. That is the (real) enunciation of this mantra i.e.
sauh which arises in the above manner, being established in the
 highest aspect i.e., the aspect of the supreme conscious Self (irdh-
vdcarane sthitau satyam).

   *In the ordinary life, a sense is meant for a specific purpose. The eye for
instance can only see, not hear. There is, however, a general state of the sense-
activities in which the functions of all the senses can be performed simultane-
ously without the use of the gross senses. This is the collective state of the
 senses,
                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana
228
                                                about has been
  The way by which this state can be brought
                                   interp rets sadyas tanmukha-
determined very often. (Now A.G.
                                               is suggested absorp-
tametc.). By the word ‘sadyalt’ (immediately )
                                              et’ means that after
tion in the anuttara stage. ‘Tanmukhatam
                                         ousnes s (para-ripa). This
samavefa, one acquires supreme consci
                                         animal s whose real nature
penetration is not the like that of the
                                        led.    (Now  A.G, takes up
of Bhairava on the contrary is concea
                                                      in this context
 ‘muhiirtam smarate’ for explanation). ‘Muhirtam’
                                        amytab ija is   undetermined
 means ‘fortyeight minutes’. Though
                                     yet the word   ‘muhirta’   is used   here
 by time      (akdlakalitatve’pi)
                                                  ents which is
 with reference to the experience of other experi
                                              ? means he who esta-
 temporal (para-kalanapeksaya). “Yah smarati
                                              ija    (anusandhatte). He
 blishes congruous connexion with amrtab
                                                   identi cal with him-
 alone holds captive (sambadhnati ) ie. makes
                                                     and   mudra already
 self (svdtmani ekikaroti) the multitude of mantra
                                                          (advayatah). How
 explained because of his unity consciousness
                                          means of cumbaka                  i.e.
 does he do so? He alone can do it who by
                                                  universal aspect,
 by means of Sakta-Sarira which contacts the
                                             establ ishes congruous
 having impressed with mudras on all fronts,
 connexion with amrtabija.
                                                     nty. He who
    The particle ‘tw’ is used in the sense of certai
                                              has  joined  his con-
  being stamped with the pulsation of Sakti,
                                               is the  embod iment
  sciousness in congruous unity with Siva who
                                                  accomplishes this, not
  of this kind of true state i.e., sawh; he alone
                          come      under the category of nara.      (The ex-
  stone etc., which
                                              as follows):
  planation of atitdnagata...kathayati eva is
                                                         which have no
     He tells by mere will (sankalpanat) all the events
                         (anarthariipam), goes on telling       all about them
  obvious meaning
                                               events of the past (atita),
  till the very end (kathaparyantatam nayati),
                                                 or which may be not
  or likely to occur in the future (anagata)
                                                 other form (anyabha-
  existing (pragabhdva), or non-existent in any
                                                   xistence caused by
  vat), i.e. in the form of pradhvamsabhava (non-e                  or
  utter destruction), atyantabhava    (absolute non-existence),
                                            of any other kind of non-
  anyonyabhava (mutual non-existence) or
                                                   ces does he do so?
  existence (itaradapi). Under what circumstan
                                              about a certain matter
  The answer is when he is interrogated
                                                owing. Only when a
   (prstam tad yasyasti sa tatha)—he is all-kn
                                                       s to know (vadeva
      question is put (prasne), then what he desire
                                                         him, he expresses
      kila jRipsyati) that which is already lying within
Abhinavagupta                                                              229

outwardly in vaikhari or gross speech           (éadeva antargaltam    bahisku-
rute). As has been said:
   “As the sustainer of this universe (i.e. Siva) when eagerly
entreated with desire accomplishes all the desires abiding in the
heart of the embodied yogi who is awake after causing the rise of
the moon (soma) and the sun (sirya).”® (Sp. K. III, 1) (i.e. by
means of jfiana and kriydsakti). One and the same yogi even in
memory       (which   refers to the past)       and   imagination       (which
refers to the future)      remains   equally    in the present.       Past and
future do not exist for him. As has been said:
   “Tt is better to remain in the present which is not limited by
the past and the future.”’** When the state of the experient has
been existing from before (from endless time) and there cannot
be any increase or decrease in it, how can it tolerate such limi-
tations of the present? “So and so knows this, does this’. There-
fore, it has ‘sakrdvibhdtatva’, i.e. it is shining eternally. Therefore
has it been said. It is because of this i.e. limitation that the pre-
sent time requires a reference to the past etc. i.e., to the past and
the future. In the absence of limitation, because of non-appli-
cability of expectancy, reality is undetermined by time. This
has been repeatedly stated. It is the Lord alone who makes the
variegated power of time manifest. ‘“Moreover in any waking
condition,    that which    is considered      to be a ghatikd i.e. twenty
four minutes, in that very time those experients, who are under-
going varied experiences in a dream, experience the diversity of
a day, three hours      (prahara), a year etc.”’.
 (Now A.G. is giving an interpretation of the fourteenth verse,
viz. praharadyadabhipretam...rudrasaktibhih. The vision of the Deity
by means of rodhana and dravana. )
   Rodhana-praharah=prakrstoharah; saksat =saksa--ad.
   Praharah has been explained by A.G. as the state of complete
dissolution. The sense is: the aspirants after having realized the
amrta-bija or sauh, and having assimilated the objective world
grasped through the senses into the Self (saksat), or in other
words achieved its dissolution in akula or anuttara.
   Drévana-saksa-at
   Making the same sense-grasped (sa@ksa) objective world which
is now internalized, externalize (at), bringing it face to face with
jidnasakti residing in Sadasiva, the so-called preta            (preta-Sabda-
230                                                   Para-Trigika-Vivarana

vacya-sadasiva-nivista-jidnasakti-abhimukhyena )        undoubtedly (asam-
                      realizes   the   zoddess   iecha-fakti—the   source   of
digdham      kyla),
                                                           ted by the
effecting all external forms (rapandm kalanam) and attrac
                                                    the simultaneous
simultaneous process of rodhana-dravana-Sakti, i.e.
                                                            ve world
Sakti of assimilating inwards the sense-grasped objecti
                                                 kytod) and effecting
 (saksasya-sendriyasya riipasya adanam bhaksanam
externalization       of ‘the    assimilated     objective world (atanam ca
                                                        akti).
satatyagamanam kytva), (realizes the goddess icchd-S
                          and  ‘dra’ denote s dravana .   Rodhana in this
   ‘Rw denotes rodhana
                                                     i.e. withdrawal or
context is a technical term. It means samhdra,
                                                     in this context. It
dissolution. Dravana is also a technical term
                                                 ie. going in a state of
means sysfi i.e. manifestation. Being drawn
                                                      he (the yogi) fully
 absorption through the samhdara and srsti faktis,
                                                        to be said. (First
 perceives i.e. experiences. This is what is meant
                                                           tion and then
 of all, there is rodhana—the state of inward dissolu
 there is dravana, the state of external expansion).
 1. Rodhana—the state of inward dissolution
                                                                am darsanam
     What is said to be perception or experience (yadid
                                  who,    having   reache  d    the state of
  nama) that comes to the yogi
                              of all the   extern al   vikalpa s   (thought-
  akula in which the waves
                                 (tat-s arva-t araiig a-prat yastam ayardhya-
  constructs) have dissolved
                                                            has reached its
  akula-sattadhiradhasya) and full of iccha-Sakti which
                                       contac t    with  sodtant rya (divine
  highest capacity by coming in
                                        (anant a-mahi ma-sva tantry a-yogat ) ,
  autonomy) full of endless glory
  realizes the dissolution of icchd  in  anuttar a.

  2. Dravana—the state of external expansion.
                                                              assumes the
     Then the same icchd becoming externally oriented
                                              indist inct appea rances of
  aspect of jfdnasakti, having slightly
   difference as its object.
                                                       even in internal orien-
      Rodhana even in external orientation and Dravana
      tation
                                                                    al pulsa-
         The jfdnasakti of the nature of samanya spanda (gener
                                                      es    the form      of the
      tion) expanding towards the outside, assum
                                                           yogi at   this   state
      senses of the nature of specific spanda and the
                                                        in  the same      condi-
      achieves the rodhana or arresting of the senses
                                                                   dgamana or
      tion outside. This is indeed atana in rodhana i.e. sataty
                                                         Theref ore,     rodhana
      continuous movement in rodhana or arresting.
Abhinavagupta                                                               230
is both draévana or expansion and bhaksana           (swallowing) or dis-
solution.   This    process   is known    as vamana-bhaksana,      i.e.   both
 ejecting outside and swallowing within. Darfana or experience
 is of the nature of prathd i.e. it involves both sdmanya or general
Jjftana and visfesa or specific jana and what is pratha involves diver-
sity of expansion (prathdyasca tathavidha-vaicitrya-yogat). A state
 of indecision or doubt depends on two alternatives, e.g., whether
this is the trunk of a tree or a human being.       Even this uncertainty
has an element of certainty about it (for certainly it is one of
these and cannot be anything else). Thus the divine power
achieves what is hard to accomplish.
Explanation of prahara...smarana
   Such a yogi is verily Bhairava who has the power of memory
which is pardpara i.e. which assimilates a past experience to a
present one. That is why it has been said only in ‘two praharas’
i.e. by placing two cognitions (fara and apara) together. The para
or the previous or the past prahara is that of actual experience and
the apara or the second prakara is the cognition of the sameness             in
the present. Remembering            the amrtabija in this way         (i.e. in
pardpara*    way)    he   becomes    settled   in yyoma or    empty       space
 (vyomastho jdyate) i.e. he acquires the status of an experient in
puryastaka (at the time of perception or first experience) and Sanya
or void (at the time of apohana). When his perceptual experience
is characterized by prahara i.e. by complete absorption, he
deliberates upon it by calling it up in memory again and again.
“‘Saksat pasyati asamdigdham...rudra Saktibhih’’ is connected with
this as with the previous one. It has been said that till that time
even the memory is like the original experience itself. It is said
that he is united with the vikalpa Sakti of the nature of apara i.e.,
apohana i.e., he experiences even the gap occurring between the
first experience arid its recall.
 (Now A.G. is explaining the 15th and 16th verses). When per-
ceiving, then remembering, then settled in yoma i.e., in apohana
 (the experience of the gap between the first experience and its
recall), he experiences again by means of these processes uni-
tedly   (trayena) then with three kinds of cognition characterized
   *Pardpara means that together with darfana or anubhavajidna,   the yogi has
smrtijfidna, vikalpaj Adana and apohanajfdna.
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
232
                                                                     r
                                the matarah sarvd i.e., all the inne
by the expression praharatraya,                                   sen-
                                inner supreme energies of the
pramataras, in other words the
                                 siddha or perfect in experiencing
 ses,° being experients become                          successful in
                                    experients being
the objects regardless of the other
experiencing them.”
                                        gained aisvarya i.e., sudtan-
    Yogesvaryah means those who have
                                     characterized by identity with
 trya or autonomy by means of yoga
                                  Mahabalah means ‘mahat balam
 the inner genuine experient.
                                     is great. The bala or prowess
yasam tah’ i.e., they whose prowess                               any
                                       in all directions without
 here means the power of expanding
                                       senses. ‘They’ refers to the
 check in contrast to the external
                                       )   viz., manas, buddhi and
 inner Saktis (antah-karana-didhatayah                     of the res-
 ahamkara.       These   are also    perfect because regardless
                                          empirical texts, they are
 traints advocated by all the ordinary
                                       ur or autonomy.
 full of activity prompted by the ardo
                                           are called the organs of
     Virah—Vircs in this context are what                also becorne
                                       such yogis). They
  sense and the organs of action (of
                                      of the viras or in other words,
  perfect. Viresvarah i.e., the lords                        ct.
                                           also become perfe
  the energies of ka and other phonemes
                                        other divinities who appear
     ‘Sakiniganah’ means Brahmi and
                                       other phonemes and who are
  with the manifestation of ‘ka’ and
                                        mental modes such as attrac-
   a host of powers denoting different
                                          rs also becomes perfect.
  tion, aversion etc. This host of powe
                                    is powerful (balavan).
  Since it is perfect, therefore it                                   parama-
                                       s   (they) offer the
     Paramam siddhim yacchanti: mean
                                     i.e., pramiti or correct notion
  perfection; parama means parasyamd                                is
                         experient   (parasya).   This siddhi or perfection
      of the supreme
                                             means of proof, the yogi is
      vikalpatmikd, i.e., even with external
                                               eme, e.g., such is the su-
      able to pinpoint the nature of the supr
                                             (most) desired object of the
      preme (asau parah) or they offer the
                                              ) ‘I’. Two alternative courses
      yogi, viz. the realization of the (real
                                                 essively (kramasah) both to
       would be applicable (vikalpayoga) succ
                                             practice as a matter of course
       the yogi who carries on the yogic
                                           (ajntatarthakriye ) and also to the
       without knowing its full value
                                             with full knowledge of its
      yogi who carries on the yogic practice
       purport ( jnatarthakriye) .
      Explanation of ‘anena.. .prasidhyatv’
                                            ts       (mantrinah)   who practise
         In short (kim bahund), those adep
 Abhinavagupta                                                             233

 the discipline    of spiritual   perfection (sddhayanti)     in accordance
 with the mantra of other scriptures, they also will become perfect
by this creative mantra (hydayam i.e., sauh bija) and will become
liberated while alive. Without this (mantra) the highest per-
fection will not be achieved. This is the sense.
    The interpretation of the last lin , viz. ‘yat kincit bhairava etc’
is the following: ‘Siddhah or they who have become perfect
 (through jrdna), sddhayanti or they who are carrying on the dis-
cipline of spiritual life (through yoga), setsyanti or they who will
become perfect gradually by means of powers like animd etc., all
these have achieved or will achieve perfection only through this
manira (i.e., sauh). Without penetration in this central creative
mantra, even success in the pragmatic life will not be achieved,
or in ¢antra i.e., in the practical discipline of yoga, all that is due
to this (mantra) only.
   Thus the highest Lord himself is this hrdaya bija i.e., sauh
mantra. In this way strengthened by the three Saktis (of para,
pardpara and apard,), he is full of udaya-samhdra-maya* and identi-
cal with infinite Consciousness.®
    (A.G. is now explaining adystamandalo’pi)
    (1) From the standpoint of pati
   Thus, ‘adrsta’ is that which is unseen i.e., unknown, the sphere
of ignorance, the limitation of maya (akhyati-ripam andam maya-
malam). This hydaya-bija (sauk) realized in this way removes
(lumpati) the limitation of maya which brings about a sense of
differentiation and also the primal ignorance (akhyati ripam) of the
true nature of the Self.
   (2)   From the standpoint of pasu (adrstam, andani eva lopah, tadyogi)
   At the same time, this amyta-bija having accepted the                 limi-
tation (lopa or sankoca) pervading the four spheres of Sakti,            maya
etc. is present in the form of limitation also.
   Thus the highest Lord who is a mass of consciousness has vidya
 (ie. anubhava or the pard state),       maya   (i.e., apohana or the apara

   *Udaya-samhara-maya is a technical term.    It means that at the time of ex-
perience, it is udiyamana (rising), at the time of memory (smrti), it is udaya-
samhara-maya, at the time of apohana, it is only samhdra-maya. Udaya-samhara
includes all the three.
                                                    Pard-Trisikd-Vivarana
234
                                     para state).    As has been rightly
state) and both (i.e.; smyti or pard
said:
                                        supreme Sakti (pard), smarana
    “Darfana i.e., experience is the                                     ;
                                    non-supreme Sakti (pardpara)
 or memory is the supreme-cum-                               i (apa rd).
                                       the non-supreme Sakt
 vikalpa or alternation or apohana is
                                      s.   He has both the powers of
 The Lord has all the three Sakti
                                          and vidya (the power of non-
 maya (the power of differentiation)                res (viz., prthivi,
                                    has four sphe
 difference or identity). Maya                                       of
                                 is  the consciousness of Self, full
 prakrti, maya and Sakti). Vidyd
                                            .”
 grace, the beneficent Energy of Siva
                                      be interpreted primarily in
    If the above verses have to
                                      prescribed in Sri-piirvasastra
 accordance with yoga then as
                                     first follow holy observance (of
  (Malinivijaya) etc., one should
                                          mantra (i.e. sauh). The verses
 fasting etc.) and then enunciate this
                                    in this way, for in the fixed prac-
 should be interpreted evidently
                                      erous practices depending on
 tices of yoga (drstakaryesu) the num                                s also
  a fixed order        refer only   to certain fixed rules. The yogi
                                       ne in connexion with nerves,
  have to observe a fixed discipli
                                    as®, creative contemplation (bha-
  vortices of energy (cakra), karan
  vand), etc.
                                  Notes
                                        I-sense will be clear from the
         1. The throb of the corporeal
      following chart:
                                                                  of the
                       The state   Name of Dimension Folds
      Dimension                                  of the      Body
                        of the     the body
                                                fing ers
                       Experient

                                         Sthila-       84      The external
      From the toe        Bahyatma
                                         Sarira                fold of the
      of the foot up      pramata
                                                               body
      to the head
                                         Siksma-        12      The inner
      From the toe         Bhiitatma-
                           pramata       farira     (84-412) = second fold
      of the foot up                                     96
      to Brahma-
      randhra
                                         Para-          12      Third fold
       From the toe        Ativahika-
                                          farira   (9612) =     measured up-
       of the foot         atma-
                                                        108     to 12 fingers
       upward upto         pramata or
Abhinavagupta                                                        235

108 fingers         puryastaka                              above
                                                           Brahma-
                                                           randhra
From the toe of Antaratma-         Sakta-          2    Fourth       fold
the foot down- pramata             Sarira     (108-+2)=
ward in the                                      110
earth upto two
fingers
Two fingers        Paramatma-       Spanda-      2    Fifth
above the          pramata          §arira  (110+2) = fold
Ativahika                                      112

   2. ‘Vira’: This means literally a ‘hero’. The term designates a
special category of Tantrika initiates characterized by courage
and an inclination towards orgiastic practices.
   3. This means that the mantra ‘sauk’ covers the entire mani-
festation.
   4. Samyama is a technical word of the Yoga-Sittras of Patafijali.
It includes the three practices of dhdrand or fixing the attention,
dhyana or meditation and saméadhi or complete absorption of the
mind.
   5. Here soma or the moon symbolizes jfidna-Sakti (the power of
knowledge) and sirya or sun symbolizes kriyafakti (the power of
action).
   5.a cf. Malinivijaya Varttika I, 156, with the sukhi bhavet.
     6. ParameSa-Sakti means the inner supreme energy of the sen-
 ses. The word mdtarak connotes these inner faktis or energies
 of the senses. There is a difference between indriya-fakti and
 indriyavrtti. IndriyaSakti means the inner energy of the senses, indri-
Javrtti: means the mode in which senses perceive objects. Indri-
Javztti is extroverted; indriyasakti is introverted. Indriyafakti has
 abhedajitana or identity-consciousness ; indriyavrtti is concerned with
 bhedajftana, the difference and variety of objects.
     7. When all perceivers perceive the same object as it is, e.g.,
 when all perceive a jar as jar, then the perception is confirmed
 and it is considered to be the right perception. The yogi’s per-
 ception is perfect whether other people perceive a particular
 object in the same way or not. Moreover, the perception of other
                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana
236
                                       whereas the perception of the
people is of the kind of indriyavrtti,                     order.
                                          is of a different
yogi is of the kind of indriyasakti which
                                        udes the ideas of ‘prasdra-
   8. Ananta-samvidaikyasali: This incl
                                   ra-hydaya is a-ha-m’. This is
hydaya’ and samhdra-hydaya. Prasa                           ically
                                        is m-ha-a. This is techn
known as ‘hrdaya-bija’. Samhdra-hrdaya
                                            identity of the infinite I-
known as pinda-natha. Both refer to the
consciousness.
                                             which the aspirant con-
   9. Karana is one of the drava updyas by                           epitome
                                 nervous system as an
 templates over the body and the
 of the cosmos.
                         InTRODUCTION TO VERSE 19
                                          er than Kula’. Now of this
    It has been said that ‘“Trika is high
                                          ds all. It is this which the
 Trika, anuttara is that which transcen
 Tantra is going to describe.
       ADRSTAMANDALO’PI EVAM
            YAH KASCID VETTI TATTVATAH
       SA SIDDHIBHAGBHAVEN NITYAM
                  SA YOGI SA CA DIKSITAH                //19/
                                TRANSLATION
                                              antra sauh) even if he
        Whosoever thus knows truly (the bijam             ction eter-
                                         s the success of perfe
      has not seen the mandala, he enjoy
                                         (really)       initiated.
      nally. He is (perfect) yogi, he is
                                       TEXT
                                                                    |. 19,
          From   mandalam   on p. 90, 1. 7 upto nityamiti on p. 90,
                                 TRANSLATION
                                             gram) in which the deity
         Mandala’ means a mystic circle (dia                 who has
                                                        or one
      is installed.   Adysta means one who has not seen
                                                 aptamelako’pi) by means of
      not joined the association of yoginis (apr                Sakti process
                                           ious rites thro ugh
      carya or observance of certain relig                    ised   at night
                                             ious rite  pract
       (Saktopaya) or niSatana ice., a relig
                                         a i.e. a persistent process of
       through dpava process or hathapak
                                       consciousness of the experient
       assimilating experience to the
       classed under Sambhava process.
                                             be the system of nerves as
         Another explanation of mandala may
                                        smaller group of nerves.
       medium of pranic currents and a                       of mandala
                                         to this interpretation
          So ‘adrstamandalal’ according
       would mean ‘one who has     not perceived the group of nerves etc.
                                                            (Continued on page 238)
  Abhinavagupta                                              237




                  ime    CHART     No.    10
           iy




                                                ba
Pars foe




                  Go                    GES
         The outline of the Mandala of the Trident and Lotuses
            (trisalabjamandalam) prescribed by MVUT 9.6-31
                              (TA 31.62-85b).
                  Diagram   Courtesy:    A,    Sanderson
                                                         Para-Trisika-Vioarana
238
                                           be interpreted as not even
by means      of yogic practice’, it may
                                            ent with lotuses.? In the
having     seen the diagram of the trid                              is
                                        the ceremony of initiation
matter     of realization, mandala or
of no use.
                                 all of a sudden.
      <Evam means ‘evameva’ i.e.
                                          been favoured with the highest
    ‘Yah kascit” means: he who has                                             ‘This
                                  ‘yetti? means he alone-knows.
grace (parasaktipatanugrhito ),                            iti ati on)?’
                              what else is diksa (in
realization alone is diksa,                                                   d by
    Therefore thus knowin    g,    he has (really) been initiate
                                                            that    “Th    e     man
                                    . The statement
 omnipresent revered Bhairava                                   elf      (wit   hout
                                        ts a mantra by hims
 with little intelligence who adop                                                   r
                                     ubl  e’ applies only to mantras othe
 the help of a guru) gets into tro                              viz.,   sauhk     bija,
                                   ra, not to this mantra,
 than this central seminal mant                                                  even
                                     rava. This mantra transcends
 for it is the very heart of Bhai                                 esv   ara    .
                                 treévara and Mantramah
 such deities as Mantra, Man                                                        the
                                        a book. It is the very core of
     This cannot be expressed in                                    this     is  trul y
                                       clearly laid down that
  Divine. It has (already) been                                         ‘any       one’
                                      of the highest grace. So
  acquired only by the favour                                                          s
                                     ire    it irrespective of caste, religiou
  suggests that any one can acqu
                                  it is the main point.
  vow, caryd etc. ; insight into                                               yearns
                                       on. Since a yogi is one who
      That yogi enjoys full perfecti                                                 the
                                       ne, initiation characterize by      d
   after communion with the Divi                                    ion       of   maya
                                        dana) and the destruct
   gift of spiritual insight (jftana-                                         ‘ca’ has
                                    to him alone. The particle
    (mayaksapana )* is imparted                                                       ly
                                         y. Therefore he should be whol
   been used in the sense of certaint                                   is    the   yogi
                                           it is said, “He alone
    considered a yogi. That is why                                             d.”
                                      on. He alone is ever initiate
    who has attained full perfecti
                                          Notes
                                   ts it in three ways:
         1. Mandala: A.G. interpre                          alled.   This is
                          a circle in which a deity is inst
          (1) devatacakram,                                         for   the
                                      d, (2) the group of nerves
      the usual meaning of the wor                                   trid ent
                                            (3) the diagram of the
      passage of pranic currents, and
      with lotuses.                                                        re-
                                           is the diagram of a triangle
          2. trigalabjadimandalam: This                            A   whi te
                                      or Devi in all her aspects.
       presenting the divine Sakti                                     shi p.
                                          prong of the trifala for wor
       lotus (abja) is placed on each
                                        previons page.
       The diagram is given on the                                       with
                                        a diagram like this was drawn
       On the occasion of initiation,
Abhinavagupta                                                                     239
lines of lime and shown to the disciple before initiation.
    3. The full verse referred to is as follows:

         Svayamgrhita mantragca klisyante calpabuddhayah
         Lipisthitastu    yo mantro        nirviryah         so’trakalpitah //

   “People with little intelligence who adopt a mantra by them-
selves (without its being imparted by a guru) get into trouble.
That mantra which is simply recorded in a book is without any
power.     This is what is declared here.”
  4. This is hermeneutic interpretation of diksa. The letter ‘di’
means     ‘diyate jidnam’       i.e. insight    is imparted;        the letter   ‘ksa’
means     ‘ksiyate papam’ i.e., sin is destroyed.

                         TEXT     OF THE       VERSE
ANENA JNATAMATRENA JNAYATE SARVASAKTIBHIH
                                TRANSLATION
  By mere knowledge of this mantra he (being perfect) is known
by all the Saktis.

    TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY                      (p. 90, 1. 22 to 1. 24)
   He is known by all the faktis means ‘by all the omniscient
deities’. By mere knowledge of this mantra, he knows whatever
is known by those Saktis. This should be interpreted as before:
*Sarvabhih Saktibhih’ is used in an instrumental sense.

                            TEXT     OF THE VERSE

         SAKINIKULASAMANYO
          BHAVED YOGAM VINAPI                           HI      //20//
                                  ‘TRANSLATION
  Even without yoga, he becomes equal to the family of Sakinis.

     TRANSLATION OF THE CoMMENTARY                      (p. 91, L. 4 to 1. 6)
   Merely by having an insight in this mantra,) without the
practice of yoga which brings about identity with the Divine after
the end of this body formed by mayd, the aspirant not only be-
                                                           Para-Trisika-Vivarana
240
                                     nis—but becomes even superior
comes equal to the family of Saki                                     lar
                                ni has only vifesa spanda (particu
to them, for the group of Saki                         rcou rse  char ac-
                                       viour and  inte
spanda) (which only leads to beha
                        ion) , wher eas  he (the aspirant) becomes
terised by differentiat
                                    universal pulsation of the Divine,
identified with sémanya spanda or                             spandariipo
                                                            (sémanya
                energy   of the    unsurpassed     akula
 with    the
                                  er of the group of Saktis.
 akularipah) and becomes the mast
                                         Notes
                                         merely    having     an insight     in this
      1. Anena jiiatamatrena       (by
                                   it thus: Etatsamavesabhyasat i.c.,
 mantra): In L.V. A.G. explains
                                    this (i.e. sauh).
 by the practice of absorption in
                           In L.V. ,    A.G. explains it thus: Sakini-
    2. Sakinikulasdmanyo:                                  na sarvasya-
                                   o bhavatt, anenajfidtamalre
 kulena devatacakrena samanyastuly                                 nities,
                                 mes equal to the group of divi
 vastunah piirandt, i.e. He beco                          e is the pleni-
                                 this (mantra), ther
  for merely by the knowledge of
  tude of all things.                                says that the
     In his Vivarana commentary on Paratrisika, A.G.
                                                                      not
                               a knowledge of the mantra sauh
  aspirant who has acquired                              rior  to  them ,
                                 nis but even rises supe
  only becomes equal to the Saki                     da,   wher eas  this
                                       to visesa span
  for the Sakinis are confined only
               ires the ener gy of sdma nya or universal spanda.
  aspirant acqu
                                Text OF THE VERSE

         AVIDHIJNO          VIDHANAJNO
                                YAJANAM          PRATI       //21//
                  JAYATE
                                   TRANSLATION
                                                                          ls,
                                      injunctions pertaining to ritua
        Even if he is ignorant of the                           ng sacri fice
                                    the inju ncti ons conc erni
      he acquires the knowledge of
      (by himself).
                                     TARY               (p. 91, 1. 10 to L 15)
          "TRANSLATION OF THE COMMEN
                                         @nam)              (of the injunctions per-
         Vidhi means both knowledge (jrd                                   application
                                  ceremonies)     and    its practical
      taining    to religious
                                          e two is a mere animal. As has
      (kriy@). He who has not got thes                               thinking
                                    “He who is engaged only in
      been said in Kiranagama:                                akah ) is always
                                         ent (bhogopayavicint
      of the means of (sensuous ) enjoym
Abhinavagupta                                                            241

a mere formless animal, ignorant, incapable of doing anything,
having no qualities, wanting in power, diffusive (vydapi), con-
fined only within mdayd, and steeped in her interior.”
  Even such an animal by mere insight into this mantra becomes
a vidhdnajia of sacrifice. ‘Vidhanajita’ is one who has both know-
 ledge of the injunctions and their practical application (vidhdnam
jiiaca yasya sah) i.e., he is both a knower and performer of the
ceremony appropriate to a certain religious obligation               (visaya-
samgata karanam prati karta jfiata ca).
   Though the sacrifice that he performs may not be formally
perfect, yet it brings about the full fruit for him, for this central
seminal mantra is all-inclusive.

                        TEXT OF THE VERSE

    KALAGNIM         ADITAH        KRTVA
         MAYANTAM BRAHMADEHAGAM
    SIVO VISVADYANANTANTAH
           PARAM      SAKTITRAYAM            MATAM        // 22 //

                            ‘TRANSLATION

   Beginning from kéldgnii.e., the earth right up to mdpd, thirtyone
tattvas rest in brahma-body. Siva i.e. andasrita Siva with Sakti
rests in an*-+-anta--antah i.e.,in visarga (coming) at the end of ‘a’,
ie. ah. In the remaining (para)* i.e., au beginning from Suddha-
vidya (visvddi), rests Sakti, Sakti-traya i.e., Sakti-trisaila—Sadasiva,
Isvara and Suddhavidya of the nature of icchd, jana and kriyd.
This Sakti-trifala is acknowledged as the Supreme (tacca param
matam) or Creative force (visargamaya).

  TRANSLATION OF THE ComMMENTARY          (p.91, 1. 21 to p. 92, 1. 2)

    Kalagni is the initial bhuvana of the earth category. So ‘Kala-
gnim aditah krtvd mdyantam’ means from the earth category upto
maya. All these rest in the body i.e., the essential nature of brahma,
i.e. in ‘sa’.
   Visvadi means from suddhavidya up to andsrita Siva with Sakti.
Anantah =an-+-anta+-antah. An means the vowel ‘a’, antak means
the end of vowels i.e. visarga. Param that which expands (visargat-
makam)   i.e., expands in Suddhavidya,        Isvara    and   Sadasiva.
                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana
242
                                               three Saktis viz. iccha,
Sakti-trayam* means that which consists of
                                              by these, i.e. sa-au--
jana and kriyd. That which is constituted
                                               same thing has been
 ah: is considered to be the supreme. The
                              ning   with  the   phoneme ‘sa’. (The
 declared by the verse, begin
                                               the earth up to maya,
 phoneme ‘sa’ is symbolic of 31 tattvas from                              ‘al’
                                          and Sadagiva and
 ‘au’ is symbolic of Suddhavidya, Isvara,
                                            includes all the 36
 is symbolic of Siva and Sakti. Thus ‘sawh’
 tattvas.)
                                     Notes
                                                         ‘sa’. This
    1. Brahmadehagam: Brahma in this context means
                                               says that    Brahma
 interpretation is based on Bhagavadgita which
                                                   ‘sa’    is considered to
 is om, tat, sat. The ‘t’ of ‘sat’ is dropped, and
                                                                   name
 be Brahma.       It is generally called tytiyam brahma, the third
                                         and iat.
 of Brahma, the first two names being om
                                                       me ‘a’ is gene-
     2. ‘a’ with: becomes ah i.e. visarga. The phone
                                                   the basis of all ex-
  rally called ananta in Trika inasmuch as it is
  pansion.
                                                        two meanings.
      3. The word ‘para’ being repeated twice yields
                                                         d para means
  The first para means ‘in the remaining’ and the secon
   the supreme.
                                                           three Saktis,
       4. Sakti-trayam means that which is constituted by
                                                        of Igvara, and
   viz. iccha, symbolic of Sadasiva, jiiana, symbolic
   kriyd, symbolic of Suddhavidya.
                            Text OF THE VERSE

         TADANTARVARTI              YATKINCIT
                 SUDDHAMARGE              VYAVASTHITAM /
         ANURVISUDDHAM                ACIRAT
                 AISVARAM          JNANAM ASNUTE               // 23 //
                                  TRANSLATION
                                                            reposing in
        Whatever is established (in the universe), all that
                                                            it in sawh in a pure
      that i.e., sawh, is in the pure way i.e. it is implic
                                                           d individual
      way i.e., without any mala or limitation. The limite
                                            edge  of the Divine   (after
      soon enough obtains the pure knowl
      the realization of sauh).
Abhinavagupta                                                           243

   TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY            (p. 92, 1. 7   to I. 10)

  Whatever is established in a variegated way i.e. in bhedabheda
and bheda in the universe, all that reposes in the central seminal
mantra sauh in a pure state i.e. in a state of undifferentiated   unity.
Anu is (1) one who breathes or (2) one who experiences and
utters in a limited way. Even he (after the realization of sauh)
becomes topmost of living beings (mirdhanyo bhavan) and obtains
by the influence of this mantra (tatprabhdvat) the Divine knowledge
very soon. How?
                        Text   OF   THE VERSE

    TACCODAKAH SIVOJNEYAH
         SARVAJNAH PARAMESVARAH /
    SARVAGO NIRMALAH SVACCHAS
         TRPTAH SVAYATANAH SUCIH // 24 //
                          ‘TRANSLATION
   (The first line has two senses:)     (1) The guru who inspires to
know the secret of that amrta-bija should be considered as Siva.
   (2) It should be known that He who inspires to know this
mantra is Siva. He is unknown to others but He is Himself omni-
scient, Supreme Lord. He is omnipresent, spotless, pure,               fully
satisfied, abiding in His own essential nature, unsullied.

    TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY          (p. 92, 1. 16 to 1. 19)

    The guru or spiritual director who inspires this mantra to rea-
lize should be understood to be Siva Himself. It is Siva alone
who inspires it. He is beyond comprehension, for he is the (eter-
nal) subject (and cannot be reduced to an object). Svdyatana
is one who (while abiding in his essential nature) emanates his
own (sva) ayas i.e., the existence or objects in the form of con-
sciousness. All this has been delineated in detail (earlier),
    Thus having described it in detail, the scripture emphasizes
the purport in conclusion.
                 Text oF VERSES 25 AND 26

    YATHA NYAGRODHABIJASTHAH
         SAKTIRUPO MAHADRUMAH /
                                                     Para-Trisika-Vivarana
244

      TATHA HRDAYABIJASTHAM
           JAGADETACCARACARAM    1/25 |/
      EVAM YO VETTI  TAT TVE NA
           TASYA  NIRVANAGAMINI /
       DIKSA       BHAVATYASAMDIGDHA
               TILAJYAHUTIVARJITA                // 26 |]
                               TRANSLATION
                                  in the form of potency in its
    As the great banyan tree lies
                                   all the mobile and immobile
 seed, even so this universe with
                                    (sauh), the very heart of the
 beings lies in the seminal mantra
 Supreme. 25.
                                                    becomes competent
    He who knows this mantra in its essence;                     without
                                   (liberation ) undoubtedly,
 for initiation leading to nirvana
                                                   (ahuti) with sesamum
 any formal ceremony consisting of oblation
                                     butter).  26.
 indicum (tila) and ghee (melted
                                           (p. 93, 1. 7 to p. 94, 1.5)
    TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY
                                           is nothing in this world
       It has already been said that there
  which is simply non-existent  . Everything (in its place) is all-
                                        banyan tree lie all the re-
  inclusive. Just as in the seed of the                   , even so
  levant parts, viz. sprout, branches, leaves, and fruits
                                     the Supreme.             The certain con-
  this universe lies in the heart of
                                          d initiation for liberation
  viction of this is (in itself) undoubte
      (nirvana).   As has been said:
                                                     leading to immortality;
         “This is the acquisition of ambrosia
                                                  grip of Self). This alone is
      this alone is the realization of Self (lit.
                                              iksa) leading to identity with
      the initiation of liberation (nirvana-d
      Siva”. (Sp. K. II, 7)
                                                     which may offer worldly
          ‘There are other kinds of initiation also              the essential
                                       this        (mantra)     is
      enjoyments, but the insight into
                                                 a) is superior to every
      initiation. That is why it (Trika-Sastr
                                           Kulasastra.
      other Sastra; it is even superior to
         ‘As in the weights of a bala nce, though there may be only a
                                              arises a good deal of diff-
      limited removal of the weight there
                                             only by slightly raising or
       erence in the measure of a thing
                                               occurs a good deal of di-
       lowering the balance, even so there
                                               of space, time, and enjoy-
       fference in respect of the knowledge
                                             s (categories of existence).
       ment of the higher and higher tattva
Abhinavagupta                                                                    245

It is even     possible that the sphere of experience                 (samvedana)
rising higher      and   higher may          exceed   the thirty-six categories.
Since insight (samvedana) into the hrdaya-bija or sauh is initiation
 (diksa), therefore is it said that vira and yogini who have pene-
trated this insight (etat samvit anupravisto) stand initiated (krta-
diksan) by the grace of the I-consciousness described as revered,
supreme Bhairava who is the ruler of the collective whole (cakre-
Svara) of the twelve* external and internal sense-divinities (ra-
Smi-devata-dvadasaka) that are constantly present (satatodita) in
the supreme reality          (para-satta@) and are transcendent to mapa
 (amayiya). 25-26.
   Thus the way in which               the    transcendental     (anuttara)    state
occurs without abandoning the external extension has been
determined many a time both separately and in a composite way.
   Now this is what is to be said. In every Sastra it is said: “’Those
who are devoted to hrdaya-bija or sauh, the very import of Trika,
even when they do not realize its full virility, are the very lord,
in a veiled form, having entered the human body.”
   How is this worship to be performed? Even though this ex-
ternal worship is without its full virility, there must be in it the
impact of anuttara-reality (anuttara satt@), for anuttara is after all
anuttara. What is the operational method of this worship? In
order to give a definite answer               to this query,    the author     lays
down the following verses:

                           TEXT OF THE VERSE

     MURDHNI VAKTRE CA HRDAYE
          GUHYE MORTAU TATHAIVA CA/
     NYASAM KRTVA SIKHAM BADDHVA
          SAPTAVIMSATIMANTRITAM // 27 //
                                   TRANSLATION

                                  External Worship
   After making nydsa* on skull (mirdhd), mouth, heart, private
part,? and the whole body? and tying the tuft of the hair (Sikhd)
with twenty-seven mantras.

   *The twelve sense-divinities    are 5 organs   of sense plus 5 organs   of action
plus manas and buddhi.
                                                      Pard-Trisika-Vivarana
246
                                      Notes

                                         ormed by vira and yogini,
   This external worship is to be perf
together.
                                     various parts of the body to
   1. Nyasa: mental assignment of
                                        ).
deities (by placing the fingers on them
                                       and yogini.
      2. The private part of both vira
                                        five times on each part for
   3. The mantra has to be repeated
                                        Tatpurusa, Aghora, Vama-
 each of the five deities, viz. Isana,
                                     ras of Matrka and Malini. The
 deva and Sadyojata with the mant                  ra is napha hrim.
                                the Malini mant
 Matrka mantra is aksa hrim and
                                    in the following way:
 The dvartana or repetition is made

                                     25 mantras

  First dvartana or repetition:
          . aksa hrim iganamirdhne namah
                                                  namah
                 napha hrim tatpurusa vaktraya
         Bobhone




                           agho rahr daya ya nam ah
               . aksa hrim
                                                namah
                   . napha hrim vamadevaguhyaya
                                                namah
                   . aksa hrim sadyojatamirtaye
  Seco         d dvartana:
                                                 namah
                   . aksa hrim tatpurusamirdhne
                                                 nam ah
                   . napha hrim aghoravaktraya
           aeton




                                                a  nam  ah
                    . aksa hrim vamadevahrdayay
                                             namah
            . napha hrim sadyojataguhyaya
             . aksa hrim isanamirtaye nam ah
      Third dvartana:
               aksa hrim aghoramirdhne namah
                                                 namah
                     napha hrim vamadevavaktraya
                                                   namah
                   . akga hrim sadyojatahrdayaya
                                      aguh yaya nam ah
                    . napha hrim isan
                                          namah
            . aksa hrim tatpurusamirtaye
      Fourth dvartana:
                                            namah
              aksa hrim vamadevamirdhne
            oe err




                                          a namah
              napha hrim sadyojatavaktray
                                                  ah
                      aksa hrim isanahrdayaya nam
                                                   namah
                    . napha hrim tatpurusaguhyaya
                                                  namah
                    . aksa hrim aghoramirtaye
Abhinavagupta                                                                247

Fifth dvartana:
       . aksa hrim sadyojatamurdhne namah                                                              |
         napha hrim isanavaktraya namah
          gee


                  aksa   hrim   tatpurusahrdayaya     namah
                  napha hrim aghoraguhyaya namah
                 . aksa hrim vamadevamirtaye namah

             27 mantras for tying the tuft of hair     (Sikha)
                                                                                           |
     1. Srstiripecchatmikaya            Sikhaya     bandh-    karomi   namah           i                        {
                         pararipaya               anam                                     |
     oe ess              parapararipaya     ,,       ”           2      ”                  |
     er                  apararipaya         »        ”           ”     ”                  |
 4. Srstiripajiianatmikaya                                                                 |
               parariipaya                  2          ”         ”      3              |
 Lore          paraparariipaya              ,,         ”         ”      ”
 Bs. 53        apararipaya                  %          2         ”      ”                                  Pe
  7. Srstiripakriyatmikaya                                                         |
                         pararipaya         2          2         ”      ”
     iy    es            parapararipaya      ,,        ”          »     ”
 1         ers           apararipaya        ”          ”         .      ”
10. Sthiti ripecchatmikaya
                         parariipaya        ”          2         ”      ”          '
lin s                    pardpararipaya                sy                                                   F
TZ as          apararipaya                  ”          2         ”     2                                            |
13, Sthiti ripajiianatmikaya
                         parariipaya         ”         ”          ”     ry
14). 55                  parapararipaya     ,,         ”          a     ”
Seas                     aparariipaya       ”         ry         ”     ”
16. Sthiti ripakriyatmikaya
               parariipaya                  ”          ”         ”     ”                           H
Te yy          paraparariipaya              ,,         ”         ”»    ”
1:    ar       apararipaya                  »          3         ”     »
19. Samharariipecchatmikaya                                                        hat
                         pararipaya         2          »         ”     »                       !
20.        5,            paraparariipaya    ,,         »         ”     ”
PANE       eS            apararipaya        2          9         ”     ”           |
22. Samhararipajfianatmikaya
                         pararipaya         ”          ”         ”»    2           J
                                                      Para-Trisikd-Vivarana
248

235.          <5        paraparariipaya     ,,              ”              ”

24. 5,        aparariipaya                  a               ”              »

25. Samhararipakriyatmikaya
                        parariipaya         58
20.)           4        parapararipaya      ,,
               55       aparariipaya         fe
OTs
                                      TEXT

         EKAIKAM           TU   DISAM      BANDHAM
                      DASANAM    API YOJAYET      /
         TALATRAYAM PURA DATTVA
             SASABDAM VIGHNASANTAYE                             /[ 28 |]
                                   TRANSLATION
                                                 with only one mantra
    Then one should fetter the ten directions
                                              to remove all obstacles,
  (viz. sauk), but before doing so, in order
                                 by   mutte ring   inwardly (through
  one should clap three times
                                              second time), ah (the
   madhyamd vani) s (the first time), au (the
   third time).
                                          Notes

          The directions have to be fettered thus:
                                                  namah
          . Sauh indradiga bandhanam karomi
                                         karom i  namah
          . Sauh agnidig4 bandhanam
       rwnr




                                         karom i  namalt
           . Sauh yamadiga bandhanam
                                         m  karom i  namah
            . Sauh nairrtyadis4 bandhana
                                            karom i  namah
             . Sauh varunadisa bandhanam
                                          karom i  nama h
       au




              . Sauh vayudisa bandhanam
                                            karom i  nama h
              . Sauh kuberadisa bandhanam
                                                      h
               . Sauh iganadisa bandhanam karomi nama
        ouon




                                                  i namah
               . Sauh irdhvadisé bandhanam karom
                                                i  namah
                . Sauh adhodisa bandhanam karom
   _




                                           TExT

                    SIKHASAMKHYABHIJAPTENA
                                                                  |
                        TOYENABHYUKSAYET TATAH
                    PUSPADIKAM KRAMAT SARVAM
                        LINGE VA STHANDILE’THAVA // 29 //
Abhinavagupta                                                                       249

                                          ‘TRANSLATION

  Then after consecrating water with the same number of japas
as are meant for tying the tuft of hair, i.e. the same twenty-
seven mantras as are meant for stkhd-bandhana, one should sprinkle
with the consecrated water over flowers and all other objects of
worship successively. All this should be done by the vira on the
female organ (sthandila) of the yogini and by the yogini on the male
organ (liga) of the vira,
                                             TEXT

    CATURDASABHIJAPTENA
                          PUSPENASANAKALPANA             /
    TATRA SRSTIM YAJED
         VIRAH PUNAREVASANAM TATAH                                       // 30 //
                                          ‘TRANSLATION

   One has to form a seat with flowers consecrated with fourteen
maniras by putting a dot on each of the vowels from ‘a’ to ‘au’!
The virashould worship the sysfi-bija (hydaya-bija), on this seat and
then should fashion another seat by means of the same process.”
                                             Notes
   1. The                 flowers have to be consecrated with fourteen       mantras
in the following way:

                    am            Asanapaksam                Sodhayami     namah
     Carnavrwnre




                    am              rr        ”                  9            2
                    im               2»       ”                  ”            2
                    im               ”        ”                  ”»           2
                    um               ”        ”                  ”            2
                    am               33       3                  ”            2
                   + Tm              ”        ”                  ”            2»
                   . Im              2        2                  2            2
                     Im              2        cry                 2”          2
     10. Im                          »        »                  »            »
     ll. em                          »        »                  2»           3
     12. aim                         As       2                  cr           2
     13. om                          »        »                  »            »
     14.            aum              35       »                  ”            »
                                                    Para-Trisika-Vivarana
250
                                                  ry.
      2. This whole practice is shrouded in myste
        The Internal Supreme Worship
                                    TEXT

       SRSTIM TU SAMPUTIKRTYA
             PASCAD YAJANAM ARABHET /
       SARVATATTVA-SUSAMPORNAM        //31 //
             SARVABHARANA-BHUSITAM
       YAJED DEVIM MAHESANIM
             SAPTAVIMSATI-MANTRITAM
       TATAH SUGANDHIPUSPAISTU
             YATHASAKTYA SAMARCAYET        //32//
        POJAYET PARAYA BHAKTY A
             ATMANAM CA NIVEDAYET /
        EVAM YAJANAM AKHYATAM               // 33 //
              AGNIKARYE’PYAYAM VIDHIH
                                 TRANSLATION
                                                  d start the yajana i.e.
       After the sampufikarana of srsti one shoul
                                              worship the goddess
  the internal supreme worship. One should
                                      all the   tattvas or categories
  Maheéani who is fully equipped with                            con-
                                         ornaments and who is
  of existence, is decorated with allthe
                                             twentyseven mantras.
  secrated with (the previously described)
                                        d   pay  the goddess due
  Then with fragrant flowers one shoul
                                           her  with yogini (yatha-
  honour according to his capability toget
  $akti).? 31-32.
                                                   d worship with supreme
        In this way, both (vira and, yogini) shoul
                                                   etely to her. The in-
      devotion and surrender themselves compl
                                               this  way. The same pro-
      ternal worship has been described in
                                              r   of agnihotra or sacrificial
      cedure should be followed in the matte
                                                   ip.   33.
      libation to fire associated with this worsh
                                       Notes
                                                         ings, viz. 1. The
          1. The samputikarana of srsfi has two mean
                                              is know n   as varna-srsti. Srsti
       group of letters from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’. It
                                                   in   whic h all the letters
       in this context is symbolic of hydaya-bija
                                                  mean  s   the  coitus of vira
       from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’ are present. 2. It also
       and yogini
                                              sakti also. Literally, it
          2. There is double meaning in yatha
Abhinavagupta                                                                    251
means,        not transgressing     one’s capacity     or capability.     It also
suggests that the worship has to be performed along with Sakti
i.e., with yogini in this context.

                          TEx? OF THE COMMENTARY
      From mirdhadini on p.95, 1.13 upto malinyddimantranamanupravesa
on p. 95, 1. 19.

                      TRANSLATION     OF   THE    COMMENTARY

                The esoteric aspect of the limbs pertaining to nyasa
      The nyésa on the head etc., is all right from the exoteric point
of view. Really speaking, however, they being symbolic of man-
tra are

      (1) indications of the five quintuple gross elements, viz. from
          ether down to earth which are said to be the external forms
          of the Supreme brahma,
      (2)   essence    of Isana,   Tatpurusa,      Aghora,     Vamadeva,         and
          Sadyojata, the five mouths of Bhairava,
      (3) forms of cit (consciousness), unmesa in the sense of dnanda
            or bliss, icchd or will, jfidna or knowledge, kriya or       activity
Their mantras are the following:
 1. ifGnamirdhne, 2. tatpurusa-vaktraya, 3. aghorahrdayaya,
4. vdmadeva-guhydya, 5. sadyojata-mirtaye.
Really speaking there is no difference among the five (etat pafica-
ka-avibhagdtmakatve). Each of these is quintuple. Therefore, the
number of the mantras is twentyfive. The Malini mantra (napha
hrim)       and Matrka mantra       (aksa hrim)   are both included           within
these       twentyfive.

                                       Nores
      The esoteric aspect of nydsa would be the following:
Number         Limb     (ariga)       Tattva           Mukha of — Sakti
                                                       Siva
 i,          Mirdha     (head)      Akaga (ether)      Isana            Cit
 2.          Vaktra (mouth)        Vayu (air)          Tatpurusa       Ananda
 3.          Hydaya (heart)        Agni (fire)         Aghora          Iccha
                                                  Para-Trisika-Vivarana
252

                              Jala (water)       Vamadeva     Jfiana
 4.        Guhya
           (private part)
                               Prthivi (earth)   Sadyojata     Kriya
 5s        Sarvanga (mirti,
           the whole body)
                                  Text
                                             sarvasarvatmakatva nirna-
   From tisrasca devyah on p. 95, 1. 19 upto
yenaiva on p. 96, 1. 3.
                               TRANSLATION

      Sikha-bandhana (tying the tuft of hair):
                                          three goddesses, viz. pard,
    There have become nine forms of the
                                        them being connected with
 parapard, and apara because of each of
                                        being associated with srsti,
 iccha, jana and kriya. Each of them
                                             Thus their number
 sthiti and samhdra again becomes threefold.
                                           e their nurture from
 becomes twenty-seven. All of them deriv
 hrdaya-bija.
                                                 Divine diffused from
     Sikhé symbolizes the autonomy of the
                                                 ity, the quintessence
  Siva upto the earth; its tying indicates ident
  of the non-differentiation of all.
                                          have been indicated separa~
       Though thelimbs, head, mouth etc.,                          has
                                             the other. This fact
  tely, yet each one of them is specifying
                                           iple: ‘Everything is the
  already been established by the princ
  epitome of all’ (sarvam sarvatmakam).
                                    TExtT

                                              3 upto ityetadapi nirnita-
        From difyamana ghatddyah on p. 96, 1.
      meva on p. 96, 1. 18.
                                TRANSLATION

      Disabandhana:
                                                directions. These are ten
        Jars etc. related to space indicate
                                                  body. In this case also,
      with reference to oneself, i.e. to one’s
      tying or fettering is symbolic of Self-realization.
      Three clappings:
                                                       Clapping is symbolic
         This should be done with three clappings.
                                                  in Self. In clapping, the
      of stability (pratistha) i.e., being stable
                                                     i.e. the first clapping
      hydayabija starting with ‘s’ is the mantra
Abhinavagupta                                                       253

should   be done   with   he muttering of ‘s’, the second    with   the
muttering of au, the third with the muttering of ah.
   The mantra should be a mere mumble i.e. it should be uttered
only indistinctly in madhyamd vani. Inner vimarsa is the essence of
sounding. That is accomplished in madhyama vani. It has been
stated frequently that vaikhari or gross speech is only an appendage
of madhyamé vani i.e. gross speech is only external manifestation
of what is inwardly mumbled in madhyama.
Paci fication of obstacles:
    (In the esoteric sense), obstacles are the stain of waves of diff-
erence of which the essence is limitation and division in the Su-
preme Self (faramatmani) which is free of all difference and divi-
sion. Their pacification connotes identification with the Bhairava-
ocean in which there is no wave of difference or division.
   As has been said by venerable Somananda:
   “May Siva who has entered into us as (the empirical) subject
make obeisance by Himself to Siva who is extended as the uni-
verse by means of pard who is His own Sakti in order to remove all
obstacles which are but Himself.” (S.D. I, 1)
Arghya-patra:
   Arghya-patra-vidhi is the ceremony for purifying the water and
the small vessel containing the water to be offered to the deity.
Both the vessel and the water to be sprinkled should be consecra-
ted first with the twenty-seven mantras mentioned before. Water
in this context means everything that melts the heart (hydaya-
dravatmd, i.e. wine) because of non-restraint and non-hesitation,
  So far as flower is concerned, it has already been explained.
Linga-Emblem:
  With regard to the worship of the emblem (liga), the view
expressed in the following verse should be borne in mind:
   “Do not worship the emblem of Siva made of clay or stone or
mineral or gem.      Worship   that spiritual emblem     in which     is
absorbed    the entire universe consisting of the mobile     and    im-
mobile beings” (M.V. XVIII, 2-3).
   This has also been conclusively explained.
                                 TEx
   From visvatmanitative on    p. 96, 1. 18   upto sabdapratitipaurva-
paryamdaire on p. 97, lL. 4.
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
254
                               ‘TRANSLATION

Asana (Seat):
                                           ed by the agent through
   That is dsana (seat) which is determin
                                        of universality is the main
his autonomy, for when the aspect
                                          the location and seat are
principle, then in the act of sitting,
determined through autonomy only.
 Fourteenth Mantra:
                                                  dy been said that
    By fourteenth is meant ‘aw’, for it has alrea
                                              lizes icchd, jndna and
 that is the érifala or trident (which symbo
 kriya).
                                               i.e.) the series of pho-
   Srsti in this context means (varna-srsti
                                          a (-bija or the mantra sauh)
 nemes from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’. It is the hrday
                                             ‘@ to ‘ksa’.
 which is identified with the phonemes
                                               also covered with the
    That is the reason why the entire dsana is
                                         (adhdra) and that which is
  same mantra, for the place of location
                                       cted.
  to be located are indissolubly conne
                                                   rence between Siva-
        (What this means is that there is no diffe               Siva-
                                    Sakti-trikona   is the   adhara   and
  trikona    and   Sakti-trikona.
      trikona is the adheya. )
         As has been said in Bhagavadgita:
                                                      Self as seated in all
         “One who being united to yoga views the
                                                  residing in one’s Self
      beings (as the subject) and all beings
       regards all things as the same”. (VI, 29).
      The samputikarana of srstt:
                                                       of the Supreme:
        1. From the point of view of esoteric worship
                                                       g of all the phonemes
        Srsti here means the arising and subsidin
                                                      vely in the Supreme
      from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’ severally and cumulati                          es that
       principle through    hrdaya-bija. S ‘amputikarana of srsti impli
                                                        mantra sauh at first of
       sampufa should be made by means of the
                                                    and then cumulatively of
       all the letters severally from ‘a’ to ‘ksa’
                                                         that there cannot be
       all the letters. It has already been said
                                                    matter.
       regressus ad infinitum (anavasthé) in this
                                                      of vira-yogini:
           2. From the point of view of the tradition
                                                          the female and male
           In the case of Sakti and §aktiman i.e.
                                                         exciting enjoyment of
        partner, sampufikarana of sysfi implies the
                                                        substance produced by
        coitus between the vira and yogini and the
        their union is also used.
Abhinavagupta                                                                      255

   In ‘samputikrtya’ occurring in the verse 31, there is the use of
the suffix ‘ktva’ merely to show the precedence and succession of
words.

                                        Notes
     The words sysfi and samputikarana have two meanings.                     In the
first case, sysfi denotes varna-srsti, the series of phonemes                  from
‘a’ to ‘ksa’. Samputikarana in this context is a technical                     word
which means the utterance of an additional mantra before and
after the principal mantra.           For instance, there is samputa of aum
both before and after the principal gayatri mantra, In the present
case, there would be the samputa of ‘aham’ mantra both before and
after the ‘sauh’ mantra.
     Samputa is a hemispherical              bowl with       two movable      covers
which encloses something. Here the mantra aham is the samputa
which encloses the mantra sauh.
     In the second case, srsfi denotes conjugal relation and sampufi-
karana      denotes   the   actual     coitus     of the    two.   The   ‘substance’
refers to kundagolaka, cf. TA XXIX, 22-24.
Note of the Editor: Cf. Tantrasara 22: One should meditate
upon the dsana as the location and the located object, as identified
with pure       consciousness.       The    samputikarana      is to be done bet-
ween the universe (vifva) and pure consciousness (samvit).

                                           Text

     From    sarvatativaih susthu abhedena on              p. 97, 1. 4 to trtiyd    ca
tatraivokté on p. 97, 1. 12.

                                     ‘TRANSLATION

   Sarvatattwaih...piirnatvam—means that the supreme Devi is
fully (samyak) and invariably (anapdyitaya) equipped with all
the tattvas.
  She is decorated          with      all the abharanas         (ornaments). This
means—
1.    (Sarvdbharana =-sarvatra d-bharanam)
     The Supreme goddess is making every-thing in all directions
 (sarvatra), even in the atoms wholly                (samantat)     her own    (dtmi-
karanam).
                                                       Para-Trisika-Vivarana
256

2.      (Sarvabharana = sarvair-d-bharanam)
                                                   nal objects, such
      It has already been explained that all exter
                                          as pleasure etc., all ex-
as jar etc., all inner experiences, such
                                           Visnu, Rudra, Mantra,
perients such as animal, man, Brahma,
                                         ava) of the Supreme god-
Sadasiva are like congruous limbs (avay
                                                organism (avayavi )
 dess so that her being a uniform (ekarasa)
                                               any definite form or
 is fully justified. That is why meditation on                   )        (only
              of hers has not been      prescribed,    for all this is
 weapon
 artificial.
                                                              ite form or wea-
      (If it is not necessary to meditate on any defin
                                                          of mounting to the
 pon of the goddess), how can one desirous
                                                            following the path
  highest stage in spirituality, and desirous of
                                                     t?
  recommended by Trika achieve his objec
                        quest ion, the reply   is:  ‘Who       is constrained to
      If this is the
                                                         not mount. Let him
  mount? If there is any such being, let him
                                                             etc., let him resort
  follow the process advocated by Siddha-tantra
                                                            ribed according to
  to the narrow method of meditation etc. presc
                                                       ta). Such a person is
   their mode of thinking (tadasayenaiva niripi
                                                        which is without any
   not privileged to enter the stage of anuttara
   limitation or restriction.”
                                                              33)
       (Explanation of ‘yajed...vidhih, verses 32 and
                                              ge    to    the    deity. So far as
       This is the eternal form of homa
                                             they   have      been     conclusively
    scent and flower are concerned,
                                              sakty a   has     been    used in the
    described. The word ‘yatha’ in yatha
                                             the   femal   e    partn er’   and the
    sense of ‘with’, i.e. ‘with Sakti or
                                             in that sense.
      instrumental suffix has also been used
                                        TEXT
                                                p. 97, 1. 12 upto             nirni-
        From parayaiva hydayariipaya pijayet on
      taprayameva on p. 98, |. 18.
                                 ‘TRANSLATION
                                                          has to be done
         The word ‘paraya’ implies that the worship
      with heart’s devotion. How?
          (Three kinds of bhakti) :
                                                     serve’)
       1. (Bhakti from the root ‘bhaj’? meaning ‘to
                                                  or  sauh (tadatmya) by
          By identifying ourself with hydaya-bija
                                               a spirit of service or submis-
       entering into it (anupravesa), and with
       siveness   (prahvatatmatd).
Abhinavagupta                                                         257

2.    (Bhakti from the root ‘bhaj’ meaning ‘to divide’ )
     Bhaktya—with the self-contrived division of the worshipped
and the worshipper.         The one to be worshipped is (imaginatively )
fashioned by oneself. The self-created object of worship has to be
supreme, full of autonomy and consciousness for such is the power
of the autonomy of anuttara (the Absolute). It cannot be insen-
tient like a jar. That is the distinction of this system (iti vifesatra).
It has been rightly said in Isvara-pratyabhijiia:
     “The Lord, by His non-dualistic autonomy, having fashioned
     His own free self into Igvara (Brahma, Visnu etc.) causes the
     world to worship Himself through them”. (I. 5, 16)
3.    (Bhakti as samavesa or compenetration )
   By samdavesa which is formally known as worship, one realizes
the Supreme Reality (param tattvam lakgyate). The recognition of
samdaveSa in all forms of ritual observance (sarva-kriydsu) is the
best means (to the realization of Supreme Reality), just as
written letters are a means for the production and understanding
of all empirical phonemes, and the empirical phonemes               are a
means      of penetration     into their energy.
Offering of One’s Self
     Atménam nivedayet means one should offer one’s self, for there
is nothing else worth offering than this. The purport is that
 (accordingto the etymology of ‘nivedayet’: nih—completely, veda-
yet—one should experience or understand oneself). One should,
in conformity to the Absolute Reality, consider one’s Self to be
the Absolute Reality itself. Here the potential mood (liz) in nive-
dayet has been used in the sense of possibility, for it has already
been said that any stance connected with Self is always one            of
possibility.
Yajana—homage
   The meaning of the expression ‘akhydtam’ occurring in verse 33
is @-samantat, sarvatra, sada i.e., wholly, everywhere, always. Khyd-
tam connotes the khydti or realization of the supreme, pure nature
of Siva. This is the true yajana or homage of the goddess Para-
samvit (Supreme Consciousness).          The root yaja ‘in yajam’    con-
notes three meanings:
     (1)   Yaja in the sense of worship means: ‘This is her true wor-
ship’.
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
258
                                             “This kind of worship
    (2) Yaja in the sense of samgati means:
                                          meeting (samyag-gamana)
offers the opportunity of appropriate
                                      ed, in other words the iden-
of the worshipper and the worshipp
tity with the Supreme.’
                                            , to donate’ means the
     (3) Yaj in the sense ‘to make an offer
                                          the narrow, limited sense
 following: ‘This worship by removing
                                   l individual, denotes the sense
of I-consciousness of the empirica                               s
                          with the perfect mass of Consciousnes
 of unification of the self
 which is Siva-Sakti.’
                                         l fire
 Agnikarya or oblation in the sacrificia
                                                    l fire, viz. the oblation,
      This is the real oblation in the sacrificia
                                                s of all desires in the mighty
  i.e. inner burning of the residual trace
                                            h is always ablaze with the
  flame of Supreme Bhairava whic
                                                 union with Siva, which is
  arani! of Supreme Sakti excited by
                                             consumption of all objects as
  burning brightly with the eager
                                                     light of lubricous melted
   its fuel, which is aglow with the abundant
                                                 alone is the real injunction
   putter of worldly attachments. This
                                                      . There is none other
    regarding oblation right up to initiation
                                                purport of it.
    different from this. This is the real
                                                       re—this is the highest
       “Recognition of One’s essential natu
                                                    This is the real sacrifice.
       mantra. This is the real initiation.
                                          the highest rite.”
        Among all the ceremonies, this is
                                           as in other scriptures, in the
        It has been said earlier that just                          d, in
                                                mantra are describe
      earlier part, ceremonies of worship with
                                             with jfana, in the present
      the latter part the conclusion is made                sittra ‘uttara-
                                                    d in the
      astra,   it is not so. What has been indicate
                                              to the end in this work,
      syapi anuttaray’ has been carried out
                                             are only aspects of hrdaya-
      Sacrifice, initiation, ceremonies etc.
                                            nscendent).
      bija and that is really anuttara (tra
                                                   that hrdayabija endures
         Revered Somananda after having said
                                              undivided character, enjoi-
      everything, has in order to prove its
                                           sruk, sruva.* In the beginning,
      ned the purification or cleansing of
                                                , powder (dhali), etc. is
      the description of nyasa on limbs, heart
                                                 tency in this, nor is dis-
      perfectly in order. There is no inconsis
                                                 a system dependent on
      crepancy perceivable. Nor is the Trik                         has   been a
                                          otherwise.       There
       the inferior Sastras that advocate
                                            (27-33)
       clarification of all these points.
Abhinavagupta                                                       259

                                   NoTEs
   1. Arani:    A piece of wood,    taken generally from Sami      tree,
used for kindling the sacred fire by attrition.
   2. Sruk, sruva-(sruc): A sort of wooden ladle for           pouring
clarified melted butter on sacrificial fire.
   Sruva or Sruva is a small wooden ladle for pouring          clarified
melted butter into the large ladle or sruk.

                               Text

   From kim evam upasdyam on p. 98, 1. 19 upto          tam yogamargam
niriipayitum granthaseso’vatarati on p. 100, 1. 20.

                             TRANSLATION
    What is the result of the worship of Ardaya-bija in this way?
 (In reply to this query), the book lays down the following:
    “Mentally dwelling on the hrdaya-bija (sauh), the adept who
performs the worship in the proper manner attains to his goal
i.e. liberation while alive (jivan-mukti).”’ (34)
               TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY
    1. Thus ceaselessly even in worldly affairs, the aspirant who
carries on worship, while remembering the hydaya-bija, leaving
aside other disciplines like Kaulasastra, Saiva and Vaisnava
Sastra, having entered into the essence i.e. hrdaya-bija of revered
Bhairava, making an outward display of object just for pastime,
created by the blissful force of one’s own pardsamvit (Supreme
Consciousness), is verily liberated while alive. The use of the
word ‘smarana’ (remembering) connotes the repetition of one’s
own experience, nothing else.       In Srimata-Sastra    also the same
 idea has been expressed.
    2. The worshipper who has not penetrated into the very heart
of the energy of the great mantra, by rightly remembering the
 hydaya-bija through the efficacy of krama-pija, having gradually
 attained to the power of the mantra as hrdaya-bija, also achieves
the realization of the highest perfection or the power of the
mantra of hrdaya-bija, either through the gradual superiority of
the efficacy of the kramapija or by himself, or through the ex-
hortation from the mouth of a pleased guru (spiritual director)
and becomes liberated while alive,
                                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana
260
                                        any         advantage     nor   any dis-
      In this process, there is neither
                                       al ) worship of ‘dodrapiija’*
advantage (khandand) in the (tradition                           the
                                                                 laid down
                    is why     revered    Somananda        has
or guru. That
following:
                                       od (parva) prescribed accor-
    “In this matter an auspicious peri
                                  ram® are meant only to enhance
 ding to Kula-Sastra and a pavit
                                         ”
the propriety of the process of worship.
                                        Nores
                                              ed worship as detailed
    1. Krama-pija—a regular course of grad
 in verses 27 to 33.
                                              sa or Batuka.
    2. Dvarapija means the worship of Gane
                                           of kuga grass worn on the
    3. Pavitram as a noun means ‘a ring
                                          ions. ” The rite of offering
 fourth finger on certain religious occas                    described
                                     ara, 20, where it is
 pavitraka to the Lord: cf. Tantra-s
 that after performing the wors hip of the Lord one should offer 4
                                     the knee, one going down to
 pavitrakas to Him: one goes down to                may be made
                                   on the head. They
  navel, one to the throat and one
                                      or cotton threads with knots
  of gold, pearl, jewels, kusa grass                            are
                                        bhuvanas, varnas etc. They
  numbering 36 representing tattvas, or
                                     to the guru.
  generally offered to the deity or
                           (A SUMMARY OF THE CHAPTER         )


             aspirants that have        reached   the prabuddha stage, that in
        “©
                                    that which                   (by itself) shines
  which the entire universe shines,                                             and
                            sparkling    Light    (which    is both prakasa
  everywhere,       that
                                         of Reality.”
      vimarsa) alone is the highest core                          contracting      her
                                             expanding     and
        Just as a she-ass or a mare
                                          ltaneously experiences de-
  female organ ( jagajjanmadhdma ) simu
                                       of the coitus of both (vira and
  light in her heart, on the occasion
                                         of supreme delight, there is
  yogini), in the heart of susumnd full
                                      of simultaneous expansion and
   the heart, throbbing in the form
                                            (i.e. srstibija or sauk). Medi-
      contraction characterized by srsfi
      tate on that.
                                            ng, remembering, reflecting,
         That in which, whether meditati
                                       rest, and from which everything
      or acting, everything comes to
                                       at is the heart.
       comes forth in manifestation—th
                                            primarily as nirvikalpa (in-
         That heart is only one i.e. shines
                                               determinate knowledge
       determinate), in which abide other
Abhinavagupta                                                     261

(param vaikalpikam jnanam), the thirtysix categories of existence,
expanse of (hundred and eight) bhuvanas (worlds), and all the
experients   from   Siva to the limited souls—all these assuming
diverse forms, though non-different from the highest Reality,
making even the wonderful Supreme Consciousness (pardsamwid)
variegated, appear as shining in it.
   The worship of this central reality is ever present in the heart
of the aspirant. Whether he may be associated with any country,
matter, activity, place, thought-construct, in every case, his mind
is ever set upon the hydaya-bija without the least hesitation.
    So far as krama-pija is concerned, Trika discipline is of the
opinion that with the observance of auspicious period prescribed
by Kula-Sastra and by means of offering pavitraka the appro-
priateness of this worship is increased.
    As has been said (with regard to krama-piija) :
    As among fluid substances is semen, among phonemes is sysfi-
bija, i.e. sauh, among scriptures is Trika, in states of liberation is
the attainment of the state of Bhairava, in meditation is the state
of absorption, in vows is the pious observance of the viras (most
excellent), even so, among auspicious occasions are those of Kula
 (most excellent), according to Trika-Sastra.
   The use of pavitraka is essential for the full accomplishment of
the rites connected with krama-pija.    Those worshippers who      do
not carry out the injunction regarding the use of pavitraka four
times, thrice, twice or at least once during the auspicious period
do not know the significance of the auspicious period according
to Kula-Sastra.     In the case of such people, the potency of the
mantra does not function at its maximum.
   Thus the nature of anuttara   (transcendental reality) has been
described in detail. In it, there is no room for contemplation. In
it only gnosis (prasamkhydnam) functions as the bearer of moun-
tains fit for the burden of means (updya-dhaureya-dharadharani
dhatte) wpto the end of firm realization of Self identified with
hydaya-bija which is characterized by steadfast spiritual delight.
   Now the yoga for those who are desirous of attaining super-
normal powers (for show) has to be described. Though the super-
normal powers pertaining to drstayoga’ are possible only by means
of the autonomy of the Absolute and they are beyond the sphere
of popularly known and determinate laws, yet they cannot
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
262
                                             , ‘yet the means              for
(wholly) transgress the divinely fixed order
                                     strange matters has to be
the supernormal powers pertaining to
                                              a in Siva-Drsti.
described with respect’, as said by Somanand
                                              ay of supernormal
   Even in the matter of yoga for the displ
                                            of the transcendental
powers (drsfa-yoga), there is no violation
                                               rnormal powers for
nature, for like the effort to attain the supe
                                      the cessation of all effort in
display, their actual attainment, and
                                         grace of the Supreme.
 their maturity—everything is due to the                 would
                                          such an attainment
 But in comparison to liberation in life,
                                               e, for it does not lead to
 be said to be due to faint grace of the divin
 perfection.*
                                                     grace that is des-
     It is, however, the yoga which is due to faint
  cribed in the remaining part of the book.
                                    Notes
                                                   s which are meant
     1. Drstayoga-siddhi: The supernormal power
                                               e in them a weird sense
  for display to the people, and which arous
  of mystery are said to be ‘drsta-yoga-siddhi’.                   leads    the
                                             st yoga which
       2. That alone is said to be the highe
                                             identical with the divine
  aspirant to the recognition of his self as
                                              glow of Siva’s Light in
  I-consciousness, and the world as the
  various forms.
                            TEXT     OF THE   VERSE

        ADYANTARAHITAM BIJAM
            VIKASAT TITHIMADHYAGAM /
        HRTPADMANTARGATAM      DHYAYET
             SOMAMSAM  NIT YAM   ABHYASET                             //35 //
                                   TRANSLATION

                                                  h has neither begin-
         The yogi must meditate on this bija whic
                                           into fifteen vowels (vikasat-
      ning nor end, which has expanded                    s of Siva. He
                                               heart-lotu
      tithimadhyagam) and which resides in the          view all objects
                                               amsam, i.e.
      should also practise the lunar part (som
                                 but the mani fest ation of sau).
      of the world as nothing
                                     CoMMENTARY

                                                 a-dhanesvarasarmé, |. 10.
         From etadeva on p. 101, 1. 1 upto bhatt
Abhinavagup ta                                                                  263

                     TRANSLATION       OF THE      COMMENTARY

Explanation from the point of view of Saktopaya
Anddya-antam bijam
    This central seminal mantra (Ardayabija or sauk) is without
beginning or end (1) for it does not require any extraneous light,
i.e. it shines by its own light (dipakabhdvat), (2) for it is without
variation, without coming in and going out (gamdgama-Sinyatvdt),
 (3) for it is ever actively present           (satatoditatvat).
Vikasat and tithimadhyagam:
   This, on the one hand, has expanded in the form of the ex-
ternal objective world and thus reached its complete manifes-
tation.    On   the other hand,       it inheres in the sixteen tithis,! being
their innermost essence.
  HAyrtpadmdantargatam dhyayet:
  The yogi should meditate on kanda and guhya                      (i.e. the male
yogi or vira on the female organ (guhya) and the female yogi or
yogini on the male organ (kanda), as if it were the-heart-lotus.
 These two organs have been called ‘lotus’ only ina figurative sense,
 for like lotus they are endowed with the characteristic of contrac-
tion and expansion (sarikoca-vikasa-dharma-upacarita-padmabhive).
  Kificasya dhyanam aha:
   What sort of meditation is this? The following is its descrip-
tion (dha):
   Somamsam nityam abhyaset—abhyaset to be taken in the sense of
abhi--asyet.
   The aspirant should cast the somdmsa i.e. apdna current                   (the
current of inhalation) full of sixteen tufts from all sides (abhitah)
towards the male organ or the female organ. This means that the
aspirant    should    project   the    apana   current    of breath     which    is
synonymous with full moon              into hytkarnika® upto puspa i.e. the
point of origin of the creative energy existing in each one at an
inner distance of twelve fingers.
  Then     after   coming   in contact with          amrta i.e. kundalini-Sakti,
in accordance with the inner vibration that is surging up, he
acquires kakacaficuputa-mudra* characterized by the electro-mag-
netism of Sakti-sparsa.
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
264
                                 withdrawn and expanding with
   Then the apdna current being                vibration within.
the relish of the nectar of Sakti, excites the
                                                      loped by
                         the apdna current fully deve
The aspirant should make                     by  the  vibratory
                          h is churned   out
drinking in the nectar whic
force.                                                                       ),
                                      the rise of the prana (sina kala
   After this, at the moment of                    vowe l-le ss  ‘s’   (vow el-
                                  nt, resting in
the exhalatory breath-curre                                                   d
less ‘s’ of sauh mantra), he   shou ld continue his practice, supporte
                                                    th),   an   inne r   sens a-
                                      page (of brea
 by the experience of thrill, stop                                            r-
                          tear s,  trem or etc. This is saktopaya acco
 tion of springing up,
                           Sarma.
 ding to Bhatta Dhanegvara
                                     NoTEs

                                     are $+15+4=16.           The tulis of
     1. The tutis of pranacdra
  apana-cara are 4415-1 =16.
                                        susumna.
     2. Hrt-karnika is a centre in                                          the
                              :  Whe  n    the apana current pierces
     3. Kakacaficuputa-mudra                                ent ,   the   kaka -
                                        Sakti, At this  mom
  hyt-karntka, there is contact with                   the   vowe l-le ss  s-s-s
                                  and as a result
  caficuputa mudra is formed
   sensation arises.
                                             rding to Sambhava-upaya
          Translation of the 35th vers? acco
                                                    or end. Of the mantra
        The     hrdaya-bija is without beginning                       okens
                                      prana, and ‘au’-part which bet
      ‘sauh’ ‘s- part which betokens                   the visa rga (:)- part.
                                           ins is only
      apana being devoured, what rema                                 nteenth
                                  a) of this visarga is the seve
      The actual nature (svarij                             inhe rent   in the
                                     the sixteenth kala
      bindu-kalaé which transcends                  apdn a.   This  has   to be
                                            of prana and
      fifteen tithis each of the passage
                                  t-lo tus.   One should always practise the
      realized only in the hear                          objects like blue etc.
                                  all the external
      repetition of somaméa i.e.                             etc.   as prameya     or
                            cont ents   like pleasure
      and internal mental
      objectivity.
                                        Nore

                                           between bindu-kala and visarga-
         There is no essential difference                the form of the
       kala. The sixteenth   visarga-kald itself assumes
                                                              becomes bindu
       seventeenth bindu-kald.    In the inner aspect visarga
                                   bindu becomes visarga.
       and in the external aspect,
Abhinavagupta                                                          265

                    COMMENTARY       ON   THE   ABOVE


   From ddyantarahitam sakaramatram, p. 101, 1.11 upto           sambhava-
nayam lin, p. 101, 1. 24.
   2. Explanation according to sambhava upaya:
   The aspirant should make the Ardaya-bija, (i.e. sauh) without
beginning or end i.e. without ‘aw’ and ‘ah’ so that only ‘s’ remains.
Then together with the sixteen tithis i.e. ‘a’ to ‘ah’, i.e. together
with the sixteen-phased apana current, he should project it by the
contrivance of grasana (dissolution) into hrdaya (i.e. kanda or guhya,
male or female organ). Just as in pouring water in a pipe, there
is at first movement with slow tempo (calana), then medium
tempo (kampana), and finally fast tempo (spandana), so by the
practice of slow, medium       and fast tempo, the aspirant should
penetrate miladhara, trikona, bhadrakali, kanda, hrdaya and mukha,
ice. hyt-karnikd. After this, simultaneously using slow, medium,
and fast movement he reaches the culminating point at which
there is a tremendous current owing to which both prana (siya)
and apana (soma) become dissolved.
   From the point of view of succession of the phonemes, without
the beginning and the next i.e. without ‘s’ and au of hrdaya bija
 (ddyantabhydm etat-bijam-matrkapeksaya aukara-sakarabhyam rahitam)
is meant the sixteenth kald, viz. the visarga.
   (1)   which   is without   ‘aw’   denoting   apéna   and   ‘s’ denoting
prana,
    (2) the acquaintance of whose virility can be obtained only by
viglesana,
   (3) which is dhruva i.e. invariable anuttara,
   (4) which is very Siva (visargatmakam),
   (5) which is the very centre of the expanding fifteen tithis and
in which there is no ¢ithi whatsoever, that is to say in which there
is neither prana nor apana, and in which are swallowed up all the
sixteen digits.
   The aspirant rises even higher than this which is the seventeenth
kala, the commencement of drdhvakundalini. He or she should always
meditate on the amrta-améa, which is the sixteenth aspect i.e. the
visarga-kal@ in the hrtkamala or in other words the generative
organ of vira or yogini. This is what my guru (Sambhunatha)
says.
266                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana

  The mystic explanation of somamSa is the following:
    According to the etymological analysis—saha umayé (vartate)
ive. he who abides with Uma or Sakti, soma means Siva, for Siva
is constantly in union with goddess parafakti, and is in a state of
spanda (ksobhena) due to union which is indicative of the state of
churning     together   of the    two    fattvas. Amfa     in somamsa    means
that all objects, internal like pleasure and external like blue, are
like organs of the organic whole who is Siva, and who is perfect
I-consciousness.
   So the aspirant should practise the meditation over and over
again with the japa of his senses both in an extroverted way in
which he regards objective manifestation (srsfi) as Siva and in an
introverted way in which he regards the withdrawal of mani-
festation (samhara) also as Siva.*         This is the ever-present hrdaya-
japa. The potential mood has been used in the sense of possibi-
lity, competence.
                                      Nortes

Miiladhara-trikona-bhadra-kanda-hyt-mukha-mudrasu:
   This mentions the mystic physiology of susumpd. In susumna,
there is milddhdra cakra. In milddhara, there is a triangular form
known      as Siva-trikona. Joined       with   this,   there   is another   one
known as bhadra-kali (Sakti-trikona). Then there is kanda which is
a samputa of Siva and        Sakti.     Then,   there is the Art or centre.
Finally, there is the mukha-mudra or hyt-karnikd. All these together
form one hrt-padma. Its centre is the hyt-karnika. This is the hrdaya
known as amrta-bija.
                                 CoMMENTARY
      From anye tu on p. 101, 1. 25 upto evam piirvesvapi Slokasiitresu,
 p. 102, 1. 9.
                 TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY

 3. Explanation according to dnava upaya:
    Others i.e. those who follow the dzava updya explain this Sitra
 in the following way:
    The starting point of breath is the heart, and the movement of
  *Svamiji says that this is Arama mudrd described       by Ksemaraja   in Pratya-
bhijia-Hrdayam in Satra No. 19.
Abhinavagupta                                                         267
Prana from that point upto bdhya (external) doddasdnta measures
upto thirty-six fingers. From that point, beginning with pranavayu
 (stryataya ullasya), the aspirant should restrain it at the point
of bahya-dvadasanta for half a tuti! (before beginning the move-
ment of apdna-vayu).     Then    after the rise   of the movement      of
apana vayu which is known as the ‘somakala’, the imperishable,
amyta-like visarga, the aspirant should increase the candrakala or
in other words the apdna kala at every tufi which measures two
and a quarter fingers.   Thus when fifteen tufis are completed,       the
apana vayu becomes ‘soma’ or moon of sixteen digits at the point of
hrtpadma, i.e. the antah (inner) dvadaSanta, for there has to be a
pause of half a tufi there also. In this way, all told the passage
of apana current is completed at thirty-six fingers. (Pause of 4
tufi at bdhya-dvadasanta+-15 apana-cdra+-pause of } tufi at antah-
dvadasanta totals to 16 tutis.    Each tuti being    of 2t fingers,   the
16 tufis make 36 fingers).
    In such a state, without beginning or end only means that since
the pardbija or amrtabija (sauk) is ever present at the first half
tufi (on the occasion of pause at the bahya dvddasanta) and the last
half tufi(on the occasion of pause at antah dvadasanta),      it cannot
be limited by time. Therefore, it is without beginning or end.
   Leaving aside these two half tutis, the aspirant should practise
the dissolution of the kalas, by meditating on the somdméa i.e. on
visarga kala (ah) without ‘s’ and ‘au’ within the remaining tufis,
separating it within himself in the form of the seventeenth bindu-
kala.*
   All these three explanations should be considered to be appro-
priate. This verse is a Sitra. Therefore, by turning its words
this way or that way, many kinds of explanations would become
quite fit, as has been said that ‘a Siitra is that which gives scope
for manifold senses.’ The respected teachers have averred that
Paratrisika is an unsurpassable Siittra. In this way, there can be
many interpretations of the earlier verses also which are indeed
like Sitras.

                                  NoTEs
   1. Tufi: tufi is that time in which the breath covers     2} fingers.
   2. The seventeenth bindukald is that where the movement of
both prana and apdna ceases.
                                                         Para-Trisika-Vivarana
     268
                                             the ‘adi-kofi’, and the antah-
        3. The bahya-dvadasanta is called
                                           Practice of meditation on these
     doadasanta is called the ‘anta-koti’.
     two spots is called ‘adyanta-koti-nibhdlana’.
                                    CoMMENTARY

         kim itthamabhydse sati bhavati? ityaha
                                                of this yoga? Inan swer
         What happens by means of the practice
      to this query, the author says:
                                    TExt oF THE VERSE

            YAN YAN KAMAYATE KAMAMS
                                                /
                 TANSTAN CHHIGHRAM AVAPNUYAT
            ASMAT PRATYAKSATAM ETI          //36 //
                 SARVAJNATVAM NA SAMSAYAH
                           TRANSLATION OF THE TEXT

                                                    objects he desires.
         The yogi obtains immediately whatever
                                               t to him as perception.
       Therefore, omniscience becomes as direc
       There is no doubt about this.
                            Text    oF THE COMMENTARY

                                                     102, 1. 15 to 18.
            From evam abhyasat upto dehena iti on p-

                        TRANSLATION     OF THE   COMMENTARY


                                                        perseverance,   eagerness,
             Thus   he becomes     full of endeavour,
                                                       ght about by the potency
           and zeal through firmness of will brou
                                                      amaya hrdaya-virya-samuccha-
           of the omnifarious sauh mantra (sarv
                                                          of the continuous state
           lita-iccha prasara) and so by repetition
                                                      t), he acquires so much
hy         of the yoga (tat sthiti-ridhi-ripa-abhyasa
                                                         whatever he desires. In
           power that he obtains immediately
                                                     acquires omniscience that is
           short, in this very physical body, he
                                                        . 36.
            characteristic of the Supreme Bhairava
                                   CoNCLUDING    PORTION
                                                p- 102, 1. 18 upto so yamu-
              From sarvamuktvd upasamhriyate on
           pasamhara on the same page, 1 19.
Abhinavagupta                                                                 269

                     TRANSLATION      OF THE    COMMENTARY

   After examining from all points of view, the book is now being
concluded. In the end, the progress of the yogi terminates in the
attainment of this transcendental state (akula-sattd-asadane) which
means resting in one’s essential Self; this alone is the state of
Bhairava.     This has been mentioned repeatedly.                Now   this is the
concluding verse.

                         TEXT       OF THE   VERSE

    EVAM  MANTRA-PHALAVAPTIR-
        ITY ETAD RUDRAYAMALAM                                /
    ETAD ABHYASATAH SIDDHIH
        SARVAJNATVAM AVAPYATE                                    // 37 //
                                ‘TRANSLATION

  Such      is the    gain   from     the    practice   of this     mantra (viz.
hydayabija orsauh). This betokens the union (ydmala) of Rudra and
Rudra or Siva and Sakti. By the continuous practice of this is
acquired the supernormal power of omniscience.

                              ComMENTARY

  From   mantranam upto iti Sivam on p. 103, 1. 1 to 6.

                TRANSLATION OF THE COMMENTARY

   In this way, the fruit of all mantras, even of the mantras with
the phonemes of the other Sastras also, is obtained, not otherwise.
The word ‘iti’? connotes conclusion.
   In conclusion, it is said that this connotes the union of Rudra
and Rudra (Rudrayamala) i.e. of Siva and Sakti where there is
no division of question and answer, which is the state of awareness
of the essential Self (svaripa-amarsana).
   Beginning from a consideration of this up to the external state
in which there are infinite, innumerable cases of manifestation and
absorption—all this is indeed summarized in akula or anuttara,
the transcendental Reality, This is the conclusion (of the dialogue
between Bhairava and Devi)            from the point of view of intuitive
gnosis (prasamkhyana).
                                                               Para-Trisika-Vivarana
270
                                                              ience”—
                                 accrues the power of omnisc
   “From the practice of this                     of yoga .
                              the point of view
this is the conclusion from                                 everybody.
   This (ic. Rudrayama   la     state) is ever-present in
                           all!
May there be good to
                                          Notes
                                                      five-membered
                            regarded as a complete
      The whole book may be                   first verse, viz. “‘anu-
                               ya-Sastra. The
 syllogism according to Nya                                      ion of the
                            t”  is the pratijiia or introduct
 ttaram katham deva...vraje                        hetu   (log ical  reason),
                               es constitute the
 topic. The intervening vers                       ion ).   The     35t h and
                               upanaya (applicat
 udaharana (example) and                            on) .
                               nigamana (conclusi
  36th verses constitute the
                                     OF ABHINAVAGUPTA
             AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL VERSES
                                                      hmir, I, a black
                              hulaka, resident of Kas
       Thus being born of Cuk                      lift ing up mankind
                               eévara, intent on
  bee at the lotus-feet of Mah                                                          this com-
            g    upt o   me       (for   spir itua   l succour), have written
  lookin                                                                               Trika. (1)
              y   pre  gna  nt     wit h   the    del iberation of the mystery of
  mentar                                                                                 the doct-
                                                       lly that so much only is
       Who can estimate emphatica                                      wor ds   in   this   matter.
           per  tai nin  g    to    Siv a?    There is no barto
  rine                                                                               e regarding
                                                   comprehension appears her
   ‘All that which is within my                                          the   wis e   should not
                                                 atmani). ‘Therefore,
   the Universal Spirit (akhil
   be averse to it. (2)                                                                knowledge
                                                    ure that it makes firm the
        This is a work of such nat                                        or  of   one     who has
                                             who is full of doubts
    of the ignorant, of one                                                 con vic  tio  n  has al-
                    vie ws.      In    the   case     of  those in whom
    contrary                                                                         it makes the
                star ted,    in    wh  om     it   is fully grown (riadhasya),
    ready                                                                          teaching. (3)
                                                   heart harmonize with its
     settled conviction of their                                         the  king  , YaSaskara.
                        r,     the  re   was     the chief minister of
         In   Kas  hmi                                                           n of the most
                                                  arya. He was a Brahmi
     He was named Vallabhac                                             thy      of renown on
                                                  son, Sauri is wor
      excellent lineage. His                                                  oce  an in dedica-
                                                    lities and is like the
      account of all his good qua                                               abo   de of virtue,
                                                     nt-crested Siva, is the
      tion to the feet of the cresce                                         spr ead     about him,
                     full y   des  erv  es   the     gre at fame that has
      one who                                                                   inborn tendency
                                                   ection and who has an
      js a pleasant object of aff
                                                 all people.
       towards compassion on                                                            ause of the
                                                         is named Vatsalika. Bec
          His life-companion (wife)                                         d   is   fill ed with an
                                                 her husband, her min
       abounding devotion to
Abhinavagupta                                                         271

inner disposition towards spiritual matters       and expands     with
delight by the worship of Siva. (4-5)
  He has a son, named Karna who is a Brahmin who very well
understands the mystery of the manifestation and maintenance of
the world, who delights in the meditation and reflection on and
worship of Siva, who even in boyhood and youth, abandoning
attachment to objects of sense, has resorted to unwavering
reflection which eradicates transmigratory existence. (6)
   My own brother by name Manoratha Gupta, having a longing
for the Supreme Self, is engrossed in the Saiva Sastras, who, in
order to destroy transmigratory existence, is eager to examine the
entire range of Sastras and Tantras in order to attain the supreme
status of Siva. (7)
   There is also another person, Ramadeva by name, who is devoted
to Saiva Sastras, who is well-versed in grammar (pada), Mimamsa
 (vakya) and Nyaya (pramana), ‘nd who brings about veritable
adornment to his birth in the highest caste (i.e. Brahmana). (8)
    May that which I have written with heart full for the good and
delight of all these serve as a guide for all for the attainment of
 (the nature of) Siva. (9)
   Atrigupta who was born in an excellent family in Antarvedi
(the land between Ganga and Yamuna) came (to settle down in)
Kashmir the borders of which were hallowed by innumerable
sages who were the incarnations of moon-crested Siva. (10)
   In his great lineage was born Varahagupta whose son was
Cukhula by name who was averse to worldly affairs and whose
heart was set on Siva alone. (11)
   From him who had examined and understood the entire lot of
categories and principles did obtain Abhinavagupta the human
body sanctified by the Supreme Lord. (Even in this embodied con-
dition), having obtained full freedom from care and doubt, he has
instilled into the hearts of his pupils the secret lore of Trika. (12)
   To those who are devoid of right judgement, I can only make a
bow. There are others who deliberate but are unable to reach a
successful conclusion.   One can but pity these senseless people.
There may be someone else, though only one          among a    lakh    (a
hundred thousand) who has become steady in mind after having
attained the quintessence of deep deliberation. The above may
bring my effort to a successful issue.   (13)
                                                      Para-Trisika-Vioarana
272

              earnest request to those who    are lazy in discerning their
      Any
                                        harrying oneself. There are
Self will not bear any fruit other than
                                           a fuss regarding the dis-
those of unsteady mind who only make
                                            my head in respect to
cernment of the universe. I only bow
appease them.         (14)
                                              confused themselves and
   There are dull-witted people who are
                                         ures into confusion. Having
 throw the senseless multitude of creat
                                           them under their subjection
 bound them fast with fetters, they bring
                                                qualities. Having thus
 by influencing them with tall talk of their
                                            of the burden of gurus and
 seen creatures who are simply carriers
                                               a trident of wisdom in
 their (blind) followers, I have prepared
                                           (15)
 order to cut asunder their bondage.
                                         many who presumed to be
    T was also thrown into confusion by
                                       (Brahma of Siva) am I’ but
 teachers of truth by declaring ‘that                      ’ and
                                        d the two words ‘that
 whose tongue had not even contacte
 ‘thou’ (tat tvam varnayugamapi). (16)
                                               of the guru with com-
    The Lord has set in motion the heart
                                                   refuge (at his feet).
 passion for lifting up those who have taken
                                         path of truth. (17)
  That glorious guru has set me on the
                                                  cting on the doctrine
     T have written this work after (fully) refle
                                           y entered my heart which
  of Somananda which has spontaneousl
                                       ht by my guru. (18)
  shares that pure state of truth taug
                                              delight rushing forth
        O goddesses full of streams of ardent                in of
                                        about freely in the doma
      lavishly from you as you move
      hydaya-bija and acting as the uppe r sharp edge of the wisdom-
                                                                 s, my
                                                       crores of my fetter
      spike that is proficient in cutting asunder
                                        of the   reaw  akening of the fear of
      mind, speech and body free
                                                 endered at your feet. May
      migratory existence are already surr
                                                 me exceedingly and quickly,
      you, therefore, confer your favour on
                                           abounding. (19)
       and dwell in my heart as Grace
          O goddesses, having your      beaut iful and ingenious continued
                                                    assigning the position of a
       existence in that hrdayabija (tatcakra),
                                                   in the act of exposition etc.
       guru, it is you who have employed me
                                                 of my speech and mind. (20)
       ‘Therefore forgive this capriciousness
                                               s) this Paratrisika has been
            In nineteen hundred (ways or verse                           the
                                                knots of doubts in all
       explained. This will cut asunder the
                                              by Abhinavagupta.
       Trika Sastra. This has been written
          The commentary on Parat  risik a is  completed.
                               GENERAL                    INDEX
a, first letter of devanagari script, 13,               ajdna, ignorance, 57, 60, 96, 97.
   15, 24, 25, 30, 33, 36, 46, 54-56, 60,               akara, form, 29,
   64, 78, 87-91, 96, 98, 144, 166, 190,                akasa, void, 25, 88, 128, 130, 132, 142,
   192, 211, 216, 225, 226, 241, 242,                       145, 214, 251.
   265.                                                 akrama, successionless, 64.
abheda, unity, 30.                                      aksahrim, a sacred syllable, 246, 251,
abhidhana, designation, 19.                             aksepa, gradual dissolution, 115,
abhidheya, subject -matter, 17-19,                      akula, the Absolute, 44, 62,77, 80, 81,
abhijit, 29.                                               84, 90, 161, 162, 171, 191, 213, 216,
Abhinavagupta,    2, 4-7,      16,19,     20,    25,       229, 230, 240, 269.
   30, 31, 35, 37, 38, 46-53, 55, 56, 58,               ama, the changeless one, 57, 58,
   60, 63, 70, 75, 80-82, 85,92, 93, 97,                amdakala, 174, 187, 197.
   98, 136-138, 141, 144, 147, 152,                     Amardaka, 4.
   153, 160, 173, 186, 191-193, 205,                    ambrosial seeds, four phonemes,                  viz.,
   207-209, 211, 216, 220, 227-229,                        rril, 135.
   231, 233, 238, 240, 270-272.                         amrta (kundalini), 263, 267.
absolute (akula, anuttara), 44, 46, 50,                 amrta-amsa, the 16h kala, 265.
   79,   144,   165, 257, 261.                          amyta-bija, the phonemes, r r | |, 137-
absorption: (samdavesa), 13.                               139, 151, 203, 204, 210, 223, 224,
acarya, teacher; 81.                                       226, 228, 229, 231, 243, 266, 267.
action, 25, 31, 40, 140, 156.                           amrtakala, 174, 184, 211.
activity (krivd), 2,9, 17, 18, 24, 27, 64,              amrtavarna, 189,
   80, 81, 91, 99, 134, 159, 165, 169,                  anadyatana, lan i.e. imperfect,      12.
   174-175, 194, 208, 251.                              anakhya, the nameless one, 3.
adhikari, a competent person, 19.                       Gnanda, bliss, 2, 31, 98, 139, 163-166,
adivya, a particular relationship, 14.                     168, 169, 175, 182, 184, 211-214,
adi-yaga, sexual intercourse of vira and                   218, 219, 251.
   yogini, 210.                                         4nanda Sakti, the energy of bliss, 17, 144,
adrsta, unseen, 233, 236.                                  148, 175, 203, 216.
advaita, non-dualistic, 4, 100.                         ananta, the phoneme a, 242.
Advayasampattivartika, 183.                             Anantabhajtaraka, 17, 47.65, 101, 200.
Agama, 83, 85, 90, 105, 109, 110, 124,                  anasrita Siva, 20, 21, 25, 28, 66, 76, 77,
   169, 190, 195, 201, 204.                                84, 102, 108, 109, 121, 128, 163, 165,
Aghora, 17, 23, 193, 200, 208, 246, 251.                   166, 172, 241.
agni, fire 88, 131, 138,        144,    175,    198,    anda, the sphere, 167, 204.
   251,                                                 Andhra, 74.
agnihotra, sacrificial libation, 250.                   androgynous, 46, 51.
agnikarya, oblation in the sacrificial                  anga (bimba), 251.
   fire, 258.                                           anima, power, 34, 36,
aham, I, 13, 24, 30, 36, 47, 54, 55, 60,                answer, see question-answer,
   62, 67, 78, 127, 131, 142, 177, 180,                 antardvadasanta the internal location
   182, 190, 194, 195, 255.                                where Prana ceases to move, 29, 196,
a-ha-ma, 55, 56, 78, 79, 127, 182, 236.                    267, 268,
ahambhava, I-feeling, 55, 70.                           antarala, a kind of relationship, 14.
ahamvimarsa,      I-feeling,      creative         I-   Antarvedi, the land        between         Ganga
   consciousness of Siva, 140, 141, 186.                  and Yamuna 271,
ahamkara, (ego), 27, 89, 98, 109, 115,                  anu,   the empirical   individual,         24,    98,
    117, 126, 128-130, 144, 148, 220,                      243,
   232,                                                 anubandha catustaya,    four   indispensable
aindri, one of the matrkas, 208.                           elements of any sastra, 19.
aisvarya, sovereignty, 67, 232.                         anugraha, grace, 9, 29, 134,
Ajadapramatrsiddhi, 55, 182.                            anugrahatmikd, grace incarnate, 10.
                                                                               Para-Trisikd-Vivarana
274
                                                               156-164, 168, 169,        171,    182,      196,
auusandhdna, unification, 70, 98.                              203-207, 212, 213, 215-218, 220-
anusvara, the 15th syllable of the vowel,                      922, 224, 226, 228, 231, 238, 245,
   30, 36, 60, 78, 87, 190, 191, 217.                          251, 258, 261, 268, 269.
anuttara, the Supreme Reality, 253,93                        Bhairavabila, 21.
   6, 14-16, 18, 20-27, 30, 31, 34,                          Bhairavamarga, 81.
                                     64,
   36-39, 42, 44, 46-3, 55, 59, 61, 124,                     Bhairavasastra, see Sastra.
   65, 76-87, 89-91, 97, 98, 100,
    131, 134, 136, 144, 14/, 159-162,                        Bhairavatantra, 196.
                                                                          the Divine Energy,        11, 176,
   1642166, 168, 171-173, 175, 181-                          Bags
                                                               94.
    183, 187-191, 195, 197, 150, 201,                        bhakti, devotion, 256, 257,
    207, 211, 213, 215,216, 218, 219,                        Bhargasikha, 222.
    224, 228, 229, 236, 245, 256-258,                        Bhartrhari, 100, 225.
    261, 265, 269.
                                                             bhasand, manifestion, 110.
 anvaya, positive proof, 35, 36.                              Bhattadhanesvarasarma, 264.
 apana, the ingoing breath, 23, 29, 44,                       Bhattanarayana, 67, 188.
     126, 217, 263-265, 267.                                  bhava, entities, 39, 41.
 apanacdra, breath entering within, 196,                      bhavand, contemplation,        22, 34, 37, 38,
     197, 264.                                                  44, 149, 234.
                                        60,
 apara, the laststage of manifestation,                       bheda, diversity, 30, 115, 243.
     86, 108, 147, 154, 159.                                  bhedabheda, unity in diversity, 30, 243.
  apohana, the experience of gap between                      bheda samkhya, vowelless letters, 153.
       the     first experience   and         its recall,
     231, 234.                                                bhoga, enjoyment, 122, 191.
                                                               bhicari, energy as objective existents,
  aprasara, non-expansion, 163, 164.                              38, 39, 50.
  apyayana, pervasion, 124,                                    bhuvana, sphere, 150, 241, 261.
  Gpyayini, the energy that pervades upto                      bija, the seed syllable, 89, 98, 122,
                                                                                                     149,
       ‘jalatattva, 124.
                                    for kindling                   176, 180, 185, 194, 204, 216, 218,
  arani, a piece of wood                                         262, 263.
      sacrificial fire, 258.                                   bijamantra, sacred seed syllable, 204.s of
                     the fifth matra of om,           125,
  ardhacandra,
     178, 186.                                                 bijavasthdpana, one of the aspect
                                                                  creative activity, 19.
  arthakriya, purpose, 80.                                     bimba, reflection, 83, 85, 108, 118,
                                                                                                      121,
  articulation, 155.                                              123, 127, 151, 173.
  Atrigupta, 271.                                              bimba-pratibimba, origin and             reflection,
   aum, 104, 255.                               19,   189,        119, 128, 131.
      avabhasa, manifestation,          17,
         197, 198, 211.                                         bimbapratibimbavada, 109.         60,
                                                                bindu, the 15th vowel, a dot, 36,
      avabodha, realization, 57.                                   125, 152, 153, 167, 168, 172, 173,
      avakasada, the giver of space 124,                           181, 182, 187, 197, 217, 264.
      dvartana, repetition, 246, 247.                           bindu-kala, B, 216, 264, 267.
      avatara, descent, 123.                                    hindu-Sakti, Siva’s Sakti, 148.
      avikalpa, thought free, 7.                                bliss (ananda), 2,24, 31, 32, 42-45, 50,
      avindbhavi, inherent, 22, 28.                                52, 62-64, 67, 90, 98, 136, 139, 163,,
                                                                   169, 205, 206, 251.
                                                                bodha,    Universal Divine Consciousness,
                                                                   7, 71, 175.
      bahyadvadasanta, the external space                                       consisting   of Conscionsness
         where prdna ceases to move 29, 196,
                                                                bag      ias
             267, 268.                                               13;
                                                                bodhini, illuminating, 124.
       bandha, bondage; 35.                                     Bodhisattva, 29.
      Batuka, 260.                                                                              18, 21, 24, sl,
                                                                 body (Sarire), 5-7, 12,               71-
      Bhadrakali, 265, 266.                                        33, 34, 36, 37, 42-44, 52, 57, 61, 218,
       bhaga, 66, 67.                                              72, 95, 123, 128, 149, 165, 207, 241,
       Bhagavadgita, 45, 71, 211, 242,  254.
                                    18-22, 24,                     290, 221, 227, 234, 236, 239,
       Bhairava, 5, 6, 10, 13-16,                                  245, 246, 252, 268, 271.
                                            , 50
          32, 34, 36, 39, 40, 42, 44, 46-48                      bondage (bandha), 4, 18, 21, 31, 35, 73,
                                               96-
          51, 55, 63, 64, 70, 75-85, 91,                           119, 154, 156, 159.
                      111-114,    117-120,    128,
          98, 108,
General Index                                                                                          275
brahma, 21,   38, 45,       50,   87,   102,     116,         37, 63, 71, 74, 77, 78, 90, 92, 98,
   191, 203, 205, 207, 210, 212. 218,                         110, ill, 115,      117,   135- 138;
   220, 221, 223, 241, bap, 951,                              141, 147, 161, 162, 174, 177, 180,
brahmapatcaka, 87, 89, 191.                                   182 183, 186, 190, 195, 236,
brahmarandhra, 235.                                           245, 258, 262, 266.
Brahma, 11, 12, 62, 109, 154, 158,                         Consciousness,        supreme,    divine,      2,
   256, 257,                                                  3, 5,       7,9, 10, 16, 18, 20-22, 25,
brahmana, 23, 223.                                            33-37, 40, ais. 49-51, 53, 60,
brahmi,   one ‘of the    mitrkas,       62,      158,        63, 77, 81, 91, 95, 96, 110, 114,
   170, 208.                                                  116, 119, 120; 123, 135, 138, 180,
breath (prana), 12, 24, 29, 31, 206,                          184, 194, 196, 199,
   208, 217, 264, 26 6.                                    Consciousness, ‘transcendental, 118.
buddhi, intellect, 21, 27, 61, 66, 89, 98,                 Consciousness,      universal,    6, 29,     50,
   109, 115, 117, 126-130, 136, 138,                         66, 71, 86, 111.
   140, 144, 148, 200, 208, 220, 232.                   Consciousness power, 6,
Buddhism, 29; 57                                        consonants (wyafjana), 87, 88,                 122,
Buddhists, 74.                                             123, 137, 141, 149-153, 174,                175,
                                                           187, 192, 195, 212, 214, 216,               217,
                                                           219, 220.
eons, vortices of energy, 21, 32, 150,                  Sy coaton (bhdvana), 34, 37,                   234,
   234,                                                     61,
   Cakra, devata, 238.                                  continuity (avicchinnaté), 9, 10.
   cakra, kula, 179.                                    cosmos (visva), 24, 37, 88, 236.
   cakra, marici, 46,                                   creativity (visarga parama), 14,
   cakra, matrka, 135, 136, 150.                        Cukhulaka, 270, 271.
   cakra, miiladhara, 266.
   cakra, rasmi, 36.
   cakra, Sakti, 36, 175, 179, 208, 209.
   cakra, vijtana, 42,                                  Daksa, 85.
caksu, the eyes, 89, 129, 130, 144, 148.                darSana, especie, 231, 234,
camatkdra, amazement, ‘wonder of bliss,                 deha, body,6,        te
    24, 112, 190.                                          deha, ese 500,
cdmunda, one of the matrkas, 170, 208.                  dehapramata, experient of body, 77.
carvana, perceptive experience with                     deities (devatd), 208, 209, 30, 246,
delight, one of the four aspects of                        256.
    manifestations, 17, 19, 189,197, 198.               deSa space, 29.
carya, observance of religious rites, in                deva (deity), 31, 246.
    the context of cohabitation between                 devata, 11.
   the vira and    yogini, 85, 236, 238.                devi,3, 6, 9-12, 14, 15, 46, 47, 50, 63,
   Caryakrama, poi
               2                                          65, 67, 70, 75, 84, 50, 97, 137, 201,
Castes (jati), 223, 226, 238.                             238, 255, 269,
Categories, thirty six (addhvd), 66,                      devi, paré, 207.
    77, 87, 116, 119, 120, 134, 150, 212,                 devi, paratita, 209.
    213, 214, 217, 244, 245, 230, 261.                  devotion (bhakti), 206, 250.
cidananda, Consciousness bliss, 54, 169,                dharand, concentration,       37, 87, 89, 98,
cit, consciousness, 2,6, 38,72, 98, 168,                   100, 179, 235.
     175, 218, 251.                                     dharika, the energy        which     bears      the
    cit pramata, experient of the void, 77.                earth, 124.
  cit Sakti, consciousness power,          17.          dharma, righteousness, 67.
citta, intellect, 35, 77.                               dhyana, meditation, 37, 179, 235.
consciousness,    3, 4, 14, 23, 24, 31, 34,             diagram       (mandala), 236, 238.
  95; S75 5 8y él, 66, T1, 72, 78, 80,                  dikcari, the energy activating the outer
  93-95, 98, ‘99, 1, 113, 115, 128,                       senses, 38, 39, 50.
  156, 158, 164, 165, 169, 183, 187,                    diksd, initiation 238, 239, 245.
  204, 207, 210, 213, 218, 227, 228,                    disciple (sisya), 202, 239.
  233, 231, 255, 257, 259, 261.                         divine (divya), 2, 7, 20, 36, 39, 51, 53,
  consciousness, I, 5, 8, ‘9, 15, 18-20,                   63, 68, 99, 117, 131, 151, 156, 161,
     24, 25, 30, 35, 42, 44, 45, 47, 55                     190, 199, 206, 242.
                                                                      Para-Trisika-Vivarana
276
                                                          156, 158, 190, 206, 230, 250, 252,
divinity, 11, 54, 91, 154, 232.                           256, 257, 266, 272.
divya, divine, 14,                                      grace (anugraha), 6,8, 9, 10, 14, 15, {3,
dravana, dissolution, 229-231.                             20, 74, 92, 101, 108, 114, 119, 134,
Dravidian, 74.                                             154, 158, 196, 212, 234, 238, 245,
dream (svapna), 229.                                       262, 272.
dualism (dvaita), 23, 57, 64.                           grammar (upa@karana), 11, 26, 75, 82;
dualistic (dvaitavadin), 4.                                 172, 271.
dualists, 21.                                           grasana, dissolution, 115, 265.
 Durvasas, 4.
                                                        grasuna-yukti, process of dissolution,
dvaita, dualistic, +.                                       115, 116, 134.
                                             dual-
                                                        gross (sthila), 31, 34, 50, 53, 77, 154,
dvaitadvaita, dualistic-cum         non
    istic, 4, 46.                                          155, 176.
                                              and
 dodrapiija, worship of Ganesa                          guhd, cavern, may, 53, 54.
    Batuka at the door, 260.                            guhya, mystery, 53, 60, 263, 265.
                                                         Guhyayoginitantra, 178.
                                                        guya, quality, 219.
 elements,     (bhita), 23, 27, 31, 41, 77,                                                     74,
                                                         guru, teacher, 4, 21, 23, 29, 34, 64, 226,
      96, 97, 115, 117, 128, 137, 147, 155,                 80, 83, 150, 174, 185, 195, 204,
    223, 251.                                               238, 239, 243, 259, 260, 265, 272.
 empirical, 24.               15.
 enduring state (dhruvapada),
                             13, 14, 16,
 energy (Jakti), 4, 5, 7-9, 52,
    33, 41-45, 47, 49, 51,       61, 67,                 ha, the last letter of consonants, 13,
                                                                                                30,
    85, 92, 97, 98, 109, 118, 125, 131,                     36, 54, 35, 60, 78.
    134-136, 171, 174, 182-184, 191,                     hamsa, breathing with the utterance
                                                                                             of
     194, 204, 234.                                         ham and sah, 25.
  ether (akdsa), 25, 78, 79, 98.                             hamsa-prana, 28.
  eunuch (napumsaka), 172.                                hatha-paka, persistent     process, 236.
  evolution, (vivarta), 134.                                                                     61,
                                                          heart (hrdaya), 1, 2, 21, 27, 45, 58, 203,
  exclusion (uyatireka), 35.                                 63, 65, 78-80, 95, 118, 151, 221,
  expansion (prasdra), 183.                                  204, 206, 207, 211, 214, 218,
  experients (pramata), 10, 14.                              292, 226, 227, 229, 238, 244, 253,
                                                             956, 259-261, 266, 271,83,               272,
                                                             heartlotus (Artpadma),                   114,
  five-fold-act (paftcakrtya), 8, 9, 16,                        262-264.
                                                          homa, oblation,     149,
  form (akrti), 29.
  fourth stage (tira), 16,                                homogeneousness         (samata), 42, 52.
                                                                                                    61,
                                                           hrdaya, heart, 1, 2, 21, 27, 45,151,58, 203,
   four states (avastha) 217.
                                       34, 35,               63, 65, 78-80, 95, 118,
   freedom (svatantrya), 25, 27, 31, 94, 177.
      54, 61, 62, 66, 67, 72, 79, 80,                        204, 206, 207, 210-213, 217, 218,
   future (bhavisyat), 118.                                  929, 233, 236, 253, 254, 256, 258,
                                                             259, 261, 264, 265, 269, 272.
                                                             hydayabija, 245, 250, 252, 254, 256,
                                         128,                   258. 259, 261, 264, 265, 269, 272.
      gandha (smell) 27, 39, 46, 47, 89,                     hydayajapa, 266.
         130, 131, 135, 137-139, 144, 148,                   hrtkarnika, the centre of the heart
                                                                                                 lotus
         209.                                                 263-266.
      GaneSa, 260.
      ghanaté, solidification, 5, 174, 175. 130,
                                       129,
      ghrana, the organ of smell,
         144, 148.                                                                      55, 57, 60, 62,
                                                           I, 12, 15, 24, 36, 47, 50,110,
      glani, ignorance, oe                      inner         70, 78-80, 82, 99,              127, 135,
      gocari, the energy        activating
                                                               138, 142, 180, 194, 195. 147, 159,
          senses, 38, 39, 50.                              iccha, will, 2, 17, 59, 60,175,98, 182, 212-
      god (devata), 105, 203,                                  162-168, 171-173, 227, 230, 241,
         god’s will, 98, 108.        46, 54,                   216, 218, 219, 223,
      Goddess (devi), 3, 5,9, 15,17,      111,                 251, 252, 254.
         62, 65, 68, 70, 71, 74, 87, 109,
 General Index                                                                                            277

    iccha Sakti, energy of will, 17, 37, 63,            Jfteya, the object of knowledge,                16, 30.
       77, 123, 124, 144, 152, 163, 169,
        171-173, 176, 212, 230, 242.                    Kailasa, 17.
 idam, object,     142.                                 kala, the power of Divine, 2, 24, 25, 41,
 individual (vyasti), 24.                                  46, 89, 98-102, 127, 129, 130, 144,
 indrani, one of the matrkas, 170.                          148, 159, 160, 187, 188, 190, 194,
 indriya, sense organ, 31, 34, 46.                          197, 198, 210, 264, 265, 267.
     indriyasakti, 235, 236.                            kala, time, 29, 88, 89, 99, 100, 102, 117,
    indrivaortti, 235, 236.                                127, 129, 144, 148, 183.
 initiation (diks@), 23, 24, 29, 81, 90,                   kalagni, the initial bhuvana belonging
     212, 225, 238, 239, ‘244, 245, 238.                       to the earth category, 241.
 intellect (buddhi), 108, 117,                              kalasakti, the power of time, 27.
 intercourse, 206, 209, 210,                            kali, a deity, 223.
 Isana, 17, 214-216, 219, 246, 251.                     kalki, 115.
    ISénabija, 137, 138, 140.                           Kallata, 92.
 isika, the power of Lordship, 17.                      kalpa, a fabulous period of time,               12, 13.
 isitva, Lordship. 9.                                   kama, desire, 41, 50, 51 210, 216, 219.
 ieara, Lord, 9, 28, 89, 99,              101,   109,      kamatattva, 220.
    110,   115,   117,    121,     124,   125,   127-      kamavak, 219, 220.
   130,    141,   142,     144,    147,   148,   154,   keitcuka, sheath, Veil, 89, 100, 115.
                                                        kanda, the male organ, 263, 265, 266.
                           , 27, 56.                    karana, cause, 22, 34, 37, 155, 176, 234,
 Isvarapratyabhijnatika, 186.                              236, 271.
 isvart, Supreme Divine Energy, 17.                        karana, antah, 8, 10, 38, 39, 126,
                                                          karana, bihya, 38.
                                                          karana-Sariva, the causal body, 34.
                                                          karaneSvari, the energy of sense organs,
Jagat, world, 164,                                        46,
Jagadananda, universal bliss, 1, 67.                    karma, activity, 16, 29.
Jagrat, waking state, 28.                               karma, indriva, 18, 27, 98, 115,          128.
Japa, repetition of sacred syllables,            69,    karya, action 16,
    70, 249, 266.                                       Kashmir, 37, 105, 270, 271.
jala, water, 128, 130, 131, 136, 148.                   Katho; anisad, 69.
Javaratha, 1, 2, 85.                                    kaula, Siva, 4, 62, 85.
Jihvamitiya, Sound uttered                from   the      kaulamarga, the path of universal
     root of the tongue, 179, 186,                           unity, of consciousness 82, 85.
Jjiva, the limited being, 28, 58, 64, 134,                Kaula Sastra, 259.
   226.                                                 kaulika, pertaining to kula, 5, 6, 34, 77,
Jivanmukti,   liberation         while living    84,      81,             ;
   259.                                                   kaulika gakti,        191.
Jnana, knowledge, 2, 9, 14, 24, 27, 30,                   kaulika siddhi, achievement of identity
   57, 59, 60, 63, 67, 85, 99, 158, 159,                     of limited consciousness with per-
   162, 164, 165, 168, 173, 175, 208,                        fect I-consciousness, 5-7, 31-33,
   211, 212, 218, 223, 231, 240, 241,                           35, 46, 47, 49, 50, 97.
   251, 254, 258.                                         kaulika srsti, 97.
  Jitana, abheda, non-dual knowledge,                     kaulika vidhi, 77, 78, 80, 81, 83, 85,
      235.                                                   87.
  Jitana, bheda, knowledge of diversity,                kaumari,    one       of the méatrkas,   170,     208.
      235.                                              kha, void, 5, 50.
  Jitana, indriya,2, 18, 27, 98, 115, 128.              khecari,     unobstructed — consciousness,
JRanamudra, internal spiritual union,                      5-7, 38, 39, 50, 52, 195, 201, 209, 226.
   209, 212, 230.                                          Khecaré samya or samataé, sameness of
jfinapratibha, 94, 199,                                       Kee 77, 38, 41, 43, 44, 46, 47,
jitana Sakti, 14, 30, 56, 8, 775,109;, 123;                   50-53,    195, 196, 201, 209.
    124, 126, 152, 156,     162, 163, 167,                khecart Sakti, 42, 52, 195.
    169, 173, 176, 180. 207, 210, 213,                    Khecart Date          disparateness               of
    214. 229, 235, 242, 252,                                Khecari, 40, 51, 52, 125.
jitata, the knower, 30.                                 Kiranagama, 240,
278                                                                            Para-Trisika-Vivarana

                                                                                                     34,
                                                          liberation, 18-21, 23, 24, 28, 29,134,33, 195,
knowledge, jadna, 9, 11, 17, 24, 30, 38,
   52, 54, 56, 57, 61, 63, 67, 75, 79,                       41, 42, 52, 53, 84, 122, 123,
   83, 94, 99, 110, 111, 140, 159, 162,                      903, 224, 226, 227, 233, 244, 259,
   164, 169, 175, 177-179, 183, 192-                        261.
   194, 197, 208, 214, 217, 219, 223,                     ae195        15, 24, 31, 42, 52, 53, 56, 169,
   225, 232, 240, 242, 243, 251.                                Ds

   knowledge, determinate, 180.                           light, 9, 24, 31, 32, 34-36, 38, 48, 50,
   knowledge, divine, 54.                                    54, 37, 71, 80, 85, 98, 111, 112, 117,
   knowledge, indeterminate, 158.                             131, 136, 138, 169, 260, 262, 263.
 Kramakeli, 223.                                          liriga, 249, 253.
                                                          lolibhava,        oscillation,    121.
 kramap itja, 259-261.                                                                           34,
 Kramastotra, 223.                                        Lord, 4, 8, 10, 11,14, 15, 20, 22, 27,
 kriya, (activity) 2, 9, 17, 24, 59, 60, 85,                 40, 48, 53, 36, 58, 61, 67, 74, 78-80,
    99, 159, 165, 168, 175, 208, 212, 214,                   83, 84, 90, 96, 97, 99, 105, 114, 116,
     218, 223, 240, 241, 251, 252, 254.                      118, 121, 140, 157, 158, 161-163,
      kriyd mudra, 209.                                       168, 174, 177, 184, 186, 193, 202,
      Kriya Sakti, 17, 27, 30, 63, 73, 77, 79,               207 229, 233, 234, 243, 257, 260,
         87, 88, 109, 121, 123, 126, 148,                       a1.
          152, 160, 161, 165, 167, 172, 173,
          180, 191, 207, 212, 214, 227, 229,
          235, 242.                                        ma, 25th letter of consonants, 11, 54.
                                                           macrocosmic, 6, 7, 51.
  krodha, anger, 41, 50, Sl..
  Artya, 40, 46.                                           anadpadin the central path, swsumna,
  ksattriva, 23.
                                                                ,   207.
                                                            madhyama, a vak, 8, 9,                 11-16, 28, 47,
  Ksemaraja, 266.
  soll, agitation,           3, 15,     17, 44, 159,          48, 63, 79, 80, 84, 109, 111, 118, 121,
                                                               122, 125, 128, 149, 154-157,                  15g,
       0.
   Kubjikimata, 176.                                           171, 176, 177, 183, 253.
   kula, 5, 6, 31-35, 45, 49, 50, 61, 62, 65,               madhyanadi, susumna, 208.
                                                            madira, wine, 85.
       77, 81, 82, 84, 85, 171, 201, 236.
      kulabheda, 150.                                       bas 13, 14, 54, 55, 60, 63, 67, 78,
                                                              182.
                                                                8
        kula cakra, see cakra.                              Mahabharata, 86.
        kula deha, 149.
        kula marga, 81.                                     mahamaya, 101, 127, 130, 144, 148.
        kula-purusa, 149-151, 153.                  162
                                                            mahamantra, 178.
                                                            mahapreta, Sadasiva, 125.
        se Sakti,       149-151,      153,   161,
              13.                                           mahdsrsti, great creation, from andsrita
         kula sastra, 244, 260, 261.                           to suddhavidya, 77, 84, 163, 171.
                                                             mahat, 14, 66.
      kulakulatma, 84.
      kulanayika, 61.                                        mahdvidyd, 54.
      kulefvari, 104,
                                                             mahesani, 250.
                                                              mahesvara, 39, 270.
      kulottara, 151.                                         mahesvari, 170, 208.
      Kunda-golaka, 210, 221, 255.                            mahima, 36.
      Kundalini, 55, 60, 78, 209.                             maithtna, sexual intercourse, 85.
         kundalini-Sakti, 263.
         kundalini, ardhva, 109, 125, 126, 265.               mala, impurity, 2,21, 84, 96,96,101,97, 242.
                                                                                                        101,
      kusa,   260                                                    ‘mala, dnava, 2, 39, 40,
                                                                     209.
      kutabija, the letter ksa, 187.                                 mala, karma, 2, 40, 96, 97, 101,
                                                                                                      195,
                                              9,                        209.
      Laghavi-vrtti, 6, 7, 49, 53, 58, 207-20
                                                                     mala, mayiya, 2, 39, 96, 97, 101, 195,
          240.                                                       209.
       laghimda, 36.                                                                                           135,
                          209.                                 Malini, 102, 104, 121, 123, 129,
       Laksmirama,                                                                                             226,
                                                                  142, 144, 147, 149-154, 159,
       language, 74, 75, 155, tl.                                 246.
       letters, 40, 41, 48, 89, 91, 96-98, 101,                      malini, anuttara, 151.
           102, 120-123, 128, 137, 149, 150,                         mialint, parva, 137.
           154, 155, 159, 177, 183, 186, 187,                        miélini, uttara,      137.
           250, 254, 257.
General Index                                                                                   279

Malinivijaya Tantra, 74,96, 98,              101,       205, 223, 225, 226, 233, 234, 238-
   102, 104, 108, 109, j21 123,              125,      240, 242, 245.
  129, 149, 154, 160, 166, 193,              195,   maydpramata, the experient dominated
   196, 225, 226, 234, 235, 253.                       by maya, 115.
mamsa, meat, 85.                                    mayiya, 48, 77, 111, 180, 183, 195.
mana, measure, E                                       mayiyé anda, 104, 124, 167, 204.
manas, mind, 27, 49, 89, 98, 109, 115,              meditation, 235, 256, 260, 261, 263,
   117, 126, 128-130, 144, 148, 220,                   266, 268, 271.
   232.                                             memory, (smyti), 8, 11, 42,45, 93, 229,
mandala, sacred diagram, 236, 238.                     231, 234,
manifestation, 1, 3, 7, 17, 25, 34, 37,44,          microcosmic 51,
  46, 48, 50, 54, 55, 58-62, 73, 75, 77,            Mimamsi, 271.
  79, 84-90, 96-98, 111, 112, 114,                  mind, 17, 35, 39, 40, 42, 53, 63, 97
  115, 119, 124, 126, 128, 131, 134,                   153, 206, 222, 372, (also manas).
  136, 147, 162, 163, 165, 166, 168,                  mindfulness, 208.
  169, 171, 173, 174, 18i, 183-186,                 moha, delusion, Ste.
  189-192, 197-199, ‘201, 213, 214,                 moksa, 21, 23, 122, 204.
  219, 224, 235, 253, 262, 263, 266,                moment (ksana), 32, 44, 64, 196.
  269, 271.                                         mothers (matrka’s), 208,
Manorathagupta, 271.                                mudra, food of parched grain; symbolic
mantra, sacred syllables,    8-10,     14,   23,       postures, 85, 203, 207, 208, 210, 226,
  33, 42, 44-46, 34, 62, 63,68, 70, 87,                227, 228.
  89, 91, 101, 102, 121, 123, 124,                     mudra,   Jiténa,    see    jitana    mudra,
  149-154, 156, 173, 177, 178, 180,                      kakacaftcuputa, 263, 264.
  192, 193, 199, 203-205, 207, 208,                    mudra, krama,
  222, 223, 225, 226-228, 233-235,                     mudra, kriyd, see briva.
  238-241, 243, 245-256, 258, 259,                     mudra, satkona, 210.
  261, 263, 269.                                       mudra, trikona, 210.
  mantra, gayatri, 255,                             muhirta, the duration of          forty eight
  mantra, mélini, 231.                                 minutes, 203, 208, 228.
  mantra, mdirka, 251.                              mukti, liberation, 19, 20.
  mantra, navatma, nine     syllable    mantra      Mukurasamhita, 223.
     153, 208.                                      milladhara, 265, 266.
   mantra, pardpara, 170.
   mantra, sauh, 203, 204, 207, 233, 243,
      244, 248, 255, 264, 268,
mantramahesvara, 10, 68, 101, 110, 153,             nad , sound, a form of Sadasiva, 90, 109,
   154, 160, 177, 205, 238,                            125, 135, 138, 139, 186,
mantresvara,   10, 23, 101, 154, 177, 238.             nada, apara, 151.
marana, killing a person ‘by the applica-              nada, para, 97, 150, 151.
  tion of the mantra, 40, 46.                          néda, parapara, 131.
marma, measure of fingers, 221.                        nadanta, 109, 125, 186.
Mata, 85.                                              nddayoga, 178.
matra, 37, 125, 126.                                Nandakumiara, 17.
matrka, 104, 130, 131, 134, 135, 137,               Nandi, 17.
   139-142, 144, 147, 149-152, 177-                 naphahrim, a mantya, 246, 251.
   179, 183, 192, 194, 195, 198, 226,               nara, the empirical being, 4, 22, 25,36,
   246.                                                54,      59, 62, 70, 7!      , 18, '82, 85,
Matrkajnanabheda, 179.                                 123,     139, 182, 204, 205, 211, 228,
matrkasadbhava, 104,                                Narasimhagupta, 2.
matsya, fish 85.                                    nayikd, the consort, fl,
matsyodari, the belly of the fish, 25, 30,          nirabhdsa, ever shining but beyond all
   190                                                 appearances, 25.
maya, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 38, 40, 53, 54,           nirodha, stoppage, 32.
   58-60, 63, 75, 79, 84, 89, 98, 100-              nirodhi, 125.
   102, 104, 110-112, 115," 117, 122,               nirvana, liberation, 244.
   124, 129, 130, 139, 140, 144, 147,               nirvdnadiksa, initiation for the achieve-
   148, 151, 176, 181, 192-195, 198,                  ment of liberation, 244.
                                                                Para-Trisika-Vivarana
280
                                     41,          Paratrisika, 16, 18, 20, 37, 45, 56, 80,
nirvikalpa, thought-free 8, 15, 22, 295              82, 83, 104, 105, 205, 267, 272,
   66, 98, 110, 111, 164, 180, 244,
                                                  Paratrisikavivarana, 24, 109, 207, 240.
   nirvikalpajfana, indeterminate know-           parindmavada, \74.
       ledge, 158.
                                                  parivrtti, turning round, 35.
  nirvikalpa samvid, indeterminate con-           parva, festival, 260.
     sciousness, 92, 93, 98.                      pu limited experient,             40,   100,   205,
nisedha, restriction, 85.                                 3.
niskala, without parts, 23, 29.                   pagyanti, an aspect of vak, 6, 8, 9-16, 23,
nityananda, 206.                                      28, 47, 48, 56, 63, 64, 76, 79, 80,
Nityatantra, 150.
                                                      84, 91, 96, 109, 118-121, 123, 125,
nivrtti, abstention, 169.                             126, 128, 139, 142, 149, 156, 157,
niyati, 89, 99, 100, 102, 127, 129, 144,               159, 171, 177, 183.
    148.
    niyatigakti, 151.                              Patafijali, 35, 166, 178, 255.
                                                  pati, the Lord, 233.
    nondualism Coane) 62
                                      246,        pavitraka, garlands with specific length
 nyasa, fixation, 123, 128, 149, 245,                 and knots, 260, 261.
      251, 258.
 Nyaya, 271.
                                                  pavitri, the purifying elements pervad-
                                                     ing upto    Vayu,      124.
                                       32,         pau, rectum, 89, 129, 131, 144, 148.
 objectivity (jayatva), 21,25, 31,                 peace (Santi), 226.
    98, 110, 111, 142, 147, 162, 163, 264.         person      (grammatical),    (purusa),
 ojas, vital lustre, 42, 47, 52.                      70-75.
 omniscience (sarvajftata) 268-270.                phonemes      (varna),          994,   295,    (227,
 om-tat-sat, 242.                                     232, 242, 254, 255, 265, 269.
 pada, sentence, 98, 121, 271.
                                                   pidhana, veiling, 19.
                                                   pinda, the body, 180.
 pada, feet, 89, 129, 131, 144, 148.
 Padarthapravesanirnaya, 158.                      pindamantra, 123, 128.
                                                    Pindanatha, 236.
 pafcamchabhiita, five gross physical ele-          pitha, the seat of energy, 41.
       ments, 23, 34.
                                                    play (krida), 19, 40.
  paiicamukha, five-faced one, 2.                   plenitude, 206.
  Paficika, !21.                                                                         153,
  pani, hands, 89, 129, 131, 144,34,148,35, 60,     power (sakti), 7, 63, 66, 81, 96,
                                                        187, 194.
  para, transcendent, 23, 31,                                                                ,
      79, 86, 104, 108, 139, 141, 142, 154,          Power, effectuating, (kalandtmikasakti)
                                                         161.
      159.                                           power, three (trigakti), 55.
  para, supreme divine Energy, 4, 11,                pracché, question, 100.
       12, 28, 48, 56, 60, 67, %6;. 39,              pradhana, 104, 115.
      84, 91, 108, 109, 111, 112, 118, 120,
       121, 124-128, 134, 135, 149, 152,             pradhanata, predominance 90.
                                                     prahara, duration of three hours, 229,
       155, 156, 183-185, 204, 253, 275.                231.
      paré-Sakti, 9,18, 47,55, 57,63, 64, 66,
                                          159,
           68, 71, 73, 79, 119, 125, 137, 212,       prakamya, 36.
           163, 171, 198, 206, 209, 210,             prakasa, tight, 46, 51,227,80,260.100, 110-
           227, 233, 234, 266.                          112, 131, 136, 169,
                                                     prakésa-vimarsa, 116.
        para-samvid, 9, 96, 118, 119, 121,123,       prakrti, Nature, 27, 34, 89, 98, 104,
           138, 155, 159, 257, 259, 261.                 188, 219, 127, 129-131, 144, 148,
        pard-vak, 6, 8, 9, 11-13, 15, 16, 20,            115, 117, 223.
           47, 54, 56, 96-98, 108, 140, 149,
                                                     prakrtyanda, 124, 167.
           154, 155, 157, 159, 167, 171, 176,
           180, 183, 186.                            pralaya, dissolution, 126.
                                                      pralayakala ( pralayakevali), \C, 57, 101,
      Parabhattarika, the supreme goddes, 45,            110, 111, 126, 177.
        69, 120, 161.                                pramana, knowledge, 30, 34, 37,
                                                                                          38, 54,
      paramartha, the highest reality, 81.               58-60, 75, 76, 124, 159, 175, 214,
                                                                                              177,
      ‘Paramesvara, the highest Lord, 84,                183, 186, 190, 194, 197, 198,
      parépara, 60, 86, 108, 139, 141, 142,              a71.
         154, 159, 231.
      pard-pasyanti,    150-1 51.
General Index                                                                                    281
pramata, empirical experient, 22, 24,            raga,     attachment,           89,   98-100,   102,
   30, 37, 38, 54, 58-60, 75, 124, 159,              127, 129, 130, 144, 148.
   175, 177, 185, 186, 190, 194, 197,            rajas, 40, 140, 216,
   198, 232.                                     Ramiadeva, 271.
prameya, object of knowledge, 30, 37,            rasa, 27, 39, 46, 47, 89, 128, 129, 144,
   38, 54, 58-60, 75, 110, 124, 159,                148, 209.
   175, 177, 185, 186, 197, 198, 264.            rasand, 89, 129, 131, 144, 148,
pramiti,   non-relational    knowledge     30,   Ratisekhara,            104.
   37, 38, 169, 198.                             raudra, dreadful, 40.
  pramitikala,   state of awareness,      189,   reasoning (tarka), 201, 204.
       198.                                      recognition (pratyabhijfia), 52.
prana, breath, 12, 18, 21, 24, 29, 31,           reflection (pratibimba), 3, 119, 120, 125,
   33, 35, 36, 44, 49, 61, 77, 89, 95, 126,         134, 140, 142, 149, 164, 173.
    149, 178, 181, 187, 196, 208, 217,           ritual, 205, 240.
   218, 227, 264-266.                            rodhana, 229, 230.
   préna-apana, exhaling and inhaling,           Rudra,           62,   101,    109, 203, 204, 208, a
   152, 157,                                       226, 227, 256, 269,
  pranacdra, exhaling, 189, 196, 264.            Rudrayamala, 15, 110, 269, 270.
  prénapramata, the experient of brea-           nipa, colour and form, 27, 39, 46, 47,
      ths, 77.                                      69, 89, 128, 129, 131, 144, 148, 209.
pranava (om), 126, 151, 152, 178.
pranayama, 184, 201.
prapti, 36.                                      Sabda, word, 27, 39,46, 47, 89, 128, 129,
prasamkhyana, gnosis, 261, 269:                      131, 148, 209.
prasara, expansion, 13, 46, 114,          163,   Sacetana, conscious 125,
    192.                                         sacrifice, 210, 240, 241, 258,
prasdara, extension, 136, 183, 188, 190.         sadaviga, six limbs of yoga, 201.
prasava, procreation, 219, 220.                  Sadasiva, 9, 14, 17, 28, 47, 56, 65, 75,
prasna, query, 63.                                 89, 99, 101, 102, 104, 108, 110, 114,
pratibha, divine indeterminate consci-               117, 119, 124-130, 141, 142, 144,
   ousness, 93, 94, 98,                              147, 148, 154, 156, 194, 229, 241,
pratibimba, reflection, 83, 108, 134, 159,          242, 256.
   173.                                          sadhana, spiritual practice, 27, 108, 128.
pratistha, stability, 252,                       Sadyojata, 17, 246, 251.
pratyabhijiia, recognition, 135, 138, 140.       sahaja, innate, 66.
 Pratyabhijnahrdayam, 266.                       sahajavidya, Siva vidya, 201,
pratyekabuddha, 29.                              sahasrara, 21,
praveSa, absorption, 13.                         sahrdayata, taste for beautiful things, 43.
prayatna, effort, 69.                             aiva, 85.
prayojana, purpose, 19,                            Saiva Agama, 2, 4, 21, 36, 131,134,
preta, corpse, 125, 229.                                  ‘O01.
prihivi, earth, 88, 102, 104, 108, 113,            Saiva Sastra, 151, 152, 167,173,174,
    128, 130,131, 134, 136-138, 142,148.                 178, 259, 271.
   prthivi-anda, 102, 104, 124, 167.                 ‘aiva Siddhanta, 82, 85,
purdna, 118.                                         aiva system, 81.
pina, whole, 7, 190, 205.                        sakala, the limited being, 10, 23, 29,
purusa, 27, 35, 71, 87, 89, 98, 117, 127,           205.
   129, 130, 144, 148,                           Skin, yoginis with supernatural power,
puryastaka, the subtle body,     19, 24, 33,        209, 239, 240.
  41, 97, 217, 218, 220, 227, 231, 235.          Sakta, pertaining to Sakti, 204, 209, 210.
  purvastakapramata, experient of the              Saktatantra, 151, 152.
  subtle body, 24, 77.                             Saktayoni, 175, 187.
Puspadanta, 166,                                 Sakti, the Divine Energy, 1, 2, 4,7, 8,
                                                    10, 11, 13-15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23-25,
                                                    28, 30, 32-34, 36-42, 44-46, 49, 51,
question-answer,     6, 8, 14-16,   21,   31,      52, 54, 55, 57, 59-62, 64, 66, 67, 70,
  47, 48, 50, 58, 61, 63-65, 76, 83, 84,           72-75, 77, 78, 81-84, 86, 88-90, 99-
  90, 97, 100, 108, 228, 269.                      102, 104, 108-110, 114, 117, 120,
                                                                              Pard-Trisikad-Vivarana
282

                    130,    134,     135,    138,    141,    Samkhyayoga, 57.
  122-126,                                                   Samkhyakarika, 200.
  142, 144, 147, 148, 154, 159, 160,                                                             two
                                                             samputa, putting a mantra between other
  162, 166, 168-171, 173, 176, 182,                             mantras one going before and
  185-187, 192, 194, 195, 201, 203-206,                         following, 255.
  209-211, 218, 219, 225, 228, 230,                             samputayoga, 119.
  232-234, 238-241, 251, 253, 254,                             sampufikarana, 250, 254, 255.
  256, 258, 264, 266, 269.                                   samsara, world,        28, 39, 86.
      fakti, aghord, a benevolent Sakti, 28.                 samskéra, impression, 18.
                           the     gakti    that    brings                                                      con-
                                                                     samuara, letters produced by the
      gakti,     apara,
        about difference, 28, 55, 63, 64,                                traction of the throat, 176.
        72, 75, 79,        110,   123,    125,     142,     183-                                                 110,
                                                                     samvid, Consciousness, 60, 63, 98,
        aoe 204, 206, 209, 210, 212, 233,                                 114,     225.
              Ae                                                          ey gakti, Consciousness-po
                                                                                                             wer, 5,
   Sakti, ghord, Sakti that leads jivas                                        227.
         towards the          world,     28.                                                                        a
                                                                      samyama, the practice of dharana, dhyan
    Sakti, ghoratara, Sakti that leads beings                             and samadhi, 225, 235.
         a he downw           ard     path     of  the    world,
               41.                                                    Sanatkumara, 17, 65.
                         ,   the    presid   ing      deity      of   sankoca, contraction, 199, 223, 233, ex-
    Sakti, kauliki                                                         sankoca-vikdsa, contraction and
          the body        and    others,     61,    62.
                                              parapa   ra,     28,              pansion, 263.
     fakti, pard, see         para   Sakti,
                        64,    71-73,     75,    79,    80,    91,     $arira  , para, causal body, 221.
          55, 63,                                                          prana, Sarira, 220.
          96, 110, 119, 120, 123, 126, 134,                                pupartatn, “arira, the subtle body
                                                                                                                      ,
           154, 183,        184,   206,     209,    210,      212,
                                                                                   20.
          233, 234.                                                                                                   e
                                                                            sakta, Sarira, the body made of divin
      gaktiksobha, union with the female                                         energy, 220, 221, 228, 235.
              artner, 215.                                                                                             of
                                                                            spanda, Sarira, the body made
      gaktiman, 63, 64, 254.                                                     vibra  tion, 220, 221, 235.
      Sakti-sparsa, contac          t    with     the    energy
                                                                             siete fariva, the gross body, 34, 220,
            in the middle path, 263.                                                21.
  samadhi, ecstasy, 13,                 22,    37,     57,     179,                                                  34,
                                                                             siiksma, sarira, the subtle body,
       201, 219, 235.                                                             221.
       samadhi, vyoma, ecstasy                  in    the     void,
                                                                         Sarvacara, 82, 222.
            219.                                                                                                     91.
                                  th     measur     e      of  pra-      ‘sarvasarvatmakatdé, omnifariousness 60.
  samand, the eleven                                                     Sastra, holy texts, 12 14, 16-20,
       nava, 109, 125.                                                        100-102, 108, 116, 119, 149,
                                                                                                                    151,
   samanadhikaranya, the state of being in                                    166, 176, 193, 206, 225, 226,
                                                                                                                    245,
        the same totatio         n,   8,   10.
                                                                              258, 269, 271.
   sémanya, 19, 199, 231.
                                      equipo    ise,      2,    171,          Bhairava, Sastra, 85, 151, 152.
   artic complete                                                             Mata, Sastra, 25, 40, 81, 82, 188, 259.
                                                                   Nisacara, Sastra, 81,
      samata, sameness, 7, 39, 42, 50, 51.
                                                                    Nyaya, Sastra, 270.
      samavesa, absorption, 2, 228, 257).                           Parva, Sastra, 101, 108, 122, 123, 166,
                                           80.
      sambandha, relation, 16, 17, 19, 20,                             193, 195, 196, 225, 226.
          adivya, sambandha, 17, 65.                                Saiva, Sastra, see Saiva.
          antarala, sambandha, 17, 46, 47, 65.                       Vaisnava, Sdstra, 151, 152, 259.
          diyyadivya, sambandha, 17, 65.                             Viravali, Sastra, 223.
          mahan, sambandha, \7, 46, 47, 65.                      sat, being, 81, 203.
          para, sambandha, 16, 46, 47, 64.                       sata, existence, 80, 224.
       Sambhi, 4.                                                sattva, a guna, 40, 67, 80, 140,216,
                                                                                                      225.
       Sambhinatha, 64, 265.                                     satya, short a, 167, 224.
                                       221.                                                           233,
       samghatta, union 15, 206, 219,                            sauh, 204, 207, 210, 223, 225-229,
                                         30, 36,
       samhdra, dissolution, 9, 17-19,                              234, 238, 240, 242, 245, 254-256,
                                             171,
          60, 64, 85, 102, 123-125, 163,                            259-262, 265, 267, 269.
                                             252,
          ee 188, 190, 195, 214, 230,                             Sauri, 270.
                                                                                                    98, 164.
             6.
                                                   13.            savikalpa, with thoughts, 15, 67,
               samharabija, the seed syllable ‘a’,
        Samkhya, 173.
General Index                                                                                              283
   savikalpajfiana,    determinate        know-   Sodhaka,       purification,             156,     157,   159,
        ledge, 181,                                  160
script, Sarada, 219.                              Sodhana,       the      act        of purification,      156-
scriptures /ipi, 233, 258.                           160.
 Self, 3, 15, 18-21, 31, 33, 35-38, 43, 44,       Sodhya, the object of purification, 156-
    48, 53, 54, 56, 62, 63, 69, 92, 94, 96-           160.
     101, 109, 116, 119, 157, 160, ‘161,          Sodhya-sodhakabhava, 105, 119.
     168, 176, 177, 190, 192, 194- 198, 206,      soma, 87, 88, 163, 171, 175, 190, 191,
     211, 218, 220, 224, 227, 229; 233,              229, 235, 365- 267.
    234, 244, 252-254, 257, 258, 261,                somakala, 267.
    262, 269, 271, 272.                              soma-Sakti, 163,
    self-awareness (bodha), 139, 140.                somamsa, 263, 266,
 senses (indriya), 38-40, 42, 44, 46, 77,         Somananda, 16, 22, 34, 37, 40, 45, 56,
     117, 230, 232, 235, 266.                        62, 63, 66, 80-83, 86, 90, 100, 156,
sex, i, 206.                                         190, 198, 253, 258, 260, 262, 272,
  sexual union, 207.                              sound, 25, 56, 68-70, 178.
nee Sport
        a         one     in yoga,   3,    204,   space, 8, 9, 11, 22, 24.
                                                  Sidra, 23
 Raat cocirana. 80.                               Sukra-Sonita, semen and blood, 210.
 Siddhatantra, 102, 256.                          siksma, subtle, 31, 34, 35, 154, 159.
siddhi, accomplishment, 4,5, 6, 31-34, 50,        Silabija, the syllable ‘au’, 173.
   81, 150, 226, 232.                             finya, void 25, 71, 78, 215, 218, 227,
Sikha, flame, 245, 247, 252.                         231.                            oe
 sihabandhana, tying of the tuft of hair,           Sunya-catuska,              ry     |, |, are known       as
   249, 252.                                           four void vowels, 214.
Siksa, teaching, 179.                               Sinyapramata, the experient of the
silence, 76.
                                                       void, 24, 29, 77, 97, 110, 111, 126.
Sindha, 105.                                      supreme verbum ((pardvak), 47, 180,
Simhagupta, 2.                                       186, 194.
Sisya, disciple, 13.
                                                  siirya, sun, 87, 88, 175, 190, 191, 229,
Siva, 1, 2, 4-8, 10, 12-17, 21, 25, 28,               235, 263.
   31, 33, 34, 36, 37, 40, 42, 44-47, 49-         susumnd, the middle channel, 2, 42, 44,
   52, 54-57, 59; 60, 62-66, 70-75, 77-               184, 207, 208, 260, 264, 266.
   84, 86, 88, 90, 98, 99, 100, 102, 104,         susupti, deep sleep, 28.
   110, 114-116, 119, 120, 123-124,               Sittra, 179,         267.
   126, 127, 134, 133, 137, 138-144,              svabhava, essential nature, 159.
   147, 148, 153, 154, 156, 157, 159,             Svacchanda Sastra, 69, 168.
   160, 164, 166, 168-171, 173- 176, 181,         Svacchanda Tantra, 14, 102, 119, 181,
   182, 184-188, 192.) 194, 198, 199,                183.
   204- 206, 208, 211, 213, 219, 222,             svapna, dream, 28,
   224, 225, 228, 229, 241-244, 251- 253,         svara, vowel, 185, 188, 197.
   at 261, 262, 265, 266, 269, 270,               svartipa, nature, 85, 115, 116, 264.
     71                                              svariipa-dmarsana,               awareness      of essen-
   Sivabija, the white semen, 175, 185,                 tial nature, 269.
       192, 218, 220.                             svdtantrya, freedom, 2, 39, 41, 68, 70,
   Sioabindu, the sound am, 173.                     108, 117, 139, 174, 175, 230, 232.
 Sivadrsti, 34, 37, 40, 44, 66, 98, 99,              Svatantryasakti, the                 power      of auto-
    100, 109, 156, 157, 168, 169, 053,                  nomy, 162, 163.
    262.                                          svdtmasamvitti, consciousness of the real
 Sivadrstyalocana, 100.                              Self, 3.
Siva praméata, 10.
Siva-Sakti,2, 33, 36,129, 176, 191, 199,
   220, 258.                                      tamas, delusion, 40, 140, 199, 216.
Sivasiitra, 225.                                  tamasa, darkness, 83.
Siva-vidya, 54, 59, 60, 201.                      tanmatra, subtle element,                   89,    98,   115,
smarana, remembrance, 234.                           117, 128, 220.
smarananda, the bliss of sexual union,            Tantra, 14, 46, 87, 93, 105, 192, 205,
   210.                                              233, 236, 271.
                                                                        Para-Trisika-Vivarana
284

Tantraloka, 1, 2, 28, 29, 85, 173, 255.
                                                 Tryambaka, 4,
                                                                                   16, 23,
                                                   turya, the state of the fourth,
Tantrasamuccaya, 74.                                  218.
                                     260.
Tantrasara, 18, 29, 100, 165, 255,                   noes            the state beyond        the        fourth,
tarka, reasoning, 261.                                 2:
   tarka, Sat, right reasoning, 201.                 turiya, the fourth state,28.
Tatpurusa, 17, 246, 251.               87,           tufi, minute moment, 92, 183, 184,
                                                                                        187,
tattva, categories, 20, 23, 29, 77, 123,                 196, 264, 267.
    88, 98, 102, 104, 113, 115-118,                  tvak, the sense organ of touch,
                                                                                         89,
   134, 150, 174, 201, 213, 241, 242,                    129, 131, 144, 148.
   244, 250, 255, 266.
   tattvas, thirty-six, 27, 112, 116, 212,                                            a, 208.
                                                     uccdra, subtle movement of mantr ra for
        242.                                         uccétana, employment of a mant
                                    148,214.
 tejas, the fire element, 128, 130,                     the purpose of distracting an enem
                                                                                           y,
                                          219.
      praménc, tejas, a stage of samadhi,               40, 46.
      reas     tejas, a stage of samadhi, 215,       Ucchusma,          151.
                                                                                          spi-
                                                     udyoga, one of the activities in the 197,
 thought-construct (vikalpa), 157.                          ritual plane, 17, 19, 189, 190,
 Tilaka Sastra, 222.            27, 29, 30,                 198, 211.
 time, 8, 9, 11, 12, 22, 24 23,
                            118, 119, 127,            Uma, (Sakti), 266.
     32, 33, 35, 64, 90, 94,                          universe     (visva),      19, 63, 64, 69, 70, 81,
     181, 183, 194 224 228, 229, 244,267.                                        136, 196, 174,
                                                            86, 87, 95, 98, 112, 205,
 tithi, duration of one Junar day, vowel                    179, 188, 197, 204, 253, 207,  211,
     263-265.                                               223, 229, 243, 244,       255, 260,
                                        210-
  tithifa, the lord of the vowels, 207,                     272.
                                                                                  pranava,
      214, 216.
                                        202,          unmand, the 12th measure of
  transcendental (visvdtita), 201,                       109, 126.
      207, 211, 227, 261, 269.                        unmesa,     93,     95-98,      136-138, 140,          162-
  triad (trika), 70, 73, 75, 212, 223.                       164, 173, 175, 182, 213, 216, 218,
   triangular (trikondkare ), 206, 238. 238,             251.
   trident (trifila), 77, 98, 109, 225,                upadhmaniya, 179, 186.
       254, 272.                                       upastha, 89, 129, 130, 144.
  trika, 4, 13, 46, 60, 63, 75, 81,  83-85,
                                        169,           upaya, means, 28, 152.
      161, 108, 121-123, 137, 158,
                                 205, 220,                   eagre     upaya,   22,   37,   151,    152, 236,
        173, 174, 180, 181, 197,
        223, 227, 236, 242, 245, 256, 258,                   Sakta,     upd
                                                             ial oe updaya, 22, 151, 152, 236, 263,
        261, 270, 271.
        trika, agama, 102.                                    Jambhava, upaya, 22, 151, 152, 236,
        trika, marga, 82.                                   263, 266.
      Trikahrdaya, 14, 150.                             Utpaladeva, 24, 110, 139, 181, 182,
      Trikaratnakula, 179.                                     186.
      Trikasara, 27.                                        uttara, 20, 21, 23, 25; 49, 76, 82-84, 201.
      Trika sarasastra, 30.
      Trikasastra, 14, 54, 64, 157, 167, 223,               vacaka, 12, 47, 122.
         244, 261, 272.                                     vacya, 12, 47, 122.
      Trikatantrasara, 176, 207, 210.       210,            vahni, 209.
      trikona, triangle, 58, 59, 185, 207,                  vaikhari, gross speech,         8,     9,      12,     15,
         254, 265.                                                                       118,                     125;
                                            210,               48, 64, 69, 79, 109, 111,
         fakti, trikona, (krivamudra), 207,                    128, 156, 157, 159, 171,
                                                                                         176,                     177,
             254, 266.                                         183, 192,        229 253.
         Siva, trikona,   (jitanamudra), 207, 210,          vairagya, 67.
             254, 266.
                                           verses,          vaisnavi, a Sakti, 170, 208.
       trimsaka, text consisting of thirty                   vaisya, 23.
          18.                                                Vajasaneya Tantra, 150.
                                            three
       trifika, the divine goddess of                        vak, avi 8, 89, 126, 129,
                                                                                                          130,    136,
          Saktis 17, 18.                                         138, 144, 148, 216, 220.
                                           241,
       trigila, trident, 58, 59, 173, 238,                   vakya, sentence, 271.
          254.                                               Vakyapadiya, 100, 225.
                                      222, 242.
       trtiyam brakma, 205, 213, 214,
General Index                                                                                    285
Vallabhacarya, 270.                                  visesa, particular, 231.
vdma, beautiful, appealing, 85.                     vislesa, separation, 188, 195, 199, 221.
Vamadeva, 17, 246, 251.                                vislesana, separation, unification, 43,
Vamana, 183.                                               44, 47, 56, 205, 265.
vamanabhaksana, 231.                                Visnu, 11, 12, 62, 109, 150, 156, 224.
vamanayukti, 134.                                      256, 257.
Varahagupta, 271.                                   visuvat, 23, 28.
Varahi, a deity, 170, 298.                          visva, universe, 57, 255.
varna, letters, 102, 154, 199.                         visvamaya, immanent,        171.
   varnasrsti,    creation   of   letters,   250,      visvottirna, transcendent, 171.
      254, 255.                                     vivara, expansion,      176.
vasitva, unity consciousness, 37.                   vivarana, 7.
Vatsalika, 270.                                     void, (sunya), 21, 25, 29, 39, 50,             71,
vdyu, air, 88, 128, 130, 131, 144, 147,                111, 165-167, 172, 194, 214,              215. s
    206, 251,                                          218, 231.
Veda, 82, 167, 173, 225.                            vowels (svaravarna), 87, 88, 122,            123
Vedanta, 68, 174, 205.                                 137, 140, 141, 149-153, 166,              173,
Vedic tradition, 24,                                   175, 179, 185, 192, 194, 195,             211,
vedya, object, 159.                                    213, 214, 216, 217, 219, 220.
vidhi, rule, 77, 85, 201, 240.                         vowels, ambrosial, (amrtavarna),          139.
vidyd, 89, 98-101, 124, 127, 129, 130,              uyadhikarana, 10.
    143, 192, 233, 234.                             vydpini, a measure of pranava,        109,   125,
vidyesvara, 101.                                      yasa, 45,
view (drsti), 184.                                  vyatireka, 35.
vijfhdna, 149, 151.                                 uyoma, void, 78.
   vijRdna-dlaya, integral knowledge, 94.              vyomacari, 39, 50.
   vijfdnakala (vijfdna kevali) 10, 57,
       101, 110, 158, 175, 177.
Vijianabhairava, 45, 97, 113, 207.                  will (icché), 2, 17, 90,104, 124, 159,
vikalpa, determinate knowledge, 22, 41,                162, 163, 165, 212, 215, 228, 251, 268.
   94, 180, 223, 227, 230, 234.                     word, 8, 10, 12, 15, 42, 47, 48, 68, 69,
   vikalpa-Ssakti, 231.                                74, 91, 96, 102, 104, 108, 114, 121-
vikdsa, expansion, 223.                                123, 128, 154, 155, 158, 161, 225.
viksobha, agitation, 43.                               word, conventional, 105.
vildpana, veiling, 19, 189, 197, 198, 211.          worship, 40, 54, 205, 207, 223, 245,
vilaya, 9, 19.                                         249, 250, 251, 253, 254, 256-261, 271.
Vimala, 2.
vimarsa, 10, 27, 37, 46, 51, 79, 80, 97,            Jojana, unification, 250, 257.
   110-112, 131, 218, 227, 253, 260.                yamala, union, 2, 82, 206, 269.
    vimarga-Sakti, 161, 219.                         YaSaskara, 270.
viparyaya, wrong knowledge, 193, 199.               Jatrakémavasayitva, a yogic power, 37.
vira, the male partner in kulayaga, 204,            yoga, 15, 53, 85, 88, 151, 196, 201, 203,
  207-210, 221, 222, 226, 232, 235,                     204, 208, 211, 232-234, 239, 254,
  245, 246, 249, 250, 254, 261, 263.                    261, 262, 268, 270.
  vira-yogini, the male and female                   Yogasiitra, 31, 35, 225, 235.
     partners in kulayaga, 206.                     Yogesvari, a Sakti, 170, 208.
virya, semen, 42, 52.                               Jogi, 13, 41, 57, 116, 126, 149, 150, 178,
visa, the region of expansion, 206.                     195, 203, 208, 215, 229, 230, 231,
visarga, manifestation, 1, 25, 30, 32,                  236, 238, 262, 268, 269.
   36, 48, 55, 67, 79, 88, 98, 102, 104,            Jogini, the female partner of kulaydga,
   124, 168, 174, 183-185, 187, 188,                    2, 3, 160, 170, 178, 203, 207-210,
   190, 195, 197, 199, 200, 207, 209-                   221, 222, 226, 227, 236, 245, 246,
   211, 217, 221, 224, 225, 241, 242,                   249-251, 254, 263.
   264, 265, 267.                                   Joginibhih, born of a yogini, 2, 3, 226.
  visarga kala or visarga Sakti, the phone-         Jdaanika, yojanikadiksa, (a kind of initia-
     me ‘ah’ 144,       148, 174,    184, 187,          tion), 23, 29.
     197.                                           yoni, 205, 206.
  visarjaniya, 179.                                  you, thou, 70-72.
                         aq


          TATA THT:                                  |
alta  career ras
faranrara    remea Teas:
   faneaoraattadagiceret staat
            aferaga    «aqaqaefastaa: |
   agaaaTAmepheaaraaeataa
            AAANGAUAAHS AA FEHTAT Il & I

   aemneafaeatafaatta
            arerare =o wreaata = farsa
   at eftcisgacat feadt at
            ae     adi        carenaifafatarg
                                          tl 2 1

   avafefaaras fara
            eet oat fafrara         = -araaq |
   sofa     gaagay
            fasratat           sfaaraneafay |! 3 I

   saeaaaafear faatfearyast:   1
   AMATTATS: AY: MPVS: TTARAT: II ¥ I

   fasfreafadtera sqsercT |
   arated sist feat FATE II 4 I
                                                     |
                                                     t
R                         aera ferar

                         sted sara
                    wat wa eq
                        ae: aifonfataer |
                    a faaraartt
                         aateanat argu       ku
    qaeat: TafarRaAa:, TAT AIIVAAT TUSIAT TICAT
areal aeqaisquearata, afe ofa: frarq Fearaatiq | ar
a afe: olarguefaretadt sana: crmeteat cara ATTA
fasqurararcafeaaiaraear       sanat    GTARIAFAReATA   Aaa-
arenfearat dfafe freer, aaq waRefangiasaa-
faariaa ada aaa anosaadfaasar aaata adar-
Sq, daeg wad gaq aiiftad sata aqhaaarenfaaa-
yaad Teraanaaa faqafa, sar aHaraTaaaTAseaTe-
depart faafaa: cafes                      fafa cyfa-
fagafa; afe canaraare False are_ea, 34 aTeaaTaafaaioat:
waa: AMAT ga: atta aerate: Azar aTavarfa-
wad farsi, Fad g aguataegeatneaa,—efa Taq
aaeaat eafatagiat da quarafa:, dararlaccatq-
quredequaraiatanrsaareiandenreere =| FTeAATTAaT
aradyaiaaiear, agat waranfeaaeata aegat exafeaar,
wat faar qeararfag aoRTIAITAT TSAI GTIA | AA 7
    2aq, Way, aa,   garlq—aaifatanoat 4 aifaq | daca ay
    quHEIAAaa age           ATT FatsaTAarernraded
    aq ga caaneBlaadl caraeda sarranad fasta egeia, aed
    ephcaafatearnaraeardy ‘sey’ af) adaq ad epelufacafa 1
               faafrraqearardgaearen tat                     g

 awe   wa F Tea        aa Aatweayay,       aA   A AETATAT
 Reraae:, aa TIA aafearafaadwT aarfrasacertaa
 seq efa ancefa: aeagarrafaecarmaafagiata: aq
qeariaeaatfenar caren eda: Tea faarers farefe | ata
4 afagq Sa    aequaa | eaar qearcnfaattest arerdtenfe-
cae cafanatararaar asad, aaieivia aatenctafead:
wad aaea gar cargfaesar fafenitaraat, eaeaeaara-
enfordaafrmarecraerntia, aaa       ATTA alerat TeATAT-
THATS           ata,      asta    adlawepranaat:   arenas:
Aaa,         Wes 4 BarHerassed aalaaraTaas; Aa Ta
qed Hwaqaraeda Aacafaa, aesata ay ana Berar |
agaq—feq aistfafaitoraagreafaeatatiag |’ aar a ca-
faaerqaeataazacaiaifrardaand fasyfaftanfeq eaat-
amaelt: | cad ara gaara AeaHT s cate    gar farrier
‘wena WWareaaraa vandiay’ ef, aar Aa St gew-
PATATTEAAAT eat       aTAAAATAaTUI aa TUT
care yaaa afaararat Faravrasraradigen<rta-
afaataearq oeaar aalfedarcaafeafaarrparaaar-
qasay aMsHTetdfaa|:, adisfa fasosya: sear
TTA    saa           = sagetae:,—efa araaferct,
pleasa agaray aarcaas dfaagia way ? sfa ear
yarraaartenasiegzag Tenaagersay faqiq, ‘aera
at quaredieta = adarraraaifaunaat ayaa’ = efa
arevay | ‘agisé faa faward’ efa fe cata soafa: | aatfe—
arg adtaraeat + cavfa smaacara, zerat qearatafaa-
mea «= -afafrersarariefearafraranfeatfetetatearasta
¥                          quar fast

                          osfaqe; afe     asfaafaarata    oad
ar aeaeat aneaag
car: ap at ag Fave Fawr’ eft Neeaayefag fe AefaeraT-
aanarq Tad,            Toast     J Fafaeicer aara wa,—afa
                                  J eq
aqona aendamaraafares qaeseaa, sarf Hee
    srarara—efat   cary facie: TeraT g aaraa | ea ad OF
    garat qefasmfea?      aaa   at aaaglt feaa:,       adarata
    afeafag gat:   Gata     afaanaafaea aaeragiearstt aata,
    aa: arta aegat faqafa ‘2at gare’ aft arage cad, agra
    aad adaaed faqenfa oerqat,          aera gaara rerAr afar
    epefat sad 7 eaTG, aaea ae nafa ‘Bd cara’ af!
                                                    eer
    vata qreatg “Ata sara’ af Aeaeay | aatfa fe car
                                                       aT
    faarraat aearda aeqara—eerd: | Bad afaTeTTa
                                                        a-
    afeeaurarearnet ‘seq’ fa sfadt 2atazraat:, afprerar
    aor dereraafanet ‘nga’ sf AASTTACHTT: | epefasad4
     gag) vasa ceadinemarafa aTAafeRATAA TREAT Fea:
     afereat: dfaat fanetag | ata a aalernaciermessatstry;
     gaua     area        aarfaazat qa faCIaa FASANO
     areaarenarneaatafanal CA      THT LHL- THT TIHTT
     FTCA       LAAT, ABTS OAL LG-AATL ATL ABT ITAA”
     AAT | THF CAPSATA (ATT ¥, JS Re)

              cqefersaga feaeat ead @a: aarfara: |
              qafarataieiena =| THATTRA "II
      afr ud a aguante: aad TATATAT aaeataaa eft as
                                                   t
      gadarcaretasm: 9% ca dara: | aa age darareTa
      aearatra-feontfesmratargansaart atm            | TET fanaa
                                                                —
               sftrafaaaqearardgacarenttar                  X

        ‘faca faataea: carat TARAT: |
        APIRIAT Aer FT Feat atfaafera: 11’
afl     vag ayer wan adfaaa,gt IeATinTTG
qerawa faaeaea aq afaanta aradeg epfed, ata
Raia a-qq-araafafaarafacat qs, mee a
Rea fead aeqqda: aged arag Aadeaq ‘agai say’ garfz
fararia-ag-qa-araacaaieag |       cata   aaqreed   Aeaaast
Aferraaeasg,      «AAAS ATT ATR HTATHITS aera           E-
aarafaetarea famraradst yaad dfs adsitaat sita-
HSA | HA Ca saesarararg eaafaseragg                carafe
qaned Aoeaq | aed a ceAagaTET aadfaata sannfa-
aTAaY, At Varaea Aa aa           —eaeaT Fa ATaeaara: cat
SHIT: eaTenTAN eareatfataeda weastaaaa Tema
earenaaa aeram aneHaq faqafa—aeta ca-fafaranent-
ee: aa qa aaa watfa—efa araq aTaaa ‘Val vara,
aqat Faq’ eae           “Ara sara, Ty Aa’ efa aera araq
‘gedag warner’    aft     sar aaifn qaetasydifa    arenfir
mag ified saMTe:, F TT IH! FT: Tae: |
          MaAMaat sal Atasatag TaAay |
          afarayead aa arena WATT             II
fersafgaataat g sata dyer afacen:
            aay aaetg aa art a awa |
            aerteat Gayfa ways faqeAy 1
            HaTqaTSTa waa AAT T |
          aeaeHeaAa          Aeaai afeieara Il
 &                         qari fara

             FEAT FRAT TETAS TA
             qefag sears faqaenageaagg II
             ‘arengugate fagafgesstaraacat
             faafaatenfaacagarftses Sat
             sarrsiateate afaaiaegeg
             HAT arakagnsnsra
             saifqatqttangetsafor
             qaaafearyaagaa |’
 vata qaaguze fadeafa—efa | agai ftataraean’:
  ‘qeafaa Reader   Tag   ANSI THET TAA TT HET SAAT AA
seife fasfaqat | aqufeafadeart va aaneara aseraa-
afafaarai wea: | oe: dare: 1 faa Afar’ efa, frat
aa        Sera            qergarnfeararahatearary
sfrar gad, gaat     a sferaeneafatheta anfadt,—efa        cae
area               aeralaamad          afagaadt   aeifear qe
afaaag, dates a eanfaard Afar                 1 ‘fae’ gata
Twa: Tofea, aerraTaareag 4 fremarg:—faa: aa: wrafa—
afa faerat, +g Paraactaatag fafa; caradisa freer
Fearg | Tarte attaraart
            ‘Frraraeaan Tre: atdalfesfacaz: |’
afa | afaararfataaar ot ca dara: ararcraiq—efa ga
way | satstat a adsaraat faa: seafraragagaateatar-
qaqawaraasaaaaay         sa faseaeagea yaaa faara-
quralstarfaaaaca fafanaratfaacacaaaea careranepie
quigrararareaazaezertcanraaterst stat va afer: |
sinaafeqniaa fe aradfgsseniqagiat Semen seta
               ainafarayearardgasaredtat                 cy
aeHanizenat eseq arafanteat afe:,—efa ae
afeasta fe arta depreara Sa qfwarataten:, frrterar ar 2,
efa | aga afteqe’
         ‘af at cea dfafa: misread aq 1
         aay     Asa Za Tae           7 sara: UN
                                        ( &9. BT. V4 )

afa | eperafasafa a cag afage ca |
        ‘afe safe arag stan ale afe faarfaarers |
        aera safranfasqm geagnafaantalt |
aaa ada          sala      ay anagadqdaaraq—efa
IMATWATATTTHT: | SHAT dararhadagaraearta |
    ay aearal seqraa | ‘agazay’ sfa, a faa sacafrg
aa:, aa fg acareaci sefaaq aafaafraqdeata geiza-
alargratatfedaararafadifa dfacafanatea, tt oer afeqat
qeatadfag, seat: al eqanadoratersarancH<ealg |
aar a faaa sat seanfaadted aa, aa va fe agrefafereen:
spartan                     sereaeasfrarifand        wate
farea:, a2a aeqa: aed aadtfaaa,—afa fefaa arardiaqac
Frag Tq | GAT GaN Aaararfaadisvadd:, a fe aeqet
faafastnat arfaarafa | cafe seat atrag srorqaraasfaea,
aaisht qfayaafaaea, aaisia eqeaarect staTeTarHearea,
adie adaaserarraraafasia, adisty aaeawaaaa4t
ararfrarrareiscal areata aTTIASTa arageqdeaTg—
efa | agar ca arfaeenonramaacafamrafagmaasra ae-              |
ALA FA, TIT Tata aa efa Fa aea:, TAIAAT
 Alet:, Iq ce-faat sau aaa afa; sat a asad aq AaaT            |
é                         quratferst

                             97 A Hale gonafoarry
tiga argue’ ef enaedé ala, aq a erase Tag, —
                                ril
qaq agaty | BH seat fe aqafep
                                 alaaqae eT sfafaed:
fa sqaeseaeaTy fancaiada, #4 Va
                                 afa, cag afaafeta
aria: surat ataq theta GF faasre
                                  Ta, AAA aeqeIsTARH |
    aq afaararfa afer aferaSaeRT
                                :,—efa araTRen fetter
    aa fe araqra: agrafata aega
                                      greqrasata Gaya—
    qe, AI AISA C4, Td SqTAAAt ana
    efa | age Waa eat
              fqaa ea TaEAfateeea
              gag Tara Farareaa TAT: |
              SAAATRAAA TATA
              aafaaata J weMt EBE A: Il afa
               wag TAT          TerATS
                            saa A
               aqaatrawia 4a stg Ml
               aa zarafasteaferaar-
               feafadearaanrencaait: |
               qaaragaiiadt fata &
               afefa aapaaeaaater: I”
              vars   ea    ‘garearagaey       afd | anieataa 4
     ganic)
                                  sit aFAd, TAT asafa
      gag | Tata ATCA: mraqat aal
                                    sata, yarfasatt
      ymeeare A aA TTAATITAAT garni
                                      et TaEGT atts
      qfaenizeraat, stad get aa:, aa:               |
                                         arat TACATTAy
      aadid, simatfasata earerraa aqufet
                                          iay se aqTalATG
      aaaq agaafasrat Hea facaccht fav
                                                   erenia
      aeaquleatg a at fart StH! aq Sgamtacreddadat
                alae faraqearsragaearealtar                  &
ard, ta farnateaarasnafaarmaag = safiaed
WA FT RAG, AAMT CAET | SAL: GRAFT: TET:,
TUG: AT Ta aT ey, ‘GAH gee Aad gq, gar ae
Seareto at: fread qetaed sa at gasronfaqrafay-
qerafacaratadiarear ane fassesia ar quightatsfaar-
fefeacar Meat deri Farad; aq aa Aaeqer cqseprarea aarfaat
aapreraraatigaed Haryreq ear fasraqat: 21 aa cafaeit
‘Fav Kota ‘az’ azo aa a Hala aq HAA | aq aeaa
            ‘ea at afa aaa      dea faratoafadt |
            alert wafa’***°(4. AT. X4) UI
afa | afafe safafa efa fafa aq—aq: arent @egdearfa:,
aa aaa Hay ay Mgraraida Prafrsaaaragraeasar
aaren afa:, a: aeasarat efa afafga:, ada sawed
aaa: qeaTdaar arfaad aaa” | aetrSaha anf
a8:    Slaten: ahaa,     staat a sad ara       sre    arafar-
eae Tat        gat, Tafa fe crag | @arfata gawar aria
Aq Gt: Ts aq AAA eaMaTTY, Tata a tare: | agai
aagaeeaqe:
         ‘ara feat a yarat sitaat saat aq’ (s. wT. 22x)
      aft) aara Sad aratedga eft            ‘a eft aor aay
TATA arate THAIN              faa ea eae    age fees rer aAeaTT
BT TMBAAa er aaa STAM Arava aaa TA faa
RoI TAT Ca aeaATAa aT et ‘gq’ faanieaar
ae ca ‘ax’ wmadi—aaiokafae
                        aa                  affaarar sate
THATTAAeetae           ‘gq’    TL    aah               aT aq
fo                     Tera ereT

‘aay ararnfe Aasfagar,       adtsfe afaaraagacy,    cena
fe arama: dalfrserfefataaaarg anarfaeeateatng 4
carafe Sqeit amet feat dfaaed q addisrafeerage-
araeiadart fafssrancareafaaecar Aearsaaaratata-
wWaanseraerearagrafegfaremeata faraa arama
HSMM SAATMT — SaraTAAAT          AATear ATT
                                        eTaeTaRAT-
Alaa sma earcafaniieneh qeMetaafestaar fanaa
faar feat eff ata agazy | afaaraara angi fafa: faaa-
faasdlag? a7 atq 1 aa ad qadist qam:, IMAM: afraada
qe: eft aadsmd:—aa:            yao: aearq afarta at
We: TIT, Ut       F Yaoraaanfaaaa       qs: efa atsanfy-
alsd:, aafe—aa stata: qae:, at qe qae:, aa gaat
Te: wat arfaara: agen: ef,     aa sraratsfa qq: geisha UB:
efa fafaa afsaqe carq. aenq aafa seat cdfaearaa-
SUOAZHAT | TF AMT: AAT afasnfaaanfasarg | va
Taq J wd—afaafed sfetfnfaaret angen,               sfaafn-
fattortera g avg, sfadeatea feraafaasdiqqard:, ce va
fg sfaatit waq, sai: art qaisfaada efa a qdla: sda,
fratwonda saneta sfeifrenrana: | aa farqeate wafer
GHer, BI Chat Aalst aeq wie arfaatsd: fr                     |
‘arearaq’ eft q sata: aanfaedisogeara ca ei, 7g ART
Taqraaraigiang   ‘ari areaa’     eeaqrefa fe eq      aay
was    qasasTowd |           seq    satafansfadvateat
‘aeq | sfetvarterag ‘aqcrag’ safe sat          sata are: |
wate aTTAat
         ‘wants aq fated fasrat aeefearg
                                                                            =
                    Paefaraqearadsasarentar                            ay
           a     arafafed seq             faacdaagaay i’
aft cd eqacrariafeatenafrardeagayy | asaya
aame:
       ‘qmacd a etfaaar: featat: aiaarhna: |
       Fed TY MPAA: TTAVAT: CaTeTATALA A (H. BT. 2,2)
afe | aq emretrafangat steaar | age Paareaet
               ‘agat          aged       gat =o ofeweqars
               afea glean arear patent aagigag tI’
afat aar
                 ‘gaat   a:   feqayt   ufeas    2 beece eee   ’


Rafe | aq SgR agai Far saitr faqazeqgfeenta ga
feaq aerat 2—eft | war ad gare—aagat adfad fe
aasaad         ada va aad              Fant    fatanqead,         aaa gay
alert weta—efa afersa sat ala oa fis ar azar
fanasfa 2—sft aqoeaaea faafefadoraifada saat
farang sarwarafara va ad yea: 1 ‘Bq’ eft aqTeatag |
Ho oqenTMaayaie-aqernaar, Hiaareorarayg a |
TAHA
                               ‘dgeratfecarg’
aft     war ge aaeta areaTaeaat aaraeaaa ate.
arama 4 tea araTAATTG | oe fg ge dea aeqg =”
aft | afg sarterraatteedq aa faafe cormsaraaa
aT, Ta *e var atfsat fafe:—aacazed afegea
aTaraed geaequraqrefacimafaatanstarcied, ai fats
aalfa agueaeaararea fe ae ae wafa | aay
8                           ora fever

              ‘safatmazreat fe fearaiseafasnenay: |
              aafeafa: sfagra fafefadfaeend 1’ (eq. 410)
efal ae efa area: anne agit geadqfa:, owada a@isaa-
feqaearq     ‘wart a’     gaa ae addi       ama       aaa
argeay, afag acacdaada, cava aacaearq sala: |
aaeafearaa amt efa adamenner gaara ytufasa-
AMAAUs agaaeTasaat saaaraeas Heat fated,
wal ag sé Gated Araqarh: wersarcas fasararenrcat
FOTIA, Tq         Aaa Haqaiadianacssat                 fateAfa,
AT GI WATAFAITAATAAA aeaHIeAfsa,                      Age    aa
famed aadfarg | age Nataaeat
               ‘aeeq Raa et Dearqanqaay |
               araraaratieardt saat. gat wag
aft faeces facawisaa ata aretaarftesa: | aT
Holg see: ara fafa: dasa Aegarctat frazear
at waft sfa—atuen fe afife agawwafaatdiatasa
aaa soifeaearataratena warat taataredt
fafa faaaa
        | adhe
     ‘ata carenameaaig FEIeacAAT Aa | (ET @1¢)
afa | dar
             serene oes copzarreta afearg | (eto Vo)
afa | aa @e faaaaorata dfafeastt fafeenada slaqe-
aaa aafaefearfaatesaaqar, ai aa: aarfeata araar-
arotfarigacata cara | age sialararaga:
            “ATAATHTTTTSAT fs fetaer aaaifea: | ( fat. J. wlRo’ )
                   staafaaayeararigaeqredttar             ga
afer |. rar
              ‘GHA TAT MATT RATATAT: |
              ara faa adet sfaqear gereaar II
              Borg afer ger sarfa atari ar ii (far. 3. wie)
aft | @e sar fafs: as-gieersaeng area afgataqe
                                               s-
fawravded Aetaaraaraar ai zarft| ada fe agai
                                             aer-
THN       TaeTaerraat               saqaeta frefaera
emaPaatanentcreg Ad faetaafa | afe asarered ara
famrareret BIO Hag, THTETET Aq, qa aq capavae-
ageerta—efe faagto aronsa | vat ta agator Paatao
MAT ATAT AAA THTATAT ATO GTea Gfaet aTaT TATATATTTA-
sfafsearni at arat fasrar aa aq fasraatay         aar fatter
sfraftarediarte aq sta aq frarata, 4 ga: wradtt
                                                wate
MAMA | TAT MAT TAA Ager,
                                          a J waIhag
aGet serie, sar war saear Fane} ex Arar, agua fared
aa aq faatanrs, seradt an stataeqaa TATBIIATA:,
                                                TA
Tarra saafs, aa fama) @ aafn ateet fea
avfa—facanaraafa,        sar   grararafzaet fara eet g
amet ef Gad, aradigcmcmaaiganfedterfeedt | avarig
TaaeaMaTgEaIe ya afarnagye adararatereq-
farnrTaaeert epetaizh a ado aqaat-nad-feagae-
Weyer ar: gaa: at aga saada eauaaeaies-
waafarar ca—eciha ar great af:
                               | agey
            ‘amaiser ong geet afmaieg Aa: 1’
ai      aa: eifega fade:1 afe arent waa: efxarett
aeai & Fefaggeq           aqaearad   gort—afadararactang
tv                              erat farat

agaraearg a | aa Saal HramTatiee rsa aqrda wed, aeat:
nar aaa afeqeaeaea rang | APATAALG TaHOTGA TEAST
qfenata fragdiat trey) aoa a FATT, aqaifaaraa
ea AMAT ATTANHEA, aaqaerafeqeararsertat
Raadal       ATaTeIeA ABET,           aTBaTYAaTAATINT                          SHAS
4 sara eaeqrakemaaaaeseafaqel AeTATaTy mamaria
quit fg afeqotanagcangrenaiaatteaar C4 | Ags aiavar-
aFaqTa:
                                                 la:   fara:      i?   ( fa.   q.   Ree   )
                baseeneenoneneeetaeen aeaITH




efa 1 aat
            ‘gage fasta a feadtsé ren: fara:                           (fat. g. 91804)
afa |
            g.asha sfaarta etait afeeirara 1 ( fat. 3. 88 )
genta | mlarfaqaay fe Faqrenreararcraty aeaaT AKASI-
armada watery | aad:                 HWTAAa Ta ATACATATEAT: wIST
faarareu: faaiaier afafaet:, aar aT Ga aeeaTeT TAIT
saqreeaaen: TagTeT       UT ATaTaeay Hag Tepfertaa-
aafaadtertaaare: genfetarq saaaA SITET SET,
Harfaaedy WAR a as eHaeareyas | TAH
                               aTHagaT         see eeenceeeneee    ’
                    ‘galet



gare sora
         ‘ar a 2adaen tana: stfeafear: A”
senfa | aaraa g aaftmacaent: faqueart fareista fafa-
seteart a4 aa faferanieegeraar dace                                                 faser-
eto Qatar Terrgqrasaaa fades: aiafeqeaay-
maarfara: | gata
                   Naafaraqearaagaearenttar                          84
              ‘deeaat agra         algafea qeeie: 1’
efa | aar
             ‘fagasaa dotaraeisa: qaarerTy 1’
zearfe | gat
          ‘ascuftanaea afpeter arary |
          Folaecafanay ma: FAT TY: EA A” (TT. 3123)
eft | areeaet: area gage               Saey@arTarfaer: | TAT
SHY
       ‘Tal aaa      deseaar aeq sarsat
       frasey aaqaraf savateast waq    (9. FT. 31%8)
eff | eqwagftard 4 unrata—aq cag atarfag afag saa
anafifamteeng fanedsfe serra aettufaareaae-
fafararearefiacasta a areata aeigencnar afeade asaa, aq
wea ostpafifanctaeaagreaaeg faaeqeadl arg: ced
ausdg | a a fameqr aquarg fancareatiat faer:, aft ga
Qa GH:      eqaeadfeaaataUIsstaqaahrafamaaETy:,
aed Gatarata Ae: aq 3 agaeaewtaaaa                             aadifad
Team: faainfa daganrea sHafanataecete | fratfe
RasaaMaaaaera:                    qaAfaysar            addaaaiay-
agafrizar agar gsaa aa fe adseradfasseoral aq aq
aqafaafa aaq aeaardlafa aatgrasrraarea: sroeaar
Sareio aed aq ais ef seat! ada aaleg agarrpaar
afarmaeaa                adie   gala aaasamdlfzaarto              dem
wa wqasaife agifanq agacata             aq     ddelaeqsraras-
sais vata | ate
            ST    tICd    madera             streeee ene Uy?
                          erat earat
ge
safe       cata a Saraaata          afeaarenactadiganet a4-
                                84eT    adeq adaatcnncary |
faaauiaeaseaas                                           Tad
earofancaieantt       adnanarararareatiaderaarg
                           qfeatentt< 7 J age ata
aq ala:, afeqeadaaneratata
                  e | Adfaen
               wanrs                    a a tier aaa
efter anfacctaaa
                             g fantetes afequraza-
 afaaeatit azqarmatoaeranan
                            GAIA: | agaarzfa fe =F
 afaqrenal caraoaaTTrearens
                              64 qaaita afa | 7a
 agvietrarnaaatiaatfaeerngaat
                                q Fad ofequqfedi 4
 area aaeianfe | seal efaa aea                   e ra afe
     aaa, eas       Tessa | aor a adaigeafeata
                                   qrararatfaa | Taste
 arated faetrarennasrratraiat
                                  tnentiaats 4 quiiaea-
 azaemerals frafeadtacaquiarrarac
                                   TAT afefnaanenteta-
 qaaatfa aat war a 4 see Haft TAT
                                afananearerat a avd-
 qaray | aaat fe wareate asia;
                                saraqreata fraferaraea-
 arareat agatat seas | seta ca                   oF CF
                                    at | gesit
     gentviated ext, Tea afaraantae
                                  argaaarte Haas           aa
     anait,, aaadafead fe amg afu
                                    faaraarad gaa afasafa
     araaragargTraranea at earns
                                  gaaaeay | IgeA
      efa Axtenaaafatiosraferarcs

                              tfaaheqet        J agraeanatyra-
      afat aat qaafgaaerqraaa                             saT8F
      qarqaaat   faserfmet aerate      gfaqaa dat addl
                                   anenrraxae — afeqoiqearare-
      afequieaenferarefaretigraraa
                                      aaafaatiaeoament 7
      eqerarraanrgaaaa arnene                     neaaTsreres
                                AT: | aarfg ae
      area Hea eH ISOA TATA Aea                                THA
      saafaqrenristt aglaearetares ASFA arr
                        afaefrraqararapasareatar                                            ts
ateariisafaornay aeaeaigd cafaenfastal a a
ceenferardeagada Rae aafaaritataaite ata agara-
Pafsatfaernraraai qagaafeaa      fads areaaesa-
afercrasiftaretsgaaer: | qee7e .
           ‘aa: ate aaq aaaubcke RassveVicenaetatsiatae de             Ge        aT. 28 )

searfe | aar
           ‘gat   Fam    aqalaeT: Peer nneteseeeeeeeeeereeeness    ’   (   q.    ay.   3»    )



geatfa | tar
           Saver ***topercesnrescesesssoe Radagaaaay              Ww   ( q. at.        EL    )


earfe | aeaarfa say
           ‘SEATArAATHe: CASA ATH: |
           aacatasta          2afer waararadcea:                  |!’ ( fa. 3. wo )
efal   awa        eaaarotfe deqei: accaeieta
                                       a qeqarafanqa-
wRaferieasiaatad:                     ayerarmeratarasts                         aaadfa-
qracqaiernaenaare vafa safasrao | acer
       ‘afmarmdanaraaraniaaany |
       aaa TAA     Tae earaaqeaai’ ( fa.
                                       3. ee)
afas
           bnenerecseeesecestees
                              coer Taq      aronrriaaty            V



efa a | aerate araar earaanfa
           ‘an Tfdegta afeaq wt careaEy |
           aaa:     aayarat         aat     waa       area il’ (a. at. 82123)
sfa May | Mararaaeeia frsfaaat
           “aTaeay Tatar: Taq Sfa atRaTasht
           THAAT ITAA TAT
       R
Ro                        qr    harat

afa |
    aang aya fanarergetataperfaseaad | afeeq
‘agat afeafafed a4 sania @atarray’ sma II 8 II

             Uta     ARTs       HIIeA AA THT |

    Tay arsed aal Teal Ararat eaeoaRaTaRa aat
feaanfa aseeq aa aAeq aye adem cafaaarepre-
aaa        | aTguiaaaaatarfaarraed           anadl     yaaa
faaror      araiarafasasfanfeataraaer      wafa efa,    araifa
assay:        fata aega:, aq sea aaa at Cayaaa aft
MAMA           TAaATATerafaafeataetarat
                                     aaaian             ASNT
ef goad, 84 @ aeaa: gorara fae frat | aga
             ‘at fanior netfee fant adzaredaq |
             faaiqatas 9 oaenrq = aquifer i
gfe | aat
              ‘seaa: aa:        TATA TATAT: |”
fal aaa agent Hater qafaereeaneat agrafseqrai
HISHAAN eaanesiwein waft aq ‘wea’ efa ag aaq
qaq! waa fe aq saafafeeateaurar fanaed cara,
arava: caeqogrdeaan arafaadfaafasid,                   sataea
fe canifanratraraenadaaaeares aefafe | sae
        ‘gataemenfasieatearar     fe atfaa: i’ ( a. a. fa. 82)
efa\ aa qerq afaxeeag | aatfe—afeeto gar afagar-
 qreqaefaated        Faas:          sRoASITesaAy:         Ader
 alfefadisnsina:, 3 ca cea              SIT frateqamsqaray
                  sina faaaqeraragaearedtaar             a
faaiea gefemmeeatemeag                  gad      aoraraae-
TeHeafaranar awed sata | Tat grea aeqafaqear-
Rafer          afsaifassora youaagTwsaa: aar,
epelasat 4 vag afagt Ga) As—TeATAFaST gals, afeay
sHIaT F eft SI Tea Tey Wada F Aga —aISAAETA                  |
TA SATAATICA Alaeat ATA, ad aneTway | eq lararsa,
= oi cdfanafarrarfaar swale, araraniaq| aq
araqed     areas sf ararraaifaqed sifaafenratq afar
aidafa i satay
                  ‘aareratfas: siftafenred: 1?
afa | favifa @ gaq ada sigdafeerary | cag aaa—aeratr-
qian afaas feaaae warenfeyfa araasaemrqaia
AAT | FATA ATR
           ‘qefasaqe feacar aa 2a: aarfara:
scala | owragiftarnes seqeaifearared facie sta | aan
ay eed     seaTHdafecaer        gdulaea aq Te Ag eT AA
aefafa | aarfg aa adaraa eft aq ara, aca fan:
gait aeaTsHAe:, T ga: AgaaY AamqdgcrTe ef
Ag A Aaa Ca Fats TR            TEA
   ‘gafacaea fafeoafansier Zadar |
   ay caeqed faarfrafanel: dtsefacaag 1’ ( at. 9. fa. 24 )
efa | aeaaift
                ‘qesafmeaeagar areatfat heat |                   |
                Rares aaa 7 feaeraa wv’
                                           ( Zo So BKIRo )
Ro                       qeratienat

afe | aga Aetarean’: frsfaqet
                      ‘a alst qefraery’
senfe | aga aremfa: faafaafafa | car eann—ag afaeart
ay afd, ae agratatwereang fast a fefaq, seq cafafee-
freaorrsseiatit feed a waft) emnearacéiferarat fastar-
Bort seatafeat a cafe aaa eafafeei arfer, aanfa ae
Araaaearat Mer saad afearar aeurawle: aaa
gored J: ase wae eat
        ‘aa feaa ada aaai
                 mgara cearaa shay |
        aa fava aatfen adfa-
                 qe qeqtfaaraey i
aft | wala daa grenrsessageaa ata qearaigear-
SARAAT MAA, ATA TAMA TET TAH ABSIaTA | sada
aat| aarefaaa afagard ara fates faentfaceata
aera aa atfed, at amadt aar eft saa) ar aaar
aaalaat aa aat TAITTAASTaZaT AT aa aAT qeT
afa agaterat) agalfe: | read fe sarofasaagrésfy gz
afaaa Ua ada        TeT SIA    | Te ATAPATATAAT Ca II 83 II
     ald   ardeernfiefrareaseraeatdaen         gage: wafer,
afar Favid frecaa
             qzaemt go at afer:
                   aifoet soarfiet 1
             at ® waq fae
                   aa gta sareaey    2
                   sina faaaqaradaceqren tar              VW
     adeq Fegqare: *eanqgaraes gX sfasreard saan
@q, tela faoeararsaafearter sar—fafaarin cerfesrarfa,
aeeaT aT ee eHUTad afs:, eer atfaar algae:
eHraatfaal, aaatfedaarames saya, fafasretatameq
TIES             FAACaMae
                        gra afer | ata a He
warguedqn ( aat a_Gve) wfoat | sar Ho wanKerey ate
aq FeAa: Tare afed at alfeat, eo fe apesara-
Bata Ta Wala | agHy
               ‘afa carmenameqariq i’ ( e. aT. tic )
efa | aar
               ‘aqlara 7S Heal: Adwawafoa: |
               sadeashrarra aumaa afgarg i’
                                           ( &. Fe Be )
afa carat safaspenidiary faea sarang | at Haq ecafy
vara sean,                saa      a aq aenTg ef | gar aq
wag aa Gia qaacadl oy oeareafadfaeararcazar warfa
aft ameaa: 1 asf        geaft qe: | agheata adsaqetaa-
era       aad TIARA, F4 a Caafalgaesedasta caf
fasmercved ofequrararicrat qf farafe ef ara cafeaita |
age Marae: eafaqat
                     ‘gfe aa wad aTAR’
seats |
          efa fraxd or ast faqrafa atag
                aaanfaaett aa faa faaferag
          waamraatea ast faarfad garg
                 afaaa eat seaearedt eqerfernacaary |
58,                           aera fart

aaa yaaa
                            awa sara
      arena   site    caq     fe gaemarreta,      azal   aeoenat
AEIaratareaaea, FasAa afMacarsea Fzrwetn aga east
BIA eH STH, eReafasafa az aaa cs! aq eal aa
areqata:
            qe wad afacravedt eaST: |
            qearafefegaar Araearfateat I
              aeaT: TaTaaed ATTASIT |
              qaaerquersaatieagyia:
              aed   saerareeaeaaeaarag |
              TR TAA Sat TeHATeAHTAH II
              qa saweqey aeaaeaata aq |
              qa TH aH THAT ATSTHT II
              aaa Taare, || TAS
              aafagaataradataer = Ag:              II
              araatfadtaaigsat = Ate ag: |
              sfaaaqeret adda = fareaa |
              Gat    sawarraareafeat           Fa: |
              awaaeaad        aed satay            |I
              aed | gqtdaruagaeaatiraay |
              qedareaded Wea: sTeFTeIaT II
                  afaas FE HI
                            afa arfeor gteqtaz
                     aaragen
                            afa faafta aa 51
              sfaafaraqarard gametar                   RR

                aTafgar afzafe                              [
                     aeqHasag
                fasing Aza Sas
                     Jae UE AGS II

             “ry Sf Agr
                    TAAATATA             3
             alfeatsa     fafadfa
                     aa geuleaatera: |
             waaay      = gtanta
                     ae: atfonfafger ux i
   af ef sraqi agg aril gea:, aT asaraT oaaer-
aroaargheaa Seqqrat qrapaateangiawar wafa eft
Req—TAAagIaT sfagsarhrafaeq: a aeM: ATT: ateT:,
areal fe af: aacagefaaarfzaeaataott | Aelq—azarfe-
eavafaaal wri faurmerifis St gem:, retard fe
dfaeaerate: eaearadeateaateadamristagie afe-
Feequadt | aga strataracaqia:

   an afedeqa: qed adfeannafenag |
   art ataad ae    firaea gest gar il ( far. . 21R0, Ro )
aft amt aa: a aa afer efa aeadfararccaaraa ar-                  |
used faut eqqead | faad a agfe qfeesdlseatasraseeta             |
wafa sft seracanfacafaarat qeraqqsrantatsecearceat-
fefraafadt mang aequeaa, seq aq arafeoreq aaoraa                |



                                                            J
RY                    quart

afr | gaafaaqd: staaifeeccatg acarnat qafa-sare: efa
faa afe g aarfe aeaeaarq aqufaead aq agaertta
aeqaatafa oearaeaatiea wate aaaqa: | ‘ages’ aaal-
safsrafiqifruimtatacaaasiaaeanaa            =| aT — E94
ANT: GasAT FAT Aa: | aq aq fas ge aq errafeafa-
quater faaterst agra             aansteraraar fragaai
MSY | AEs BEATA
          ‘FHaasAT A aravaraa: Hharlera |
          a faegdea af are   Qauraccarrzey |
aft) sreaaa age ‘nga’ eft ed aaa add aean:|
quacen fg caanenreaiad aq ‘agen’ efa aa ara ag:, aa
a quraenearenfafa 781 aa ca aa a TR ag
syolfa—aameaar aca fagedt dear:       sand qexHesfanea-
EqTAATT TA ABARAT TU SAS IA FSANGAAATS! TATAPAA |
aa fg faat soaestaesafattd speqafi—a sroiin ef aa-
axfa surat) seacnrafacata g dasafafa aaa safafa
Bae | aRATe a HoHetata: sara agafaag 7 antq
aqqaIay aa vag aguifafeney senate wat | Tat
faaigfaaeat + HeRTET sy STOTAaes aqeafa: eaTq—
afgaeiterseHerinageaarael qartaredieaea AGT: He-
HEY | TAIT FT Va aah: Ga CHewd     aHoaaIssed: HoHs-
qecaear: | aenetaeraTer        Haea     fearHTaeHeErT
sfa daeata a4 oThit | deed
                        a anadt aa ce aaa
Huta | agHy
              ATHY FH AAT: ( eT. HT. Vo )
               stra faraqararapaeared dar             aK
sarfe | aeaat fe aonfa    oeafa afe qeifa scarfs aaa
Ua Bqy | Ta
           ‘da we ta Tee eqaigedl @ AAAT |
           waaa fasrarfa fans ofefersad i’ (%So W213)
efa Fare Tarato | at gy Tao AIA eH HBASTAHATUTgAAT-
feesaniaciata 1 aafe—elawax ct sleaseecaet
wafaarifacigraat wana faefraary
        ‘ana yaa aeg a saiqieta ea: 1’ (ea. a. RvR)

aafg were arta arya arae: eeqay, earatfasaea-
wpe edtageredanfaarta afafayaate aectgrt frse-
aratiqvaanaty earfafa aerszarafata |
        ‘qt: aaa ae aaeaisat satiaa: ” (ea. F. WULw)
egy, aa: + ara frwerfafaate: afarq eft aesatqaata-
araTiatrgiagetadatsh aera ca Aaot EAT TA ITEM,
aa: AeTATIAT     UG      aTad—aveq    = afetcABTATataTg |
arafariarg fe egeant fasra ca, 7 a aa ateafaatat
arearafaraea: tarq | aitgreaeaata aaa autsisaufacta,
afa geqafasta crenion aaa, arcafeateatafatra-
HAT UfaeaTaa SHeemTAacIaaea J aifrctaraty afe
ama eadlat araraa orcraifefaart gugufesat arg,
aaa qt: qad—efa dtadaate cag, ead saRTaTATAT |
a gaat araeaoraiia ege oferta | aTafe-ferareaa
fg a ad faneqta | aa aq Sad cqraft aafead aq Fad
weerit yeaa aus ae: fagfa efraq, wTva TAA-
gesfaga: es: aq gafeefaeaia area, aaraerarreat
RK                            aera ferent

ararantgaraaateatiadat gaara                 qenemezeagaed aeeIt
                                              E F |
eG, @ fasta ceaa fe oy oF qensesad:, ATAPANAT
                                                r-
aafg aat ad fagrfa aaa aanfa afr) aearfa aenga
afegrarg ara arent veteran fatearrs sacs afaaeata
                                                         |
aqrrsaa, wards neangedr aaafeata, det fe Tact TUTT
                                                   a afa
ade gar fafesraarenrefrctetea ta oare fart a fagif
quragifealaa:, TA SAAT FOIA, AFHH
                        AT
                     TAATAL
                   ASEM
              qEATRA                        «ATTA: |
                                                             )
              aatsfen ath a2 a afaa: gears: 1’ (a. aT. R418¢
                                             qaeneaat
 efa | aa atierventg Saaaista fe waACay afer
                                               aed
 aaa afgaa ada aefate ofefad adufe safest
                                             Soy |
 gaat argcafadiend | aaarigel cadens fararna
     aq va decor aafacernaes fafa se areafaa—
     aearsarretes      Farad rageaarg | aaterar4 areqesaa fa
     a      fefaq—eqraaraaaereardaamiazearraceastagrst
                                                    d carafe,
     a guafea adtarfaracertencat:, fasafadishs gsua
     aa ca ‘afog Foueendy aa                Seradeargaaret qaraetfe-
     aferiterad        aerated       sq        |   aeatfg—eaeararreara-
                                         ‘stat gat aa
     aferatatamaer aacaerterasada faqetq
     qa’ afa al      STAATATEY denar stafegata 4 aaat:—fagier
         sarfanargrae: | ad fe aaterafater aerate ST afa ae
         aqaen:    THAASTATA        wafa—rra           arait:, Fe: fare-
                                                                  gonad
         feorad warfa, arg Sait aatfer eats atta: | areata
                                                           &    qaaaaa-
         eqafa auentai wat ca TITETAfSAAT,
                                                          Tea"
         afafeta ‘aaracanaitenta sfara: | marfrerta “Tat,
                                                     sara            sail-
         carfeacaafatttarracraeed faaacrenmsraagenfa
                   faa faraqarardpacaredttar          Re
fragrag | amareeremit a adeqfarnacanfa eq
amet afd cata ad ware aft geaaiq faaeaeqata a
sfeaafagafna aaa      agufaada i aseq, caisea,
aa wg, fe arg, agt wea eeuret fg wefafe quite
fafeod eqrared, qeaaar g fafeeda ezrar saa aa aT-
qT ATU Gea: | S Hay Raat TaTaTHeaesa Ta
farses, fe g gd qaneafaafeaqaea | aa ated egeda sfa-
FRAT ATHAUTAATTATUS TaGea, 7 Gaawdkaa ade
ependifanay | aaafasfasteraar sarang TH-fe-agET-
aficaata saatagq faq | os fe
                ‘ow aeq feat ad fear yaRAaa |
afar. carne’ fe asfaatfnearg faraar, sfaalfraaa araicag,
aaa        Ae    va quer     THe Fe: gat ger: TzgeTTATTT
eeafa fg fagfa faga: fasta eft a ctta feorafaeghata
gag, TaN
                ‘QaarHay Hear Hl 7 AAI Tra |
afa   aa ca acafe-frarcaat grater          ual gatawae-
qgTae wa—aeaa FeTe: TeTTATASTaTG, Ta a a faws:,
ayaa aga faa: efa sdtfaea ca anandenrcare:
aifeapsaitgneaa, agar a fasraraqasafa dentter 74
arafa @ aafaeat atarreafasrfag aarfa sata arafaa:
wa: aaa gialaa oclfa qoalsqaeq acadlfataeaaar
saaxta wteqeanaraag, wart ata
              ‘a ar iat a gaara
fa | aq aden agar casita, saTTy
Re                              quratfaret
                                                   V’
               ‘q Afgan waeseat arat arts faarifa:
afa 1 sivarfertarasta
       ‘qd aaigeraafaera wat fevar |    fa. 313¥ )
       aur a afar sat: afta aie WV (AT.
efa | sttarraqaasts
                                             ry |
                 acafefaarafer faatacaar fer
                                             i
                 aaagrt setoi a adarat 4 ada
 efa | aa         azafafaara         epenfaafadaarayaaert afaag |
    afe : faa sf a ada ge: sfe raf ren: GAPALSEATAAT-
 au
                                eageaa eT HIATT
 qe:| eae qaerfenara fafa g
                                  ‘my Sfa’ eft | ‘geazeatta’
 aifcomr TATA TATAT | IA aqreata
                               gfaaaaq—sazeatta afafe-
 efa, aga—aangaaaia, 37
                                       agataraiaaa WaT
  aea aq saat, TITER fE garafa
                                    at THY (AT. VRIRE ) |
  araar, aa ca saeata aaTg car
                                    e | aa fe aaqaeT
  gat ed fe aargaagrangqaeet
                                 | qat
  faaerta adeqanfeeres ga Aad
                                           I: |
             eqrenaeatfa TL ATAATATSA:
                                           TT Ut
             aaa mama sG Fa Fst TE
                                       Tals saad 4 THI |
   gfat ae SaTeAThT WTAE aga                                        4
                            Tere feat:       qansacatd,   saree
     qaarear     aa
                                   fayeacnfenaet Aq
     agiaer Gatargeat FATS: | SALT
                                              t fafer:—
     aga fasrferearta | fe aq? gerrg—aa atfeve aglafeedt
     HoTHOTAT         ATR     aqreatay fadtaaraeata fafa:
     qaigararaqentfantieratl ARHTCA  RA Tata Tagqar, AGHA
                            pee  oneeaseaneet pneenson: U
                                   aa: aa
                Slaafaaaqaragacaren tar               Ww

efat aaife e¢ faa fafgormteqag:-afaraecerfeaataeat
great raraat Araafafe afeartta aerenha        Stor aed |
qafa ater et areata srafaett aaeaaa         asareraraar-
qe:, aarfy   qweqerararanlsaese:   aa atfea, fazarena ca
wat: | aa     afe cotaafeafa: a earg aq saargederaifenta
wesumnaanraty a wag efa aqfaarafederamagaruatarar-
fasta arasid faratenod fasfa| aaa afarq raed: |
wa ag aa eqs: aaa fafa: aifem: feadt faarfra sora:
adfad fe sefaaein, aa: araraegradfaaraa: afer:
qeafararag fara carat qeale aq ata Acafaeseqear-
aft afesa ceased fasaq, ata eacaurafafgact
ATaTATA | AE


efat ataq franaata ararafaticedtarnaaty Gat.
aa stators qaqa freA aeqa: gateha
caarafarnaaghatadaimarwagaey | alga caeaetsafeaa:
‘an ggenifea’—anfea aq Cag ged adararai ead sfagrara,
Aerdat fe aeaa: fefaodted Facenfafaerat a fafa 1 aterfe
eafafa sarata | aq ‘aafa’ afafesrancarcinariget ar
afte aray’ efa ata aerfeerafafa, aca ateaed aleraaea-
aaarageres Aq salA—aa aq AAMTUAH fad htd—araa
gay, at Ca aafrafiaeraa yaed sate aa! | aaT
aay faafrassraadiaarat             aq gaa ceasfasrea
‘aefafa’ aeafa cata darceqneaa ‘Ag a aft aA          A
farcraaat o-efa, grefedt-eaorenai sfaea, ofequfruta-
Ro                     qaaitfrat

AAI aalfafeest a-geagafas ae vafe, waza aa gee |
wa ae ed sad at a feared ata fremarqaeaad ea
MoMA ATTA AATATY | TAHA
        ‘ga feaafad ad ard aenrg favag |
        aeararqaercara fatrnisfer Hafaq ll’ (ea. BT. 212)
sfal araveaa fadearfandisit fe aaracorfecararsdor
WHAT Sfamarcars va gpa: | afer faqra: adfaaaea-
dqfa: aqvaaedadadtfacar fait careqy watad 4
add | aa fg areata   ae:—aag atfee:      afesac:,   ayaa
eeefta wafeaa: atargaty | Us deta cavfastequaeare
freq satmataed fearrfrecafaadt faecafa ‘Hearth’
geatfa | aaa fe Sag ad cugeeATIufesageqeatfenat-
qferensfafeoanaratae: | searife aqfaceagte ot-
vgihnleaaft taget araasard arenaelmanriaagad eae
aTalfa, TSH


afa | saaaaeayfa awasiftarata acrarceafa Fea UeaaT-
agir agawaaqefagraa, aargirafaqdl aataareqrar:—
aaatfa efa sarah geafeara af, aareta aden ara
fargio saarifa, atarenfa: gaqatadep: freer gaay-
Weaq | ed aleq qa            ‘aa’ efa—‘g va FTA
AaATHSMRAaTAAa
            —ge:, Tea ad ‘aq’—atfow-
fafred, afg sarafaneiqetzaesecifatis § fafaq        Ararat
aeag | aordaeereteararfecaralarate waregar TufaRaTar-
afa, sar garage: aaa fearacay araaea-
                      laafaraqaragaearedttar                   RR
    9a:, IAT      va aar faaeisitfaasnrraata aed,           aq a
    careoafandarrearanfatata areata | aat afa agit
    arate aed alfa feorafasrocarg aq ver eft fafa aga.
    fager: | aafafa Sfaq qxa: goa | age sifagaecnt
                  ‘sererararaaa ag iaeacaea fg 1’
    aft | efteqeasfq
               Aceas scares wafer Tears: V (ea. BT. 814)
    efet | aitararaqreefa
                  ‘qeaaeazaral fe eateieaa: fara: 1’
    eft caeqqay | age


    efa | aeda frorafasat freqafa ‘sifeafatger’ efa, alfa
    aq eareata ae fafa: aareaaret aq at          vate, aa fg qe
    ardisarate aaa gergerfe car wafs aa sda                ad aan
    caaret AHA | aga
                       mer treqzat Prag |’
    ef) aeaarfa
                ‘aareed act ard oat aet aa: GeR |
                aat et aaa        faa aatert geq |)’
    afa 1 slfaerrartsia
                 ‘araarmifatreistt Safire: qzacafaq |
                aearat Aa aisha He ats Frasha a: 11°
    afa | faatartsta
                 ‘armaraifatesists efars: azacafag |
                PASTY ga: deareagia |’                              |




i                             ee                             I
RR                              qzanierat
                                afaTTATAAATTHAGT
afer | wore er OF OH, Aq TAT HA
afag qerreteargara ef | Tae
              en ada fret aes aatent TA: I
                                           dlarareme:,
ef)       atagaetaead Tiles fasfaqat
                                   arerata:—
 faagar aatarqawagaeeng afa | ad
         ‘qaqa agdaanHreana
              gafga fafa aact fetsagr |
            aa af sa awAla
                                    s II
                          aaaneaAnfTIRs
             ofearngufaaqustetag sr qegnt
                                     gegr
             soaqgrenfarasasqatigta yt
              staaaaefcragnfhaargaeffaaffaeaaeenginaaaretetessray™e
              dazfafsafa
                              CATA
                        te ATAT      T TIT
                                 T GAT
              fordtg ParR            AA v
              THAAT         TMAH IAESTAPS
                                                  GIT |
     age Se            IAT AG aed: caverta Teresi
                                        A at gar waa, sarfa
     gafa qearaadeatefael’: ae AT
           sq ac na at aa g = Tq apa rt   aad faeat—agaey
     aa aa
                                        184: | ‘ganar’ cearieat
     gearfant aia eetta ferafaea:
                                          7 qfaaaanra ‘SAAT
     sada afefara: | ear ay aa’ <ca
                                     SFA | aa afe wat
     egg?     af, dare: gat TTY TATE             ea
                                    seTTagy: | aa J ar
     faaraifaarior aareat aq acfara
                                      araaqead, aa Tah
      gras aan a & aegey Feraeraearen                -
                                        a—a fe aardlat aat
      geafagadtaafa:, aeerectaet 4 daea
                                   T J aqacfaraea a reteT
     aratafa:, ZACASTATAAAT
              staafaraqarardgacaredttat               Ra
agate: | aafg aqFaq qeqeahy Sqay eetareat Bag
           Sad 2a neratdt Pred TARaT |
           sat 3 aar ad cacaararaarfeay WW’
afl   dent Aalaaraqafrefaacqrengata             aq yxa:
gatas ata aden welfa feraq |
          RaaePAgeeITTA   AA YOAAT: |
          qederaargqagerqafaatas: |
          aearararatatafaerrtsagfa: |
          deisfaaayaa eareqrara: safer: 1

ad aaisd atfeat fafa: saafe, aa a offersadl asa, aed
4 <¢ aifem, aeaTqatfaegay | aa aeataq alfeat fafa: ?
ae o aea Fatsgaad ? wet ata seq sfagr? ae a ag-
atweqeay ? aginy—sateragaciafs, aq aa qaaaa-
eqdacafasnduacaraaaracafanaagong fecarg ofa face
fafralq: arara sedifa araratg, Talaggdtrtafadfaatar-
fanrafancrteddenrt     J adtarada     ‘aqut Haq’ ecarfe-
adaalagrafatiqat    sata, Ty    Mf’   gcarfear ardeste-
fasiiaa Tat aqaTIanitaaaaehayRAaaT FAG AAT |
qacaraeaa = 0a     genfarfasfatedianaciag—aqgar:
GRE: | aaqUTITaaqafanwad rata asa omrasfatasa
geararaaacia, SERA Il ¥ Il

Tea
              aureateaaa:aa
                    eaut farzaaraat: |
ay                          acres
                   aaa:   | Hea
                         ataqat wattaat 4
                   qfaearatfa aearft
                          gaara wg |
                   mary sifag Ty
                          Reread      gaa uu & tl
                   arafaaiacraet
                          QM        AGZay |
                    aged fa faeate
                          Greate TAIATA          9 Ut
                    AST     AMATEATT
                          atteat Afeaatgan |
                    aagra    = Arar
                          faerai a aafeata        cu
                    ga alfa: aateatat
                           adariq     adat |
        aargangataa aifes qfeesthta facifaa!            aa aeate-
     fefa daeu:,   a@argat-qd’—afefead:    |   qafa     a aerate
     greaaaa srorifer ated a eatq gare sateaaearacer
     aa araq eareafa earaearg TAT MEAT ata-diataaafa-
     cfr aataat     sa-actaaerdgq—araagena              afeeatafs
     mrad | Ay                        CHAT st
                                  a — -te
                   etafaareararacataa       ITT
                sitrafamaqaranigasaredtiar           ay
Ta asraerAAIaITAaTANTSST | Tea Geol aTaTe-
waratiqag, geafa aaa aesalniaera: | aegG—H fa aT
waa: ada? aft aq—a afaq—ad adlerarqi ag
PAA     AIT:
           ‘apie: fra seqmeaaTt: AfHEsTa I’
seamasaad      ay   caaratagaty efa araafat,      anix-
SRITAACA
    HHA AIAN TAA TASS Ta aaa AraCaE
qaeateetea     «= aa ATI    TAB TVA eawTIASIaT | -AY-
aeadea | aq areaifa: faaca faafaaq,—argeea ariaed
adil Fo arergaafaan: | deg aar-faaramarencarhehacangte-
aaafesqat qaaeaea afadagq | afetasacianta atarhamaer
aftaa ayaa faaay | aa g asaraaafafaareagueaniafad
walfaefeacaraaaaaar: &: fasilag camfag aig serdar
aa    qfetarfaar 4 afertarafaafoataoma waate neahag
saa, FT YF TAAStaaaTafesafasag—efa arenfa:
faaca farfaay | Vaaquagaagufasiat a agardiat, caneq-
afar gata aaah a qaga@erafaaat agqtaraaly af
faenzq, senda saafaetfanfaar 1 seqaaqaua:—‘a’
ara agi catty | ae at aHTeT GaAs aE ay are
agifafa | wa-aeaer aa F aearart ara arateael, aft g
arat 4a ae, dare aaat ania quarafafafag frvifaa,
aaa asaafas faangfad afaenata qq diana a
agfa adaatenaat aadifata | at a gered quragricar
aarfaafafaaariantieata gaqearfear: = qeraeragi fart
PHEM HAH AMaaeaafasandaay, afe ‘aa warferaq
qarcafed’ aft rary, IAM a sani sfaarfaei data.
ag                      qeritferat
pogresrpal wad dfaeq | aarfe—aketaq acaae
Faq aeafssa srafsar Sto Tasers aggfacr
SaaeHedraaeqedtsaegelfaaeqauagenaam          era
                                           nada
afararalaaaraaararad dfafe wrageangreatenta fag
qaraarafaases: sede adaaryfadataaraal asfay-
ag afar ca, quUgaeifatacaraaaraiadfastiad-
TaraISIseTaaaaaaiafafaaeaas: afafafaetety sfa-
ara-frarqaaeqaaaastaad fararaacdatal—a aehaar |
aalg: aHeweqTAT:
               ‘qfeqa adacradadeaara: 1’
eft   gate earariaedsia sat gaat seeda—aq aq
Frama gaa cafes rear aaTeae fa atsaA TAA ART
aafaaedare = fateraarfadacanfiafancororadtertetae-
fawcagtanfa fafancqdfagd aafenertafacaifanattedar-
arranfanta wats, sar fasafrecadfatandars, aq
afeezetiedararmtiafaad        a aafa TaeAAeTTAMAA-
Motarararafawcrgaaraa a vata, aar AOsareresth
amg | wale a gaqeaindaeqgaafancqararacucala sAara-
sferarfe eearrnsite fafaacaai adatafaeaifanaderfefaaed-
qaafa | cenreaaraanrafaaraatafa         sadier saa ea
TeaTgqaitd—mnaniaiza, aq dfacenata, aqat aaa
dfardtartiee cHUMagdataay            efa saree    fac:
adarfar: safe afaare ca eft a afafa:, dasqefaareraa-
ora     FT seq afanerata agararafanaaacraiay fe
aefacamdfagriradaes a    fanciqeacd—aargeorara,
Aaaratesraar | add gala, faneq    a ai
                                    afaned fear
                sfanfaraqarardsaeaenaar                rs

Wea:,   Fea          |   eae          a RTeeMMINTIARATA,
aharfeentet 4 aa aqua fear ga:, afar sreraaa arerie-
gfessarara:, ef wa ar orarad sferar aenghqeateicea-
aferar cdfaer agftfencaarar aakta | aeasht adaraya-
afasaacfaneracaayta, aaa faaagaéusafaaaia-
Aalanay | Adare @ Taaeacafaat faseqai afata           fa
afadt @q: areaafafa, a a qaraafafancrdfrarrariefr
afarerasaaet aar ar saifaefe ar ada, a a aalsea earqia:
afarar-afa a faadt aratfeaat + aferrfacetearaia: | gerea-
ufafo af frasrarel ealtararfacatfedtar: afegar waa |
aaaley g afeeaq serranfediar favaarar gai genie ag
facifaneraatta, fa fe caquionadata | fad arag dag
           ronfrd     fafasasfanraata-
                    gqaiqaravat fafaorena aq |
           went sataage: reat
                  rerfadied fea ATaaMTasAT UI
           TAIT MAY TLIATaAregaTEs-
           narmlay cafeneeqaia gaa verfsaaary |
           sfasr aerafafassadgiaazar
           qe eat ga sfasafa quigfatea
    TGA ETS
           carfatagfoost 8% aearararaa: afa: 1
           agrrafaae SeHa: Ar eaTesTAT II’ ( eT. wT. Rc )
efe |
           ‘unfaraimamey qa:     caTeqaaa: |
           Bag: a F fava: cat TATA II” (EF. FT. 318)
bra                       qeraifaeat

afa a
            aaAaaAayeaea                aNaz
                   HAMAAAABATITAT          BET: |
            Fist ata vasioiat: refeaq
                  dfafaaraaed sea atta tI
wag:

         menarafreaia Fay THTTTA U ( AT. fa. G13)
ef |
                       ‘agrafaae       aq a)

afa. cata   aaqeaay,        adtseaat,     war: fasloncaneaar
AMA ACTH, TAACT A FFA faato:—efa                        fa Ha afea-
gq, ef qafreqsana wag
             agafesonqqesar
                 sagnigaqaatsaa
                             sag |
                 aarfrafaesearearr
                     THEGASSAT LATS            II
ada aTadl qrarafa: wiigacqearaaacls facacasarcaife-
fafafasqcratragtfenfasat = agnifsreaafaaiaaferaaa-
FO CRRICICECEECIC       EC EUR
                           TRC IMME ECC EO LCE CIFIC &
aiasfaacnfargayarericaen eaeafansadafaattaa
aragiefeafadatarnangafeataufe-araen ‘aura gea-
feat aaa factig anaat favifaa, efa feaaq | ata frag
gearat faiaa—anrafe-faanied faaard, aifeerd wufe-
 aaised waTss,     Afe-aread aearfe-aecied          arnratas,   zife-
 ored Taneaed HHterIes, aera                   Honfe-sated afe-
                 faefraaqa rarasaetrenttar                             aR

SUITS, We-aied AAlseHITafes Tafa-qerred was, ararfe-
TeeaTAT    AeA   THAT           UeT-fa-werarareaihs               acaria,
erafa—qarqaaar afaartaafea ef ercorfa, et ara fort
sasqaiaanaaseaia,          aa     fe—feaea               cannfa   ca   aa
wat: sareneafa azagieqata2 azaafa                         aateafa, sare
feraget
            ‘area aaarag epefaqataag: |
            afaemearsaz: sataqafee: fara: w’ (far. g IR)
afa | aate eqe
                 ‘qa   feqafad    ad seereeeveces   Ng



efa | ud carcneda sareat saraaa feraarorg Arana atzafa
eann gale araA—asaraMaeaaesaaa || THT TAL
qyat va, Gaels agaiaaa arearaata | afet wracaareraa-
aa qafaardt       ata    forar eafrar,        aaifa        aq     Saray
ABA APSA         Talewladaaaaea                 said, 77 Yer.
arfarmeqie frasaraafiacied saqaged—efa aeeT-
aalargaadt agaa aatseranatfa agaraea atager, afar
aafataaaragata:, aaqadt aa fafaq arma—areor-
ala,      KARAS | WATT             seq        agrareafatacigaats
quarafad va afe: sat—aroraudaarg | eaafafea
dfag aq aanacasaaid | aad cqrened oq Ata ATaATT
saranda agarafa area arararfancoaa | ef gaat Ta
          —ag Sax va wearfa afeataarg Ferg aeraaT
aq waeatarfiad
qeafa i. aaat    aisha araar          tareana            ca—efa   carenfa
aarfaat: aeefaaa arfaral aaa fraaaaentarayaregare |
zaifafata a aarfaacaneafa crea ca arfraarnry aTaly
vo                      qeratfrsr

sera araradpat sofa sataaat aeafta, aaeaeia
Geaaaaareiaya fata fafa sees, sresaarear:,
forgerarafe adta sHerateamraqa—feraarraa THITAT-
aeda fg ardarrat—saararadat saga | sete ata ferag-
saralat
            ‘Saisie a waar amar ara faa’
af | adafexta
           ‘aaqaen fg 58 s=aizetefasiad |
           qqATeT aar Sqeaar a farat faa: 11
afa | aad areetarraeay TanaAdasfeeraa acaria
ag faefrarfa, aga sttarrart
           ‘arated Tat: Waleatarreareqaaierar |
           faararaifraearean: ameqreaat sara:
afa | aq Atala: arogeta agiia frefaari ger
PATTI, TA TIAMAgCATAAATA afasta:, ast fe
gait det
           ‘eqverreacaera faaitey a ae qs)
           cad & SaaTEMe frassicaraenay |’
efi   onfe-aird agrrafaaacaararaaied           araanq |
aarfg- ararataea soft fracas saad aeatrater ufaa-
aaq—aa famaraerai feafa: | aang
          ‘area qafaara: afa fasrataen: 1’
efa 1 aarfg seraratara araig? seahaoraraafeata:, faerqe
9 fadeacrdtarg—efa fafa aq fasraaeregé ena, aa va
frarrassgararafy ost | aznaaracifemrafasatesergeara
                   sitaafaaaqerardgaeqreattar                ¥R
a@arfaarasstae,          “aa fanmtacl       aseae:”     (ar. fa.
URZzR) efa TMAAAITAR   aS      Agaeest wfaray |
a oa qafaaarazerd afar araadenfeaaarfiat wafer
ale | qaats
               ‘faaasaorasl MAA          FaTeIT
zearfeat,
            ‘qeaneaaea afaasa aa: Fa: |
            AEMOMTATTAeaTHe!:      AAVSST: Il’ (AT. fa. Re)
eeatfaat Tl ahaa MeagaT AINA                 AeMSMMTAalTarIA
facracaaisada facifaa, safaq gataraaeasraotearg arat-
meager | sar aqfagq wetg ‘UTaes Fela aay’ fa a
gay TUAey | sar area frarag faafoaret as gaa
faefadt | aa aa faaraarfaafeard aang | facisaa a
wag | est a aaa AeReaA a grat Rzaqulotearg daregfa-
age al cakafa agierracarfa sfearnar feearfa
aera aifeeraa asd | aa e¢ fasldd—sane: fraacagq
‘a’   av, aa     qari   zeafe   araaed   afmacay —sfa      atod
afedarefeueraarearnt aeatg w:, ada a dlarfertfersrat-
avfagarasaafearesy aaa sayfa aaaied orf.
dai faararat aearat faaar aa:
            ‘qraarfea 1 aurd ata aeafaeaa |
               uate TAR eT TaroAAT eat IN’ (AT.fa. Bo)
sealfeat, aaa a gataaafaafodasrRagart = BRT
afanalfaargqafaaaramacarreacheadt   ara
            ‘% auracagfes arfaenrasgqaa: |                         |
                                                                   |
              aafareaardifa sarareatta seraq’ | (ar.fa. wiles)
                                                                   |
                                                                   |
¥R                         Tera ferat

            otfaarfzacadtaat    faefaar |   gaze       a   aaa
genfeat
sft faerraargarer
            ‘fqops qanaret sretaroiga a       (AT. fa. 12)
                                               ates
afa quraeragifeargare, aiart ferracag aart aa
                                            AT
aca sath ATAATTAT | ofHSTTTASTeHTPAMT
         ‘apfasga = aTRARHA ITAA |
                                                    viv)
          azar: aareatar aarfatar fasta: WW (arfa.
                                      arena, Si art At
 geatfaat GEAIe WiaasTSAISaIy, dart
                                            farett 4
 qog 3 fa aeafaaar: | Arqeragtfemrentfea
              grata faa ated PARA FITAA |
                                               at.fa. ¥I24)
              gatdig faaiio ser aartanareat W?
                                                    giate-
 efa aeada      sfearatsid facfaaq | gala atqara
                                     HAT A, AIA
 dearqoracfereragreara aaa qeaay
                                      aq gafee adtat-
 safq cana faqdeamrd ag age fasfaag,
                     ata FeTTIy arafaa: eanenett 24
     sqar efa ofegeaa—
                                       aa geteeraaits-
     adfaaiat: aqgaa | a a aiafaafad
                                         ata aq, aaI—
     afeada eto a ener aeqar faecraraiag
                                         areg aaa Seqy,
     aifrmren: atereaa aed anafenta, aea
                                              fsasamgaracgela,
     wad g BLA, TAT F aiaifeat fag
                                       aarzarancard A Tea
     efa—aisfanea fe aaafeaacatd
                                         care | eeaeafs qzara-
     MICE RIRICRSCIMEL | afrequitaeata
                                             TASTIT:, sfagt
      ada, afe deat ATH ara: ahaq—ea
     fe atat arafezaraafeta:,     aararazfoca faratcaraatiaant-
                                     Aq—afe        gta       aaa
      fafuafaaazarfaatienadre :, aft
                                            eaRTTFEATATIEAT:
      adaegaaal fF ahareazrsan | aapraet aT
                Sraafaraqearardpaearen sar                  ¥3
atael raasathraangasfagerfaaaa
                             amaragag
                               rada
aafa faecata ) a alafeecqain:,    vada       srdifafe:—ecafa
fare     fnget: Saad saat | aaa va | afaner ara
favor a faareqadinfaaa 2 ef Aq—as aeaarearaaenr-
emafaarcofafreararea 1 afeaisa Card qeare: | qoitara-
Twit aq, wraesaarMaqarad, afesa aqaeren
ua faarorat cdamaafa | aay qrasaifeata ge aaa:
yaa way afaqaig: eateadaauferaarcaqadeaarty-
aifaagqenaniangaafaqoiakeneaqiena: ar caraeq-
fafa! aq aaar faqeafad add—efa vataq a ada: aq
aa saa      edlaat aiaq afeeua: | adfadfnfaq         a-aeqa:
Haad Vaasa agawsdearlcaen    aera aes
                                   p
area TarsaiTAAAIAIAT aaTteTaTg—efa gta:
sia sfraafgana:, varia faeaza: afefgaa—aq               rage
faaaea, aa: gfadt gearfa asd wm eft, ara afeaq eA:
afa qA:, aed aq waq     WX Tat fated adfeoraraadfasd
eaTared faarted aaa cad, auife—aaaqer gat TUT
fear atradt Fain gar, ar aarferaaeararfaahraacaeatiq
saftqfa:—aaraeatt araaqetaaeara | carte
         ‘Pat a wed seared aaa       |’ (AT. fa cige)
aera aarfaarraarad arareaqerfatas siigeenenadeag,
               ‘gaa adaraay’ | (at. fa. cig)
aac
       ‘area Teghad afsaeoy wad cata’ (ar. fa. clea)
sfa afmearfttanarnassgaaqaRq i aarti FHT                eAHIS-
femisaqaarafaaaqeaaecaar         frefaag,    gedaq IATA
“Y                            qzratferst

quqdeaeata aft, agate a aatai feafa: eft ated
wae        Masta     Geta ATererequfamadiigedaa
feaaq | aaa faraget
             ‘garenta     aTaafqat aarferarecar |
             saracoaryat at qeaeett Ter feafer: 1 (fer. FRX)
efa |
seamen fg qfe: qeardl aaeaar ot aafranararaa
aathraferarateate fareafea | aatseareat: sefasyeaaa:
aadaemar® gealteaaratearaferata ger sfagry: |
ef araq anmafad cadaeadigd a1 aq qeaegafe Tafa:
amadt—aa aaadera aia a faqead a) safe fe frase
aTarqasfy asda      raat feaarfa           aa faasiseaa,      faa? fe
eafafa      «osarqsdasratadisenrenta «= dartq, § — aareaifed
faqeaa—‘aefaan’         ef,    aq caq aa              facia    afnc
oa       sfafaftaanaata       aaaraarad araiaifiawqqey | aa
aa Sauraesal TeaIUeAT aa AIAT ATA, TIT ATaTeafy
HAUG | TT aa GUT UAhe: eae Sf | aa Ca aq Saeed
ofa afafed stagemtaca:, aq safrarafasatargragq—
efa a araeay, neanzarfag g So aatagzaredaty aq.
qeatalg ‘aeaaey’ | ‘ed gaftata’ efa afag, famarerat g
aMaqaras           wie ‘ag’       Faq      sf faqs       asatarg ‘ag-
fade’ aa aan,           TeIhafeaTy          ‘ganay’    casqata,    aq
qrare 3 afafancrnararaa aaa afer aarfae oa sroyay
fanei:, aarfa agveragreaea aeraratarfaaacimeatta aaeafa-
feweafa at ganaaer fanaiea ‘ez athefe, agad, atset
wat, <2 serfany, at aq fay’ efa AeAa faneheqaay
                  Armafaraqeararigacarenttar               vk
aaa fannie, ta gq aafaaet areoeacrdaearenecy-
arash @ wreet gaeft cafauaterfafratraraciqarag acta
afancqafaaiena: tat amedg | aat amedalnea a azaea-
afaorrerny teadnaatta faeaq | wet 4 aarardeadnatd—
adt teatafa va aha sash ar aeaaiad enfea araar-
fatet a dure od fanei:) aa g qeafafe ada are: ada
smagreaaistt fare: | Ja—ae ga aed sareraaa sarer
aaa   HATAAT Ca     AlaT Ataea, 4 gj tafaranctarta Faaq |
mraqigarts Taare sata frees grag aataeaeat sar
wafa | ca a ararens dead eae: frag aarfe sas ada:
ate a adae adarafafe fangt aa geqarg | acaurafaat-
areanaAaaaag      carniat   sateafa, ata       a faqafa aata-
TATA           | ay aq Tar fants aq aifanrattararaate-
derma Nears areca                aay Bay Tareqda aafa |
Tar Hag aq ofa Get srafaa: mreafaa ar ge areata a faRaG
aq Gees AgUafaMaTATTAT aafeqosfaaa-
maufrateatasay — afqaieqcaeangnamisarsgea-
cercnieiekaganeas safeaeqhanaraaaaqagct-
agifcared waq | Gargrartrtgarara @ a fafaq eg fasen-
AI waa Faget afa | tag agiat, sfafgaaracfeeterar
areray, at fraleitgearaaar,        tae gygeg amaanrao
qeag—ala a aad gaQ | aq cata           wala dasa       a, af
RAAT TATA CAATATAT Tae aaa faasianfe at aeqag, a
fg Seay AIT: Tar aTag catered frag deer ETA daRAT
ealgraarahagagdafenmead arama faqeanaar got
ga, agaist aig: agacarysnfaqugdafequ'arararctaned-
ve                           qerar frat

aaa           LGM TA
          TGAVS                       AT
                                  HAT THATS
                  aTAsEd tas > eTEqT
peeaqdgdaufaameacrain araarat faqerataar aaar-
afea:—add 9 oaeqdgdsaarar | auafeaifefaafistacar-
waft seqaamacaaraeafaagaaaeeaeaeaeaya
miTanenre csaafe o¢ gol wafa | araq casarafasazarta-
aafanzavala      eo,   ata    eaeofaatfaura at Aaret ag;,
equa afgneigaat waa saearaaT: | @e-fafe-atanqeqarfis-
aarata ved       ageafs ar axons             zuaafesar efetara
aefreaaaaagarar wagers                    ofa asarsarararaar
     ‘faqafafefaeatal 2a afe fafafeata            (fa. ¥. 0)
seatfa, ATT MITT: TA TARA AVA ale aT aTazaaa
Gag aH Fa HATHA SATSqAAaAA fasta: | faaigeg aT
HAlaeaaaeraRHTHA Ta aquafaravea: qaifanadaarey
—sfa canta arg alata: Trae: | aaafeaafeo-
fanfaa g wqsageagaaa 7 aeadlddaaadela afaciient-
fadagfafacts dadisa fasraisa faatd aaa:, asa gata
afequit sfeara:, aarfa fe afarear afaq afafa ataartga
faqala,   adeq    wmutq faseqifae         at atafsaeurmg       are
equaracaat a aqsfaatea, eft fanaa) atata garfa
faaaed war afaneata fancagfa <araaatanarte aalfe-
yd fagq | aa ataq a fanfar! ad qfego aur wafer afe
adaeai wfadta qaafaaa | atiefaq fe var at faqa-
aarfa awazararaaq faqag a afe accaed aaearaarafanatay:
aaifaaa | caeqaaed @ Hear: afequsatacearaesaacarsear-
           rwad
      aaa ead
Aaacqaha                 aaa AAA ATS
              gHafaearae iara
HAMA awlfadareHre Aa feHT MA caaeg HLTA ABTS HIT
                      sarafaraqaradsaeqren tar                 x9
AORTA HA aa            Aaaae rayaantaeafaaaT   aa.
eared attar: | at fg arava adarat araq cawqaacda,
maa qaqa              aaa        arfeata araq arfa anfrcanrorfa
faseaetiqresa            aarfecanmasfatgaqeracawqugaty-
canqaaqerad | afe ‘sqrarafanasimeaeqeag: art
aaa earq’ efe eaieay, fafa ia aafaq a aralafeta
sant         vafaqi       wag    saHafaaranaeqa      aafaeasac
aret   fasgeq       fasgisauenrfata—efa a sa faaaqi ada
way    aaq      awl     aatshe qe    ada    caequraeada   wranrst
faqeantd     a agrarfansiancaiarasea              amfayazfoaca-
aearwaars Wwe efa grag, aed Ga quafa-guadt frarata,
aq aaa soeagheaaa ‘staaraaft sar: adeqy | whe
aa a act sefaracanaa’ aay faeftaqi oi a
spleqeaareayreart
           ‘faqaaa     aafateaqar cararafagai
           aan fa agatha        caqataraaeae i!’ (ea. wr. 3122)

gerd geinataden: | aw Wea azara afaatafe fRaeaq |
ag aq fact a wafa aq aiaq ered oar farrqed qaerteqy |
qraaeatarafatigatafafagerat aa aca taeda wala
aq a4 faar waa) gar gqacaqa fererqreaqaral, 4 wafer
aati       sadearaia seifagdigd faar—efa aracea-
eqnda | at fe a ae far waq—yata sifeaeetarq ead
aA Yaris aeanaiaar Hay 1 arate efexasewar feat Fey |
afxaroafa adarfagieaamaa faat sq) aatfor daar
farsitargererestnfasata                    ayaa    | qasafacta
A                        qua faat
                                          agfad, THrsaat-
ateat atart fear | egrafaarrafireaea
                           ie-
            carnrafganronaret s          afaarena   aTratoT
ag      a
                                  arared ararreratt
aN | afazaravsearat: aa dalaareme
                                     ararcactatfas-
far aghaaed eararmd F dgtans adgfaa
                                    faneaced faxez7
areararata aadinzdgraaragiaaatantia
                                       rareaza faat
aq waqi adda az santa zaaeagfequra
                                  | afacta setferst
fafata a—efa eadfaferdiss ataweA:
                                       weg eft FeIATAR ata
 aifard faar & efa azifa afea-giaat
                                        agrearensrere lace
    fis axeadgq | 1eAT afequiqatena dea
                                    tfeeareareafameraren-
    qQamada earq | aaa qaracragifea
                                         quragifearaefa   ag
    gfacdiacegergetenfaacatargarey
                                             TaATHTa ATAAT
     fata agar farsa | afasaata eg areata
    RaBYSTATPAAVEFeSN AAT           afacaat | aatfg—afasafa
                                   gatferd ag Fe GTI
     sat araomeraiatg—ecatte aie a
                                         efa aq fe a car
     frase, B44 aT TyT TAT aaa eafaa—
                                   Gs Bq FF BSA, THT
     alaea C4 aT, AeaaeTHTAISAl, A
                                            Aq afe are
     afeaaq safaa ? facatfaueacatq—efa
                                        arsaaaaaaarera-
      afaa dfacrnta aaafaernaatage eqr
                                          qaratsenfargiy-
     anfacdigfagterctiaceneraarersagie
     gaarannfafa Aeragie      adufea —eerenifrereaeaaraira
                                        ar eaata a fastia
      qaaraiad 74 atfaas faqaacavsta
                                     cad seatt qoiarens-
      faecaa | deal fraacafacnaraed
                                              TA aaa
      cee       NAAR EAT ATAT HP TATE ATEA AT
      qzafate aanifedeaty   aaifadfaata = fafawraarencarg
                                     oantald Azaerafase,
      macarerscarqaaraeont qraaaraai
                                  4g faaqeatfaatr—
      qraasareaqiaata Aeqeaifaeta
                   Sraafaraqarardsasarentar              ray

afa faqs @ Qs ca agent, aengqent sara: —yarwaaay
adda cdaacaen fafaser 4 aedtaen dgdtecmg aafaea |
qr aaa ‘oeaedlerraareea Rar aerate.”
afal aa: Ra Merrapata fa aragaaeastteatar,
qaTay
              ‘aafaaqd wfaared 4 gaa |
              aead sized st faareneafaagag i’ (ea. \4ve)
geatfa| cage a oeraeragiftaraacar gwarata eaqreaata-
admren, aa acqragiitaraeta qarfea—safafarag |
aq Sq aar fara sfafart Searqzart yaqusaarafaa 4
aenfafaftaaqeqa—araraaatataa | ag aaraaT           dat    F
aifa qarart a4 gatacaraafernarfafaqdarg gaearia aaara,
aza sfafaftaaqead | aq acanaaia wafs, a g faar-
fay, ct a qeardiaacarustfaaeyghaa adaafaate
aq      aquighenfaaraamafriva,        aracaatfasagarafan-
qnenfasranfaaeaadasarta             aderafs = fig
vgiftarag: osfafarantaq = caeqreaareaafesyanifequagi-
aaararaaa saeafa | acateed UAE awarA Tafa Tae-
agaqana       asda         faasmt a    atacsfafaraafa ata-
gufeacarat    faqata aaigsraa     aq qdfafe    afeacd ata
quanta Gfadiatd, ag sacs aeefwacay, fa aareag
safa atalat feafa: | amageangreneg aarqoisataeaaea
va a     favdena     srgfaafa—fagarfaterenag      sfa    om
aga: | gueafy TeHet TUIAeiRaTaTaa aTealfa, TeTAaiar
Bie erreaarHerTaTs ef | ta eae ca | TUT g AaeT
          ¥
4e                                  qeratfarat

ataaaa sfafaraaaa | ara qaanaiaadl afe-eneaaor-
ASAI = araeestiedenafeaagcraarhea fafasacaslataca fa
arate Taq asaarraarstaare-araqzardauaag sea lez
faqataa avait dara        sedfararacsfafaraaiaeaara-
afera—afa anata, aa: gfaal ‘eare’ gearfeetereqrtear
a fafafeesq | aatfa avearaqarg os ca aifeasigara: |
aaa a catntarq cateeaaianeqadeia taeqadara-
TaVSTAIG TAPAS               Aesaaqla:— area ag-
Hanag | fasts a ada atgdayfacfaarg | aacqei Aarfesi-
agiftarqare 9 ‘aeqat                ateqat         feafa:        afa,     aafa    favita
fascanit faqaeg faateafasininrameaa: qieaae: |
aaa            aedaaleaiaara ‘Taal qefafe
aaaifeaa’ ef       age aq aaa facndudfea anaara: 1 od a
qrdfazeatiafs Hemera ququragiftarfayrared?  feafa-
faqead, AemAT aracatfaareae fearaacqieafa at gz
eHerasaHaAeT                    ae           aH            aaa          areanETea’a|
fasaa aiza fasarcaft aranafa afe fasanaa ate qerqz-
smaawiarararear faagq aeara:, a caraer | ae fagye-
eaAaTATASA       Te:    serratresrat:                    earqi        fasarnaed
qrequeqaqegifasaal             card, alstenal              eat ataned             afr.
SUT F aearal aaa
               — aA                                Fraga
     ‘aaa fara: afmattafeeafaeiaa                            (ar. fa. 312%)
efa | aur
     ‘Aoraeaeasrsarg fear at caer war: |
     alfafaar   eqar   aifa:    1    Meee seneee    ee   wees    vr   (ar. fa.   BUo-2k,
                   stnafaraqeararegasared tar                4
efa agdarafieing faa ca fe sarqaranaagy ara:
ead, saataraaifedt aeta azar | Asia fe arse: sfaqrar-
sfaraataaeqsaraeqerifakerd            ct    saa) frateraeaz-
Haer     wads      aseaaanfrara—
                              Ao                 awa: sara,
sfa—anarataa factera:, aa ca          cacao           fasta
aa:    aeaacanesaa       gra fadea:—eeqgataraneqsqiag
aaa: | airanisfe     careafa   aifaantstt   ada—efa    fie wea
Aanq—eata HeaMTA arcaTagHeaq, 8 aatat atagaeafaaar-
afar at dfacifcaat fre afazrad | alasta eqagreq?
Weaafraaiqapeaad TAIT                seqanetarfeoi
THIS     aH | aha        qasactafray | ez a Taragaza-
arifaaaaatearsaeda ot fagafa eft arenfaer ger
FaTHTTMTeTAAgaTAalateaaTaKS faded fafga:, ca-
aa aarafoossafasate       aroraeasata a mareagatqufede-
Pasaated faata | ut andl aferda             _eqqrearfaaneqy-
qaafmadcay, Aa Cale Ngaaret
       agenedfasa §=— araceargafaary |
       masarTTIs faaais g Arf Ul (ar. Fa. 3134-34)
afa | fasaifaed a favifag, aeaarta
       ‘a gfe a at awa aa art aaa            |
      ascalfaftaacaig | A wargaar : 1
eft 1 cad a fea adaatnacad ata AMR               EeE aT
TIBIRaAT        seafaferg secarrdfaanten may
                       (#)
(8) Ma ararTHAaST alegre
() aqarcagarcasagesraraya sfad qefacanarca
4R                          quatfarat

(3) afefa aamraataaca-caminae sfagar
(¥) seoqrareaTea feats
(4) ata eqaiaemat feat
(&) Garay art ald ara Sarasa afasia
(9) atareafat acrarat sfanfeag
(¢) adisha array setg-Teatsar-disgeqat aes ATs
     alfag afaaza
(8) gfad-aqasaifaaaifase ( fraacay sate vata) |
                               (a)
     ards              I—
(8) ( a4 ) aameas-ar-ed ata Hag sae,
(2) arqsai af;
(3) aearaeat qafama;
(x) aeaareaaeT error a feaear,
(4) Saraaistaraer,
(&) saahay aaa,
(9) vao-Keddigaita araeeaagfa;
(¢) aarfera-geaevqafaarad vata,
eft aataeraraminad             aafieaq    aaraafefaaacag
aware vate |
                               (=)
     aifsrary    eer        ae- TAT     WAAAAATATET F
mI —
     “aq:   aared a ‘a, ay grave ‘sy, asda frandt
qefaar ‘3’, gat ca cqaeaseara: ‘a’ feraredt rar, arat
                     saafaraqearsrasaeten sar                   43

faafaar ‘a:’, safe: atmar ‘a’, ua:      faafaar ‘ay’, ora: fae
q's: fo:       Her     a, ‘Sere GHIA   Tae ‘S’:,       eaet: safer
‘a, Teae ‘a: deqsy, way aga            a ‘o:’,       ‘tw’ faa aaa,
ararafiaa ‘a: ta a, waa a! ta: eT ‘ae, ‘a
HST WAT a, aTaraafe: sat ‘ar ait a, fad aaa ’a’,
faavafe: ‘a: ofmes, aaifra: grea ‘e:, qefaar wae
‘q’:, afe-gfadt sqeasg ‘a’, gaigq aeaea ‘HS’, AETAAT ‘eT:
eqaiaa, aeaal fraale: ‘a’ ed a, atfaat wea ‘a’, faaafe:
atfeaal ‘a’ arasa, Ga dat‘ auea, ada argacal ‘i,
ay, aay aaa ‘a: agaq faa as |
   ata 4 sate Tora —eas adaataaed frag waq |
quragifeta fe Maa gearcat sfafarad eanndaaron acaa-
arewa carenarerracaafeaaaneanienter faa fraeeqarar
aaa         ea Ras ares HTATAAT THT AAHS-
geatfaafermaaaa feared aiferda | aatiay
            ‘aaa: Heated Foafafata               |
            arfadl g astedt ofeaifeafanerg wl’ afer |

aata a mr afetaag aeag aeq a aa arATATT AViT
adfeafeara atta 82 aot a Hafa | sar aifaedioen: ayaa
fafaea wi      faeaa aat aifaaa aqgya alaat aFarara-
aiafaear sifata fafe faata, vars arafsafaeararcafa-
mr | valfe sfaaeaqar araat @ aifaagead faa-
fasfanrmagfaaanatasiamaraa taanigarrararaage
qafaferaiagged:          seal    faefaa: | aa ga a aealSre
fasfaa:, ata         arqatedt   aarfaadtdtartladigaaeaegear-
uy                       erat tert
                                                 IC!
afadt asifaaa | aan aflfreararag BEG ICG CORICID
                                          sal Fe-
aagarerafaastnarfacrama ta faa: | Aa FqV
                                               Be,
adat a og va faaaisfasra:, 44 aanrarfaqfaniana
aat Aarradaaest aniq antfad fraeitny
              ‘saacataatam   feet    fasopqaredaq |
              ard TeRaTeHeaA Tal: TTBAAT Ul”
 efa | aar aifaneaasta
              arqurat + asatacaearfa + wearag II
              at faaaeq antat add aa rary |
              aa yaaa Tar: aot aateg Fae: |
                                                    aa-
 afa | aaife—aearorraar ta area aT eases agita aeae
                                                aaear-
 qreatrenalfefanrtareaareag | Far Aaa Tea T1aeT
 qadiaed a 8a da-araifeaeag, Far al WASTHOAEITHCA
 gaa AAgeSOHMET F AAMT! ATT ZeTPMFS
     afmagharnzararafagerargaa feat
               ‘ga GUTTAIT TE BART FI
               qasfa a aanga arqerat fafa:
               aaa = faaaifaeaeaa: I
               qraradeat aald atareeanfeat wv
     afa |
               ‘quis fafafaag Radeagq sag |
               ua fargearfa sTmFAq STHATFeTITA Ul
               eaqeni a at deni fafaaedaa: fertg
               HER TSaAaATSA-EGEALE: FA: A: I
               qalG: FAA        fafacraraaan
                sttaafaaaycar ard pastienaar                    &y

aaaa fafear a gegerafeatfaat          face     daar aeaRBeazt:,
eel qq aeAere:,         ata      fasaeeanqi     a gq aeat:, asi
eaMATAASTAAIAIaeTATAa: | AAA
         ‘genfecaraqgadet STAATT TIAA II
         Rear wleafeaa: arat: faafaaifaar: |
         APTN TAA AAT: GeAAAAA MW (AT. fa. Rive wt)
afa | aed wmadl qeragifear qatearfed? aeanar qeqar
qe      anaenifettega    aaear     ofeamasafaadaecgeqeqenr,
aaa a ata carenfa aaleqacaaiaanserg                aci-qae-qraren-
seat | vag aaanwnatad              efa aeaerq | qeaeedatisacat
fe qian: qeat Ga meat         vafea—aracfaca ca gaara |
sfadtfeafagerrmaamasat J TeAATIe MeaaHwada aeadta-
qeqBTIaM areeqeneeaa aqi qragifeardfasadd g
aedad     fae      a fe aa        gaat    aduas)    aarfg—arer
fataa: gala eqalyaearaacar afed, cara wat Arargata-
faarafaata ar fe aqeafafaarlareqanata—efa araq
feaaq aa afe seqnia® aaifasdatiaacegelafacqeeara-
HUTATAMIEHLT F EATG, Tagaites alwHeA ATaTTaeT
aaerwaraea ar eqeadit a fasta: alg, ReaAa aT aqeqeay
fafasaa ? efa aq, wafafa aedai araq—aoada aq Tsay
qaaaraty yeaa, avian aaa                 TIyAG, Bara w tae
AAT: AY Waa SI sa MAMA!   TATA arateqarfafas-
eqraawnean aeaa gait qisio vata aalaad 4
afaat aaaeat oa efa seq lcd a tetigeda aeqararmesy-
faged cai sReaTaaasarenhs eReaTeaa HAAS ITA
HSA      HA AAS     TATITIAZTATAHT | aaa faAeaAraalera
4R                     erst ferat

GRIT, FARYSTA F | tread wa Bat a | sft away
feafa: tatarafaea | aera fe faarcar faaaedl, taed Fata
wade | ied ofa g ade ata caeararayiadalaer
aranfgafasnraca waa: | Tera g daraaerer aafaatfa-
mira Pramerata weal la frame AST HTAeAHsA TATA
etyarennaatfaraaraatataeneaa       mess yearaay -
afratarenal axa: masiees, ef facta: | aes falar
aaa: faaget
      ‘aengaaatfae: §— eqrerareafrareet |
      fara: Vg IAT AA: THAT TaTeAA II’ (fT. g. 81%)
aft adimarerd     cdeqarqas: faagst | cafe a gaTtat
aeqarararata farsa
      ‘aa ane q gh aad ae
      SH gaa aca aa eaafa ACT 1N’(A-AT. WRIRElvo)
 afa | afeataradt arer aeatanafa ataaafa sileata—efa
 stgsdaredt eatead: | faqoafa sai grag feafadacia|
 afe wrad, fancvie aeaq seqafanetta aeqcaeafa | aa J
afeqor aa arafa amar Aa ca—eeraquadsanaaaq<-
aieaq—ararden eqafarnaeaaqeiadacaig | A aq quad,
afa ¢ ‘aaraterarasenq’ fa alavenfanra: fatagquaea-
gaafate sa—anaq af, anantaq—efa aq Fa ay
aIsT | erage dfaaenfa srHaaa H: HIS: | Ter HEAT
TATTATfeaaTaTaaearastreagy TAT faTASA AAA ay
q:, tf Aq—siaea carafa araraisaar at wiser faaist
MATA TAT gA: cath Fatq adqeand qA-
               sfraafaraqearardipasareadtiar                 4
qerarsad | sar se a ua aet agar gaomanacafaaasta
as    SEIT      —aaaearaaaMtg alfer Hea |
Ta agderd STATA ag eMT—aqdarat: efade qeatar
agaaasiaeaquararag | faa a faafed                 mitaq   gered
saafriadiaiarg,—efa      ffs     qerarnay        sadazefaed-
qdaarfaart | et anadl oer ena feaatt qugafy 4
aw aradamenaaat acai feafa: —geimg fasarae-
arate        aeragafeeq:       aa: |     a@eifanaagqaata
araaay aefaeaer:        are: |       awa        fe Axawgizm:
armafagareqiidagivaaraaasara                   aadly eaarary
wife afa faaraq | wa ataacarfa ateacafaeaey gene:
                      HareTTat Pray 1
efa feaeat daar TeanaanNenal aaa sarernaq fre-
arate | aats aia ea
        foes ot Fraprnt Pad afer’
eft   4 Sanaqeat—adenred aaacazeifatenaeaa
           sermon da aie aeag |
edata aeqeay | aeaa: alanis at eialesearai grace
RAT Te Cal Mead FGA: TaHaTsgeaaafaaale
gaag ca adeqrasaa sfqorda, ageafa
         ‘ad ay afa araa’    (9. at. 24 )
 geatfa | aq srafaeanaquaafataarat aateracarg
        ‘qq Maya AfeTMsey AeTAST: |
        qagzqmacaife fefaant: aA ¢ II
        sar: acdarazarat caratvigarfaan: 1’ (ar.fa. 314¢-€o)
uC                            rural fara

seurfaaaarg oifanetearratafearaqaraararer
                                       aft aygtay |
aq od SaaReqq Matas                           aa TerTaTaAra: |
aT araea       arfarag arfaenftad          afaaeararearfasar—
afa feaaq | ud feadt saanqaTUA:—aaita               vs Heal
aiaqat at aaea: satfisarfafa dara: | aseeta oipaaetaa
HGS Aaa TARA | AAHeAaraTaansas— Haass
faaata,     soarenar fg fancafe: | ameatorgeaty           gata
aa a fafaq—alecagarfascara, qatarazarar af aaracara |
fanatafeesr ga qwadt          azanerenen farfaaaeatasaifenat
quigmagaacaagaatgaaaratage | aa a afer erate
FOE      M HIATAaT Talaeat: Tag fearafaatsaraaTfA-
sanamenneaca arafanararacarfala |
          ‘gaara: afeqaisd ararrazat fay: |
       aatfea aa fans aradeearcnager ||’
afa Alar      saaloarafesyeacneqaed Ca           alaq   RATRATA-
WT, Wad         Agana         AT fasixila:, qewnea gy acqdahor
afada watq | aesfagteaia seq mA                dat aad      cara
arya: quad:       was    ca    aeacdfaenqecamA va—efe aaaq-
wafada fafaar qietad qeragifear | aaeaemaraartor              aq
geaifacqazar: rd: . wa quate carenfa eeoifenat caraesa-
afeefeamafastar                6 aradadfaecaarafanarad | ‘a’
aegead | at araearta gee               oagaeat ssqmoTagar | aa
Cagqaaagraateasa TTT | TAT: ae TaeaT RIAs
gratwracnaaty cama safe quardlegaa, sarft He-
qurmaiaisey cares faaig:—efa Azaafwafensacag | aiqeaa
Ga: ava aTaeaafer: ‘a’ efa sqat 1 ofeqersar ‘eg’ ef
                   sla faraqarardpasqiedttar             4S
ara Afamaraareaaearaan faeeed faraear & eft |
stagedt g araafsiweanmanemaragaa ‘a’ sfa 1 afay-
aa     ofafasararafy   aeacsimadeqedieagataedety      ara:
HUTATAAAeHeMaVaiaqaaarararariary: aalaaata TaAt-
magawadmarist                    aar_aadeqeaaa      sea
weanenracifa: geHer saat ataafs: wy efa asada
qeareq Wars F asl! Saar eaeqahequneqeanq qui
arena waceafaterg agiaat ada efa alae caraee-
faarfaarat e=eleat FGAT Ag afseqaaaar | agenda ‘aa: afe
asifafa’ (9. a. 88) 1 factor g aeaeouraufatangaaa-
feel   ARAMA      FM    AAHSSTHTTATATWIEATATTT       YCheqT
eqeqga       Fedfacfsadaiferar    verdereafeatare | aarfa
a satearareaaialaaana earafa aed dager
qaspaad eadfacina wiaied
                       | wanted | faqdasfe aa.
qaicuanaiedgianaaat: SqNdad | aT AAA,           TASETIAy
TAUTITFAU       SIs,    TaT       « TaRTTAAeewraATATTAA-
aracfaahtacwtsa
              gid eft aay,            sae eta gafrwawasi
araq | agafagat gent faneicediq | arafe sereiafa     fama
wad aaa        sasedrsddetecaisd aa sea cal aaria
a agradtaragerferangerionansts         daa:— wHaalguaes,
aeqa: gafaaaraey TAMA” | dfas: caraeeay ca Aral.
Tagmatad         eqafzesrammeta | agragaaed afagar
afegat earaeasaia tarcnaraeaqar Aaedt caarar eatq—
semaraisla    areata: | aaa         afenraerqasaqqgwaAeHe-
are Fangs: ada sqeaa wraat ca | aanfa aqqaasss-
qaaraag wregfane, asrafassefaareta = aayfay
go                        reratferst
                                aniqaeaaeat Ua
afaaararat at ca aaa: afarona:
                               Aeaearq—aet Be
eqdfaa:—ofequicaaraald | daar
                                 ‘FaTAAT HST
gaanraaia wlarq) | aa Ga Marae
aeag’ eer
               ceqaat cafereaarai aaceh gamed   |
             quate fara at carer Freer FAT II
                                         ralaeg TAA
 fa aad sem sqct mrAaacardy | fra
                                         arasneseaaga
 faaadi—esorary 0a queqzeaeqaisaaf
                                        raenfafaaaiad-
 qayqaaera fas FTAA feat, aa aae
                                              TT TAT
                                           NGAST
 aeaaaratata qacarRRAaraMaeaSTA
                                        aga saxfa, aenT-
  wafa—gaafna Far’: | TATGATTARAAT
                                         ate, qdrafafa-
  aeaeTeaA | AAATTAT aaterqfaca vac
                                                 AGA
     weqeate | Paeg AB SETCATA aeedeSaaard aeaft
                                         TMIEATAT areat
     equa @ GATMAAT | Ta: Ga PATA CF AGL
     ei aaataa sad mea Tee ef              oa fe “ee wag
               TAT HTAT AAA, TAME ATATE TALE:
            TAGE
     AIeaTHTe
                  ‘oafaarareatal fase
                                           qa fafa
     fai at fe fase =F agafafaertat apeate
                                 Li | qiaasqaacaaae-
     arent feaaaa, aa Er CRICEL
                                      a wd gqaqeras
     AAT -SHTAATTA ‘ee fala
     anaATaHEaSHe_™At        sat       AAT faaei qeat aaa
                                            earna, said g
      cpaeaafa | easier dat a afta’ eft
                                  ata gangsta
      adeda Aare way | Aa EAA are
                                   aradisfaa Weed
      geateat Taq | TaRTH aA IAAT
             1a g ada   saASIATATATA,      araaearers eraeraey-
      mega
                                                    arafaararg |
      aanfatinn: seafaqcrarata, *gatfeareay
                     sirafarayparad gaeqredttar               RR
  Afeaganfey Salata fasrtauaseqaia | atarqadageT
 farqay | atafassed ararcagia agaeacarafa a aiearfatt
  raerarearfata aqua           ‘a ate € fa al adteg ‘east
 sam      fal faqda araneaagsat emafa shaleds: |
 araraqargaaal fe epear, agendas g qenar ater,
 aang anarq asrfaqufearaq
                ‘eralrat araafacroradtar
                aeraraare aaa U (AST R. 2. v9)
 afl atasfa sreazerarsrat ege va og afaaa: | greatest
 carteratartarateaan aq Bean waaarfetafaaa qxaq,
 aaang Aas —ay wae, aT TUfATTAT | waq—'d ay’
 afa diet feng. qaafa aarmaciyd afaeg: ada a ata
 eqnaaag    ‘a, at, g, ‘CU afa      gaqeHasfy     areqq—sar, a,
 3, Ba aft ‘a, ar, a, AY eft Saeqeae aaa
 Tay Tals Teaatamed Fig, aanfe eedaasmeansraaeqogey
 GF Fa | ssaeg cagheqiaed aifea—aeqenaag
 feafa: | gafaserma agaceaengnada sidiqad qag
 afrasa Tarfadtafaafeqreacimteaatenfaenageraesa-
 aRaAaASaaegaAaaIT agET aTagUTqastt ‘afafa’ |
 aafe   ateit   oa     fearafeafeedee:   oftamicaa   afa—erar-
 aaaaraaarg | Pysercaqed geet faefraq
            ‘artaead card faysa aqeang |’
            watcha faertor azrar aqrfeafeera 11 (ar. fa. wi)
 earagedy | fag: gadeararaiada | adeq azararafadaats
 fad act eaenetanaara faqafa carne aprang afeatia




ee                                       ee
aR                        quart
                                              satel J AT
faqafa a gt TAT TAF afwagaaaraaat,
                                               frearerfasret
faasigeraaat ‘at? af | aitareaied fe favidrya
                                            TATCAT =o
carats aqafaergaerae AtaNEIHET FAS
ala-faaren ata ieee tiene tear aret     sfaafagi-sesaat-
                                                    m frist
se faaareaarat: ganansatearayelaaragy fre taea
                                                     cats-
 eRe Mar: qeavoraferfareag sqeracora
 eqagitan: | aa ca fragfearet acaaifgt
              afarizacreiaafeanarce tater \
              fadlanfefaad gueqeagaraara I
 zeanta
              qenifa afedfeavsrzaferaat war’ (fat. §- Re)
 gaurd fae
               coata fg acted a dearctsfaferat I’
     efa afearaeata    qaea fafa aearaesaeniTEHUTT HART T
                                            | aqaaraattee
     afeadtaradzaara faoifag | aaratalnaen:
     asia
                ‘g qarea Faarqiantargaaaese: |
                afasar aradl arasata atafemar fg at Ul
                qqenafafaararatett ada |
                 fagar@raqzat fafaart: ozeazt I (far. 3 81R¥)
     efa | aan searafesa
                 ‘qarfangatasta oé atarfa ar faear |
                 aratfa aranata    fafesstaacerta:
                 ateqeararaacaes faqfatagia fact |
                 ast sada aa aa     afa faar fafa wv’
                                                (far. J. UREA)
                 staafaaaqarartpaearenday                RR
fa | aar
         aa seefa asarg ae at Besar fear
        dear: gatael art wert ge fe aru (fa. g wiR8)
        acatfaqfamttacteqed afgarfaar |
        a deqersaga fara: eae        Bfaq      (fara. 2129)
saris Gaammadeannada       gfagaaa eaamlsagq | a ag
qeaRat faqafa faeaq | aq wcfeaacacd aife-enraeqg—
afa caradt faaate: ‘Geet ner’ sf tay
            ‘ged qisans aragedat Ferry 1’
afe | ear fe 4 aidan arfa aarfeaat gy, aft g dada, faari-
afata   a neat qHArayfading | od fe aaprafred
aaaraeat Frerat Wet aSqI=qaAA | azaq cacaeq ua
Afret dainfgasainegera, aang
            ‘a faant nerefa aa faenfaqeefa |
            Teal dealt ofa ageaa 1’
wearfs | aareeda aaT ‘Hatt:
                         — Hose , earteq “aay —
THM, THWT ‘Tat:        — aga, wae        ‘zaafP—
qaqa, ‘warer aail—araeara, mat’ aadieara:, ‘a
eatea, ‘way caviea, arise ‘aqavat:? gaat | aataear
qaeafa Frearaearta frarafmedaa | at alee afaaes-
era        —aa Ta sat: TEeqhnar: faqs gefa: a
sefaaq waedft) ate faadista eararsarq aalqaaar
vafsagia aimed gquaar foeq afafeafaitaa 1 adafe
get qaiwaaa aresermessinaget aeqa: safasd ata
dfasada wafe, a2a gsceqeatq | aaa g dada are.
x                         quar faret
                                         aeperqafaas-
qaar:, aaa aq HANNA Faw toraaT aed
                                            en- water :
arenfeerainqatfea -qfefeafadgia-eerirgorgg
                                             AFATATLAAT
maarfestorfraar arearadt Aza BetheaT TAT aRT
                                              e aqrard
 ayfafefa fazer | aaa sigfeaarad aoeaafaar
qeraaatfaneariaed
               ‘qriate mgrarar Paatoaeaetaay
gare | aa Ua aarfandinggaeararafaaatndsg: aa
 eqrnata goa eeqatad “fifamaraar®
              ‘Praafrarrear feraafwaarers: |
              faaafaaarsfatas     aqsderTy U’
 efi ua a satmatsia Sadted aafa egeluafs, aaify aa-
 aatata quaragia qeatarafaea | a7 1 HoaleEaTA aT
  cafa adaaterareaa afa fade: 1 aarfg—araeis dared 982-
    fafa tHE TaTgMa: |    Aaa    eqratfesa        TITAS
                                                           fa
    qutara | far agat araisia ageneaaraisea: saresaaT faqa
                                                         Ta |
    araaray | facdaor daaarfa ar arag faqafa aradaaat
    aq aatfaniga Ga      aa Ga darefaarereasraAgisiraraTa
    arargaaranfaaliista + araecaragiaaetara: earea | aFaaT
                                                       e
    qeatag ara vTTg aeatgantnaraal Featafa wag: | azot
    sie qenicaatet daeaatfa aRscaainearacta eaeqeMeaaT-
                                                nga far
    afastatatg | data AaRaT faalfoaarachasafan
                                                    nter
    afedteaat dfaeqi = 4a adaatanalaaaaacsterea
                                                     TAT: \
    qarfanaidaaafaratenneaarsaar eng raea era ag ea
                            st CATA,         FF   FLAG,   aa   at
     dAsaaafataaraay
     efa edart feat eft Aq?            ata eared aenfad areata
     gast, gafad, arate, TATA           geaqaraata | aedafaafar-
                   altmafrraqaradagceqren tat                  RK
aweqraaraa Sl at fear         at sara: ? aa wa aa qWsTTAE-
fatenqutaestafenraadtaanaatest wha TeraetieeT-
afa: adaateata gearcetore’ ef | afefaacarnfearat-
wafafafasrgergeanaieermecetier ‘Aeratay’ eft
faa ans adonfsqtacsfrarqeniag a ca caaiseadt-
san   tmaggaaseaa            fe    Head |    ot    arAeqaedsaly
aarfaeatareasha        arsaq | aaca 3 a va aut: eafaemt-
fof earareacaqereata wafa | qar Saale HHTeATeGT
sqva: at walawageonetadal yea aormeast a
Ua sara:        eat |       meee      A   aTgarfatfeonsarang |
aiqatfataala sean: aedisgraarea aygraea: easy |
awormameqenta Hrenarqarasataca @raafearsarhecrats
aeta—efa siseaishrna TAT: | TRAST eq wMEqAyeT-
ata smal ara faeftaq—adarardtarta araeorica-
areaaifaarang | aa a
                ‘farafadtagared: area: TATA
Rea         —ersienieeaat          | itaagardtat     |   arelaaet
faeqorg |
            ‘an @sfa agg     ara    saadla   a
        fad asifa agsa ge: aeged Tar Il
        aad gat: qroraraatea aif: |
        aerneasaisaaareareieaat
qe qantas)               aiaraarataqi aeqdeg “arax
aaral arareat nea’ efa g weanrd wages aearfacts came
atarrfaracata aa darfad wat deg serait
            4
&R                       Tera ferat
                                    ua efa feada | aa
amfeta rea: | mer fageratsfs 421 gz
                                            feaa| yat
groraaifadea     carareacafa agaty 4 vacate
                         quadafas ageaTHysT |
gaat adqaetard ASSTAPTAT                T ta
                                  HT eqTaaTeoTTaA
gener mecrdseaarat a eetazreaTa
                                   atereatiatla rem
data aeafrarreeacatera: 7 qumege
                                    amiartra Terese
fepfaaarara waedq | Fat I 7 ca amt                ara
                              gaat AF va fagaifent
ararramernt arene’ atfead Tar                     tfa-
                                 TATABATTTT fagm
 Qaifearsar afa fe aataea CA AAT
                                    astdrarqeearaaary
 eat aa fara Pereareqreregarter gfa              aatt |
                              atedt 7 J AITAT     aaf
 cqeaqeRaary” seaTetfa aranra
                                 aragara: faastatat-
 aa va fafagtarmmrereatracry aa
                                4 quid, SaeHTAT
 fagrernceah, aaafates: 12
                                  a agqisfedatt ST,
 aaaartea: ara waaay Feafar            cagots THA
                           FEA    VASAT: sfaa
     aened ata ATU
            qurpafadaa aTget at frets |
                                         WN’
            ata Foam J a7 amrafad ST
                                    tag | =e     aca faeatafa-
     efat arqararaae facazat faefaa
                                     ten: afaeqraaan: |
     faae:—qorararearg | a4 adarai
                                       aqaraarata facts:
     gard: aaccrara: arena frat aT
                                 araq safest Aaa | 74 aT
     qaaafanatenrcaenraretaate
                                       A: gfacaal Ye
     adatfafazfamett wat Had | Tq TA
                                      er saa | aeqar Feaet-
     carfeparfearenfaadtafroseratfeant
                                       sans ad ead!
     qasrmaarararanegefatanctarathy—
                                        | 7 I tet aaed
     famedisht aeratatea: arta axfngatg
                                     ag:,   aa   aeqieafaraa-
     facatq | aat a 424 againfat ara
                                        aeaa | aaa arai-
     wd qsafg: ada: ahaloTaqaMeaaay gaf
               sftrafaraqararagaearedtyar           ge
aah arenafa aur ae arian: ahar: gafea | sar ag car-
atardafaaaesaraied     sfacara | aur erequfactata fe
ast araaararal ara: aeaq | aa eqeafaaTaaraaay
aaafaraniva faawgdqateasaraaa: | ada shan
Maeaaits aeamrlaraiafanraaaaaa fra | aad
areeatfa searratigawista faceaaraearal feadaraitfaatt
aal—aeqaraaeararg | vata ehagentsafa: aaa sat-
aaqacafaaranrarafa Aagewmeansirotiag | ea ATgIaTAA
             ‘quem                     =| Teafe |
             faraaeaeaar yes caraiafaat feafa: 1’
afa | aereqetlsttaoodtar:
          ‘qaiscaray fafa aera tifaag’ (Fa. a. cise )
gerecaatag | aafa aihfannerag: cadterrgeraegaereta-
af wafal aaaqaead aad aetfaeraecaqaraafasy
advenart faacigear saeaa, faateda gHorsdeaaay TAT |
aearfa gareraterafaguefear: eaeotarnafargeaeqater
agar    ca dearg   eaeq og faattea: | caravafagq   fae
eqera Ca BaHeaeAlarerafatedta srpMaTaqtaaaa
afnfa qefaentyet srafa 1 oefaadyfaess ca aaeeeeareil-
Ag ienafaadfasafearataaarag araralat feats: a cr
fat: eqaararataaaaa adarferafeaar aaa Tax arfreta
qaora: daa | snotaaadafata sega: arleerearaaca-
mafeafa: | anda a gaefe farcragsfareagqaeae oF
qdaeafa | saddateaatequied daaracrmsteata Ft Tat
qeaeadt | a cra anifadtn: aRaq i aeagead ‘aefafa’
faqda a deat ‘nea’ af | duafa a eatta aeqa: afaq |
Re                        aera farat
                                                      rt |
                                            rtaadeayense
gata a aaa Teqarfanraisia earenfaif
aes
                                              V (F. 9. fa. 28)
            qapreremrenfasmiazearay fe faa:
                                         teat efe TeAgT-
fal a a aega: aatara:—anacattata
Femrgfady Seana 04, TNS nite eat
         faxqa wages TRAPATT
              fasaqrarea          iaat |
                             anesrs
         ai quiqeagfafa sameaarat
                                                  Ww
                 earenfeaia cazaa: soratia Sate
                                              saaaaat eae: |
 ef       og ca staraatatiad agadafaattas
                                    fa gcazatarel BRITS
     aa feaataq—aart oa aate: | gar                   at
                                        earets C4 | ara
     afa aut, aaa aenfaaracataagatacavi
                                         arraiastat Faver
     aeda gra: aqraa Tea qrarfacraroeart
                                    aai ca 2aat: ata
     aaceanrcar: ey | wa Ga aa fast
                                         aaraaat sretfa-
     ayed auafeaat afafeagfe adafa | qaa                a-
     araerasfersa set  srasesrisisia at afsaafaqureeate
                                       Tea TOMA         frefaat
     qa       arqecs rai area
                                    —tFETT: qzarel: |
     naferda strat | gaaTeafeaeata Te
      afe qatararard atita—aseaaara—seraaag eft aTHeaTqAT
                                       A wapeataa
      afanaatfe, afafe g aeats wad Ta!
                                                    Baa r7aT-
      qramearat ‘qenearafescanencag’ seaTeaeea age
                                                arqaisefafa-
      fagrt acadaaranfa | aateda + daca
                                              nra:fe   aaaraa-
      qzaraifa fanataareaa | aed feaay—oafesa
                                               BATA
      afwafedl ang aaaraea feat 07 qeaeaal Ta
                                            g FATA
      gfareraradarrafastr eretatacafat | Ca
                 daafaraqaratgacaredtiar                  &
Midagaafaraniana Meare                            AAR    EEA
qaerrdarraTaarstar fant fafeosay gaunt aqat-
qa Ua sfaafa, afr sri sataq | att arereran: feafaara:
st gfedisamfafeaar ost gfe attgeqratdarta seat-
aaadferft    geaafarasareeqai           aaa,      sfa—feaa:
HoRarsy:, Testa a wer franca fafkecard,           aaah wer
Taranfeareq frefrar
            ‘al F aaeett eal gareratedefrany 1’
efai faaier garadearq adtsfa        fasceariafafa faza-
waetaacer sargT fener ? eft Aq—aeneat              addarag-
aa farnderqaraarafaterq | aarfa a earaesarza aazat-
aarasit aaqaataranfadt, ver ear seg at facta: | cata
amiaafa: | ara    sgaaeamenfeatiq              sansa    gaa
aTaTAH: BH HVS Beat areatefed efa | Brvaryemeasty aara-
BISA MAG AG Hroqed wi aq gq areaefast ade
aaafa | aera sesesdaaraa ‘agraraag’ gesagt
fanrafaarag a featieatt aifea:1 ada aratsfy arf
ararfaatr: dae: | gals BEATA
            TIA SAATATA SATS ABA FA: |
            weresraty Aaoayory carry A: II’ (ea. Fa.)
eft | eg ¢ cetagat fawar afeseatate | aafag aaife-
meaty fradfeteeta agaacacieratareadt ser geazqT
Ta | aeara: Be Cr Blaaalsaqeagqaraa: ‘ear’
qe    | Sara Teas gaa fad gt = ceed
ura gt aesarafe dard aefa, @ a med
ve                               quratfarait
                                                 | Tt GF
aifeataed       tifa —ate: qaraaeat aafa efa cat
                                     aurgraratest           Frdgfa
fg Faaqiaqaat TWeleasr:
                                 fasr ar fadacagatar-
ARSAATERETATA) FAST AT aifaacifa
                                   tedta dfacteraata-
fasafa SAAT Cartaed: azafacarfadc
        TA    AT AT: saiaafra—
            T ATA                                 ecatal Jarates
eal FATHETA
                                  ae tard | ua aaa
safest, aaTa4a faaqeaquransestiae
                                ata atfaedteat: TAT
qaea aal cata afaraaatar<ager:
                                Read          AAA:
qaeeasgrefanat aRHAT | ATAATAT:
                                     efaaiarg |
 denote fexmntd aRaTIAfes, aA Feqara
                                        BAST                A      TIO
 sfa     mifgazarennafant faorafacareas
                                       TAATAT: TEATA-
 area fea traaeoraaea: carafe Gera
 aaa feHeIAaT       seirrearaadafaersastr | areathast
 PUSIATATAAA:,               aaqelantafanchenn fare ragerategt-
                                 sfaaeaisrdatgat aa
     aura arma Sremanafeagyedsar
                           qnartactareorages            §faqaeer     o-
 qararafaratteaet
                                          naAoTaT-
     fanaa qigermadioriet fafaaarat: aaqa
                                           ara a fag
     anaage aareaarfaaat Ae a aifenfasrana       qat
                                         aracanetasfa
     qual ‘agg’ sada wnat afe: | age Har
                                            ei a g ‘a’
     tq: a gada fapatfagrett ATYRT qaf
                                                        aarcrenferaa-
     ghaaqaeararcienat farsa: | Fat fargiart:
                                 aarvta | | aaa       dfacact       ‘eaF2’
     eaeedt feat     sea
                                     oa   fafaqoaql    «6 taeTy       afe
     aeqgfaattrd |        wrad
                                                        na a fafaq |
     qearacrmnnt agaaaa a finfaeag | aT aq aoa
                     TF     aarfagteert        TRU              —sSSCT
     aealq    taeT
                                                    ’ RAI —
     siafefa aeaiedfasrgfaaetemag faatea: ‘ear
                                                    at aeareal-
     fafagaareraeara | a 5 faraarfaes: araeafaatare
                    slaafaaaqarsdgaeniealtar               wg
a4 | ‘orenferaa: fargaaram: areata atagal’ aeiarge-
ear: Gfaearatfa Farag wees araaat eacraca: |
FAG | AT BALAI He HIG: Tar Heafa Hearfasiong |
aad aa att feaea aiafagt + eka aaa, araeaorafy wad
Qa Saretay, CaAyoI—aaTeT aarATATST | aarfacarg |
a BAT FEIT: TeSATagI seTaTETishy AT aT: TUTATST |
ATS AMATI Adee A aA AeA VET alsar
MTS | Qa a Hat—aeaeaTATAG, afaMaTs eA quoi
araaafatd qeariewqeaa Teary | aeararaFafaaToTAy at
sTaaaaTat aT wafeeqaareararcar qferqaargeci tara
TAUTAAST        Feed Fe | Chay          fraad
                                           Ta TEqrOT
HATTA            TATA amar AaTeEIs AC TATAAT AFA,
aRaraafaeqarai,          § aatat   adligyat     = aeaSarai
faararg (atft:) | gi eat adargafaer aig aig FATTY
a aaig berg aati a ad aadt fafeday seqtarsact |
wenfaet        arargfe    at antag      anfg—a Ga Yanra-
eq ant: Tae qafaafard
                  fees arm
                         Maye
                           act
eaSqAIAVA,
            ‘qa faqdatar varmafmer HeOReATT |
            aeifaafatar qfetaureer fafa: 1’ (at. ar. ve)
efa fe ca ga seat: qaagfeSt: Tar qeraaT, adteY
            ASTI BET THA: aaafeaar: |
            aa: Teargaaa a frat serra: 1’ (eq. BT. 8184)
afa l aur
            ‘TATATET A: TATRA: WN (RI. HT. BY)
i)                          quar ferat

                    ecr ree rer cta eat a    e   R  ETT   FAT
                                                      AATAT
cear fe ct
        ,   sea maf
     an ri aa dg ie  cr ea nc ni  an  qe  en ta tg an arent
qram
saaaifant Frefaat atgaeret
                                        |
            ‘adqremeatanat ead fasaraat
                                          (AT. fa. 312%)
            aatt araarata eaaat THAT: I!"
 gaa-faeat
                                                |
             tq aur asqe: a4 ifs fairs afefa:
                                            WV (at. fa. 29)
             aemAraTa aa eaereMTATAAT:
 earte,
                                             T: |
              Aedcifah eat: GA: TASTABEA
                                       afeed WV’ (ar. fa. 282)
             qatar araaeatTt ATAAT arc
             | Ga Te aT AT  TH AT   AT F  AUa TParary | aaea SAAT
     gente a                                                  AT-
                                                           ATATE
             ya ae at er at  FEA T,   aaa   TACAATPTA
     sar et
                                    aaa:
     sarretent Feat aT | eA
                 gqqar RETA ITAA     LATTA |
                                              II
                 gar aaah fast Brad Feat FAT
                                             A: |
                 qeat: eaaTaaTT 3: TsreS? TA
                 qarfrarafadedtotiagentat: II
                                               a: |
                  araara: caesar: eqasraaaifot
                                                   II
                  gaa afaarare: «| ea aeAATRA:
                                                 |
                  eqeadaed ara saTafafer avid
                  arafadaadfact aeateaAa ATA Il
                                          e: |
                  gaara fred a fey Itta-a
                  arearraarat:       svdtergaat a4: I
                                                  |
                   gearfeat gear ad aIcatt fascad
                                                   II
                   qeadaed « TeafaeeareTAay
           atraafaaaqarardgasaedttar        0%
      agt arafretferrarascafasar |
      aarata fawat fe aa afacraraa |
      Ga WaT aaa taeqraatarferat |
     wermdt       aq   ata    qzaTFAg: II
     afefarcrmaenfefaasaamay            |
     ae Taree fg a og ATT wag
     HUAI          AITETe: He fafa: |
     aa:   ahatigd cataeafanataq i
     TTP SHOTATAT
               ATTA CAT
                     ATATA |
     afeget ea: at aatarefamerrg 1
     taratfaangrefacaciem tae      |
      Tafa sqefiequarnsy tl
      aaa Argared etrlai fast ag: |
     TeTTTATMBTHTS FeATRATAET  STA: 11
     aaa Ns frsaireaeray |
     frarmeaeg dageedtensafearcara: 1
     FRET TATA asa TA RaATAT I
     areeafearieancataay: |
     agitate favife afeesoortsar |
     fares gf aeite eran ageaa
     aA             UT Beart fafa: |
     aened g aritaracigenfarefaar 1
     aTaTaTered Prat stg afecrera |
     THT ReanaaTaaAET




oe   ee                                     e
wy                quar fara

     eqST AMAT ASTATTCAAT |
                                      aT:
     ahareentareareat: Saat Fararferr
     aaa data faat     HATAATAANy |
                                           I
     gear: ated eaATAA TSATAATAAT
                             A |
     He atta Hae qed TTANTT
                               Il
     faatat cigar defae aT; IH
     Hafaeqenata aT AAT AAT |
      azacaida     «= faarnigarerensa Il
                                THT            |
      cqequra 1% TAMAS:
                                 |
      fagarfatcaaeda sean agiaay
      aifanoeagathien afretseqara |
      azafens faut atarqatrd vara tl
                                       |
      wat dfacnrared aceaTePSAAT eafad
      darada afed arated setae: 1
      gadt g saafeorar gest afae fe |
       VATA Sa HATA STATS, sfasfead: II
       aatfaarfedtacentha: THSATT |
       aeMTRMrAATAMA BIST! aT II
                                     |
       maeaa afaat TH: GEATANKATT
       a: aaaTararaTagy | TATeAATA II
       afqaenea froifatt Aa sat AAT: |
        gag agar aed fared a aeegie: I
                                     |
        aot nekagent featgat faaert:
        mratarermiged aRaereAlt      feafa: 11

        facatawareat cares cael TATA |”
                  aitnafaraqarargasaredltar             4
             FIAT NT ATAAS TTA TSM AASTTEAT-
                                                                |
       aan aeifg avfatag ofaftad aaget crag
       fegaat afemgs ex aafarongen aighage Haga
       faafefa afafe aan ga ae faafef ararag atfex-             |
       fagfeott fe faantufy aarégae of for gfe fai
       aganerd fagfon gefseat aac aay afer rata
       waa Tra wenela faegigafe gare ga araT aaE            |
       acne fegfafa fata fade: anfe fang aag aa-
      eng wearaA aes ae     fas: TUAW         IE Tea
      areata aa alfa farag fasrag aif at afa and
      afgar aeqfanedt amasca assafe ofeefaatafn                 |
      TSH agg arcfafr fracen sterear afe afatafare              |
      afer gram fasafa qaeHTE STEM    TATATBAT |
  qaquTeaagatinia agay ‘aradisarqaeea’ geitialara:          |
  Hoa A: Afevat: a faeaea favifa: | agtercafa warget
  car frefiay | sarit agqazta eaetor faeaeat fared
                                                            |
  ater | ca faeagarat faated) aqearat fattraraaia: eaeqat
  sferet eqrarq | aor aa faaarmenntats aaeaatect-
                                                            |
  serrtnfa gaat      seat, se gq aafe agat ara aaa              |
  fafrarfea—araa aera carfamara, anit eararsq-
                                                                |
  FAMIAATTH MAASAI | sTaTaT aqe TR         Tae
  farataisqarearetfreqa gearaaat—
  afreqala

             agiagd Hz
                   frdtermaerateary      <1




SESE                       ee
wt               qari ferat

     aera
       wer geifer
          Qed ATA:             |
     URTATatfarettarTaT
            atest SAA PREY U Lo Ul
     qed tataed
           wen aimfaqteney |
      AACA
         FA AAAS
            meaner RATT NeW
      qeeAA RATA
          CAARTATHATY |
      aga FARA IT
          qramenfagiag: 88

       a avatfa
             aat aa
             APaAATT          AT: |

       aqetrerTaTrTerTraty
              quiset waaeafa          gu

       qecreratasict
               JaaTSTYSaTT |
        qrearererereifaret-
               arg amafenra: WW tv Ul
               Strafaaaqaracigacarentar            199
           AREATATAT
                 SUTTER FTAA TATA |
           way Aa:     aat
                 atieadt agraer: 1 24 1
           att asa:
                  faa
                 aeaTserReatrT: |
              ATray
           AVAAA
                 Wea    cetfeat: ee
           qeot
              Iai a
                  fate
               Be wat aatfgay |
          aaa faa: aeafa
                      afamt: 1 20 tt
                area@ ta

          afenfagea at
                aancarenfagata
          aqEAVeT sca
                         eoeeeesces   u   Rc   u



   trereqes fear safsrprarmafrefrarrcearaeragifont-
eae: UT:, Tea gat are ferred qpaas sitmercragrfenar
wafeigay | aata fra adaaiemarag: afeed
TaigIeNA Aer vaTafears            ger aeaza aal-
BIT Ct! aa, Tara fare Aeeteratg eeqe ATR A
                            ATTA ATAT
9
                                    enmararat aad Tatar
‘gear’ gemAFATE | aatrararar
       at zat af ae rT e ae: —ara:FaAHOMARSTTLATT:
aaq Ne
                                            saseaea
                                   SEAT aafaarafaa
cara cra aa aTRATE TEA
                     |     qe at ta ta nd iaqearerrenntaest taser:
Tea                                                           lst
    am ac te ad  war   qed  ae  s    Sfed FITS Faas
 ar                                                               -
                                     gal cag geld terete faa
 anqraararfagrafarerctt
        rg    | Ft   Ca  g     AA T    47 -4 qeqaat waa EA ST
 qtae
                                        eaange7t afa ataearaarelt-
 aaafena | aaqafaecaratianf                              ctoata-
    arzafeheata       ananfafadraafeatateatacofe
                       equna            anfaaea | afe cageaty:
    fagnaraat casemate
                                adi tat ger eedasoreciatet
    gaa va ‘cagaasgataetster
                             facaca: |
    HKU: gaarararinfagt
                  daraara gaa afe TATA
                                             |
                      at afad wemdered a oF:
                  aqrageaarareatafegaen
                                                      eta
                        aarsaganer afcar feafa:
    aged Aaa ENA
                                         TA
                   qa BaeTaAfeTATTAMTAAT
                                                        G |’
                        eqattaraear eReAfaraead AA
                                  2a           quraeaaeafateaaet
     eft wa ca stg qoatferet, qed
           ra ra za ra tt t ar ar as ta at ia—eta @aarat asatal,
     faea
                                      erafaenraraenrarenn gaa agat
     area aterarafa grace
                                         aenteaatta, satst aaa
      efa | cuetreararatt eqeqraraf
                                           eract aaa waren area
      fexafa vacate faatorararentatafa
                                         taaryr, TATA
      wala afafaaqwacadeatret
                           at aefaraqeradpaearenttar                  &
               ‘agiaves aed g fad gana ferta 1’
               HAS ATA aT caTAeat Ysa i (fa. F. & 2)
      efa | caaraeaatt va gaagqar | oats Paeazart
               ‘ararasat: Gar at Paar sHeTaT |
              qerynfanrtey cagcitearfeong |’
      eft lade qatanafad—arafearafmarceara | had Qaarg
     maga aecefeer, fearqat afg: | aq facta: | saraereg
     anaar fardarss | attarfaora arteracareah fos ferrari
     anda | cataq sadag ad dfed gaara faeterta
     faatior Greetathaag | cat aqéaafed aa gra Steet faetat
     qaearaTaten faa: aeaea: acaaeagaener              aafrad ged—
     aalfr seqardifa aegha atta Astact qt Stormrateye
     faeaE:,   AT     TA     AA FAG!      aarqecrgarts    ataq aar-
     ae aaa                  eaTaya Maa aArarsfaarry:
     srafiat, dat qaafaarft, a ca faettartie sarearar: aes
     naearaaeafa fg aaa | asi fade —aqaant: aan:
     a: aramfaay | asa qatd—atreten faraed eq | Femme
     afadenfresag sata afacerastgernat at cares:
     earenfa walgaq        aataneiaanraear       tarerqeesdeqra-
     aTFaTAA aT THA ARaTeAAT PageuAAat ofa | aaEE
                    ‘saqacaarend adyarta areata
                    Seat NIZA aaa Taaela: |’ (at. a. E120)
     ef! esatesamenf ararcrat ataq ager ager fiear-
     afante gda eaqfiesien, ada MaReaTATTIHaT                  TAT,
     aaa za    aeaftaq acatartea              otarcafermafgarta




oS              i                         a
ce                         qatar

aeatfa, Tate
                                           IT: |
                ‘qefarsarertiatta saat AT:
           qt faa J FCT Sea greatest
                         sraaceat gal, wa facharatst:
 getfa, qay | araraafatg
                            —efa feanfaeird | aa
 acter afrequTifata: aafaaq
     ada ra agf anr d gde nra ned ed Here: | 14 aaa
ged,
                                  naaagn areata eft
g aeafenataafafaarat qgaezarfom
 araeay |




     arafnd array |
                                        TTSTTATATIAAT ara
        Sqrattean qarafaated FATA
                                   qa aeeacetfrsat 47
     aqgart searfeacteaat SHTAT:,
            rqeaaryaercray
     fadrarea                  Hea gla: — FOUTS
     eaariraaq |
                                    | act agdarat
         etaremarrafentita qed weet     tfatt aafa,
                                   faarnt 74, ava
     aan wa aeqaearfeaatFa gan
                                   t aeTa, THRYAA AHPATH |
     aan feretrertett —goafnranede
      aeredlsa ATTA: |
                                          feria war erare fea:
            aoarrafeatenraferncaa ieeaare
                                          aaqeqeryeqerrrt
      gareent ataq Fat) afenfageras,
                                      facut: qeayaaay Tera
       qaed qoqearens Aq, AI 04
       arfaenta: aafraay|
                    Aaafarraqerardsaearenl sar             et
    Ta ITASHATT TaTt wUalat set faarennfersr Frere
an Teena 84 ad qed aaleored fadbaceaitea aaa TAT
asarfaarq |
   areataran aaa weeray caata cata |
    qed aarored agat easryMarg, aeazat aA ATETLAAT,
aar gay)       fadtereaea    ag: Aaat      aagatet   aa afed
aaTAeA |
     ada gad aa, aadaqa fadteraaatad ofequarred-
cReaT ALATA |
    rar as faseqaraqaarratgar Aaavedinaat aarerafa
aar fafaeraraaia fase afefe acaeat arearstorstat frerat
aqmafangifaata,    mwaatagyaargentargafaer       «aif:
TAT
               ‘Atpica faaralshe sqearara | HET 1”
eerie |
   aytnerrea         ataerweaeraindatasd         attr agesit
vaq—“seer         gargawasaaaifedt       waft aat    after
Waray,            aaad—faetaaneagamt = fafestseqearai
aeafadnget aqarettrefaar aged? eat aaifer ararea-
MAS        TAHT!        ATHtT     Agar     gd qald wees
faraled faettrearsrteareaaracaaracaraa afraatg”’ |
   aafe ada gaze         cet aaragofaafa     oar, cet Aart
afegot dhifact a:—aenrefafe qdaqi          aa caaea aaqraq
vafardtaafasnaraeng 9 arearessaandy —efe | ara
watraAeAe |
           q
“a                          erat ferat
                                               |
                l@rira BTAaeHTATA BIA BIT ATTA
                                             (araaeatiaa vise)
       geatfa
                                            \ (aT. 4. 123)
                caaread ast arfaarara Faery
                                J fai war faeitertect-
canfe, qanseavigta Tea ‘“Aqeagd
 anfad’ ada dearergecsaraaiaed |
                                                 ALATA
       cad a        Feafeagaqatea factereaaatead
 azarae fargrenh Teaq |
                                            afefaqsante
     qaofad acamis Srarnaaeed, Ad CF
                                      aaatyd AareaHeTa-
 dfgd war faanteas afe:feat 9, Azaren
                        aAT AT dfgaa—efa                faaviaey,
     sBaaiheaaqareats aaHITS
     fasiict Aaaaaras |
                                             eg, sfraet TA
         ga Meatferat stsaTTATET | aifrenfea
                                             araeatfacegreae
     ata, aitsconfasrae g freq, arenat
                             atfaag, aed: fretted maa
     TEMSISATTAGETT ATTA qra                       ala
                                         steh Fe qer
     Fatmarerat sroraraetor ad gated Gle
                                                    -
     ary | FAT        ea TFTA | aqom ad ca qeeagler
                                ere nt rer ferereere THOTT   HTT”
     BA qa af se t  aier rcea n
                                                     ETON: SATATE:,
     arat arreren aren era ger Tee ARTETA
                                            SS TAAT
                                   : TAT PARA
      UaReary Feary | qaeteraisaaa—
      mrtg aeaatesHTTAMAT             THAsT AE FI aqda serferat
                                                gate, aeaaatrad—
      Faepforarraitfar: | ferra: T@er, Sqr war
                                    — SISTA TAAAA TEA
      anfeaat gar faqfara: Bete, rh
                                                   eases sg °
      qenacarerenrceraraatafanraeg gata
      fenat reaTag. WAST             qfeateaa” > qrafaarasata-
                    aafaraqarsiigaearentar                ra)
 Fea Vaart agqragafaarssa eq Aaguaaieeaq fae
 uraq—suafaaniagery, anfad—afefangaradia gan-
 eaqred Away | Ada gar Tafeeqaaresis yen, Azqren afear-
 aaraaaaes, get F Gea fezateaaacarearaaaeqy | az-
aft zenfr aereni aanofaerserta | care seat gard
a: —afen dalareasr Ta award Ser, Gaqea, darz-
Head: saargeafa: | at arsqarq ofa feafadaq—efe
sae: wferar | ararq ofa secomrarfa a ast ear afasadta
weft aa ca afasmmeqarta ar aghae-arraifecrssfazear
sfaaret sfaeet araraear | aalay

         ‘verfatagfossr 8% aearrararaa: ofa: ’ (ea. aT. 21¢)
afer | af gar afefa faafoar safe aat fazeamaaararorRSy
Aragerrgafast aafe | ef ater caevare afaaeaqi fa
Afremneast wa: | shrifrerarafa say

            ‘drat       afraid          araaq’

eearfa | sitaatartsta
            ‘aarsga        qeeda: afer def: |
            Hear amienar: ay aah: ay ferarerer: |
            Sante yar ant wearaed g ofaay
            aed     a faed a aad     aw ged I
            eae aya arafeerarara sea |
            tat a fad a ate get a a
           ag genet aff a aa xed aafaq
           woreadd HA Hel Sy facts 1’




(ee
on
“a                        qzratfrat

                                      :, SH aT wAEA
efa | staterafoeressta ganatfasa
                  ‘qaleeentoare
                            ra
                       ane aA y TTA FATT |
                  ageigrarafaataerTig
                       dented sorarfir Te         AV


 ofa | sarend Saenat agra              mane facact: | Ad TH
                                      feacat ga, aeqreqeoraa
 adereacaada feat stat fraranire
                       Faaramat facet        Se         araat #
 edzanararq | eft
                                        aaa gata J Faaty
 ararratat atfea feafar:—sferaeata, aat
                                                      y,
 ay serr        a a ATTA aqgedigarat faeceat favita
              — aft
     tq aaetagaa |
                                        facta          faa: gate
        ager: AarTaarTAeaT: |
                                          | aafg—atentaq aq
     war s-gneaTy | Cast aegan fara
                                 rai ara ar fearat at afaa-
     qriaamrEaaTalaed Aaa Tq gzo
                                  ae faqsad ad a fraratq
     afa aatenncatq fared 24 fra
                                fafaseas: | fared fg sHat-
     faqsad—ecafataas C4 gariit
                                    caaret afasadtfa acara-
     afarafatanrdya, caeret wate,
                                       eft) seat meraafara-
     areata Saqzardada frat
                                      dt 7a |
     afacia ata 2aarerai darcaaaengte
                                             :
              aareqatavaretafemaearate@ irae
                                                        |
                   qararea: quigaaarsrn eae
              fareartaisacaet: aafsat:
                   feafga faa gafafafaararesacia Il
      Hacacafaararaeyas
                 ataafaraqaratdgaearedttar                 “4
           ‘aati and   faaa   sata ofearaa: |
           frareral faearat satsfa azerar i’
                                         (arratfastz 2122)
  fa)   ger areftaea ca aqusfaaaarar areadt zeqmed ¢
  GUA      aaieg ai Tat aAfrragia | va adavbreashy ara
  am:, aarfe—aareeaiag TeATAaTSeTaIA Tea Ca and
  aimenifas seafa | saagedcaandtat senfaa aq:
  MeanwaysaTaaaugaMaasaIseT, az fe aa
  atarrar aegat erg! =o aanfe segaaagifgafagar
  MATA TaITSAArAafaast — TaHTUfearanzaras
  faraa—arafa aeagasquaanq, wattaeta avieq aread
  araaeag | Tara
              ‘asaTeseqararfaatatrerrandaz:
               aefaaTdaneadyasaaag          (at. q. tv)
  Sfe | ara Ca greats Tare-aaTereE aot cHaTiearat Fata.
  fawremaat araraasfa oremifasng sarquedtafaerarrere
  qeaacryd dacfafeeramaqgianafaredtaaqgaiten-
  adafaaafa | wy ca alaeaaaaay ager: ag
             ‘qaare qaaad v2 arareerfaeafa V’ (ar. g, 212)
 efa araafaart | car a acomrHet Treaty oTety aeaalerria-
 Tey geraiarag fdaaqaagq | ag 4 ed frafsaen-
 fafa a steqdeaq | aad aa gga             atarefaantafy
 arena | aga Agaeres
            ‘arcia Pad card aaa saeay |
           aaicte faattor get sorftreargar il’ (Ar. fa. x84)




be ee                                        e
ck                           qaumfaat

fa | ar
                                            TE: |
            Feshornfa aar ATE Aart Tava
                                                \
            qdegeufantaaiia eiqonieha:
                                              |
            afeat gaat at FETT geaaat
                                        eae
            aat fafasat fat atraat arat                      (ar, fa. 3-42)

 efa | aati
                                                    aad |
             um afer ais CHT ARTF
                                     tge feaa: 11
             aaah aer wae atsfaeriea
                               t faan:, agaarreasia
 gfa | aa cateed geass ac
                                                     atta: | (AT. fa. 314%)
                ‘qrnaearteadl S13: qrzeqdan
     afa | serfs azaet             °°"   ee   eoeceeee   \
              ‘qaT   cage   sea:


                                    raterat TFTA, aegaeg,
     efa   aaaq Fearn ged—arfa
                                    srgasargaray, at aaat
     garcranirearss faerie: 1a:
          s  Te ta ’, A TT A— FE I:  GIG wpe AAT AT areal
     gras                                        | a GF rely
                                     latn Awaareag
     arfa saint: | aa                                            :|
              :\ ad aa if a ef t | ( a a:) at saat a udfadt area
     fa vi fa
                                      saa—aatanfat     teratata |
      aeddfan: a EGE SAT CT EA,
            AT AS IT aT Af ea ar aa feeat | ATTATTSTT faqeq-
      HEAT                                          afereat: |
                                                 HTI: fear
      aifaer:, ARIES SHSATATM LA
                  AT RI AA TA TA TE T: |  eq enrena: stg eaeeare:
      aegal   AM:                                               -
                                       EC OS qreareaTerHASATT
      ager a araar:—atefa Cree IG
                                 area: | aT ea cand serdea
       waa eaarandargfasaaq
                                         aT safe: sat aaa, aaa
       aardifa <aar, fat seater freaTr                       feat
       weet am sat HAT        Safa asa Ametrgre Hedaeet
                   slaafaaaqarardacaiealtar                ce
 weary | adaq ae fro aga: | aa sada agra:           qed |
 arqaa aeaveteaate | aT ITAA age sega fates |
 at   Ca   _eiq—anmafoaasle       Hates         sAsaTa     7:
 eacfa —agdad a oa arena aeaqarrot daeafa—eqien-
 amlaafa aga: | ae ?—araha fagaeqaiaa ora ST
 faa: atat gfx yao Feat, Grae | 7 wa armeqragiza
 vafawaraaafaeaigearas: a cad wf a g atHeT:
 gerne | sade agiamd aaaeted srearaata eaxafa a
 meats Ga—sardeaat aafa | dacqaiq| wd? qe:—qe
 aq aeafet & aati        gaa scat—ada feo seafe          azz
 arate afgegad |

 Ta

           ‘aasarafadt wat simasatrefe ferarz |
           aagatad   seat dareafa Afar: w’ (ea. sr. 312)
 eeaife | gat fg vat eneotetemarafa arama adara:|          4
 eal Yaaro, TATA
           ‘sraraaraitheeea aca feafasdag 1’
 eearfa | sitaae carafaneces gafed ararfa waif searfe-
 aararafgen:    aafeaacayq | aa cals      ‘yatater adma-
 HST TTA        FGA: saat:      aHrmafsacata    aeqacaq’ |
 sfa fg sanaaq | a ca g aeafaraaraafa frag |
           ‘fe a arafe afeafeagtentfananta at
           seas TATA: | eacaMPRTTATAS: |
           feasazanifadfasan fi   Farag




os                        Sa
ZA                           quar iarat

                              :, agisarataratd saeres-
efa ater seer ee aeTUSHATE
                                 as aaa erat ST
araraarfaraacatafazarrersert hag
                              eqeared aA       FATT
wart HAA | AAA afgues
                                Taf aefard Heat, Caged
 aaa Hear | qaagranatafaee
    a—a fed aai d ATA aa d at AAAAATENFHATIAETA
waf                                          ar |
                            | esoraf       ena: Saat carrat
qaran fgnearae=aarTrg wmafa
                                          ATAATATAT AT \ asaita-
gequratgt gqqegederemTATETAT                                  ,
     ata atg egr aer ere a eaa rat agrtaay | Taes ATAATAATH
 afe
      ai  a    daa   HA TA  |   oa wa anTaert | aaaer aara-
  aq
                                       g | afafeadtaarerareaara
  quad TATA aarfasafazaalti
            ara taf a aai fer aaa | ad go nad qeteranfe: | C4 g
     eangge                                           a’ | ct J
                                 ETE ‘ggzgacnt
     aqat qaraverenfaateary Ata
                              face aa ge qa a, FETA:
     eata ( ATE: ) aaa site                    TeUhA
                                    wd nar ga: Ja:
     eqarareara: s@camferd seated                      efa
     eqzata Fl Aad         ererera rarer Bel azafefa:’
                           ‘qreqr
                                 A | ud g ‘artienalaaet-
     dara: | arate daft aaah, {F
                                   PALES aATHEAT FAT gait
     afage’ goad | qadfa—aeag                          T
                                   ATaAA TATA: TA
      qaafa aaa seclqmferaaetaaact             ten: aza-
                  GCATAA frat: guraacfarafagat
      grea: aed TAT
          eas ert a att aea d  TAT  qpg rae ataeraren:, agd@—areiraa-
      qre
             at    ad ar sf ag ar at  ae
                                     ed      aTat aT HARTA ATAA: AT
      qearet                                                avaasagie
                                           n fa zaera aa
      afa faet ga—fanat quraeranaram                           aerate
                  ate afafeafrzarert:      asfa fast cat
      erarq|
                                     fat: | aqatfeanitarafaaat
       aaa: alifeantenta: asfa                       afmaye:,
            fea aat erl  aag aae inf afa eigtacana:
       area                                              UT
                         aac awa!                 aa dye T
       aisfy fag Cal
                    srafaraqearapaer ren tar                   ray
qwea    at araRdtq     sfa   fancaferat     fafeq,     sat alfed
aera ‘ad’ aafa cased | asrareifet arardiaa a oe aT
faweriin: | fe agat & afaotsazererneafaar: araatea4
ashi ata gada aeafa saeqer wafeai ada feat ot
atfaat fafed vada ara:          ‘afesfageaearfe’       aar a far:
araafea a aa aecafear afnerfaaing asf adda afe oa
gaargaae faat satagifeaata fafe: 1 adt—aea farareata
ara    frarpert aq fafaq     fafastd      aaa cal      gate IwHAy
va gear | wdeqaat afafraadigaaadieanadfgaarn-
aeaafaaaaaret |
       %.    Vaq—aqeq—aenfaery, avs Aas,
             acd 4 wala Hated art, arafa
                                    S    caq Taaq |

       2.    Vag Geanvsaisho—aearht sverag
             Ba: SHA: TAANAT |

Taay        aaa Aaa      IAAT Us Ca Fagaa:, Tay
             ‘ait J IW eal SAW TUTTI
             fancqeara sat fraafeag: sy: II
             aratfad st cea Arar g waxes |
             fant    caeqafafaxauenat        fear 1’

afa | af g dasrerad aar sigaifemeatretad gta aarfe
Bat ‘aeilgrt ga’ cane eta aedaq) ad eeniq
faafaqcara-fraraert fraatarferafa | aifitarafa fg aera
HUTATAATAATAZICT PAA Ga |} Le UI
%e                        qeritferat
                                              aatat-
       aedartt fantder age ‘gorertat Para eft
agate, afrerafa
                aqrAVEsaa
                     a: whagfa         ara: |
                a fatgaraafact
                   a anit a a atferat: ues ul
                                          t Tatfraer-
       Huse — Aad aey, qqsaafi—amrenenist
                                                aVTTeaTeATeAT-
 gorfeat | avseifa qaearsraargawennin
                                  qusmrfealenaa: |
 arena, fagarearfenssoageatty, a4
                                     sataaa fe tet
 wana afaq—oeafenatayerd Safe a: ‘qa
                                      Araagreao aifera: |
     aara dar’ | ta Ua od STAG fay
                                        enreataray | afe
     aa ca ‘aa aglanearer’ —echagaaifar
                                            AIT ATA |
     aa aral—eaanaead | HaRATAASTSeM
                                           er CasraeacaT
     qeaasaseatad ‘gaafafa’ | qrafaaagresl
                                         aaaatretcternt
     afa facifaqg | dar 3: afatafa—arfa
                                       naaatassta’ ef,
     aaata fe setaqs a fafeata, aWit—a
     aat—araaranrrarieao      cela ater| apTaSTATTT |
                                     earaiit | aca a
     gas adal Heda: | aalg—aA TF faf
     ajfara: faeafafa 88 1
                    aaa AAATAM
                        aaa adafenta: |
                                           ataa | TaSaTART
          gaifa: aaatfa: adafefaar adazal
                                      araa efa stag | aaifa:
      azfa afenfag arse aaa aranras
      afaratefa Het Gaar |
                  aaa faraqerraagacniedltat              RR
     at
                atfetRearateay                                |
                     wae faarfafe uv Qo 1
     aaa aaa         aaranfas maeeraaaasarEd F
faatfa     afpitgoen— fariceqraad:,    aHacTeEq      Hae:
afaamary aafafa |! Ro II
     faa
                afafast faorast
                     waa ana sft         82 0
     fafe:—frar aia a caea aa arfes @ 9e:, as faeoIATY            |
            ‘qafaat aAdise Fafeaay favisitsry: |
            amt aralatieaea AlNaafafacaa: 11’
afa) aaa aaa aaa, fae at a aed a—aal arat
a faqaeranea sf sad | ast a seqrgoiafa gut wadtfa—
AaAMATT TEAC U1 RV
aarfg                                                                 |
                wtatfaatiaa: Heat
                      Aaa TATAEAA |
                farat fasareraranea:
                    at afenad ATT 1 RZ
     aroradtaraataat         Aaaet     sag, Fa: aaTET
%,        faaysarq—faaracaties        — firdisefraafnecer,            |
&R                        quraifarat
                                     ag I AAG!
qacaen arated ara: 1% faeries afaad,
se a ‘area’ gearfe 1 RR Ul
                aaadia atenfaa
                     qenti sraferay |
                 anfaqeatac-
                      deat ATAATAA              RZ MN
                                                dq   gaadioreadia
        aq fafaced aqafead 9 fafaaracd
 qé waa,       aa Fat      aaa!        am: —aere aiff anfa
     aafa afefadtearerg erat      Wag TTATATS deat sag af
     aaa areafa 1 33 Ul

     ROY
                  asaian: faraissta:
                      wat: TARA: |




                                              aalan: |
           gales      qe: a faa ct FA: faa va
                      —:ea              AATF faarreaty aTatetAt-
      a aaa aida | ease
                                           Il
      Alfa | at Aafaerea frvifaaa tt Re

      ud facazatsfaata area Faraata
                   wat PATA:
                       aifenett ARIEA: |
                staafaraqeararagaearedttar                8a
             Tat Faratsed
                  ATAASATATT           24
             va at afa aaa
                  wea fratormfaat 1
             ata wacreifarer
                  fasrsargfaatarar        8&0
   Be Faq 7 aaq fafaq—eequaq 1 fad a frarenanfafa
aaa Fat aed ceaqfaata agar agefaerranenfa
fasfea, ca farafad geaiea: | od oftaata      aafarar faato-
Dear qa
        sanarqamcawanacnal «=| «Tes|
        ad faatraten 4 fraagraarfaat I (ea. aT. 0)
gfe | arat aft der atarg faatgela, eaafearata g acaat
Safa     aa Gara aaa —gueetensty arfraara i
aoe grey waged affaashe gacaafeasaraaat
afearnea waa, Caqeatedacay Qaareddaeaarg aaa
Raravfafa | cay ova afealaagq sefrerdts  arfizat
wafefa | aa aaaata den, aa ca saa afazgafast
ae ar afta ar frscraraadtfeararadaareneaacne
                                           er.
SAHA ATHAAALITATA  ASI HTAHAaaeATSTGIIT Ha-
Set afer Wh W-R II
    qanguTequcensfanmaa aar aafe an sqraaar-
area yaar frviiag, agar ged among | geq% aracad-
arety
aw                   erat fara

       ‘aAsTegAreaTa SBAEA TAT: |
       fadtdafa & etd Pratt ayaTaa II
                                              q—
efa 1 aewanemtarar? aaa atgazacar ararfa arer
aqatataa | ar a Hay?        gearateeat faforatqueareaz-
Haat

             afer aet a gaa
                qe aal aaa at
             sare grat frat aqeaT
                 acataafaataary Uo

              wae g feat ard
                 aararata ated |
              ateaad Fz Feat
                 aed     fartaraa URC
              fravdeatfracctt
                 aaa             Ta:       |
               qerfas Ars
                  fag at cafescrisy aT URS
               agaanfirsreett
                  qeroTarKetaT         |
               aa afe atte:
                  qatatad        aa:           Roll
                sitmafaaaqeararagasaren sar           ay

               afe g agétem
                  RATATAT
               adacagagat
                  aatacorafaary | Rk
               magat Aga
                  acaiaafantaary |
               Ta: quieaquieg
                  TAMA AAAAT UR
               QaAITAT AAAT
                  amar a frat
               Ua qAAATeATA-
                  afianrascad fafiz: 13311
    wide      aeantfaenfit:    sega: qaarecnfaga-
TerenRedya faa coaecaacaaa eae fage Aa sarara few
waa—aeafe  srg, aa AAT:

    ‘ Sarayed, Vagevawaa,         2 adtegara, y ard
Tera, 4 vasa
ef, aaasafiarnenae sarttee: qarenat—efs
qafaafa: | ata arferafanearrmgsaa: | fern or: sede
favarferaaing aaierai star: | gata afefeafaeghraerg
aaarqar   eft anfaafadyagdaa 1 ferarat—uadequegea-         |




a
a                                qeratfarat
                                                                           |
gfeneraeataeza Sorat:            ara—aattaartart | ararctaq
                           aaaTatit TREIT fastourtfa |
qaifay taceaft gata waitin                           |
                               feerarat Fet                e C4 fat:
ag favitata adaaterncafaotaaa,
                                                 A
                                              — AT
                                         aaa AH    TA”
arax eqraeran aara wafed | arta
                                                             zifa
THA | Cty MFA,                    AST gfasifaatied: | aa aat
                         fe mea: | aq FETA
gauna | ag aed HEAR, qezd               ry—
gaat:           q—age eT: | at 4 facata
               asdarnsear
                  weafosa     qearenfe        quaaeTdaTaaTVasnele
    atarenfa                                                      TaTAT-
                                                      | 451g
    Hoga,        aifa:—aaeadeartaararceana
    aeaqral:
                                                |
                ‘qeagaaatfag: eqrenareafarareet
                                                         1 (fat. 4. 818)
                fara: BOG TAT AA: TACT aarens
                                adtarafafa: | dra aaa
    eft | cava aataafase arafac
                                aaarg, ged aTeaTey,
    gaaaaren—afaateaaeaty gqar
    fog4
                                     qaaq|
               qesmargeaens fag a
                                           i? (at. fa. 2218,3)
               gazrenfens fog aa At ATA
                 fasifata |      faarafa       axa arfa-feararafanenea
     gaaafa
                                   , CaTAAAT HECAATACTT |
     ager MAA FATA ROTATE
                                        ayaa | afe:—arfe-
     agqeett atata— ata FIseratg
                                   aiaaata aa GAa—ATATRT-
      eneaaralernnd Zaqq | AT GF
      jaar: aeeatwSreals | TATA
                                          |
             ‘qa yaeaneals adqatfa areata
             Saat     agar            847      anaata:” W (a. at. &IR8)
      gearfe |
                    arrafrraqerardgaearedt tat              ge
    aqacngetiearaa:             sas ade          Casa    TACT
Uae            day | a aaaaeta | Bar dgawyaa-
aagsetaTraSTy | ageamerganshs | seat art steam fa-
qatetart | adaed: gee eaea aerTamfaaar
                                   qoieay | aes
3 TMA             ger ana    Ai—aalelaeng | adat seqa-
fedeacfafefafasnesneraarfraternget:               TaaaHTtene-
w—aaatae facfata |            oat ca faferereearqerfzearaas
areq—aeq fraaq | areegtaraferaaifrergnar sa-
    ? ef Aq—aearaafenna: | ar afg areerq fagrararfa-
ardeg
fafirta,  aareaaa    fasfraaaaraifedalaareraany,
adafrargaee fg aafasa cal oy wa adlfadt ata:
meagent facia, aaraec: age, qatar a aaaler | Tas
ASIA Gag, ST?      . WRIT —ATATATANaAT       aera,
2. aaa
     — ear Faas yoagaafaarta | goat fe eat Goad, a
at caaeafarnaarrwaes ca—agaeearaaaarg | t selfetea
we efe faetiiss, aga sitseafasrarg
        TATA SATA PACA TATA ASAT: |
        TyTCafadnetiaaia   aqaereag WW’ (HF. FT. VWAIE)
Sfe 1 3. waar a SeITaT Gata Te aed Beud—adfemTead-
eqarseafraraqrearg §—feraeeda artaaviogerdt, \—
aearfe a acidiaigaaa 1 arcana faaadq—aeaen fraeea-
Marq!          Cs a areqrata facade franca Fetq—agqae
AAG            | ay Aaraarai foe—aaatdaadaarafeaa: efa
fg say)
   way M—Aara           Aaa aa aq ead ‘arenfanqafaa-
          i)
Re                         qari ferat
                                         y: (2) Garay
equqsarferet carta: aaa aed ae aafagrara
(2) FATT ATRAT         I STAAHL (3) ada @ ofefaar
                                                     e rT
                                                  artren
                                            el — aca
aftereneqeaeafagear afequifageraferaer
SACATTISATA ATS STATA |
                                                TTAS Tee
    vata afrrard—adarearatarat Aa aPTA
AISACAATA,     faaciagetvaeg nareersea eforaraayfeTTeAeT-
            aaifasaGernarAeleaaisasas ETAT           — Ara
naTaefa,
                                          gaa Bhar—
algiq | rata afar fafadteradeatsta, area:
afar areaatq |
            ‘gqeqeqattart AeASA         TTATaR: |
        Haase ara feataTacagay:
 aa ca sitateq—aaeaa aetorenfefear                  sete aTaara-
                                        aaaaerat
 Aaa Aafeefa 1 agaa ‘Tavereagaea’ fe aa
                                                 |
     aaa frodé—ganeia arrdtenferresertg TT AGATA
                                                  aafrsa-
     seracante argadenreie adagasfaraaa,
                                                    asad,
     carfastaor frefeag | canal agqeseafotarats aad
     a fafaea; arqaraa, atcafed; argazaratfaad            agasita-

     weay afa fautiastaya 1 Wo-82 II
        fataqararat vata ? <eaaaefe
             saqattata: TAR
                  eaea atst sfagafa uae
         wanaacd aaagiteata dist ereta— areas Hagaifata:
     (2) saioreageoerrea tice aomarraeiea fret            aTagta-
     AETRSTAATIAB: fasazafaguenrcaafafaaaraatersratl
                                                 fefa
     SaysCt vals, EATAT varaarada a eaeaq Pafa
                sae fraayeararapaeqreattar                  88
‘HUY’ HY         Aaaaeasqata—(2) sqraHeaagaiaBaa-
TAMATATST HATTA Asi AFAR CATA TTHAATET-
araneaala: satin fagafa— maga rade areararfaaarg
tae aT SaATRMETHAaARASIEl Heads TearenHarareafa
Harqrar vada araqi aa aakaryeagad qr @veai
att agit | aava     wgné:     sae         aa   z geraifn   ofa
af arsed gorfaat: Wail
                           (aatoret:)
       ‘aaratas aft aq ada waa
       epwra fe ar Gar gad gee gar: I
        vam asa      aft     ee oaseqar         aq |
       anne fanteta dalea gfe esate il
       aaaMSraatge saa AT             \
       area         «ga afeeaTA     II
       soareaesfayagZaal   aa Hafaq |
       fasfanfa aentq Teatded g aq Il
       aepaa,      asda,           aafers      gq   1
       aaa        yaaa: = ferafeaqaraz: I
       ed ed fafaa farara: coed qrzaifang |
       faatgarda aria at Peat afad garg 1
       aaaeaiearearamafasatt            = ada:     |
       argaa aera: gaea                 aadifear i
       waa           a      Zeqdafrah:              \
       aert gat te            aeaaed fawarat
Qoo                        qerataat


                    aTat     amiat    afestree     |
       gawnfaa
       eqrevartat Paras erret sverrord Seat fea:
                    anrafadarat       ateqferat    |
       aq:
       ata     qdaet gq gecaife | atae Il
       wast afr       armat geora       afaaag |
        qfaat 7 Fara          Aafefenaq =          I
                                          I
         gerd a arated act at a Cele
                              aife asa atFUe He
HE FTA AHS BASAZ A az
Adisas AEA TTY GIA IT EET IE Il
                  faeatat facitd—aa     alaaaaaare: |
    vanqueered
                                    nsteraferateta a
qeeaT TAT aya qeaneremennigengaaren
                                   J a aHea: |
 ghamettaercscis wat fafeiay
                                 anfatefraaatt
 elacariaaareata gentafatey alfa
                               fraget
 qeiaeqacareahracrafaeard, 1st
        qanfa farntetgarat ater arate
                                    aifaq—sefaalcar-
 eft aaa arqaceqer fet area
                                      | freq HaqaT-
 genta aartaaenmfaateeataety THAAeATE
 dear aeaafearaserseaa, aqeisraeata II
     q amart freafad aeatistsaacfa
               areracigd ast
                     fanafafareany |

                     atest fFaeanraeag 1 84 I
                  sina faraqerarigeearedttar           Zoe
      i. Uada geass SoarAaq           TATAYAIATA = aad
 feceatea aaraed, aaa fanad ofequied ard fae       ae —
 eee, aaa aatafanraaataftasaaa Hed Te Tala
 saa | fe a sea eqrare—‘ania’ Tiseseras aA-
 Say afaa: anraaede feta—ofequiaeeatea goa forerfarater-
 BOAT = -RARATAATIATSTTSAeATAT           ASA TTT:,
 MAMA TAGs         ATM RAS TIS yAIAfas:, — FAeTaTAT-
 fafererpazarearafaneateeaasacaraiadfaagaraagied -
 WA: Ga: qawleraaMspaniearafaesed Masada
 mAAATHTTATTSaeesrare Fatfaf asraacaat |
   2. aerated sare Neararafefafaated seraraaaT
 qcisafafertg | areariericaq amaarqaeqaaanifas-
 Puraraasceyaqay gute faoftaaneagaacae-
 feaaferrntaaisrnagiaeranreae aerated Fat
 MAA     AAA     ATH           alHaHrUeat ved fas
 qfavordtiaftad, wa faantena, fanaai waeerat facia
 arned fafarigata geaad sleet, aatsir aeafa aq—
 ‘aaaet wer EE aa easy ayaa gewas
 wg      da    froadifemengyea: | aatfg—ag           saat
 Wan weaaaacenia acafadearnar ade eft at
 WE:, Tey aarararaafaa: sfequigaradisat Aegerfa:,
 qearaeafs eaeaeqradagiedarradameafenat ga: FA-
 wadaehfa aq aeaTeTa | a ca OT aadlfadt gaasT:, Fra
 arat fae |
      % wea J Fea ged wae: selaMTge:, aa qT
 erate,        afgvigfeart   fer      afaareaqareafaated-




on                           ees!
LoR                     qari frat

aad       anageisasaraai gt Tt FARSI,
qq gat quiat, gaat quar nafa; aigfent a aaa
fasta: | gd sisagzaeat sefaaaguartt wafs | ea
aeqay      ‘araravigay’—aaeafaacarg | fanaeg fedtarfaq
aad       amie faaied fafieer aac,           ofeileaa
wag seraarad gaiq—eenfe antfeaqs ad Faq
gaia weaeaq| aa Wqearaed area qaeargasaya,
qa aq ‘aaraaqamg qaq’ efa ‘Afaat saceqay’ aft
ata: | od qasafa ealaqay | 34 I
      faq geanrara afa waa ? sag
              OaTRTAaA BTAT-
                   ALATHAAAAAATT |
              aeaTETeaATATAA
                   aaa A aaa: UW Re U
      canealad TaeHTAIa    TTAfaTeT auifaradaagenale-
 apaferratsataerafaramarderaae:,         FAs TT
 afeafaefecqreatarg siete) fe agar adaed—otaear
 emacaaaad sea—efe tl BU
     adqadtrdfeaa | tea fe saxedadet faenfaeat-
 Hoacaar Waa eeqsrTHy | AsaqII AA:
              ua aeaaTatita-
                     feaate GRATATA |
               vaararaa: fate:
                     adaeararcad | Ro 1
               saafaraqarsapacaren tar            RoR   !
    wag Mearatan antat a Hetanaraa aaa
areal emer ears sers—dae:   falfaarisedtaces-
ISTATATAT AVA aragferararafenaafedarcaraat
Tara:, Tada—efa saerrafTAAA | ‘TATA
aeadaeay’ eft aanefaanayq | aadifed fe vacadea fa
fray II
              Wantafad qeatfrarfaacay uv


       aed TIAMAT SCI T-
            MAASAI ATAANT: |
       afa equrferacacafanaiaat
            PMH STAR TATET TAA AL A

       caradafefa seqeatcaa
           Matad aaaaifsara ava: |
       vad araafasrentas aif ae
           are aattss aferet T IEAM:       | WA

       aaeq aaafariaahtay at
            avd saraeigd safe      aaa |
       weer fararadt gaasfasi
            dared    spe | afetgaitag         3
       HANG    TIGHT     TATA    Area:
           MArASA FAaeaaaa: TiasTeAT FET: |
       aea carga: sfaferedtarst anihiit:
           HMR:      fayaeaseaeneqacarsz: MW ¥ Ul
Rov                    aera feraT

       efreentaad Ten Tae TEMES AH:
                                             |
            aierered TATASHSUTTAST arafeaia:
        sfingeataatinat aeae Teas AATSAT
                                                       4 tl
             Aeeracafa eacgat eat AA aaa

        aetarenaat faarfaasaenifeata: ae
                                                    : |
              eqraratafefaratactan: eatfaerat fast
                                           feaet-
        at aredsora Tasha facarafe faera
                                                  Ut & U
              aararqaa faasiaaal darefarfoatg

        grat ada faaeraaeefad:
             eq: cuenta HATTA |
        a: reaaeanfad saaearr:
        greg oe fare HaaaATT II 9 Il

         framredacfan: searersarafad |
                                       Ul
         qatatrerass = feds: Ml ¢
                                         |
         vaferafganwrseseaat array tfaag
         aniaeda aq ader        Pararead Fara tS Ul

         qraaarafayea fae:
               grealeata qifaereataasrar |
          fangercisaraqeraalt
               fadearh: oifadtareaararg UU Xo
                                        TTAT |
      aemeaard mela IAAT ACETATE AfersS
                                        ra: Ut 88 Ul
      aaTTAATATTSAA 3: fadafaarqaoriae
            siaafaaaqarsapaeared tar                 Fok

aan feafaaaaeararas  rar
     eeealfa taradl o@argary |
qtearaasharaearar aara:
   sraaafernaacatad fayeq 1 22

§ araenfaanareagaatedea: STAT az:
     Sscyrd ofafaat a a Tar: oe fatatTaerz |
qeaea: sfanearcaadtiaaraargferat
     weaisie a ahaa anelgata aed FAM 83 I

carnta Sfararcaoaat & frais sretar
       aresearenazaara Ita: fafaens ates |
feaemien fafawa feacfaat a ataed ga:
       avavaafag ads fafgat yeah sorrataz: | fy II

wired waafra aeafagored Tega aS
    career qorfaeraaad agar sé aaa:
qeaa     TAATaefasad ararqararqaqy
       aerasfandata afedt safer        Far il 84 I

       aghrefa alsena ofaaeacatazerained: |
       arafafa avigrafs agi carat 7 sega I kk U

       TAT: ATAVSLTHWMITR
                       RETA: |
       alarea: aqaifaaa faqwaizaca | Le |

       aatafarsfeafafaaninesd cat sfasfaa |
       sSlaaraeanc faqs sar fraafaaq | ve 11
Rok                    qeratfarer

      2a   gamaresfaraamafadraragai
          RomisenearaHerfareaqeaayA  eta: |
      AararsHratafaraasaMeaes AOaTs ary
           Mea waa ve at fe sie aravare TTT I BS II

           aqreqifendafenfere Faget
                qeaifaefen Teatangafasy |
           alfeanarqefad aa aa Beq-
               caqmaTeageeaaa:           §=—-eTABAT II Ro II

            aetarafaaear afraa faafaar |
            aay faneneagy aedlfaaafacafa 1
                 UW afacfaraqaed aarar
        LIST OF ADDITIONS                       & CORRECTIONS                         |
                              (SANSKRIT         TEXT)
                                      aferst
 Page     line                  aE                               Te
          RR          add     after quotation: fo         5/32
          R40         ARR BETTTT                       WT TRSAAATT
  6




          qX         FAT RATT                          FART,
 mm6




                 3    add 34a:              before TEE:
              9      arararertaafeaer             =| Serarearrarefastar-
                                                       fastfaccrer
              sy     PTo ¥/qo                          a5. fT. 92
 93       Re          AATT            sIT              ACA            TATA ASAT
 qy¥
          Wo         gage                              waza
 Gq           4      aera                              area
 qe       RR         WT. 92/93                         with. 9¥/3
qs            X      delete     tat     at the end of the line
qe           g       TaHST. .                          azaeT
9&        q¥         add after        quotation: tfo    5/34
Qo       92          wat                               wat
Qo       qa          oar fa ca                         delete 74
Ro       qe          wa                                qa
Ro
         VW          art                               Ararat
R49      Re          Fraferar                           frafirary
RR       qx          WaT                               aay
RX       VR          FATT sT                           TAT
RR       qv          art                    wat
ree       &          add after quotation:to fHo €4
Qe       qe          aafafa                            aatafer                    |
RR       RT                                            SIT
Qs        5          afrat                             aferay,
Re       2           after fafa: add: #ifea:
qos
                                                  erat ferent

Ro                            wad             +                   qeaard area F
R              RR
es             qv              road afezentats                    aifaaqiteedtaia
                                                                  wa
RE             qo
                               we      after quotation: fo To              4IR

               rad             ST ATAATA,                       asf tafaar aisht aTaATT
RE
                               add after quotation: 47.7.                BISIVRS

               q¥              acamt 7 ert                          avant {eet Fert
¥q
               q5              Fat                                  qaaaeTy
 ¥9
                               qo YINYS                             Fo YINIKS
 YE
 yo             qv             ree                                  ae
                                 _ feet aha                          _. oiifedtt at aftr
    44
    aq          44
                RX                 aTerearh                             areas
    a4
                                   arrerat                          aisreraat
    XR
                4%                 eaten:                               uatend:
     4S
     bac)
     Ke                            Sareeat                              earetr
     go             RR              delete | after cea          ohibi
                    qv              3,5 a aft                              a oY aft
     &q
     go                            AAA                                  ates
     go             qv              wart art                            aarfe reer arr
                    RK              add | after araTerfaatarcat
                                    Wea:                                 vel. Ot:
      WR            WR
      os            WR              ea:,                                 Hea:, ALT T
      wk            xq              aa ATeTATCATA                        aa qaeT TATA
       54 q\9 and             84 delete: ica”
       sR        4&                 qeairt                                aera
       BR    Ro and           RX     delete “.. .”

       BR        x4                  delete | after4 4
        EAC)
          os             ai          (=arTeT: )                             (aire: )
          ss             RK          arstt                                  aisft
                           ufava                         Gok
 se     q   arraary Sfa                    HMA    wat It af
 a4         wfatyerer                      weft Heret
 &4q   WR   after quotation add: 4/42
 Re    2    FW. TT. g/RE                   F. Tt. &/20
qoo    qs   after quotation     add: 9/&
194    qh   SaTaaT         aT              WaTaareeat
qeR
YOR
                                            faficrer
        INDEX OF HALF-VERSES OF PARATRISIKA*
                      amtatgiqnataat
wah ASAT            qe                                  qs    Fer
  Rab         amfaqaentac—                                     Rg
 q3b          AAA TAT ATT                                      @&
   ya         aareanferaa: aa                                  RR
 qsb          aeeHsa saa                                       vo
 q&a          WES ISaI AT                                      bo
   qa
              WTTT HF a                                             R
 Roa          at AAA                                           bo

 qisb         aaa farar: aceaha                                99
  ca          AAA THATSAAT                                     3
 R49          afafast faerasit                                 eq
 3eb          Seat                                           19%
 qab          WGA FA ATS                                      @&
 qb           ae TAA TAT                                      99
 Ry4a         orerachedt att                                 qoo
  ea          ea aif: aarearat                                 Eas
 oa           wpe g feat ae                                   ay
 Reb          waesaraa: fafa:                                YOR
  Ra
              Udete Aertel                                    qs
 qob          waearathrettrrat                                9&
 2a           wat Aeatpararter-                              FoR
 33b          ua ATT ATEN                                      gy
 Rea          ua at afte aaa                                  RR
  ¥b          aaarta year                                     RR
 RRa          arartrartad: Hear                               a4
 3¥a          paqaifata: teary                                es

 *I thank Dr. (Miss) Sushama Pandey for preparing the    Indexes
  (Editor).
3¥b   FAUT         TAT   qoo
 xb   qarert gar aie:     Ro
998   gaa taaaeT          we
                     INDEX   OF   QUOTATIONS
                             TEtU-AaAt
TET                           YATE      HTS        qs
ware: fora Seq                aaTaee                BY
WAM      ogd Ae               ft qatare             53
Faas       aaah               fato Fo 214           we
aarta oer fafect                                    qo
WAT: FAY                                            YR
TATAt TST                     Go RRs                25
WTATZ Tet                     farareaea             94
WAPAPAT HAT                                         28
 stpisis areferat             fatogo 4120           23
aft carcarernid               POAT YS           92,249
araaes    fe ta               AToFo    319192       Yo

‘gy’ aw we fret               arara (faafr)         Zo
mere      fader               aft farreaEat         &R
TEARTAA     aS:               fitoqo 414        ye, 8¢
AAA          FET              FFoTo GSE             Ry
aaa      Ta aTAT              fitogo qz             3k
STATA         BATT            HTofao RYo            “4
SATA: TAT                     fanaraare             we
ararat a wattaT—              oft far wea           yy
WATTS WaTeT MT                                      qX
fa ar ae afate:                ToATO BY                 6
 HAA    AT A                  att aaa arat          yy
aad Aaa,                      aToffo sigs           43
gafacaes fateort              Domtofto 4y¥          qe
zararrata-                    FIOFTO                &
gvat 4 Wat                    HToffo sles           “3
Sealed HHA. . «
                       sary                                         ke
saerH: TATA:            fargate, Soyofaofso,       III,      64,    45
Sra: Farah —                                                       qoo

Taras att                aToHo    4153                              id
ahaa reraaer            PToFTo     RIE                              29
una fe tact                                                         &R
CHAT TAT                Fotoqo wig                                  a
um req fear aa                                                      EAC}
ua aftena att           Hosa,            fro ftoqe 4s               st
wa waar —               Atofao     3136                             Xs
WTS AAT TT              Frtoge Ry                                   &
wore Seay               PToFTS VIJo                                 WR
HAT BHAT FAT            Floto VINE                                  SR
araraarafehoet          aTaIAaA, ATofFoFoTo             FE          mig
HAT F Tht                                                          qoo

qefsreqya feacar        FHo 5124                               BAe
rarfafactfoorr 8%       PTPOFTO 315                           29,53
aerfemenrerstt          Fatoqo q1R¥                                 EX
aeisa facet aar         FoMo     YWYIR                              qe
marirat array           Fo AMT W14I¥9                               £4
ava fat a ara           ToFTO 419%                                       &
Sar: Tea HTAATTT        ATofqo Z1g0                                 Xe
aerated frarfa—         Fatogo q4qe                                 £3
aa fasracit wearaae:    ATofso    4122, 23                          ¥4q
_. aercerata: fara:     fatogo 318%                                 ye
vara Fraania—           Fitogo Ie                                  Yoo
aareta Tat: sro         neat                                        eX
.. warfer rear:         FTORTO WY                                   4
THT Tet AAT:            FToFTO    Go                         RU
septate                                                             3c
ara area icaa afaa-     AToffo sige                                 ¥R
aearh afar feros-       Frtogo 9195                                 %
aT ug tqaqey                                                        qy
q48                      ora ferent

afer   aaaca—                Tare                         aq
      yar: art:
aed afat                      AToffo 2125                 8%
waa sana FT                   Hoo          FRU VS         4g
famartecaar Sat:              PAPaaTT
aateaiscra
        aT arat—              RIofto 4                    QV

        eat                                                cE
aaaJ Te
feqaraa aataty                eTomTS 31949                 ve

gash   sfaaret                fatoge Xie               V8, 1%
                                                         qoo
xarorfira wrete
 areatet Tat: TTaTA            ATAAAIT
                                                           Qs
 a afaat waeoeet
 aqfaa   it at                                             44
                               Sreraqyeat                  Qs
 aceafad-fararafar
 a ar trata eearrrfrat         afar                        RV

                               saraare                      Ro

 fred fates:                   famget
                                                            eM
                               faowo       Zo               xe
                               atofao ¥I9&                  ¥R
                               ararrea (faqfe)
                               AloFTo Ve                    94
                               AToTo BR                     sk
                                                            a5
                                                               34
                                HTofao YE                       Ea)
                                eqoFTo      31IV¥               94
                                oto BY                          RK
                                fROTTT W492                     &4q
                                TT HIST                         cAC)
                                fafatrars, facaratso            4%
                                      qo   Qs
                                atararaqz                        53
                                sifrearart                       34
                        Vau-Tat
                              *                            q4V9

Sareea  rer fare —        Tomofso          22          9q5,&5
sorateaterararat          FofFo      w                     ge
Sats a qaeer              fraqscararat                     Yo
& wera fase               ATofto ¥14X                      ¥4
aterma fara: fa           atofto 3192                      Yo

ara
rarer       are atare     Toft 2190-94                     Yo
wearfeerraraed           AToffo      qivo                  XY
TACT TACATAT:             afiarare (Faq)                   qv
AAT RAATTTS               afarayt                          oa
AeA       TAT far        Fitogo    19°94                   Gq
                          Htofto 3145                      By
                                                           54
                                                           ey
Haisoeae fafarct         Foto      SINS                    AC)
Framerate                 ATofto 4124                      £4
Heart pleatera:          ATofto 41¥4                       ay
                         Toi#fto   qvi3                    qv
Femara frst              ATofA 4122                        35
Arafat si Tet                                              GE
ararafe aerarat          Seframa                (ass       ay
                            frarz)
                                                          Yo
                         Aroffo 4519, 2                    Rg
                         Fatogo    qigé                    &R
                         Woo       FRIZEIVS                Rs
                         aaa                               EAC)
                         PTOFTO YR                     Ro, Rk
                         Pqoqo     AI       es             ¥E
                         PFToRTO     319                   sy

                         HTofto R13¥—-3e                   44
                         PTOFTO BIVE                       UX
aafead safe dat          afar                              Qo

ara wana fret            Foo       VREIIS                  32
                       aera ferat

                         aTaatrat V4lds                RE
                         Holo       FRREIIS            RE

                         WoMT       FRREIIS            34
                          FSO RUZ                      Ry
                                                       ee
                          erart                        go
                          faowo vo                      qe
                          faomo     &5                  oe
                                     3¥Y                5k
                          FTofqo
                          airarrare                     24
                          sara rare                     24
                           HTofao                       %4
                           afar                              5
                           afaraarat                    &
                           atofte 2134                  q%
                           ft spi frat                  53
                                                         34
                           Homofto IR                       qR
                           HAA Hae                          93
                           faotpo &&                        qe
                           FTOFTO 3192                      qu
                           FtoFo 3199                       5X
                            sifanaraart                     ey
faraarfeaararacat
                            AToffo 31K9                     ot
farcaorrft car uTeit
                                                            se
aefareerertatht
waned a afaaT:              ToATO B14, 2                    44
                            Rroffo 2128                     92
 a dat ays: AT
                            Holo FARES                      Ro
  .. Waaes a:
                            Howto Zo                  8, RE
HATTA
Rama aahaeay                Atofso 312%                      oR
                            Buea                             oy
                                                        qoo
aaar aft aeat
aat ware faa                 Soo (AMAA        2192)          5y
                         aura                      qe
a aaredt Frere are-       ftogo 413                RR
aa carer
       aft                                         53
a frat werefa                                      §3
aaraaifen: srfaatears:                             4&
aveq trast a              Parra                    45.
                                                   VW
ag aaah sar               Parernrest               ge
ar faa werfaer                                     q5
a afaagr: qe              Ftozo qIRe               23
arene ferret area         HToffo ¥IRY         BR   oy
aMaeat arred              Atofao       WIRY        a4
areavsga eareg—           AToffo ¥I2¥              SR
 aa oa fare +             Frtogo   wlqYou          Ve
Orangre-                  Fatogo   9               &R
qaerafratacas-            fitogo 4qI¥              RR
                                                   qs
PpaTepat Bat              aaaraye                  5R
rare: feist                                        Xs
STA        ATT            PTOFTO       FIVH        94
FATACaTAAT
       ATER A             FoFTo    YWAIVES         &o
eat eat ea                reathratarat             gy
gaara                                              &&
eaa a: fearait afea:      fararcriea               14
fe wat 1s TAH             ara (faafe)              xq
A TRIDENT OF WISDOM
A Translation of Paratrisika-vivarana by Abhinavagupta
Translated by Jaideva Singh
With a Foreword by Paul Muller-Ortega


“Thave prepared a trident of Wisdom in order to cut asunder their bondage.”
                                                                 - Abhinavagupta


  This is a long commentary on a short Tantra. One of the most authoritative

and venerated texts in Kashmir Shaivism, it deals with the nature of Ultimate          J

Reality and with methods of realization focusing on the theory and practice of
Mantra. Abhinavagupta presents his metaphysics of language, of the Word
(Vak), and its relation to consciousness. He calls it, “trikasastra-rahasya-upadesa:

The teaching of the secret of the Trika doctrine.”


A volume in the SUNY series in Tantric Studies
Paul Muller-Ortega, editor
