CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




Cornell University Library 
NA1502.H38 



The ancient and medieval architecture of 




3 1924 011 010 109 .,«,.... 



M 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924011010109 



THE ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL 
ARCHITECTURE OF INDIA: A STUDY 
OF INDO-ARYAN CIVILISATION 



THE ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL 
ARCHITECTURE OF INDIA: A STUDY 
OF INDO-ARYAN CIVILISATION 



BY E. B. HAVELL 

AUTHOR OF 

'INDIAN SCULPTURE AND PAINTING," "THE IDEALS OF INDIAN ART' 

' lEfDIAN ARCHITECTURE : ITS PSYCHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND HISTORY ' 

ETC. 



WITH 176 ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP 



LONDON 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W. 

1915 



.■o 







All Rights Reserved 



a<S.PS3 



^ 



TO 

ABANINDRO NATH TAGORE 

WITH HIS guru's greetings 



PREFACE 

All but the last three chapters of this book were written before the fateful 
days of August which saw Great Britain once more engaged in fighting 
for the liberties of Europe against a hateful military despotism. The 
splendid demonstration of Indian loyalty which the war has called forth 
should not blind the British nation to the fact that the work of building 
up our Empire in the East, so far from being finished, will inevitably 
grow more difificult year by year and demand more watchful care from 
British statesmen. 

It will certainly be impossible for Great Britain to continue to refuse 
India privileges which our ally, Russia, is willing to grant to her Asiatic 
subjects; and the problem of reconciling Indian aspirations with the vital 
interests of the Empire can only be solved satisfactorily by avoiding the 
dangers into which we have drifted with regard to the government 
of Ireland. The root of the Irish difficulties has lain in ignorance of 
Irish sentiment and Irish history. Similar causes will sooner or later 
produce similar effects on a far larger scale in India. It is therefore that 
I believe myself to be fulfilling a patriotic duty in endeavouring to remove 
the misconceptions of Indian civilisation which have so largely governed 
Anglo-Indian policy. It is good to remind ourselves how history is 
repeating itself — that our Indian comrades-in-arms are of the same stock 
as those who fifteen hundred years ago were fighting on Indian soil the 
same battles for liberty and for Aryan civilisation against those who, like 
the modern Huns, knew no right but might, as we are fighting together 
in Europe to-day. It is good for us to know that Indian civilisation is 
a branch of the same tree which we are proud to call our own. And this 
very feeling of comradeship makes it imperative for us to try to under- 
stand the political and social ideals which India herself has cherished for 
so many centuries, rather than impose upon her those which we, from our 
Western experience, judge to be best for her. 

Great Britain could grant India no greater boon than the restoration 
or reconstruction of her ancient Aryan constitution. None would accord 
better with Indian popular sentiment or do more to strengthen the ties 
of Imperial unity. 

The present volume is supplementary to my " Indian Architecture : 
its Psychology, Structure, and History," which dealt with the Muhammadan 
and British periods, but it has a wider scope as a study of the political, 



VIU 



PREFACE 



social, religious, and artistic aspects of Indo-Aryan civilisation, as revealed 
in the ancient and medieval monuments of India. Far the chronological 
and statistical framework of it I have mostly used the data furnished by 
such well-known authorities as Professor T. W. Rhys Davids' " Buddhist 
India," Mr. Vincent Smith's " Early History of India," and Dr. Barnett's 
"Antiquities of India." The interpretation of Indian history and mytho- 
logy through the reading of the symbolism of Indian art is my own, and 
my authorities the architecture, sculpture, and painting here illustrated. 
If my reading is wrong, my critics will convict me of error from the same 
sources. 

The reasons for rejecting entirely Fergusson's classifications of styles 
and some of the chronological estimates which have hitherto been adopted 
by all archaeologists are stated in the text. Owing to the fact that for 
the last fifty years archaeological research in India has been conducted 
entirely on the lines laid down by Fergusson, it has been sometimes 
difficult for me, not having had the opportunities of collecting material 
for myself which officers of the Archaeological Survey of India enjoy, 
to give a sufficiently clear demonstration of various statements. The 
position of unquestioned authority which Fergusson's works have hitherto 
obtained has unfortunately had the effect of preventing the collection and 
publication of much material which would demonstrate the fallacies of his 
theories ; but I have not the least doubt that a great deal more will be forth- 
coming when the clues I have given are carefully followed up. In the 
meantime I must content myself with making the most of the material 
at my disposal. At some future time I hope to be able to deal with the 
subject more effectively in every respect. 

I have to acknowledge the valuable assistance rendered me by the 
Secretary of State for India in granting me permission to use illustrations 
from official publications. In etymological questions Professor T. W. 
Rhys Davids and Mr. F. W. Thomas have freely given me the aid of their 
accomplished scholarship. Dr. J. H. Marshall, CLE. (Director-General 
of the Archaeological Survey of India), Mr. Abanindro Nath Tagore, C.I.E., 
Mr. Nanda Lai Bose, M. Victor Goloubeff and the Editor of L'Art 
Decoratif, Paris, have helped me much with the illustrations. I am indebted 
to Mr. Ratan Tata for placing at my disposal reports on the excavations 
now in progress on the site of Pataliputra, and to Mr. Murray for allowing 
me the use of blocks from Fergusson's works. Messrs. Johnston & Hoff- 
mann, Calcutta, have permitted me to reproduce one of their copyright 
negatives, and I have to thank Mr. J. Marshall for some useful references. 

E. B. H. 



CONTENTS 

PAGES 

Preface vii-viii 

Introduction xxi-xxxv 

CHAPTER I 

The Mauryan Dynasty and the Foundations of Indian Civilisation— Indian 

Village and Town Planning 1-18 

CHAPTER II 

Building Bye-laws— Village Dwellings — The Assembly-hall— The Ad- 
ministration of Villages and Towns — Constitutional Government in 
Ancient India — Village Walls and Gateways .... 19-32 

CHAPTER III 

Fergusson's Classifications of Style — Divine Worship in Ancient India — 
The Village Shrine in Asoka's Time — The Inspiration of Indo-Aryan 
Art 33-45 

CHAPTER IV 
The Stflpa and its Symbolism ........ 46-54 

CHAPTER V 

Symbolism : The Lotus-leaf Arch, or Sun-window — Pillars, Capitals, and 
Bases— The Vishnu Standard and Pillar— The Holy Mount— The 
Symbol of Death SS-64 

CHAPTER VI 

The Chaitya-griha, or Buddhist Chapter-house— The raison d'etre of 
Rock-cut Temples and Monasteries — The Yikx\t Rock-cut Chaitya- 
house— The Birth of Gothic Art in Europe .... 65-77 



X 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER VII 



The Vihara or Monastery— The Gautami-putra Monastery, Nasik— Monas- 
tery at Bedsa— Models of Monasteries at Mamallapuram . . . 78-9' 



CHAPTER VIII 

Vishnu and Siva Shrines— The Allegory of the Dawn-maiden — The 

Brahma Shrine — Orientation of Indian Temples . . . 92-109 



CHAPTER IX 

The Evolution of Indian Fine Art and its Influence on Temple Building — 
The Gandharan School — The Philosophy of Indian Temple Building 
— Indian Arches — The Temple of Martand .... 1 10-124 



CHAPTER X 

The Gupta Empire — Vikramaditya's Statecraft — Indian Colonisation — 
Chinese Accounts of India in the Fifth and Seventh Centuries — 
Harsha of Thanesar and his Government — The Feast of the Indian 
Trinity at PrayAga 125-139 



CHAPTER XI 

Ancient Indian Universities — The University of Ajanta — Vishnu's Last 

Avatar 140-155 



CHAPTER XII 
The Great Temple of Elephanta — The Trimiirti .... 156-165 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Dynasties of Southern India— Aryan Civilisation in the South— The 
Five Great Assemblies— Local Self-government in the Tenth Century 
—Siva Temples at JB^dami— Temples at Pattadakal— The ViriipSksha 
Temple — The Evolution of Temple Planning .... 166-185 



CONTENTS xi 



CHAPTER XIV 

PAGES 

The Tirth of Ellora — The Visvakarma Chaitya-house — The Dumar Lena 
Temple — The Ramesvara Temple— The Kail^sa Temple^— The Indra 
Sabha and Jagannath Sabha . 186-202 



CHAPTER XV 

The Hindu Decadence in the North of India — The Temples of Khajuraho 
— The Domes of Mandapams — Sankaracharya and his Mission — 
Southern Indian Architecture in the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries 203-216 



CHAPTER XVI 
The Muhammadan Invasions and After ...... 217-223 

Index 225-230 



LIST OF PLATES 

Abbreviations.— I. O., India Office. A.S.I., Archseological Survey of India. 
The Kailasa Temple, Ellora : South Side ..... Frontispiece 

{From a Photograph by lifessrs. Johnston isf Hoffmann, Calcutta) 

PLATE I'ACING PAGE 

I. Indian Cottages, circa 250 b.c. {from the Bharhut reliefs) . . .18 

{I.O. List of Photographs) 

II. Modern Bengali Cottages and Roofs 20 

III. Ancient and Modern Houses in Rajputana 22 

IV. Stone and Wooden Pavilions in Ancient India 24 

V. Northern Gateway of the SanchI StiJpa 26 

[I.O. List of Photographs) 

VI. Town Gateway in Ancient India {from the Ainaravati Sculptures) . . 28 

(LO. List of Photographs) 

VII. Fortress Walls and Gates 30 

VIII. Ancient and Modern Temple Gateways 32 

IX. Village Shrines in Ancient India 38 

X. A StOpa [Jrom the Ainaravati Sculptures) 48 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 

XI. The Symbols of the Four Gates 5° 

XII. Vishnu Pillars and Standards (Dhwaja-Stambhas) . . . .56 

,\iii 



XIV 



LIST OF PLATES 



PLATE 

XIII. 
XIV. 



XV. 



The Sacred Lotus and the Water-lily 
Temple at Aihole {circa a.b. 600) 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 



Vishnu Pillar at Aihole 

(/. 0. List of Photographs) 



XVI. Sculptures at Aihole 

[I.O. List of Photographs) 

XVII. Entrance to the KArl^: Chaitya-house (first century b.c.) 

</.0. List of Plwtographs) 

XVIII. Section and Fa(;:ade of the KARLfe Chaitya-house . 

[Frojn- a Drawing by the Archisological Survey of India) 

XIX. Interior of the Karl^: Chaitya-house 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 

XX. Vishnu Pillars, Karl£ Chaitya-house . . 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 

XXI. Ancient Indian Monasteries (circa 250 b.c.) 

XXII. Facade of the GautamI-putra Monastery, Nasik (second cen- 
tury a.d.) 

(/. O. List of Photographs) 

XXIII. Monolithic Model of a Four - storied Monastery, Mamalla- 

puram {circa a.d. 670) . . ... 
[I.O. List of Photographs) 

XXIV. Monolithic Model of a Two-storied Monastery, MAmallapuram 

{circa a.d. 670) ........... 

XXV. Arches in the Sikhara of the Bodh-GayA Temple. 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 

XXVI. Monolithic Models of Siva and DOrgA Shrines, MAmallapuram 
{circa a.d. 670) 

XXVII. A Ruined Sikhara, showing Construction 

(/. O. List of Photographs) 

XXVIII. Shrines at AjantA and MAmallapuram 



FACING PAGE 
. 60 

. 64 

. 66 

. 68 

■ 70 

• 72 

• 74 

• 76 

• 78 
80 

84 

88 
98 

100 

102 
104 



LIST OF PLATES xv 

*''*^'^^ FACING PAGE 

XXIX, Thk Teli-ka Mandir, Gwalior ii8 

( /. O. List of Photographs) 



XXX. Jain Temple at Mudabidri . . . . ' . . . . 120 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 

XXXI. Section of a Vishnu Temple . . . . . . . 122 

(From a Drawing by the Archccological Survey of India) 

XXXII. Temple at Martand (eighth century a.d.) ... . 124 

[1.0. List of Photographs) 

XXXIII. Vishnu Shrine, Barwar Sagar, Central Provinces . . .126 

[A.S.L Photograph) 

XXXIV. Vishnu Temple, Pujaripati, Central Provinces . . . .128 

{A.S.L Photograph) 

XXXV. Vishnu Temple, Sirpur, Central Provinces : Details of Brick- 
work 130 

[A.S.L Photograph) 

XXXVI. A Vishnu Temple, Chamba City 132 

[A.S.L Photograph) 

XXXVII. A Vishnu Temple, Ahmadnagar District, Bombay . . .134 

[A.S.L Photograph) 

XXXVIII. Porch of Vishnu Temple, Pathari, Bhopal 136 

XXXIX. Vishnu Temple (RajaranI), Bhuvaneshvar, Orissa . . .138 
[A.S.I. Photograph) 

XL. Plan of Ajanta 140 

[From a Drawing by the Archceological Survey of India) 

XLT. FA9ADE OF College Hall No. I, AjantA 140 

[I.O. List of Photographs) 

XLII. Verandah of College Hall No. II, Ajanta 142 

[1.0. List of Photographs) 

XLIII. Interior of College Hall No. II, AjantA 144 

[From a Photograph taken for M. Victor Goloubeff) 



xvi LIST OF PLATES 

PLATE FACING PAGE 

XLIV. Prince Siddhartha, Fresco Painting, AjantA .... 146 

(From a Photograph taken for M. Victor Goloubeff] 

XLV. Devas and Attendants, Fresco Painting, Ajanta .... 146 

(From a Photograth taken for M. Victor Goloubeff) 

XLVI. Facade of Chaitya-house XIX, Ajanta 148 

(From a Drawing by the Archzolggical Survey of India) 

XLVII. FA9ADE OF Chaitya-house XXVI, AjantA 148 

(1. 0. List of Photographs) 

XLVIII. Interior of Chaitya-house XXVI, Ajanta 150 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

XLIX. Pillars and Triforium, Chaitya-house XXVI, Ajanta . . . 150 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

L. Carved Temple Doorway, Dhamtari, Central Provinces . -152 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

LI. Carved Temple Doorway, Sirpur, Central Provinces . . . 154 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

LII. Carved Bracket Capitals, AjantA 1^4 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

LIII. Central Aisle, Elephanta Temple 156 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LIV. The Brahma- Shrine, Elephanta 158 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LV. Image of BrahmA, Elephanta . . . ... 160 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

LVI. The TrimOrti, Elephanta ... 162 

(From a Photograph taken for M. Victor Golonhef ) 



LVII. Siva Temple at BAdAmi 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 



174 



LIST OF PLATES xvii 

PLATE FACING PAOB 

LVIII. Siva Temple at BadAmi 176 

(AO. List of Photographs) 

LIX. Temples at Pattadakal, General View 178 

(l.O. list of Photographs) 

LX. Tower of Siva Temple, Pattadakal 180 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 



LXI. Stone Lattices, Vir6pAksha Temple, Pattadakal 

(A.SJ. Photograph) 



182 



* LXII. Nandi Shrine, VirOpAksha Temple, Pattadakal . . . .184 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LXIII. FA9ADE OF THE Visvakarma Chaitya-house, Ellora . . . 186 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LXIV. FA9ADE OF THE RAMfesVARA TeMPLE, ElLORA 1 88 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LXV. Transverse Section, KailAsa Temple, Ellora 192 

(From a Drawing hy the Archaological Survey of India) 

LXVI. The KailAsa Temple, Ellora : General View . . . .194 

(t.O. List of Photographs) 

LXVIa. The KailAsa Temple, Ellora: South Elevation . . . -194 

(From Fergusson's " Cave Temples") 

LXVI I. KailAsa Temple, Ellora: Entrance Porch of Mandapam . .196 

(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LXVIIL Lank^svara Chapel, KailAsa Temple, Ellora 198 

{/. 0. List of Photographs) 

LXIX. The Indra SabhA, Ellora, from the Entrance .... 200 
(I.O. List of Photographs) 

LXX. Longitudinal Section of the Indra SabhA, Ellora . . . 200 

(From a Drawing by the Archaeological Survey of India) 

LXXI. Side-chapel of the Indra SabhA, Ellora 202 

(/.O. List of Photographs) 

b 



xviii LIST OF PLATES 

PLATE rACIHO PAGE 

LXXII. Facade of the Jagannath SabhA, Ellora ao2 

LXXIII. GoPURAM OF THE Madhava Perumal Temple, Gandikota, Cudda- 

PAH District 204 

(A.S./. Photograph) 

LXXIV. Kandarya MahAdeva Temple, KhajurAho (tenth century) . . ao8 

(l.O. List of Pliotographs) 

LXXV. Chutterbhuj and Mritanga MahAdeva Temples, KhajurAho 

(tenth century) 210 

[I.O. List of Photographs) 

LXXVI. Dome of Mandapam, Khanwar Math Temple, KhajurAho . .212 
LXXVII. Dome of Mandapam, Vimala Saha Temple, Mt. AbO (eleventh 

century) 212 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

LXXVII I. Sculptured Panels from Temple at Gangai-konda-cholapuram, 

Trichinopoly District (eleventh century) . . . -214 
{,A.S.I. Photograph) 

LXXIX. Siva and Parvati, Temple at Gangai-konda-cholapuram, Trichin- 
opoly District 216 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 

LXXX. Mandapam of Temple at DArAsuram, Tanjore District (eleventh 

century) 318 

(A.S.L Photograph) 

LXXXI. Great Temple ax Ittagi, from the South-west (eleventh century) 220 
{A.S.L Photograph) 

LXXXII. Interior of Mandapam, Rangaswami Temple, Dharwar District, 

Bombay 220 

(A.S.l. Photograph) 

LXXXIII. Details of Temple at Dhambal, Dharwar District, Bombay . 222 

(A.S.I. Photograph) 



LIST OF TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS 

PIG. I'Afitt 

1. Village Plan called DandHka 10 

2. Village Plan called Nandyivarta 14 

3. The Symbolic Figure Nandydvarta 15 

4. Village Plan called Padmika 16 



LIST OF TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS xix 



PIG. 



PAGE 



5- Village Plan called Swastika 17 

6. Plan of the Tij Gardens 18 

7. Seven-raftered Bambu Roof of Modern Thatched Bengali Cottage . .21 

8. Plan of Fig. 7 21 

9. Plan of the Great Sinchi Stflpa 29 

TO. Rail of Stfipa No. 2 at Sinchl 30 

11. Plan of Brick or Stone Wall 30 

12. Typical Plan of a Hindu Temple 37 

13. Construction of the Domes of a Temple Mandapam : (a) with Concentric 

Rings ; (d) with Slabs laid diagonally 39 

14. Section of the Great Stflpa at Sinchi, showing Rail and Gateways . . 48 

15. The Tee of a Stfipa 50 

16. Bodhi Tree with Vedic Railing 51 

17. Sun- window of the Hinayina School . . . . . . . -55 

18. Sun-window of the Mahiyana School . . . . . . . -55 

19. Mahiyana Sun- window used as a Shrine . . . . -55 

20. Leaf of the Pipal Tree (Fkus religiosd) ........ 56 

21. Vishnu Pillar from the Bharhut Sculptures 58 

22. Fruit of the Sacred Lotus {Nelumbium) 59 

23. Top of a Nepalese Box, in Repouss^ Brass, showing Lotus Flower with 

Turned-down Petals, and Fruit used as a Handle 59 

24. Fruit of Water-lily {Nymphcsa), and Section showing the Mystic Wheel 60 

25. Indian Water-vessel 61 

26. Capital of Temple Pillar 61 

26A. Cross-brackets used as Super-capital of Temple Pillar 64 

27. Plan of a Village Chaitya-house 66 

28. Ancient Buddhist Chaitya-house at Ter 67 

29. Plan of Temple at Aihole 68 

30. Interior of Hinayina Chaitya-house at Ajanta 71 

3 1. Plan of Karle Chaitya-house 72 

32. A Modern Indian Sadhu 79 

33. Plan of Gautami-putra Monastery, N^ik 81 

34. Section of Rock-cut Vihara at Bedsi 83 

35. Plan of Vihara at Beds4 84 

36. Gargoyles of the Dharmaraja Rith 87 



XX 



LIST OF TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS 



37. 
38. 
39- 
40. 
41. 
42- 
43- 

44A. 
44B. 

45- 
46. 

47- 
48. 
49. 

5°- 

S3- 

54 

55- 

56. 

57- 

58. 

59- 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 



showing the " Eight 



Diagram of Dome, showing Eaves added for throwing off Eain 

Conjectural Plan of First Floor of Dharmardja Mth 

Plan of Bhima's Rath 

Vishnu Temples and Royal Tombs at Nineveh . 

Miniature Vishnu Shrine found at Sarnath . 

The Temple of Bodh-Gaya, Restored . 

Plan of the Internal Structure of an Ancient Jain Stilpa 
petalled Lotus " 

Diagram showing the Constructive Principle of Siva Shrines — with Flat Roof 
and Dome ....... 

Diagram showing the Constructive Principle of Siva Shrines — with Sloping 
Roofs as used in the Himilayan Districts and the West Coast of India 

Sculptured Shrines, EUora 

Plan of the Mirtand Temple .... 

Hinayina Sun-windows, Chaitya-house No. IX, Ajanti 

Monastic Hall or College No. VII, Ajanta . 

Monastic Hall or College No. VI, Ajant^ . 

Plan of Monastic Hall No. I, Ajanta . 

Siva and Parvati (Painting in Cave I, Ajanta) 

Plan of Chaitya-house XXVI, Ajanta . 

Plan of the Great Temple at Elephanta 

The Mahiyinist Brahmi StApa .... 

The Stflpa Anthropomorphosised .... 

Plan of the Virflp^ksha Temple, Pattadakal . 

Virfipaksha Temple at Pattadakal, South Elevation 

Temple at Tiruvalldr 

The Waterfall at EUora 

Plan of the Kaildsa Temple ..... 

Perforated Window of the Mandapam, Kailasa Temple 

Shrine of the Sacred Rivers, Kailisa Temple 

Plan of the Kandarya Mahideva Temple, Khajuriho 



Map of India showing the Principal Buddhist Localities 



PAGE 

88 
89 
90 

95 
97 
99 

105 



120 
121 
123 
142 

143 
144 

M5 
149 

152 
158 
159 

'59 
179 

181 

184 

187 

195 
196 
199 
209 



facing f age ,t 



INTRODUCTION 

Once upon a time a Botanist, very learned but with rather 
defective eyesight, went travelling in far-distant lands. And 
he came to a great primeval forest with lordly trees, to whose 
branches many kinds of creepers and curious plants were 
clinging. Wishing to know what kind of trees these were, he 
began to gather the leaves and flowers of the creepers and 
parasites which had intertwined themselves with the branches, 
without noticing that they were not the real growth of those 
great forest trees. And he brought them home and dried them 
carefully, gave them long Latin names, and sent them to other 
men of science as leaves and flowers of the very rare and 
curious trees which he had found. So he became famous as a 
great discoverer. 

But soon afterwards another traveller, not learned but 
loving the beauty of the forest, went the same way and saw 
the same lordly trees. And at first he too thought he had 
never seen such trees before ; but, looking at them closer and 
pulling the creepers and undergrowth aside, he saw that the 
trees were really of the same species as those which grew in 
his native land — such as the oak, chestnut, the elm and ash 
tree — only in a tropical climate they grew larger and more 
luxuriantly. The Botanist, when he heard of this, smiled 
scornfully and said : " That fellow knows nothing about trees. 
Did I not examine every branch and give the trees their proper 
names ? Of course, the leaves and flowers I took were of the 
creepers aiid parasites ; but the trees themselves are rotten and 

^4s xxi 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

useless. The forest should be cut down, so that the soil may- 
be ploughed and used for growing things that are useful and 
good for food." 

And the King who ruled over all those lands, wishing to 
know the truth, for he was building a new city and wanted 
good timber for it, sent some of his servants who were learned 
in forest lore to inquire into the matter. And they came back to 
the King and said : " It is true, O King, that these trees are of 
the same kind as those we have always used for building in our 
■country : they are very old, but sound and fit for use. The 
forest should not be cut down, for if the parasites, creepers and 
undergrowth which are spoiling the trees are removed, the 
forest will be of great value to the State and give good timber 
for building many cities." What the King did belongs to 
another story ; but as he was a good and wise King, I do not 
think he had the forest cut down as the Botanist advised. 

I must leave the interpretation of the parable to my readers. 
The present work only deals with city building incidentally, 
as part of a much greater subject — the history of the civilisation 
introduced into India by the Aryan race and its relation 
to empire-building. It does not profess to give more than 
an outline of its fundamental ideas. The materials dealt 
with are mainly those furnished by the ancient and medieval 
monuments of India — an open book for those who can read 
it, but one which has remained closely sealed for Europeans 
€ven to the present day. Fergusson, in his great pioneer 
work, "The History of Indian and Eastern Architecture," 
made an attempt to interpret it at a time when the diffi- 
culties of the subject were immeasurably greater than they are 
now. It says much for his genius as a historian that he seized 
at once the great cardinal truth stated so admirably in his 
introduction — one that cannot be repeated too often : " Archi- 
tecture in India is still a living art, practised on the principles 



INTRODUCTION xxiiii 

which caused its wonderful development in Europe in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries ; and there, consequently, and 
there alone, the student of architecture has a chance of seeing 
the real principles of the art in action. In Europe, at the 
present day, architecture is practised in a manner so anomalous 
and abnormal that few, if any, have hitherto been able to shake 
oflf the influence of a false system and to see that the art of 
ornamental building can be based upon principles of common 
sense ; and that when so practised the result not only is but 
must be satisfactory. Those who have an opportunity of 
seeing what perfect buildings the uneducated natives of India 
produce, "will easily under-stand how success maybe achieved ;. 
while those who observe what failures the best educated and 
most talented architects in Europe frequently perpetrate, may 
by a study of Indian models easily see why this must inevit- 
ably be the result. It is only in India that the two systems 
can be seen practised side by side — the educated and intellec- 
tual European failing because his principles are wrong, the 
feeble and uneducated native as invariably succeeding because 
his principles are right." 

Fergusson did not always rise above prejudices which are 
as strong now as in his own day, and the keynote of his writings 
on Indian art was that " it cannot, of course, be for one moment 
contended that India ever reached the intellectual supremacy 
of Greece or the moral greatness of Rome." But, making 
allowances for this, the statement quoted above is as profoundly 
true in every respect now as when it was written over fifty years 
ago. If Fergusson's followers had taken it for their starting- 
point, they might have added much to our knowledge of one of 
the most important chapters of the world's history. But with 
a blindness characteristic of imitators they have quietly buried 
with his bones the one vital truth which illumines Fergusson's 
pages, and have only taken for their texts the fallacies which 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

Fergusson, if he had lived in the present day, would have been 
the first to reject — his classifications of " styles." The history 
of Indian architecture has therefore remained where Fergusson 
left it— not a history of Indian life, but a Museum of Anti- 
quities wrongly labelled. 

" Bureaucracy to me in India," said a distinguished his- 
torian of English politics, formerly Secretary of State for India, 
" is a great and splendid machine performing the most difficult 
task ever committed to the charge of any nation. Show me 
where it fails — no sensible man would hold it perfect in every 
respect — show me from day to day any point where bureaucracy 
has been at fault, and do you suppose I will not show my 
resentment at the fault and will not do all I can to remedy it ?"^ 

There is much food for reflection in the fact that the 
abiding cause of the failings — such as they are — of bureaucracy 
in India has always been, and still is, its complete ignorance of 
Indo- Aryan history — the only history of India which really 
matters. It is an axiom in British Imperial administration to 
trust the man on the spot. In India he is the District Officer, 
the eyes and ears of the Government of India, dispensing 
British justice under the village banyan tree. His knowledge 
•of India is certainlyextensive and peculiar— only his India is not 
Aryan India. It is aboriginal or prehistoric, Muhammadan 
India, and the India of the Government files. The India which 
■counts most in history, Aryan India, is not on the file, and 
under these circumstances the District Officer would be more 
than human if he knew much of it. 

It might be supposed that the educated Indian, born in an 
Indian village, must know his India if any one does. But neither 
is his point of view, as a rule, Indo-Aryan India. He does not 
read the open book of Indian art for himself— he trusts to the 

1 Mr. John Morley, M.P. (Lord Morley of Blackburn), The Times Parliamentary 
E.eport, Feb. i, 1908. 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

Anglo-Indian interpretation of it. He learns his history mostly 
from official text-books, and if he is an official, from the Govern- 
ment files. 

A bare recital of the historical fallacies which form the 
basis of European histories of India would fill a large volume, 
and the omission of essential facts another one. Perhaps one 
illustration will be sufficient. In the Session of 1913 the Under- 
Secretary of State for India, when presenting the Indian Budgetto 
Parliament, explained that the chief difficulty of British govern- 
ment in India lay in the fact that the great mass of the people 
" still lived in the fifth century a.d." These words ftiay express 
a profound historical truth, but only when taken in a sense the 
very opposite of that which they were intended to convey. 
Mr. Montagu wished to paint a picture of the Cimmerian 
darkness in which the Indian masses dwelt, but not to revive 
memories of the time when Indo-Aryan civilisation reached 
its zenith ; when Vikrimaditya, the hero of Indian romance 
and legend, had saved the liberties of Aryan India from the 
savage barbarians who were ravaging Europe ; and when 
Indian culture was the inspiration of the civilised world. An 
impartial historian might well consider that the greatest 
triumph of British administration would be to restore to India 
all that she enjoyed in the fifth century a.d. 

Many explanations have been given of the causes of Indian 
unrest, but none seem to take into account that which has 
always been the great disturbing cause in the history of India. 
It has never been a racial question. India has been as happy 
and contented under Scythian or Mogul rulers as under those 
of Aryan race. It has not been a religious question, for no 
people have been more open-minded in religious thought than 
Indians. But ever since the Aryans made India prosperous 
and content with the wonderful organization of their village 
communities and the splendid culture which grew out of them, 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

those who have tampered with it, knowingly or ignorantly, have 
had to meet the active or passive resistance of all — to whatever 
race or sect they might belong — who had learned to love the 
freedom of Indo-Aryan institutions. 

It may seem paradoxical to those who have been taught as 
schoolboys that the basis of Indian polity has always been what 
is called " oriental despotism," to speak of India as a land of 
freedom. " Oriental despotism " is one of those historical 
fallacies upon which British administrators of India are nur- 
tured. Of despotism like that of Imperial Rome, or of the 
Greek Tyrants, there are very few recorded instances in Indian 
history, either before Muhammadan times or after. One was 
the Hun king, Mihiragula, but his tyranny was short-lived. 
His freedom-loving Aryan subjects rebelled and escorted him 
beyond the confines of India. Aurangzib was a tyrant of 
the Western pattern. He threw India into chaos and shattered 
the Mogul Empire. 

There were two things which most impressed the Greek 
Megasthenes in what he learnt of Indian politics as ambassador 
at the Court of Chandragupta Maurya — first, that "it was a great 
thing in India that all Indians were free," and, secondly, that 
the power of Indian kings was restrained by the " Five Great 
Assemblies " of the people. Taking into consideration that the 
Indian franchise was the franchise of intellect, not of wealth or 
physical force, and that it was limited to those who wore the 
sacred thread, i.e. the three highest castes and skilled craftsmen 
attached to the temple service, India, down to the time of 
Aurangzib, probably enjoyed as much political liberty as any 
European country before the eighteenth century. Evidently 
the Indian system of serfdom seemed to Megasthenes like free- 
dom compared with the helotage of Greece, and at its worst it 
may be questioned whether it was more cruel and tyrannical 
than the feudal system of Europe. 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

It is true that Indo-Aryan liberty was not of the crude 
Western type represented by the formula " Liberty, Egalit^, 
Fraternity." It was liberty for every man, whether king or 
peasant, to follow his own Dharma — the Dharma being that 
which long tradition and the wisest of Aryan law-givers, who 
knew Indian history and the Indian people, had taught every 
man within the Aryan pale to regard as his duty to God, the 
State, his household, and himself. And the constitution which 
preserved this fine ideal of liberty was the Aryan miniature 
Republic, with its Council of Five, which was the political 
unit of Indo-Aryan Government. 

The Dharma of Indian Emperors and Kings was to main- 
tain this constitution. Those who did so were honoured as 
Aryans, whatever their race or religion might be. Those who 
trampled it underfoot, even those of the purest Aryan stock, were 
written down in Indian history as Mhlechchas^barbarians, 
and enemies of God and man. The Kshatriya warriors fought 
for this freedom — not merely for their cattle and pastures — as 
valiantly as their Western brothers fought at Marathon. No 
people were more willing to accept alien rule under these con- 
ditions. The Rajputs who defended Chitor heroically against 
Akbar, believing him an enemy of Aryan traditions, built him 
a throne as Vishnu's Vicegerent on Earth ^ when they knew 
him as their friend ; and the Mogul dynasty had no more staunch 
and devoted adherents so long as it remained true to its 
Dharma. 

The history of India is the history of Aryan institutions, 
traditions, and culture. But what does the Anglo-Indian 
historian say about them ? He digs up the names of forgotten 
dynasties — of those who failed in their Dharma — but the 
" Imperial Gazetteer of India," in its summary of Indian 

• In the Diwan-l-Khds at Fatehpur-Sikrl. See " Handbook to Agra and the Taj," 
by the author (Longmans). 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

history, does not even mention the Aryan village community. 
Indo-Aryan history has dropped off the official files. The 
same authority declares that there is little Indian sculpture 
to be called art after the fourth century a.d. Similarly in its 
history of Indian architecture, all of Fergusson's archaeo- 
logical categories of " styles " are cited as he arranged them, 
but the one vital truth which he told in his history — which 
should be written up in every Public Works Office and inscribed 
in letters of gold over the doors of Indian universities — that 
the Aryan tradition of building is still a living art in India — is 
suppressed. 

Anglo-Indian bureaucracy is indeed a great and splendid 
machine, but the familiar proverb, Humanism est errare, is 
not yet written in its code. Sir George Birdwood, who for 
thirty years kept the conscience of the India Office in artistic 
matters, revealed the true spirit of bureaucracy when he 
declared that Fergusson had fixed " past all gainsaying"^ the 
classification of Indian styles of architecture. Any official, 
unless he be of the highest rank, who impugns the accuracy of 
Indian history, as it is written officially, is viewed with sus- 
picion and risks his prospects in Government service. My 
first venture on that desperate enterprise was to question 
the theory, asserted in official handbooks and propagated by 
Government museums and schools of art, that India never had 
a " fine art." This suggestion was received with mild surprise 
and scepticism, for the highest medical authorities had said that 
Indian artists were totally ignorant of anatomy and perspective. 
But as art teaching is never taken very seriously by British 
statesmen, it was not considered a very dangerous doctrine. 
So after many years Indian fine art has at last been put on the 
official file, and Mr. Abanindro Nath Tagore's recent discovery 
that India has a very perfect and practical system of artistic 

^ "Journal of the East India Association," January 1913, p. 22. 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

anatomy ' — more practical than that which is taught in Western 
academies — has finally disposed of the old European miscon- 
ceptions of that subject. Yet Western anatomy and perspective 
are still taught in Government schools as the correct formulae 
for art education in India. 

With greater rashness I called attention in 1901 to another 
error in the summary of the District Officer's knowledgeof India, 
the statement in the then current edition of the " Imperial 
Gazetteer" that "the greatest industry in India, after agriculture, 
is the spinning and weaving carried on in power-loom mills." 
I showed, by facts and figures taken from the census of India, 
that this industry was of infinitely less economic importance to 
India than one which was omitted altogether from official statis- 
tics of industry, although carried on under the eyes of every 
District Officer — the village hand-weaving industry. That 
brought me into departmental disgrace at once. Only a senti- 
mentalist and idealist would think of mentioning an industry 
which was moribund and doomed to disappear before the march 
of Western progress. What did 5,000,000 village hand-weavers 
matter when 350,000 coolies were working the latest Western 
machinery in the mills of Bombay and Calcutta ? However, 
as the result of my indiscretion, during the last thirteen years 
some knowledge of the economics of Indian village life has been 
slowly trickling on to the official files. 

Two years ago I made another offering at the shrine of 
Truth by calling public attention to the work of the living 
Indian master-builder, whose existence is ignored by the "Im- 
perial Gazetteer." Departmentalism became seriously alarmed. 
He was not on the file — the District Officer had not seen him. 
He must be extinct, for Sir Lepel Griffin, K.C.S.L, when Agent 
to the Governor-General for Central India, had written that 

' " Some Notes on Indian Anatomy," by Abanindro Nath Tagore, CLE. Published 
by the Indian Society of Oriental Art, Calcutta. 



XXX INTRODUCTION 

" the love for and practice of noble and beautiful architecture 
seems to have died out of India previous to the advent of the 
English." 1 Official experts said he was a figment of my imagina- 
tion. And so he remained officially, until last year the Report 
of special investigations into the conditions of modern Indian 
architecture, undertaken at my suggestion before the question 
of the building of the new Delhi came into the arena, was pub- 
lished. The inquiry, though admittedly only a very superficial 
one, had proved that, so far from exaggerating the facts, I had 
understated the capacity of the modern Indian master-builder ; 
for besides a quantity of fine building work in many different 
parts of the north of India, the Report revealed the fact that, 
under favourable conditions, Indian master-builders can build 
as well as, and better than, their forefathers did in the days of 
Shah Jahan. For in the very district which was Sir Lepel 
Griffin's field of observation, a mosque larger than the famous 
Jimi' Masjid of Delhi, and, so far as it is completed, a finer 
work of art, is now in progress, designed and carried out 
entirely by Indian craftsmen. 

Departmentalism, more suo, of course will belittle the 
importance of the revelation, as it did in the case of the hand- 
weaving industry ; but the living Indian master-builder is now 
on the official file, though only as a "controversial subject"— 
for departmentalism is still incompetent to weigh artistic 
evidence, however convincing it may be to those who are able 
to do so. 

Just as an Act of Parliament, however bad it may be, is 
law to all good citizens until it is amended or repealed, so the 
Indian Public Works system of building, based only upon 
inefficiency, ruinous to Indian craftsmanship and otherwise 
economically vicious — equally bad in art and science — will be 
defended by officials, as good officials, until the order is given 

^ Preface to " Famous Monuments of Central India." 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

to revise it. By the irony of fate, it seems quite probable that 
the deus ex machind who will secure this long-deferred reform 
for India will be the English craftsman who is now in revolt 
against a system which, as Ruskin said, makes him the most 
pitiful form of slave — a mere machine with its valves smoothed 
with heart's blood instead of oil, when he might be a living, 
progressive, and happy human being/ 

In questioning the soundness of the historical basis upon 
which the statecraft of the British Raj is built, I am now ven- 
turing still further into the depths. The Indo-Aryan village 
community, which has dropped off the Government file, was 
many years ago a very thorny question. The agents of the 
East India Company were the first European officials to come 
into direct relations with the political organisation of Aryan 
India, so far as it had survived the chaos which followed the 
disruption of the Mogul Empire. It occupied the close atten- 
tion of British officials until long after the events of 1857 
brought India under the direct control of the Government of 
Great Britain. But during all the years it remained on the 
Government file, it was only regarded from one standpoint — 
the collection of revenue. The officials who occupied themselves 
with the subject knew as much, or as little, of Indian political 
history before Muhammadan rule as they do now. The religion 
and culture of the people they were dealing with were even less 
understood. Hinduism was to them an idolatrous superstition 
which all good Christians must wish to uproot, though as 
officials it was expedient to be tender with the feelings of the 
heathen. Indian art seemed strange and wonderful in its 
heathen way, but wholly incompatible with the ideas of decent, 
cultured. Christian gentlemen. It never occurred to them that 
the very institution with which they were tampering in a British 
businesslike way (and only with an eye to business) was the 

1 " Lectures on Architecture and Painting,'' p. 128. 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

most sacred thing in India — the fountain head of all her culture 
and religion, that its plan was built into the fabric of Indian 
temples, and that its daily life and very name were consecrated 
in Indian religious ritual by the tradition of five thousand years. 

And it has never since occurred to Anglo-Indian historians 
that the great upheaval of 1857, when Hindu and Musalman 
joined in a desperate effort to overthrow the British Raj, prob- 
ably had its root cause, not in greased cartridges, but in what 
seemed to the British official purely a matter of business. Or 
was it a mere coincidence that the years immediately before the 
Mutiny were those in which the agents of the East India 
Company were most .active in dealing with this question, and 
when the effects of their activities were most keenly felt ? 

The net result of the organisation of Anglo-Indian adminis- 
tration effected since 1857 is that British officers, giving up 
their lives to India, working honestly and whole-heartedly for 
her good, according to their lights, rarely come into touch with 
Indo- Aryan civilisation except in the process of uprooting it, in 
which most of them are engaged. And the political reforms 
of recent years, from the grant of municipal self-government to 
the establishment of Legislative Councils, have been conceived 
in the same profound ignorance of the Indian point of view 
with which the art which reveals the people's innermost soul 
has been always regarded. Is it necessary to look further for 
the cause of Indian unrest ? Is not that unrest merely a 
symptom that the ancient spirit of India — which by the law of 
heredity runs in the blood of every Indian man, woman, and 
child, though they may be unconscious of it — reviving under the 
benign influence oi^h^pax Britannica, is beginning to reassert 
itself? If so, are legislative machines of Western pattern, con- 
structed with a total disregard of Indian conditions, likely to 
allay Indian unrest, or to add fuel to the fire? 

The fact that Indians who come into closest touch with 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

Europeans like these machines, just as they like gramophones, 
pianolas, oleographs, and other mechanical devices, may be 
taken too seriously. The renaissance of Indian culture, of 
which there are many evident signs, is indirectly the effect of 
British administration. It might become its greatest strength, 
if instead of the pinchbeck Imperialism and spurious Nation- 
alism which are now so rampant everywhere, a wiser policy 
informed by the sympathetic study of Indian history and 
Indian traditions ruled the Councils of the Empire. At 
present both Anglo-India and Nationalist India are equally 
out of touch with the spirit which has ruled India for five 
thousand years, and still remains unaffected by two centuries 
of contact with Western materialism. If Anglo-India or the 
Calcutta University had awarded a prize for literature, open 
to the world, neither would have discovered a Bengali poet. 

Lord Curzon at the end of his Viceroyalty, in an eloquent 
speech, declared that the highest aim of the Government of 
India was and had been the interest of the Indian peasant. 
That must be taken to be more a matter of intention than of 
achievement, otherwise the interest of the Indian village would 
have been considered before the interest of the town and city ; 
the interest of the handicraftsman before the interest of the 
mill-owner ; village culture before town culture ; and the 
restoration of the real Constitution of India — the most perfect 
organisation of village life the world has known — would have 
been considered before the grant of Western forms of govern- 
ment which neither satisfy Indian aspirations nor are adapted 
to the genius of Aryan civilisation. 

The Anglo-Indian argument against the extension of self- 
governing powers to the people of India is the so-called 
"illiteracy" of the Indian masses — another of the fallacies 
arising from the misapplication of Western standards to 
•Eastern conditions. A people who have for thousands of 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

years handed down an oral tradition of the highest philosophy 
and the finest literature are not illiterate ; though they use not 
pen and ink, they are not less cultured or intelligent than the 
majority of those who enjoy the franchise in Western countries. 
But when their own instruments of culture are taken from 
them, and replaced by others which they cannot or will not 
use, they tend to become illiterate and uncultured both in an 
Eastern and Western sense. The Anglo-Indian pedagogue 
has been sterilising Indian soil, so that he may plant in it 
seeds of a Western culture which will not grow. The Anglo- 
Indian statesman digs up the roots of Indian civilisation and 
expects to maintain law and order upon principles totally 
foreign to the Indian mind. The Indian masses are unfitted 
for Western forms of self-government, and will remain so as 
long as the British Raj endures ; but they are not unfitted for 
self-governing functions which their fathers (and mothers) 
exercised for countless generations while the British Raj was 
yet unborn. 

The study of Indo-Aryan civilisation throws much needed 
light upon another vital question — Indian religion. Christi- 
anity will not suffer by a sympathetic attitude towards Indian 
religious convictions. Can the Christian teacher who regards 
his duty otherwise be said to be fulfilling his Master's mission 
in the Vineyard where Christ Himself laboured ? It is a fatal 
misconception to consider Aryan India as idolatrous or poly- 
theistic. No religion has been more careful to discriminate 
between the Symbol and the Reality behind it than that which 
has been taught by Indo-Aryan teachers ; and if its principles 
have not been fully understood by the masses of the people, 
can it be said that Christianity has been more successful in 
this respect in its own special field ? But that the teachings 
of Aryan India have been far more successful than is generally 
supposed is proved by a remarkable paragraph in the Indian 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

Census Report for 1901, one of those flashes of insight which 
occasionally appear in Anglo-Indian records. The Census 
Commissioner had asked the Superintendents to make special 
inquiries into the actual beliefs of the ordinary man, his 
standards of right and wrong, and his ideas of a Supreme 
Deity. The result is summarised in the words of Mr. Burn, 
I.C.S., one of the Superintendents, as follows : 

"The general result of my inquiries is that the great 
majority of Hindus have a firnl belief in One Supreme God, 
called Bhagwan, Parameshwar, Ishwar, or Narain. Mr. Baillie 
made some inquiries which showed that this involved a clear 
idea of a single personal God, and I am inclined to think that 
this is distinctly characteristic of Hindus as a whole." ^ 

If Indian art throws any light upon I ndian history, religion, 
sociology and the inner working of the Indian mind, it demands 
the careful study of all who are concerned in the' administration 
of India, whatever their functions may be. One of the greatest 
artists of our age, M. Rodin, has truly said that the word 
"artist" in its widest acceptation means the man who takes 
pleasure in his work. My aims as an art teacher will be fulfilled 
if through my interpretations of Indian art I succeed in adding a 
new intellectual pleasure to Anglo-Indian work and in strength- 
ening the bonds of sympathy between the Eastern and Western 
branches of that great Aryan family which has done so much 
for the advancement of civilisation. 

June, 1914. 

1 Census Report for 1901, vol. i. p. 363. 



THE ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL 
ARCHITECTURE of INDIA: A STUDY 
OF INDO-ARYAN CIVILISATION 

CHAPTER I 

THE MAURYAN DYNASTY AND THE FOUNDATIONS OF INDIAN 
CIVILISATION — INDIAN VILLAGE AND TOWN PLANNING 

It is almost as difficult now as it was when Fergusson wrote 
to carry the starting-point of Indian architectural history much 
farther back than the reign of Asoka, 263-226 B.C., the famous 
enlperor, missionary, and saint, who, after his conversion to 
Buddhism, then only one of many contending schools of Hindu 
thought, made it the state religion, and began that zealous pro- 
paganda of its doctrines which spread over Asia to the farthest 
east, and as far westwards as Alexandria. His grandfather 
Chandragupta, nearly sixty years earlier, had founded the 
Mauryan dynasty by consolidating the numerous republican 
confederations and petty kingdoms of Northern India, whose 
quarrels had made Alexander's opportunity, into an empire 
strong enough to bar further invasions from the north-west for 
many generations. Seleukos, Alexander's general, who seized 
the eastern portion of the Macedonian conquests after the death 
of the latter, made a vain attempt to repeat the glorious campaign 
in which he had assisted. Chandragupta Maurya not only drove 
him back across the Indus, but extended the north-western 
boundary of his own dominions so far as to include Kab(il, 
Herat, and Kandahir, which formerly belonged to the empire 



2 THE MAURYAN DYNASTY 

Alexander had wrested from Darius. This disaster made 
Seleukos anxious to come to terms with his Indian antagonist, 
and after sending one of his officers, Megasthenes, as an envoy 
to the Mauryan Court, he turned his arms westwards. 

The account which Megasthenes has left of the splendour 
of Chandragupta's imperial capital, Pitaliputra, the modern 
Patna in Eastern Bengal, are of little practical value to the 
architectural student. 

The excavations recently undertaken, through Mr. Ratan 
Tata's public-spirited liberality, on the site of Pataliputra will 
doubtless produce material of great archaeological interest, but 
they will never establish any new theory or confirm any old one 
concerning the origins of Indian art. These are already so 
decisively indicated by the great mass of material accumulated 
in many other places in India that the question whether Asoka 
or Chandragupta Maurya planned their palaces on Persepolitan 
models, or built them with foreign craftsmen, becomes entirely 
a side-issue and a matter of local interest only. It will doubtless 
be used as an argument for British architects in India importing 
modern Western methods of building — though there is a 
difference between those which stimulate the craftsman's ideas 
and those which sterilise them ; but it is foolish to argue that 
Persepolitan fashions at Pataliputra prove that all the great 
art of India in early Buddhist times was inspired by foreigners 
— unless all Indians of Aryan race are to be classed as such. 

We learn from Megasthenes that the imperial palace was 
planned on a grand scale like those of Sfisa and Ekbatana, that 
it was gorgeously decorated with gold and silver and placed 
in the midst of a fine garden with numerous water-ponds — a 
description which might apply equally well to the palaces of the 
Great Moguls. It is highly probable that Chandragupta, like 
his grandson, made considerable use of craftsmen from Perse- 
polis or from Mesopotamia. Indeed, the latest discoveries of 



THE MAURYAN DYNASTY 3 

Western scholars seem to make it necessary to abandon the 
theory that the early Aryan invaders of India were only nomads 
whose practice in the arts was chiefly confined to war and 
agriculture. If it be true — as the Russian scholar, Sheftelovich, 
asserts — that the Kassites, who took Babylon in 1746 B.C., and 
established a dynasty there which lasted 600 years, were Aryans 
speaking Vedic Sanskrit, whose chief god was Stiryas, Babylon 
must be regarded as a half-way house of the Aryan race in its 
march towards the Indus Valley, and some at least of the early 
Aryan tribes must have acquired, before they entered India, 
not only the high spiritual culture which is reached in the Rig 
Veda, but a prolonged experience of the civic arts, including 
architecture. 

Recent German excavations on the site of Babylon show 
that the science of building in Vedic times had advanced much 
farther than has hitherto been suspected. The Babylonians 
had apparently perfected the construction of radiating arches 
centuries before Rome was founded, and it is probable that both 
Roman and Indian builders derived their knowledge of it from 
the same source in Western Asia. When the seat of imperial 
power was transferred from Persia to Eastern India in the 
fourth century b.c, it must have been as natural an inclination 
for Chandragupta Maurya to supplement local architectural 
talent at P^taliputra by bringing experts from Persepolis as it 
is for Anglo-Indian rulers in the present day to supersede it by 
experts from London — for Western Asia was the great culture- 
centre of the Indo-Aryan race. 

But it is a great mistake of Anglo-Indian writers to assume 
that Indian building under the Mauryan dynasty was wholly, 
or even to a large extent, an importation of " styles " borrowed 
from Persepolis. Chandragupta and Asoka might set Perse- 
politan fashions in their palaces, just as Indian princes of 
to-day try to imitate the fashions of London and Paris; but 



4 THE INDIAN VILLAGE 

Indo-Aryan culture had already for many centuries planted 
itself deep in Indian soil, and Indo-Aryan building had acquired 
an Indian character as distinctive as that of Indo-Aryan 
philosophy and religious teaching. Just as at the present day 
one must look for all that is truly typical of Indian life and 
character in the village rather than in the town, in the same way 
the essential derivations of Indian architecture, in construction 
and in decoration, will be found not in imperial palaces, but 
in the life of the village folk. 

The village in ancient India represented a highly organised 
social community, far removed from the decadent modern type. 
The Aryan, jealous of his tribal honour and proud of his social 
privileges, was, as the name implies, a born aristocrat ; but 
his ideal of government was essentially democratic. Only the 
urgent necessity of national or racial preservation reconciled 
him to the life of great towns and a centralised form of govern- 
ment. The philosophy of the Vedas proclaimed the highest 
ideal of self-government, and Aryan philosophy was not an 
abstract speculative theory, but a practical formula of life. The 
teaching of Buddha, though it disputed the divine authority 
which the orthodox attributed to the Vedas, only gave to this 
formula a different interpretation and a wider application. It 
was a protest against sacrificial rites and the debasing practice 
of physical self-torture, through which certain Brahmanical sects 
sought to acquire spiritual wisdom and to inculcate habits of 
self-control ; but it was in no way opposed to the esoteric teach- 
ing of Aryan philosophy. On the contrary, it laid the founda- 
tions of the latter on a wider footing and opened its doors to the 
whole world, instead of reserving it as the exclusive property 
of the Aryan race. 

The great bulk of the population in early Buddhist times, 
says Professor Rhys Davids, or at least 70-80 per cent., lived 
in villages, and the entire literature of early Buddhism mentions 



THE INDIAN VILLAGE 5 

hardly a score of towns of any considerable size as existing in 
the whole vast territory, from Kandahar nearly to Calcutta, 
and from the HimMayas southwards to the Run of Kutch> 
Buddhism did not succeed any more than Christianity has done 
in effacing social and racial distinctions. The four varnas, or 
colours, representing so many ranks of social precedence, were 
recognised distinctions in early Buddhist village communities,^ 
though' the rigid barriers of the caste system did not exist. 
In spite of the colour bar, however, India's melting-pot long 
before the third century b.c had profoundly altered the social 
and political conditions which prevailed when the Aryans were 
disputing with Dravidians, Kolarians, and with wild abori- 
ginals classed as Rakshasas, or demons, for possession of the 
soil. The former had adapted themselves perfectly to their 
Indian environment, and had intermarried to such an extent 
with the civilised tribes which had preceded their immigrations 
or invasions, that it only needed the moving of a common 
spiritual impulse to make India a nation. And this impulse 
came from Asoka's propaganda of the teaching of Buddha. 

We must, however, guard ourselves from the error of 
supposing that " Buddhist art," as Westerners call it, was purely 
sectarian, or anything else than Indian art during the ascendancy 
of Buddhism. Fergusson's classification of Buddhist, Jain, and 
Hindu temples as representing different epochsof art or different 
schools of artistic expression is entirely fallacious. In a village 
or town where Buddhists were in the majority, Buddhist shrines 
would naturally be the most numerous. In other localities, at 
the same time, Jains or followers of other sects would build 
similar shrines dedicated to their special divinities. Whatever 
school of religious doctrine the buildings might represent, the 
craftsmanship and principle of construction remained the same, 
and even the symbolism was a common vernacular language 

* " Buddhist India," p. 50, * Ibid. chap. v. 

I* 



6 ASOKA'S PROPAGANDA 

employed by dififerent sects to explain the special tenets of their 
respective cults. When a great ruler like T^soka exercised 
supreme political power over the greater part of India, the wealth 
of the state was naturally devoted to making the buildings of 
his especial sect of better and more expensive materials than 
those of others, and consequently therecord of Buddhist building 
which survives to this day is more complete than that of the 
rival schools of religious thought which had to be content with 
less costly and less permanent building materials. But a town 
or village and the buildings therein, inhabited by Buddhists, 
Jains, or Brahmans, were never at any time in Indian history 
entirely differentiated by special' characteristics of style. 
Buddhist art was at the same time and place also Jain art 
and Hindu or Brahmanical art. India has never known any 
style that can be called architectural but one — and that is 
Indo-Aryan. 

Asoka's religious propaganda was no violent disturbance 
of the established customs and beliefs of his subjects : it was 
a policy of peaceful penetration in strict accordance with the 
spirit of Aryan philosophy, which proclaimed Truth to be a 
temple open on all sides to devout worshippers, who might 
choose the approach most accessible to them. Whatever 
Buddhism might have been as a school of philosophic specula- 
tion, Indian art of Asoka's time shows that as a popular religion 
it was a synthesis of contemporary Hinduism, as complete for 
the age to which it belonged as medieval Hinduism was for its 
own time. But as religion has always been essentially a part 
of Indian daily life, we must begin an account of the great 
religious architecture of India by trying to reconstruct, out of 
the meagre architectural records of the third century B.C., the 
practical planning and building of a typical Indian village; This 
can be done to some extent by making use of the clues given 
in the Hindu Silpa-s^stras, and in the sculptured representations 



THE MASTER-BUILDER 7 

of Indian buildings on the monuments of Asoka's time, and 
by comparing them with descriptions in Pili records which 
Professor Rhys Davids has collected.^ 

We may take it for granted that just as the types of houses 
represented in the sculptures of Bharhut and Sinchi resemble 
in many respects the domestic buildings of modern India, so 
the planning of Indian villages laid down in the Minasara, the 
Silpa-sastra^ of which Rim Riz has given too brief a summary 
in his valuable essay on the architecture of the Hindus, does not 
differ in essential points from that which was followed in the 
third century B.C. 

The Manasara Silpa-sistra, anticipating Vitruvius, first 
insists upon the high intellectual and moral culture necessary 
for a master-builder {stapathi). ' ' He should be conversant with 
all the sciences ; always attentive to his work; of an unblemished 
character ; generous, sincere, and devoid of enmity or jealousy." 
His first assistant, who might be his son or an apprentice, was 
the surveyor, or sUtragrahi, who must be particularly skilled 
in mathematics and obedient to his master. The next was the 
vurdhaci, or joiner, dexterous in joining wood and in com- 
bining other constructive materials with it. " He should be 
of a calm disposition, and acquainted with drawing and 
perspective." 

It will probably be a revelation to modern architects to 
know how scientifically the problems of iown planning are 
treated in these ancient Indian architectural treatises. Beneath 
a great deal of mysticism, which may be scoffed at as pure 
superstition, there is a foundation of sound common sense and 
scientific knowledge which should appeal to the mind of the 
European expert. The most advanced science of Europe has 

1 " Buddhist India," chaps, iii. and iv. 

2 The Silpa-sistras were possibly compiled about the fifth or sixth century a.d., but 
the traditions they embody are of far greater antiquity. 



8 THE VILLAGE SITE 

not yet improved upon the principles of the planning of the 
garden cities of India based upon the Indian village plan as 
a unit. 

For choosing the site of a village, the Minasira declares 
that a careful examination of its position and soil is first ne- 
cessary. The best site is that which slopes towards the east, 
so as to get the full benefit of the first rays of the morning 
sun : those who have cultivated an Indian garden will appre- 
ciate the truth of this axiom. It should be near a stream 
running from left to right — the auspicious direction in which 
the sun moves across the sky — and the well-digger should be 
able to find water at a depth of about seven feet.' 

The soil must be tested by its colour, smell, taste, appear- 
ance, and feel. Four different qualities were recognised — the 
first would be firm, of an agreeable odour, suitable for growing 
various kinds of shade and fruit trees, vegetables and flowers. 
Sites to be avoided were those inclined to the intermediate 
points, as N.E., N.W.; stony ground; that in which human 
graves, disused wells, caves, or refuse of any kind were found. 

A rough practical means of testing the soil for the founda- 
tions was to dig a pit one hasta in depth, and then return the 
excavated soil into it. A stable foundation would be indicated 
by the soil at the top being higher than it was before ; an in- 
different one, if it were of the same level ; a bad one, which 
must on no account be used, if the surface were lower. 

When the site had been determined, the ground was 
ploughed over. A pair of oxen, of equal size and of the same 
colour, strong and without blemish, was chosen for the purpose. 
If they were to be found, oxen with white spots on the head 
and knees were particularly auspicious. They were decorated 
with gay trappings, and gold or silver rings were placed on 

^ It may be presumed that the time of the year would be during the monsoon or in 
the cold season. 



VILLAGE PLANNING 9 

the horns and hoofs. Then the master-builder himself, gar- 
landed and dressed in clean garments, turned the first furrow. 
The rest of the work was done by labourers, or s4dras, hired 
for the purpose.^ The oxen and the plough to which they 
were attached were the stapathis perquisite. 

The true position of the cardinal points having been care- 
fully ascertained by means of the shadow of a gnomon, rules 
for the construction of which are given in the Silpa-s^stras,^ 
the alignment of the main street of the village was marked out. 
The general planning of the larger villages followed that of the 
cosmic cross, and the so-called magic square, representing the 
four quarters of the universe ; but the reader must not mis- 
understand this association of mysticism with the practical 
business of the Indian craftsman. All art in ancient India 
was held to be magic, and the magical virtues of these figures 
simply lay in the fact that the experience of many generations 
had proved that they were the best for purposes of defence 
and gave the most healthy, pleasant, and practical lay-out for 
an Indian village or town. The easterly axis of the plan 
ensured that the principal streets were purified by the rays of 
the sun sweeping through them from morning till evening; 
while the intersection of main streets by shorter ones running 
north and south provided a perfect circulation of air and the 
utmost benefit of the cool breezes. 

The two principal streets which formed the arms of the 

^ The distinction made in the Minasira between the stapathi and sMras is one of 
the many evidences which might be cited to show that skilled craftsmen in ancient and 
medieval India took a much higher social position than that assigned to them in modern 
times. Literary references to handicraftsmen as sMras must be taken to mean unskilled 
labourers only. The stapathi, in this case, was the officiating priest, and it is significant 
that the hereditary caste craftsmen of Southern India, who add "Achary" (religious 
teacher) to their name, wear the sacred thread and do not employ Brahmans for their 
religious ceremonies. The Mmayana also states that the craftsmen who carved the 
sacrificial posts at the Vedic sacrifices were honoured equally with the officiating priests. 

^ See &km R4z, pp. 19-22. 



lO 



VILLAGE PLANNING 



cosmic cross were broad avenues, probably planted with um- 
brageous trees. The long one, running east and west, was 
called Rdjapatha — King's Street; the short one, which pointed 
north and south, was Mahdkala — Broad Street, or otherwise 
Vamana — South Street — from the name of the mythical ele- 



N. 



d h 



u 



w 




PATH OF A US P I C I U S N E S S 



^^^ 



«3 




J [ 

trempla K I N G' S STREET 

ti l - 



Do 
ID 



D 



^^ 



PATH OF AUSPICIOUSNESS -^'r-'^j 
> ■ ■ ■ 

S. 



3/ 



Fig. I.— Village Plan called Danddka (corrected from Ram Raz, PI. XLIII), 

phant which represented the south quarter.^ The road or wide 
path running round the village inside the wall or stockade was 
called Mangala-vttht — the Way of Auspiciousness, or Good 

1 The elephant was the rain-cloud which came with the south-west monsoon. Vamana 

was also the short arm of the cosmic cross — otherwise Vishnu's dwarf incarnation the 

apparent distance between the sun at its zenith and its nadir being less than that between 
sunrise and sunset, or the long arm of the cross. This street could, therefore, also be 
anglicised as " Short Street." 



THE ASSEMBLY-HALL ii 

Fortune ; this being the path by which the village priests went 
daily in performance of the rite of pradakshind, or circum- 
ambulation. Mangala has also a secondary meaning as an 
epithet of Karttikeya, the god of war. In this sense the name 
refers to the use made of the road by the village or town 
sentinels whose watchfulness ensured the safety of its inhabit- 
ants from hostile attacks. 

The centre of the village, at the intersection of the two 
main streets (fig. 2), was the recognised meeting-place for the 
Council of Elders which regulated local affairs. A banyan> or 
a pipal tree planted on a mound sufficed for the mote-house 
or assembly-hall, except when the village was a large one, 
and could afford a pillared mandapam, or a pavilion of wood, 
brick, or stone. 

In this ancient Aryan village custom one can trace the root 
of the idea of the Bodhi tree, or Tree of Knowledge ; for the 
tree of the village elders must have been associated with the 
wisdom of sages long before the forest tree became the place 
of meditation for the yogi who sought spiritual enlightenment. 
A symbolic or mystic meaning also attached itself to the 
Council tree ; for, planted at the centre of the cosmic cross, it 
was the Tree of Vishnu — the sun at noon and the all-pervading 
■cosmic force. It stood for the mystic tree of which the sun 
and moon and stars were fruits and the blue vault of heaven 
the foliage. 

In a small village the Council tree, or Tree of Justice, 
would give sufficient shelter for the general meeting of the house- 
holders, who formed the Parliament of the Indo-Aryan village. 
They had the power of nominating all the Ministers — the 
Council of Five — except the headman, whose office was heredi- 
tary, but who could be deposed by the Rija, the head of the 
-clan, in case of any grievous offence against the laws of the 
Aryan community. In larger villages and towns the meeting- 



12 HOUSE PLANNING 

place of this general assembly would be in the parks or groves 
of sacred trees planted near the gates. 

The Minasara gives the maximum width of the main 
village streets as 5 dandas} The others varied in width from 
I to 5 dandas. The size of a single cottage was reckoned as 
from 24 feet by 16 feet to 40 feet by 32 feet. They were 
generally grouped together by fours, so as to form an inner 
square or quadrangle : the " magic " of the square depending on 
the fact that it afforded the best protection for the cattle of the 
joint household when they were driven in from the pastures 
every evening. 

Four cottages combined into a single habitation, with its 
own inner courtyard, was the next step in the evolution of the 
Indian house-plan. Such a house might belong to the chief 
herdsman, who was an important personage in the Aryan village 
communities, or to the headman of the village, both of which 
positions were hereditary. This was the derivation of a house- 
plan, eminently practical and suitable for a tropical climate, 
which is still universal in India for all classes, from the well- 
to-do ryot to the Maharajah, except when Indians prefer 
to make their surroundings uncomfortable and insanitary by 
adopting building fashions appropriate only for European 
climatic and social conditions. 

Just as the single cottage, or village hut, formed the unit 
of house-planning, so the village plan was the unit used to form 
the mahalla, or ward, in town planning.^ The Manasara recog- 
nises forty different classes of villages and towns, according to 
the extent of the lands owned by them ; commencing with a 
village-unit which was 500 dandas, or 4,000 feet square, so that 

^ A danda, rod or pole = 8 feet. 

* The city of Jaipur, laid out by a Bengali architect in the eighteenth century, is the 
best known example of a modern Indian city planned in accordance with the ancient 
Hindu traditions. See " Indian Architecture : its Psychology, Structure, and History," 
p. 3 1 6, fig. 49. 



STANDARD VILLAGE PLANS 13 

the extent of the largest cities would be 20,000 dandas, or about 
30 English miles square. Of this area about one-third was 
devoted to building space, and the rest to the agricultural lands 
owned by the community, It should be observed that neither 
a village nor a town was usually square in plan, but a rectangle, 
with the long sides running east and west, so as to secure a 
proper circulation of air even in the largest cities. In the 
description of Ayodhya given in the Rim^yana, the proportion 
between its breadth and length is as one is to four. Fatal iputra 
was about 9 miles in length and ij miles in breadth. Hindu 
Gaur was also a long rectangle. One of the long sides 
generally faced a lake or river, an arrangement which provided 
bathing facilities for all the inhabitants, and obviated the neces- 
sity of building defensive works all round. 

It will be interesting to examine in detail some of the village 
plans, of which eight standard types are given in the Manasara.^ 

The simplest one (fig. i), called Danddka, after the staff 
carried by sannydsins, was specially intended for a hermitage 
(asrdm) or other religious community. It consisted of from 
one to five long parallel streets running east and west, with 
three shorter ones intersecting them in the middle and at 
the two ends. There were two bathing-tanks near the N.E. 
and S.W. angles of the village, and various shrines appro- 
priate for the particular sect to which the villagers belonged — 
the principal one being placed at the west end of the Raja- 
patha, with its entrance facing the rising sun. Minor deities 
had their temples on the outskirts of the village, outside or in- 
side the wall or fence, which had four large gates facing the two 
main streets, and smaller ones at the angle of the village. It 
contained from twelve to over three hundred houses. In the 
given plan each of the eight inside blocks had two rows of 
houses ; the narrower outside blocks only one. 

J Ram Riz, " Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus," p. 42. 



H 



STANDARD VILLAGE PLANS 



The plan (fig. 2) called Nandydvarta (the abode of happi- 
ness) was named after the mystic figure upon which it was based 
(fig. 3). It was intended to accommodate a mixed population 
of different social grades, or belonging to different religious 




Fig. 2.— Village Plan called Nandydvarta (corrected from Ram RSz, PI. XLIV). 

sects, e.g. Brahmans of four different schools, in which case 
the village had the affix -mangalam,OY people of the four varnas, 
when the affix was -puram} The arrangement of the different 

1 Mangalam means auspicious, and puram a fort. The implication seems to be 
that the Brahman village was protected by its own virtue, while the lay community 
defended itself by force of arms. 



STANDARD VILLAGE PLANS 



15 



social grades is shown by the relative depth of shading in the 
plan ; the highest class, in the centre of the village, occupying 
the four blocks which are left unshaded. 

The outer blocks of houses, to which R^m R^z makes no 
reference, were probably the bazars placed near the gates of the 
town or village, both for convenience and for the purpose of 
collecting tolls. In the Umagga Jataka there are frequent 
references to the four bazars placed at the north, south, east, 
and west, and serving their respective quarters in the King's 
city. The two main streets, as always, formed the cosmic cross. 
In the centre of the village, at the meeting of the crossways, 
was, says the Manasira, the auspicious 
place for the assembly-hall, or for a temple 
of Brahma, which had four entrances. 

The Nandyivarta type of village con- 
tained a great number of shrines dedicated 
to various deities, for the location of which 
the Minasara gives minute directions.^ 
This part of the subject will be considered 
more fully in another chapter. 

The plan called Padmdka (fig. 4), after 
the lotus leaf, is interesting as showing how sedulously Indian 
town-planners avoided the inauspicious lay-out in which the 
main streets run upon diagonal lines in the direction of the inter- 
mediate points of the compass, the objections to which are not 
merely sentimental.^ A plan with streets radiating in all direc- 
tions from the centre of the village, like the spokes of a wheel, 
would be the first to suggest itself to an Indian designer, on 
account of its symbolism. He avoided it for very practical 




Fig. 3. 



-The Symbolic Figure 
Nandyjtvarta. 



> Rim Riz, "Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus," pp. 45-6. 

2 When the European experts who have planned the new Delhi are better acquainted 
with Indian conditions, they will, I hope, eliminate the features in their preliminary scheme 
which will make the lay-out of the imperial city inauspicious in Indian eyes. 



i6 STANDARD VILLAGE PLANS % 

reasons. First, that it was bad for purposes of defence, as it gave 
an enemy many opportunities of establishing himself m the 
centre of the village by a sudden raid. Secondly, that it tended 
to congestion of traffic, and an uncomfortable plan of house and 




Fig. 4.— Village Plan called Padmdka (corrected from Ram Raz, PI. XLIV). 

garden, especially in the middle of the village. -Thirdly, that 
the streets would mostly run in the wrong direction for the sun. 
Another interesting village plan was based upon the Swas- 
tika, the mystic sign derived from the " magic square," which, 
as stated above, represented the four quarters of the world and 
of the universe. The magic of the swastika lay in the fact 



STANDARD VILLAGE PLANS 



17 



that in the Aryan military camp it was a formation used for 
defending the four gateways ; it was also the Indo-Aryan re- 
ligious compass, indicating the apparent movement of the sun 
across the heavens, which movement still forms part of Hindu 



w. 




\m 




J 




Fig. 5. — Village Plan called Swastika (corrected from Ram Rstz, PI. XLV). 

religious ritual in the performance of pradakshind, or the cir- 
cumambulation of a shrine, keeping the right side towards it. 
Philosophically the sign represents the principle of evolution ; 
the reverse sign, associated with black magic and representing 
involution, was adopted by certain schools of Hindu philosophy. 
In this plan the direction of the blocks of houses in each 
quarterof the village indicated the movement from left to right. 



i8 



MOGUL GARDENS 



A comparison of the planning of the Taj gardens (fig. 6) 
with these ancient Indian village plans will make it clear that 
when Babar began to lay out his fourfold field-plot at Agra he 
was not, as he evidently thought (and as Anglo-Indians of the 
present day believe), bringing fresh ideas to revive the parched'* 
up plains of India which his ancestors had devastated ; he was 
only unconsciously repeating the traditional Indo-Aryan garden 
plan, which probably Indian Buddhists had been the first to 

teach the Moguls. 
The " Mount of Fe- 
licity" in the: centre 
ofhis gardens, where 
he and his boon 
companions held 
their music and 
drinking parties, 
was nothing but the 
Muhammadan secu- 
lar notion of the 
mystic holy moun- 
tain, Meru, the pivot 
of the universe, of 
which the Indian Vishnu shrine is the symbol. For untold 
centuries before the Prophet of Mecca was born it had been 
the high place upon which the Indian village council tree was 
planted. One may even admit the possibility that the irrigated 
garden plan might have been a more ancient idea than the 
other ; that the Indo-Aryan village took the lay-out of the 
garden plot as the basis of its organisation. But more probably 
the village scheme was originally the plan of the military camp 
of the Aryan tribes when they first established themselves in the 
valley of the Indus. 




Fig. 6.— Plan of the Taj Gardens. 



r\. vvK I 




'HB-t - '^-j-f 






ffiati't:^-! 




INDIAN Ci I'll -\(;^.^ ((7/-<v: 250 I! C ) 



CHAPTER II 

BUILDING BYE-LAWS VILLAGE DWELLINGS THE ASSEMBLY- 
HALL THE ADMINISTRATION OF VILLAGES AND TOWNS — 

CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT IN ANCIENT INDIA — VIL- 
LAGE WALLS AND GATEWAYS 

Among the building bye-laws laid down in the Manasira are 
the following : " Schools and buildings for religious study 
should be erected at the angular points of villages," i.e. they 
should be in the quietest places, out of the main trafifiic and near 
the least-used entrances of the village. A dharamsdla for 
travellers and pilgrims, with water and other accommodation, 
ought to be built at the S.E. approach to the village. 

" Private houses or mansions may consist of from one to 
nine stories ; but this is to be determined by the rank of the 
person for whom they are built. The lower classes must never 
construct their houses of more than a single storey." 

" As far as practicable the height of buildings in the same 
street should correspond. Buildings of the same number of 
stories should correspond in height." 

" The front, middle, and back doors of a house should be 
on the same level, and in a straight line with each other. The 
outer door should be placed not exactly in the middle of the 
fa9ade, but a little to one side. The usual rule is that in a house 
ten paces in length, the entrance should be between five on the 
right and four on the left. The same rule should be observed 

19 



20 ANCIENT VILLAGE DWELLINGS 

in|the gates of temples. A vedikd^ or raised seat, should be 
constructed on each side of the door." 

The quaint representations of buildings given in the 
Bharhut and Sanchi sculptures will give some idea of the aspect 
of Indian villages and towns in the third century B.C. ; but one 
must not suppose that the sculptures of two sttipas in places not 
very far apart exhausted all the types of building then current 
in India. At the same time Asoka's vigorous propaganda of 
Buddhism, having Pitaliputra as its centre, certainly had the 
effect of spreading the culture of the Magadha country over a 
great part of India, and the Buddhist Emperor's extraordinary 
building activity must have created a great demand for Bengali 
master-builders, and thus have established the reputation which 
they had even in Akbar's time.^ There is unmistakable evidence 
of their handiwork in many parts of ancient India. 

The commonest type of village dwelling shown in the 
Bharhut Sculptures (PI. I) is, like those of the present day, a 
very simple structure and apparently built of sun-baked clay. 
We can gather from the descriptions in the Ramayana of the 
hut built for Rama in his forest exile that the typical Indian 
cottage was then divided into four rooms, like the quarters of 
the whole village. The entrance, with double doors in the 
middle, as shown in PI. I, a, opened into the quadrangle formed 
by a block of three or four single cottages, owned by different 
members of one family, in which the cattle which was their 
joint property took shelter by night. When there were only 
three cottages, the fourth side of the quadrangle was closed by 
a wall with a door or gateway in it. In the illustration (a) a 
woman stands in the quadrangle holding a basket into which a 

1 Vedika meant, originally, ground prepared for Vedic sacrifices with the sacred kusha 
grass, or the altar of sacrifice itself. Hence a seat for the gods or for honoured guest.s. 

2 The Aln-i-Akbari, describing Akbar's buildings at Agra, refers to " the beautiful 
designs of Bengal and Gujerat." 



'LATK 11 



uJ 



,^':-- -'^^, 



\, 



—JJ, 



A. IIIATCIIKLI COITAGK, HKONT \Ii:W 



li. TIIAICUICD COITAGK, SIDE VIEW 





HU^ 



! I 






'It!: 




C. INTERIOK OK '1 H AI'CII El ) KOOl', MlnWlNG HAMHU CoNSlKUCIION 



Mi 



\ 



% 






\ 



11. ENl.AKGEU DETAIL, SHOW- 
ING liAMllL-s AM) MATTING 
UNIJI'K TH1-: THATCH 



IC. CAKIN HE A BENGALI llOAT' 

IMODKRN lil'.NC.AI.I COI'TACJIiS AND ROOFS 



MODERN BENGALI ROOFS 



2 I 




Fig. 7. — Seven-raftered Bambu Roof of 
Modem Thatched Bengali Cottage. 



grain-seller is emptying a measureful. Outside, his assistant 
is waiting with his load of two baskets slung on a pole. There 
is a small window in the centre of the gable wall, and a larger 

one beneath it. The rooms of the 
front cottage, on either side of the 
doorway, are also lighted by win- 
dows in the centre. 

The roofs of the cottages at 
Bharhut are barrel-shaped, with 
semicircular gables, as in PI. I, b, 
or built with pointed gables as in 
fig. A of the same plate. The 
exact material used to cover them 
is not quite clear, but similar forms 
of roof and the methods of con- 
struction applicable to them survive in the Bengali thatched 
cottage of the present day (PL II, and figs. 7 and 8). 

It is necessary to explain that the peculiar double curvature 
given to these Bengali roofs and the drawing-out of the eaves 
at the four corners of the cot- 
tage are not mere freaks of the 
unpractical Oriental builder, 
but thoroughly scientific in- 
ventions designed for throwing 
off heavy rain. A thatched 
roofof the straight-lined Euro- 
pean type could hardly be made 
water-tight for a long time in 
the torrential monsoon rains of 
the lower Ganges valley. The 
same reason applies to the more permanent roofs of brick and 
plaster, designed on similar lines, used in the old temples and 
mosques of Bengal, 




Fig. 8.— Plan of Fig. 7. 



22 ANCIENT BRICK AND STONE HOUSES 

The progressive European, rather than learn anything 
from the Hindu builder, endures patiently the leaky roofs 
which the British engineer puts over his head in the plains of 
Bengal. It is enough for him that they are British, or as near 
British as the ignorant Hindu can make them.^ 

The derivation of the vaulted roofs of the great Buddhist 
chapter-houses, the stone vaults of Akbar's Rajput master- 
builders, and those of the mosques at Gaur, from these Indian 
village prototypes is quite easy to follow.^ 

I think, however, it is a great error to suppose that thatched 
or wooden roofs were universal in the India of Asoka's time, 
merely because the sculptures of Bharhut, Sinchi, and Amar^- 
vati give no indication of any other. Professor Rhys Davids 
tells us that the old Pali writings describe great houses with a 
flat roof called the upart-pdsddatala, " where the owner sat, 
usually under a pavilion, which answered the purpose at once of 
a drawing-room, an office, and a dining-hall." ^ Such houses — 
with the entrance through a large gateway, to the right and left 
of which were storehouses leading into an inner courtyard 
surrounded by living-apartments — correspond exactly with the 
terraced-roof mansions of modern Rajputana; and there is every 
reason to believe that in localities where wood was scarce, brick 
and stone houses of this type were built in Asoka's time as they 
are to-day. 

1 It would be interesting to know how much is spent annually by the Public Works 
Department and by municipalities in Bengal in repairing roofs of official buildings 
" designed " after the regulation departmental patterns which the Bengali builder has 
to copy ; and the annual average rainfall inside the roofs of these buildings would be the 
most curious of meteorological records, as I have had occasion to observe. 

^ See below, p. 91. Compare the sketch of the interior of a five-raftered BengaH 
thatched roof (PI. II) with the vaulting of the Bona Masjid, Gaur ("Indian Architecture," 
Plate XLIII, a) ; and the plan of the seven-raftered roof, fig. 8, with that of the stone- 
vaulted roof of the Buland Darwiza, Fatehpur-Sfkri ("Indian Architecture," p. 166, fig. 39), 
or with the roof of Ibrahim's tomb at Bijipflr, Hid. PI. LXXXVII. 

' "Buddhist India," pp. 68-9. 







'^\ tee 









^,fa. 



v' Cvv^^M-l 



ANCIENT BRICK AND STONE HOUSES 23 

Three-storied houses or palaces are frequently represented 
in Asokan sculpture. The general arrangement of the " Palace 
of the Gods " (PI. Ill, a), which may be taken for a crude re- 
presentation of a typical Indian mansion about 250 B.C., does 
not differ much from that of a well-to-do family house in modern 
Rajputana. There are the familiar chhajas (verandah roofs 
used as cornices), to protect the walls from rain and the burning 
heat of the midday sun, which are so conspicuous a feature in 
modern Indian buildings. The lower storey has open veran- 
dahs with the vedika, where the men of the household can sit 
to transact business or converse with their friends. The first 
floor has balconies with Bengali arches and screened openings, 
where doubtless the ladies sat as they do in the India of to-day. 
The upper storey, or attic, corresponds to the modern Rajput 
open-terraced roof, with its domed pavilions, or chhattris, only 
here the chhattri apparently covers the whole roof. It is 
probable that houses of this type were built in the third cen- 
tury B.C., not only in towns, but in the larger villages, whose 
inhabitants belonged to the higher classes of I ndo- Aryan society. 

Besides domestic and religious buildings, the Indian vil- 
lage, as before mentioned, had sometimes its Assembly-hall or 
Mote-house, where the village council met, as well as school 
buildings and rest-houses for travellers and pilgrims. These 
were generally pillared pavilions, which were the prototypes of 
the Diwan-i-Am, or public audience-hall, of the Mogul Empe- 
rors. A double-storied pavilion of this kind from the Bharhut 
sculptures is shown in PI. IV, a. In this case the building is 
a religious one, but it must be remembered that all Indian re- 
ligious buildings had their secular or domestic prototypes. A 
royal audience-pavilion of about the seventh century a.d., from 
a fresco at Ajanti (PL IV, b), with a chhajai and flat roof, 

1 The stone or wooden chhaja is derived from the bambu-and-mat or thatched lean-to 
roof of a verandah. 



24 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION 

closely resembles the Mogul palace buildings of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries. 

Though the ancient Indo-Aryan village was essentially a 
self-governing community, managing its own domestic concerns 
and only paying to a central authority the customary vali, or 
tribute, due to it, the principle of co-operation for the purpose 
of carrying out larger public works which were beyond the 
means of single villages was always recognised. Not only were 
the village artisans liable to be called upon for the King's ser- 
vice in war or peace, but the villages united of their own accord 
to build assembly-halls, pilgrims' rest-houses, and irrigation 
works, to lay out and plant public parks, and to keep in order 
the main roads of the district.^ 

The wonderful organisation of Chandragupta's empire, of 
which Megasthenes gives us glimpses, was not the creation of 
the Mauryan statesmen, but the centralisation of the social and 
economic activitiesof the self-governing Indo-Aryan village com- 
munities. Pataliputra itself was only an aggregation of Indian 
villages joined together by spacious parks (the sacred groves) 
and stately avenues. The administration of the city by a board 
of thirty commissioners,^ divided into six committees of five 
members each, was only an enlargement oi'dx.t^tzX.tdipanchdyat, 
or Council of Five, assisted by a staff of permanent officials — 
the headman, accountant, watchman, banker, master-craftsman, 
schoolmaster, story-teller, and musicians — by which every 
Indo-Aryan village managed its own affairs. An inscription of 
the tenth century a.d., lately discovered in Southern India, pre- 
scribes the qualifications of voters and the mode of election for 
a municipal commission, similar to that of Chandragupta's city, 
consisting of thirty members — one for each ward of the town.^ 

^ Rhys Davids, " Buddhist India," p. 49. 

* See Vincent Smith's "Early History of India," pp. 125-7. 

* See infra, pp. 172-4. 



ri ATK i\- 




A. DiiUI:L1:-s'1oK11.IJ rWIl.lON, KIIAKHI T .SCULl' l lkics 



^-*^.^»y< i <f^l f *»*»»«g-'*><i»«i<»n»g»»»<Wy ^ i » ^<fy»«r#?*»-*p<*. 



r^ 




V. WUODEN I'AVILION, H;OM A FU I.SCO-I'A I Ml NO Al' AJANTA 

PILLARi:l) I'AVII.IONS IN ANCIENT INDIA 



=4] 



FEDERATION OF VILLAGES 25 

The King's Road, which ran from Fatal iputra to the north- 
west frontier of India, was the main highway of commerce, 
linking together the hundreds of single villages planned on the 
principles of the Silpa-sastras, which lay between the seat of 
the central government and the farthest confines of the empire. 
It was not the work of Chandragupta's government, but of the 
Indo-Aryan village communities. And there can hardly be any 
doubt that the construction of the great irrigation works of 
Chandragupta's time, and all the regulations for using them 
and keeping them in order, were natural developments of the 
traditional organisation of these con;imunities, and not any 
new departure in the economic life of India. 

For imperial administrative and political purposes villages 
in ancient and medieval India were grouped together in tens, 
twenties, hundreds, and thousands, each group acknowledging 
a Raja — the over-lord or chief of a tribe — whose duty it was to 
protect the village lands and the public roads under his control 
from robbers and to defend them from other enemies, in return 
for which each village or group of villages paid him a certain 
vali, or tribute. But the principle of mutual obligation between 
the rulers and ruled was recognised to such an extent that in 
case the officers of the over-lord who were responsible for public 
safety failed to detect and punish offenders, the overlord himself 
was expected to make good from his treasury any loss which 
individuals or the community might suffer. Whether this 
obligation was generally fulfilled by the central authority is 
another matter — the fact that this was one of the implications 
in noblesse oblige shows that the democratic principle of govern- 
ment was fully understood in ancient India. 

The dutyof loyal devotion to the supreme authority, which is 
always strongly insisted upon in the sacred literature of India, 
was something quitedifferent to the Western notion of the divine 
right of kings. The principle of constitutional government for 



26 CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY 

which the nations of Europe struggled throughout the Middle 
Ages until the present day was the essence of Indo-Aryan 
policy. The King was the Vicegerent of Vishnu on earth in 
so far and as long as he remained the constituted Defender 
of the Faith— of the laws, customs, and religion of Aryan 
civilisation. 

The English schoolboy is taught to believe that all 
Oriental monarchs were like Darius of Persia, and that the 
Greeks Vv'ere the sole defenders of liberty against Oriental 
despotism. The Indo-Aryans were not only lovers of freedom, 
like their Western brethren, but they asserted the principle 
of constitutional monarchy in their Magna Chartas and Acts 
of Parliament much more strongly than the subjects of Euro- 
pean sovereigns succeeded in doing until quite modern times. 
" Holy sages," says Manu, the great Indo-Aryan law-giver, 
" consider as a fit dispenser of criminal justice that king who 
invariably speaks truth, who duly considers all cases, who 
understands the sacred books, who knows the distinctions of 
virtue, pleasure, and riches. Such a king, if he justly inflict 
legal punishments, greatly increases these three means of 
happiness ; but punishment itself shall destroy a king who is 
crafty, voluptuous, and wrathful. . . . Punishment shall over- 
take his castles, his territories, his peopled land, with all fixed 
and movable things that exist on it ; even the gods and the 
sages who lose their oblations will be afflicted and ascend to 
the sky." ' 

For purposes of military defence the capital towns and 
villages commanding strategic points were fortified. The Um- 
magga Jataka throws a sidelight on the" relationship between 
Indian villages and their Rajas from the military point of 
view. In this legend of the Buddha's former births the Raja's 
first order before starting off on a warlike expedition was : 

1 " Institutes of Hindu Law," translated by S. G. Grady, chap. vii. sect. 26-9. 



PLATE V 




26] 



NORTHERN GATEWAY OF THE SANCHl SlUTA 



VILLAGE DEFENCES 27 

" Go and build villages on the line of march ! " When the 
Bosat, his minister, had finished his preparations he said to 
the Raja, " ' Great King ! wait not a moment on the road, but 
advance immediately. I have already built villages for you 
at intervals of seven yodunas, established halting-places, and 
filled the hundreds of villages that are on the way with clothes 
and ornament, food and drink. I have kept elephants, horses 
and vehicles ready for you in those villages. When you go 
from one village to another leave behind in each successive 
village the unserviceable beasts and vehicles and take others 
in place of them.' " ' 

The shrines and other religious buildings of the ancient 
Indian village will be dealt with in subsequent chapters. The 
wall or stockade which enclosed the village must now be de- 
scribed. According to the importance of the village and the 
locality to which it belonged we may consider it to have been 
built of clay, wood, bricks, or stone, or a combination of these 
materials. Outside it was defended by a thicket of thorny 
shrubs and one or more moats, filled with water or sand ; 
inside a broad path was kept, both for defensive purposes in 
case of hostile attacks, and, like the procession path of the 
Buddhist temple or sttipa, for the circumambulatory rite of 
the villagers — laymen as well as priests. 

Of stone-built walls, such as an ancient Indian fortified 
village or town possessed, there is an extant example older than 
the sixth century B.C. in the hill-fortress of Giribbaja, near the 
modern Rajgir, said to have been planned by a master-builder 
called Maha Govinda.' Those represented in ancient Indian 
sculpture are sometimes of brick, but more usually of wood. 
The latter description are known by archaeologists as "Buddh- 
ist's rails"— the label given to them by Fergusson which 

' " Ummagga Jataka," translated by Yatawara, p. 187. 
2 Rhys Davids, "Buddhist India," p. 37. 



28 TOWN AND VILLAGE GATEWAYS 

inverts the whole sequence of their derivation. The rail sur- 
rounding a Buddhist or Jain stdpa, and placed there to protect 
it from the influence of evil spirits, was not derived directly 
from Buddhist or Jain ritual. The rite of pradakshina, which 
Buddhist and Jain pilgrims performed within the rails of their 
sttlpas, was the ancient Vedic rite practised by all Indo-Aryans 
within the walls of their villages, and the rail was merely a 
symbolical adaptation to religious purposes of the heavy timber 
fence constructed by the hereditary village carpenters and 
joiners which protected the whole community from its enemies 
in the flesh. 

Even the religious significance which attached itself to 
the rail in connection with Jain and Buddhist sttipas was of 
much greater antiquity than either Jainism or Buddhism, for 
this was the identical fence — the vediki — which enclosed the 
sacrificial area prepared with the sacred kusha-grass in Vedic 
sacrifices. 

Similarly, the torans, or gateways, o'f Bharhut and Sanchi 
(PI. V)' are reproductions of the four gateways of an Indian 
village or town when they were constructed of timber. PI. VI 
shows one from the Amaravati sculptures, with part of the 
railing. The subject of the sculpture is Prince Siddhartha 
quitting his native town at the time of the Great Renunciation, 
the Prince being represented symbolically as a Bodhisattva, or 
Buddha that is to be, by a horse without a rider attended by 
heavenly beings, one of whom holds the royal umbrella over 
his head. Here the toran is a plain, businesslike structure, 
without any of the elaborate sculpture which adorned the gate- 
ways of Jain and Buddhist stdpas after the Mauryan epoch. 

1 The present gateways of Sinchi are later than the stflpa itself, which was one of 
those built by Asoka in the third century B.C. They were probably added about a century 
later, and the sculpture represents the transition from the severe simplicity of the art of 
Hinayana Buddhism to the great elaboration of the Mahayina school. The town gateway 
shown in PI. VI gives a good idea of the original Asokan torans of Bharhut and SanchL 



PLATl'; \- 



^.^ 






-L- 




■JdWN i; \ I I.WAN' l\ ANXII'.XT INDIA 



28] 



TOWN AND VILLAGE GATEWAYS 



29 



It is evidently part of the defences of the town or fortress- 
palace of King Suddhodana. Above the toran, or torans (for 
it must have been doubled to carry the superstructure), is built 
a guard-house, with the usual barrel-vaulted roof and framed 
balustrade, made in the same way as the wooden walls of the 
town. This gateway is clearly the wooden prototype of the 
guard-houses of later Hindu and Muhammadan fortresses, 
with their naubat-khdna, or music-gallery, where the royal 
drummers announced the King's going and coming at any 
state function, and sounded the 
alarm in case of attack. 

But the origin of the toran 
may be taken farther back than 
the time of Buddha to the gate- 
way of the Vedic Indian village. 
Here its practical use would also 
be for defence, and as a watch-tower 
upon which the village sentinels 
could easily clamber to survey the 
surrounding country and to give 
the alarm in case of a sudden raid 
upon their crops or cattle. There 
was magic in the swastika, which is introduced into the gate- 
ways of Bharhut and Sanchi (see plan, fig. 9), because it was a 
practical device for strengthening the defence of the village 
entrances. The symbolical meaning, as an indication of the 
path of the sun across the heavens, and the propitious 
direction for the priest or pious pilgrim to circumambulate, 
grew into it gradually with the evolution of Aryan religious 
ritual. 

The construction of the wooden rail, and of the stone imi- 
tation of it, is shown in fig. 10. It may be observed that the 
form into which the horizontal bars is shaped is exactly that 




Fig. 9. — Plan of the Great Sanchi Stupa 
(from Fergusson's " History"). 



30 



TOWN AND VILLAGE WALLS 



which is used in the traditional timber houses of N(M-\vay. It 
is, in fact, the simplest method for ensuriuj^ s^ooil horizontal 
joints in the walls of wooden houses. 

Brick and stonewalls in an aneient Indian village or town 

were constructed either on the 
principle of the "embattled 
fret" (lio-. ii), which follows 
closely the i)utline of the 
timber railinj;-, or in a wavy 
line like the edge o{ a lotus 
leaf, or "like the wreath of 
waves rising" in the milky 
ocean." ' The latter type can 
be seen in the villai;e plan 
called PadmAka, (.le.scribeil in 
the Mc^nasar.i (lij;-. 4). It was 
probably built of mutl or 
brick, but miyht have been 
simply a bambu fence bent 
round a line of upright posts. 
PI. VII, B, from the /\inara\ati sculptures, shows a town 
t^ateway built of brick, with a wooden j^iiard-house over it of 
the same description as that given in PI. VI. This is the 
prototype of later Indian fortress-gateways like that of the 
Purana Kila at Delhi (PI. VII, c), 
and the Hdtht PAl of Akbar's 
I''ort at Agra. 

The origin of another im- 
portant feature in later Indian architecture is also staled in 

• Ummagna J.ltaka, p. 98. It may be noticed that the wliilcncss o( houses ami 
walls is often referred to in Sanskrit and I'aii iilL'raiino, showing that the practice of 
plastering brick, stone, and clay walls with fine |)olishoil cluiiiani was common in ancient 
India. The plaster was a protection against daiup in the rainy season and kept liic walls 
cool in the hot season. 





1 


fe 


H 




■ 1 



Ku;. 10.— Knil of Slflpa Nn. 3 at SAncht (from 
KtMjjvisson's " History"). 



Km. II. -I'laii of HiiiU or Sic 



Wall. 



TEMPLE GATEWAYS 31 

the gateways of the ancient Indo-Aryan village — the gopuram 
or gateway of Indian temples : both those which Fergusson 
classifies as " Indo-Aryan "—a type which now belongs to 
Northern India — and those which he labelled " Dravidian." 
The former, PI. VIII, a, with the naubat-khina over it, roofed 
in Bengali fashion, is clearly related to the town gateway of 
ancient India built of brick or stone with a wooden super- 
structure, as in PI. VI. 

A careful study of the facade of the great hall or mandapam 
of the temple of Virtlpaksha at Pattadakal (PI. VIII, b), one 
of the earliest of the so-called Dravidian type now extinct, will 
show a similar relationship between it and the fortified town 
walls of ancient India. The treatment of the walls, which are 
divided at regular intervals into pilastered bays each containing 
the shrine of a deity, is structurally based upon the " embattled 
fret," like the brick and stone walls which surrounded an Indo- 
Aryan fortified village or town : the walls are crowned with an 
entablature which is a close adaptation in stone of the ancient 
superstructure with the vaulted roof, which gave shelter to its 
Kshatriya defenders. Even the sun-windows of the traditional 
Bengali design are reproduced as decorative features on the 
stone chhaja. Over the entrance-porch, which may be taken 
as the type of an ancient Indian town gateway in localities 
where stone was the usual building material, the naubat-khana 
appears as usual, only employed here for purely ornamental 
purposes. 

In the Ramayana the word gopuram is used in the sense 
of a town gateway, and the meaning of it, "cow fort," or shelter, 
also gives a clue to its secular origin in the daily life of an Indian 
village. The medieval temple gopurams are not cattle-shelters ; 
but it is easy to imagine that in the ancient Aryan village 
communities the gate through which the cattle went to their 
pastures would be called the " cow-gate," and that in case of a 



32 THE ARYAN DHARMA 

hostile raid they would be first driven to the " cow-fort " for 
safety. And as the routine of daily life became recognised as 
the dharma of Aryan religion, the forms and names of secular 
things sanctified by immemorial usage in the Aryan family 
were woven into the ritual of the pious Hindu. In India, re- 
ligion is never regarded as external to secular life, but as its 
consecration and illumination. 



PLAIli VI tl 




A. i;ati,\\av of a mohkun kknauks tkmi'Lk 




u. GATEWAY OF IF.MI'Li; A'l I'ATTAUAKAL (EIGHTH CF;NTUI!Y) 
ANCIENT AND MOnF:KN TV.UPLK GATEWAYS 



32] 



CHAPTER III 

FERGUSSON's classifications of style — DIVINE WORSHIP 

IN ANCIENT INDIA THE VILLAGE SHRINE IN ASOKA'S 

TIME THE INSPIRATION OF INDO-ARYAN ART 

Before proceeding to analyse further the structure and sym- 
bolism of Indian temple-architecture, it is absolutely necessary 
for the student to make a clean sweep of all the labels and 
systems of classification by which Western archaeologists have 
agreed to mystify the subject. The reasons for rejecting them 
will, I hope, become clear later on. The " styles " of Fergusson, 
whether they are labelled Buddhist, Jaina, or Hindu, or " Indo- 
Aryan," " Chalukyan," or " Dravidian," are classifications all 
more or less false as history and misleading as indications of 
derivation. Fergusson's great pioneer work was fatally biassed 
by the fundamental misconception that the history of Indian 
sculpture, which is the history of Indian temple-building, from 
the third century a.d. was " written in decay," ' and by his total 
failure to read the symbolic language of Indian art. His theory 
that the distribution of the Hindu temples with the typical 
sikhara, or curvilinear spire, may be taken to indicate the 
limits of "the Dasyu province'" is grotesque; and to treat 
Buddhism, Jainism, and Hinduism as separate religious factions 
indicating so many different epochs of Indian architecture is not 
less opposed to all historical evidence. 

The history of Indian civilisation is the history of its village 

1 " History of Indian Architecture" (2nd edit. 19 10), Introduction, p. 36. 
' Introduction, p. 14. 
3 33 



34 INDIAN SELF-GOVERNMENT 

communities, which embraced within their pale many schools 
of thought differing in philosophical theories, yet all having 
their common root in the life of the village and in the Vedic 
philosophy, which remained the motive power of its social and 
intellectual progress even when teachers arose, like the Buddha, 
who disputed the efficacy of sacrificial rites and the divine 
authority which the Brahmans attributed to the Vedas. 

The Indian village always remained the political unit of 
the state throughout the centuries when dynasty after dynasty 
succeeded one another in building empires upon that founda- 
tion, until the foundation itself was recklessly broken up to 
make a new one after modern Western models. Its wonderful 
organisation was the true secret of India's recuperative power 
when one horde followed another in ravaging the land, or when 
the continued failure of the monsoon rains brought desolation 
and famine. The working of the secular bureaucratic ma- 
chinery, which has been substituted for a system of self- 
government probably the most perfect the world has ever 
known and consecrated by the religious sentiment of the Indian 
people, may justly excite the astonishment of the world. It is 
an amazing experiment based upon the same ignorance of 
Indian history which inspired the writings of Fergusson and 
his followers, but it has still to justify itself. 

Just as the root of Indian religion is to be found in the 
daily life of the people, rather than in dogmas or religious 
feasts and ceremonies, so the derivations of Indian temple- 
architecture must be looked for in the simple shrines of the 
Indian village, where Indian life continues to find its fullest 
and most characteristic expression, rather than in the splendid 
monuments by which royal devotees sought to establish the 
supremacy of their own particular cult ; though the sculptures 
of Asoka's monuments disclose some of the characteristics of 
Indian village shrines in the third century B.C. 



THE EVOLUTION OF ARYAN RELIGION 35 

The three different degrees of divine worship recognised 
in modern Hinduism — that of the Ishta-deva, or the special 
aspect of the Divine appropriate to the individual, the Ego ; 
the Grihya-deva, or the guardian deity of the household ; and 
the Gramya-deva, the patron deity of the village — represent 
the threefold religious responsibility of the Hindu — his duty 
to God, the family, and the state — the village standing for the 
whole body politic./ 

There were three analogous stages in the evolution of 
Aryan religion and of Indian religious building. First, the 
personal religion of the Aryan, which was a direct appeal to 
the Deity, and needed no shrines except those which God 
Himself provided ; next, his position as the head of a house- 
hold in which he was the family priest ; and, thirdly, his joint 
responsibility in the performance of tribal sacrifices. In early 
Vedic literature there is no trace of the relic or symbol worship 
represented in Asokan sculpture, nor evidence of shrines or 
temples being dedicated to the worship of any deity ; but it 
would be rash to assume from this negative evidence that all 
Vedic Aryans lived in a spiritual plane so much higher than 
the rest of humanity that they could dispense entirely with 
temples and symbols made by human hands. All that can be 
said definitely is that the philosophy of the pure Aryan re- 
ligion, though it recognised many different manifestations of 
divine power in nature, was essentially monotheistic, and as 
much opposed to image worship as the Puritanism of Christi- 
anity and of Islam. It is this aspect of Aryan religion which 
is represented in the Buddhist sculpture of Asoka's time. 

In pre-Buddhistic times the Kshatriyas, or fighting Aryans, 
recognised no priestly intermediary between themselves and the 
Deity. The Kshatriya head of a household was the sole ex- 
ponent of the religious traditions of his race, and the Brah- 
mans, who were a special class versed in sacrificial lore, held 



36 THE EVOLUTION OF ARYAN RELIGION 

an inferior social position ; they were perhaps originally only 
the attendants at tribal sacrifices who chanted the Vedic hymns 
and were charged with, minor duties, such as the care of sacri- 
ficial vessels. But in course of time the increasing complica- 
tion of sacrificial rites and the supreme importance of a correct 
performance of them increased the influence of the Brahman 
in the Kshatriya household, and made him the family priest. 
But the Aryan religion remained an exclusive one, the rites of 
which were jealously guarded as tribal secrets. There was no 
missionary propaganda among the early Aryan invaders of 
India, but elaborate precautions were taken to prevent the re- 
ligion of the Aryan household and tribe being degraded by con- 
tact with non-Aryan allies, whose gross idolatry was anathema 
to the Vedic seers, and whose ignorance of Vedic ritual might 
spoil the efficacy of tribal sacrifices and bring dire disaster upon 
the whole community. 

It is obvious, however, that as the Aryans gradually settled 
down to agricultural pursuits on the plains of India and or- 
ganised themselves into peaceful village communities of which 
they formed the aristocracy, this intellectual and spiritual 
exclusiveness could not long be maintained. Social intercourse 
and intermarriage with non-Aryans would bring pagan rites 
into the Aryan household, and the federation of many 
different tribes under the leadership of a warrior of great re- 
nown as their Raja, or king, would likewise widen the boundaries 
of the Aryan body politic. It must have occurred to many 
Aryan thinkers, even before the time of Buddha, that the 
narrow exclusive policy which confined the light of pure 
religion to an aristocratic caste would inevitably fail to preserve 
intact the precious spiritual inheritance of the Aryan race. 
The propaganda of Asoka was, therefore, not to create an 
entirely new starting-point for Aryan religion, but to use the 
doctrines of the Kshatriya prince, Sakiya Muni, as a means 



VILLAGE SHRINES 



37 



of placing it upon a wider social and spiritual basis— that of 
the Sangha, or community, instead of the household or tribe. 
Thus the simple shrine which served for the religious rites of 
the Indo-Aryan village grew into the cathedral church of the 
Buddhist Sangha. 

There are many representations of village shrines in Aso- 
kan sculptures. PI. IX, a, shows a typical one from Bharhut, 
which proves that the Indian village shrine of the third cen- 
tury B.C. already contained all the constructive elements of the 
medieval Hindu temple. The main building was only a square 
or circular cell — such as might have 
served for the hut of a hermit, or yogi — 
covered by a dome, doubtless constructed 
with a wooden or bambu framework. ' It 
contained sacred symbols which were 
the objects of worship. This cell corre- 
sponds to the garbha-griha, or holy of 
holies, of a medieval Hindu temple. In 
front of it was a verandah covered by 
the usual Indian chhaja, which served 
as a shelter for the two guardians of the 
shrine, human or divine, who are shown 
standing in front of it. This is the primitive form of the 
antarala, or inner chamber, of the later Hindu temple (fig. 12). 
In front of this, again, is the hall for the worshippers, the 
mandapam of the Hindu Silpa-sastras, covered by the typical 
Bengali roof. 

The symbolic meaning of the railing enclosing the shrine, 
which is the prototype of the plinth of a Hindu temple, has been 
already explained. It is the rail of the ancient Vedic sacrifices, 
which showed that the place was holy ground. As in the rail 
and toran of the stdpa, the secular origin of such a village 
shrine and of each division of the Buddhist and Hindu temple 



garhha-griha 



antar&la 



mandapam 




Wl-Jni i^TW 

Fig. 12. — Typical Plan of a 
Hindu Temple. 



38 VILLAGE SHRINES 

J can be easily traced. The familiar name kuti, or house, given 
to such a shrine is sufficient indication. It was originally the 
hut or cell of some holy man, a hermit, yogi, or rishi of great 
fame in the village, in which his staff, water-vessel, and begging- 
bowl would be venerated as memorials after his death. The 
sanctity of the man would cling to his hut, but the name given 
to it in the Asokan sculptures originally meant nothing more 
than that it was the house of a particular hermit or yogi. As, 
however, hero-worship gradually developed into definite 
religious cults such as Buddhism and Jainism, the house of 
the saint came to be regarded literally as the House of God. 

Ordinarily the hut, with its verandah in front or all round 
it, would become one of the village shrines, the verandah shelter- 
ing some other religious devotee, perhaps a chela, or disciple of 
the deceased, who took charge of it. But when such a shrine 
became famous as a place of pilgrimage, a hall, or mandapam, 
which Fergusson calls a porch, was placed in front of it for the 
accommodation of the worshippers. The simplest form of the 
mandapam was an open pavilion supported by four or more 
pillars and roofed, according to the character of the local build- 
ing materials, with bambu and thatch in Bengali fashion, or by 
a more permanent structure of timber carpentering, covered 
perhaps by skins, or by clay and plaster, or otherwise by flat 
slabs of stone arranged in successive tiers one over the other, 
as shown in fig. 13. 

In all cases the model for the temple mandapam was that 
of the village assembly-hall, or mote-house, which was at 
the same time the local council-chamber, court-house, music- 
hall, theatre, and school. It was here that the village council 
gathered to discuss local affairs, to settle disputes, and decide 
upon the punishment of offenders against the traditional laws 
of the community. It was here that the villagers gathered in 
the evening to listen to the recitation of the national Aryan 



PLATE IX 




A. FROM THE BHARHUT SCULPTURES 




B. nCrRGA SHRixE, mAmallapuram 




C. FKOM THE BHARHUT SCULPTURES 




iaa.FiFi^i^v i^. ]g 






r r r 

D. FROM THli BHAKHUT SCULPTURES 

VILLAGE SHRINES IN ANCIENT INDIA 



38] 



THE MANDAPAM 



39 



epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata ; to take part in 
musical festivals, and to listen to the tales of the V\\\2.gtkathak, 
or story-teller. It was here, also, that by listening to the 
learned disputations between the pandits of the village, or of 
wandering ascetics versed in the spiritual lore of the Aryan 
sages, that the Indian peasant, illiterate on<ly in the narrowest 
technical sense, acquired that familiarity with abstruse philo- 




Fig. 13. — Construction of the Domes of a Temple Mandapam : (a) with concentric rings, 
(ti) with slabs laid diagonally. 

sophical speculations which sometimes astonishes the Euro- 
pean who tries to penetrate beneath the surface of Indian life. 
All this fine traditional culture is being entirely swept away in 
British India and in "progressive" native states by systems 
of education devised in the offices of Anglo-Indian cities, as 
far removed from real Indian life as Manchester and Birming- 
ham, which destroy the spirituality of Indian life, turn the 
village craftsmen into city clerks, and uproot the whole founda- 
tion of Indian civilisation, based upon a far more perfect 



40 ANTIQUITY OF HINDU CRAFT TRADITIONS 

conception of law and order than that which they seek to 
establish. 

The Manasira, as summarised by Rim Raz, contains 
several directions regarding the placing of village shrines, but 
the question arises as to whether it is permissible to assume 
that this part of Hindu craft-tradition is as ancient as the Bud- 
dhist sculptures of Bharhut and Sanchi. Rim Riz infers that 
it cannot be, because among these directions are some which 
place " the objectsworshipped by Jainas and Bauddhas" outside 
the village. But I venture to think that he is mistaken in 
assuming that there is any sectarian contempt or disparagement 
implied in this passage. It simply records the fact that the 
principal object of veneration for Jains and Buddhists was the 
stdpa which originally belonged to the cremation or burial 
ground, outside the village pale. The provision made for Jain 
and Buddhist worship in this Silpa-sastra, and the fact that 
shrines of Durgi are placed in the same category, are sufficient 
proof that there is no sectarian feeling in the injunction. 

One of Fergusson's most fatal errors was his conclusion 
that the symbolism of Buddhist art was more ancient than that 
of orthodox Brahmanism, instead of being, as we shall presently 
see, entirely derived from it. Brahmi, Vishnu, and Siva are 
philosophical concepts which have their root in the earliest 
religious ideas of the Aryan race, and the blunder of dating the 
history of Hindu temples from about the seventh century a.d.,^ 
instead of from the earliest origins of Indian religious building, 
has put archaeological research on the wrong track ever since it 
was accepted as a truism on Fergusson's authority. 

Primd facie, it is wholly improbable that the philosophical 
speculations connected with the three positions of the sun in 
the heavens which are fundamental to all Indo-Aryan religious 
belief should have remained without concrete artistic symbols 

^ Fergusson, vol. ii. p. 89. 



ANTIQUITY OF HINDU CRAFT TRADITIONS 41 

for so many centuries. The fact that the earliest have not 
hitherto been discovered is only an instance of how a false 
premiss may obscure the mental vision of experts ; but when 
the fine work of the Indian master-builder in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries has entirely escaped the notice of Anglo- 
Indians, it is natural to expect that they should often lose their 
way in more remote fields of observation. 

" No one," says Fergusson, " can accuse the pure Aryans 
of building temples at all, or of worshipping images of Siva or 
Vishnu." ' He ignores such passages in the Mahabharata as 
that in Bhishma Vadha Parva, sect, cxiii. " : " The idols of the 
Kuru King in his temples tremble and dance and weep." The 
Saivism and Vaishnavism which run through the whole of 
the Hindu epics Fergusson treats as modern corruptions of 
the " pure Aryan faith " as expounded in the Vedas, and explains 
away the evidence which conflicts with his statements as falsi- 
fications of the Hindu sacred texts made by the wily Brahman 
of medieval times. But the architectural theories which he 
brought forward as evidence break down at every point on close 
examination. I hold no brief for Hindu theologians. All 
schools of theology write history from a theological rather than 
a scientific standpoint ; but when one considers how Hindu 
religious traditions were handed down from one generation to 
another, the probabilities of any extensive deliberate falsifica- 
tion seem to be very remote. It is easy to falsify a written 
statement of which only a few copies are made, but that a 
national oral tradition, the precision of which was scientifically 
maintained by a most elaborate mnemonic system in which 
every word and syllable was counted, could be deliberately falsi- 
fied by a few unscrupulous priests is less credible than the 
assumption that amateur archaeologists sometimes make fatal 
mistakes. 

J " Indian Architecture " (revised edition), vol. i. p. 42- ^ Roy's translation. 



42 BRAHMA and VISHNU SHRINES 

When the Manasara Silpa-sistra gives directions for the 
placing of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva shrines in the Indian 
village, and defines their relations to those of Buddhist and 
Jaina sttlpas, there is no reason why it should not be accepted 
as a tradition as old as any in the history of Indian building, 
provided that there is no positive evidence to the contrary to be 
found in ancient monuments. But it is necessary to remember 
that the Silpa-sastras are technical, and not sectarian works, 
and that the terms used must therefore be considered in their 
technical sense only. It is just at this point that archaeolo- 
gists of Fergusson's school have gone astray. 

A " Brahmi " shrine which the Manasara directs to be 
placed at the meeting of the four crossways in the centre of the 
village (see fig. 4) is a cell, square in plan, with its walls front- 
ing the four cardinal points, and an entrance on each side. The 
sectarian worship to which it is devoted maybe Buddhist, Jain, 
Vaishnavaite, or Saivaite ; in itself it is only a cosmic symbol 
which is common to all sects. 

A " Vishnu " shrine, according to the Manasira, has one 
entrance, always facing the east, except when dedicated to the 
Narasinha (Man-lion) incarnation of Vishnu, in which case it 
was to be built outside the village, with its entrance turned 
away from it. In this exception there may be some old tradition 
of a Brahman or Kshatriya hero's success in warding off a great 
danger to the whole Indo-Aryan community. The special 
characteristic of a "Vishnu" shrine is the curvilinear spire, or 
sikhara — a symbol of Vishnu's pillar, standard, or of his holy 
Mountain — which Fergusson took as the typical feature of 
his " Indo-Aryan " style," though he left the origin of it 
unexplained. 

The key to this question lies in the symbolism, which can 
be most conveniently reserved for a separate chapter. Here it 
is only necessary to mention one fact which goes far to show 



VISHNU SHRINES 43 

that the "Vishnu " shrine is as ancient as any other — viz. that 
miniature shrines of this type are constantly being dug up at 
Sarnath and other ancient Buddhist sites, side by side with 
the miniature stdpas which were the special symbols of the 
Buddhists and Jains. For reasons which are given below it is 
necessary to reject Professor Macdonell's theory ' of the deri- 
vation of the sikhara from the stdpa, to which I subscribed 
previously.^ The constructive principle was the same in both, 
but the symbolism of the stdpa was different. 

The most noteworthy example of a " Vishnu " shrine, and 
one of the earliest now existing, is the famous Buddhist temple 
of Bodh-Gayi, built in honour of the Bodhi tree (Vishnu's 
tree), and of Buddha as the Upholder of the Universe. Not 
many years ago the possession of the shrine was the subject 
of a great controversy in which the Government of Bengal 
opposed the claims of the Mahant of a neighbouring Vaishna- 
vaite monastery to its custody. The official experts seem to 
have misapprehended the historical aspects of the case, and, as 
so frequently happens when history is misread, led the Govern- 
ment into a false position with regard to the religious traditions 
of India. 

As a " Vishnu " shrine may be Buddhist, so it may also be 
Saivaite, for Siva to Saivaites is Brahmi, Vishnu, and Siva. 
It is the image for which the shrine is built which determines 
the form of the latter. There is some internal evidence as to 
the antiquity of the M^nasara traditions in this statement, for 
image-worship was not generally recognised by philosophical 
Hinduism until the rise of the Mahayana school of Buddhism 
about the beginning of the Christian era. But shrines for 
Brahmi, Vishnu, and Siva were certainly built before this time. 
/ A " Siva " shrine, in the technical sense, has one entrance 

^ "Journal of the Royal Society of Arts," Mar. 5, 1909. 

2 " Indian Architecture : Its Psychology, Structure, and History," 1913, p. 98. 



44 SIVA SHRINES 

facing west, or towards the setting sun, and the roof is of what 
Fergusson calls the Dravidian type — i.e. it is crowned by a 
dome, evidently derived from the sttlpa, but in all buildings 
now extant reduced to a solidly built symbol. The coincidence 
that "Vishnu" shrines are chiefly confined to Northern India, 
and those of the " Siva " type to the south, has nothing to do 
with " Dasyu provinces," ' or with any ethnological question. 
It is explained by the fact that the schools of Hindu theology 
which take Vishnu for their Ishta-deva^ are in the great majority 
in the north, while those which are the exponents of Saiva 
philosophy, taking Siva as \h€vc Ishta-deva, predominate largely 
in the south. Fergusson's conjecture that Saivism is " an 
aboriginal superstition assimilated by the Brahmans" ' is pure 
nonsense. 

The derivation of the Hindu temple from the rat has, or 
cars, of Aryan warriors, on account of the poetic imagery used 
in the Ramayana and Mah^bhirata, and the attempts made by 
medieval builders to give literary imagination concrete form 
by placing stone wheels on the sides of the vimina, as in the 
Sdrya temple at Kandrak, has, pace Dr. Coomaraswamy and 
other writers, no historical foundation. It is a clear case of 
putting the cart before the horse. The temple car on which 
the sacred image was carried in procession could not have been 
introduced into the temple ritual before the image itself became 
part of it — i.e. before the first centuries before and after the 
Christian era — and all the constructive types, as well as the 
symbolism connected with them, if Indian temple building had 
been developed before that time. There is no instance of 
viminas being made like rathas, or cars, before the tenth 
century. 

1 Fergusson's " History of Architecture " (new edit.), Introduction, p. 14. 

^ See ante, p. 35. 

* " History of Architecture" (new edit.), Introduction, p. 42. 



ARYAN INSPIRATION IN INDIA 45 

It is equally fallacious to assume, as Dr. Coomaraswamy 
has also done,' that Indo-Aryans borrowed most of their 
architectural ideas from the non-Aryan tribes which became 
subject to them. There is absolutely no historical evidence that 
this was the case, but per contra there is strong reason for 
believing that all the higher culture of the ancient Indian vil- 
lage communities, including their organisation, arts and crafts, 
was directly due to Aryan inspiration, or to the practical adap- 
tation of Aryan philosophical speculations to the concerns of 
daily life. I do not mean that the Aryans found India an 
artistic desert or peopled by primitive savages. The more or 
less civilised tribes whose immigrations preceded theirs may 
possibly have acquired their culture, directly or indirectly, from 
earlier Aryan sources ; they may have represented an earlier 
stratum of Aryan civilisation. This would explain why the 
Aryans of Vedic India found it comparatively easy to adapt 
themselves to their Indian environment, without establishing 
impassable social barriers between themselves and their dark- 
skinned neighbours ; for the exclusiveness of the caste system 
did not exist in the sixth century b.c. or for many centuries 
after the time of Buddha. Indian civilisation is, like Hindu 
sacrificial vessels, an amalgam of many metals ; but the fire 
which fused them and separated the dross was the Aryan genius 
— the philosophy of the Vedas. If it has once more to go into 
the melting-pot, those who tear up its foundations should at 
least study its history carefully from its own standpoint, and 
equip themselves with sure knowledge of the materials they are 
using to form the new India, otherwise they are mere empirics 
in statecraft, playing with forces which they do not understand 
and which they are unable to control. 

1 "Arts and Crafts of India and Ceylon," p. 107. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE STUPA AND ITS SYMBOLISM 

The previous chapters will enable the reader to put in its 
proper place in Indian architectural history, and in the life of 
ancient India, the interesting structure which I will now pro- 
ceed to discuss, the sttlpa or funeral monument, which Fer- 
gusson took for his starting-point. The sttipa itself, being 
originally only a tomb or cenotaph, never came within the 
enclosure of an Indian village except as a symbol ; it belonged 
to the cemetery or cremation-ground outside. It was only 
when it had been consecrated as a religious symbol, like so 
many other structural elements in Indian building, that it be- 
came, like the village shrine, associated with life as well as 
death and was used to mark places made sacred by the events 
in the life of the saint whom it commemorated, and also as 
an ideograph in a hieratic language employed decoratively in 
Buddhist-Hindu art in the same way as Arabic and other 
script was afterwards used by Muhammadan craftsmen. 

The sttlpa did not originate with Buddhism, nor was it 
solely associated with that aspect of Indo-Aryan religious 
thought, though the effect of Asoka's ardent propaganda of 
the cult of Sikiya Muni made the Buddhist stdpa much more 
common than any other. The Jains, and probably all other 
sects in Asoka's time, had their sttipas. The former place the 
earliest of the 24 Tirthankaras, or saints, commemorated by 
their sttipas, as far back as the Vedic Rishis ; and doubtless 

the oldest stdpas were not symbols of a religious cult, but 

46 



THE STUPA 47 

memorials of the dead associated with the practice of burial 
instead of cremation. It may be observed that even in the 
present day the body of a Brahman who has taken the vow of 
a Sannydsin and retired from the world to devote himself to 
a religious life is not cremated after death but thrown into a 
sacred river — the idea being that it has been made so pure 
by spiritual exercises that the purificatory rite of cremation is 
superfluous. Another exception to the rule of cremation is 
that of a Hindu victim to small-pox, in which case Sitala, 
the dread goddess who has possessed the body, is supposed 
to claim it from Agni, the god of fire. Probably the imminent 
risk of infection for relatives whose duty it was to prepare a 
corpse for the funeral pile was the motive of this custom. 

It seems likely that the earliest Aryan immigrants into 
India also disposed of their dead by burial, marking the grave 
with the tumulus, which afterwards developed into the structural 
sttlpa, and that they only adopted cremation after they had 
settled down to life under tropical conditions, for obvious 
sanitary reasons. Certainly in Asoka's time the sttlpa was 
generally, like the modern chattri, only a cenotaph, or reliquary. 

As the purpose of this work is architectural rather than 
archaeological, it is unnecessary to repeat the detailed descrip- 
tions of the existing remains of early Buddhist and Jain sttipas, 
dating from about the fifth century B.C., which are given by 
Fergusson and other writers. The plan (fig. 9) and the section 
of the great Sanchi sttlpa (fig. 14) will indicate the usual form 
and construction, and PI. X the appearance of one of them from 
the outside, as shown in the Amaravati sculptures. The latter, 
however, representing the development of Indo-Aryan religion 
in the second or third century a.d., belongs to the Mahiyana 
school of Buddhism, but the form and structure of the sttlpa 
and enclosing rail remains practically the same as in Asoka's 
time. The chaitya of the Kdrl^ Chapter-house, PI. XIX, 



48 



THE STUPA 



indicates better the austerity of early Buddhist ritual, and, 
making allowance for the fact that the rails are only carved in 
relief on the face of the sttlpa instead of enclosing it, one can 
realise from it the exact appearance of one of the 84,000 sttipas 
which Asoka is said to have built. 

Fergusson and other archaeologists have failed to remark 
that the sttlpa was not a special product of Buddhist and Jain 
religious ritual and dogma ; as it existed in Asoka's time it 
embodied the symbolism and ritual of all Aryan religion directly 
derived from the Vedas. 



s . 




'^^^^^^^^^^^^^555^?^?5:^^;?;^^^^^^^^^^^^W' 



Fig. 14— Section of the Great Stflpa at Sincht, showing Rail and Gateways 
(from Fei^usson's " History "). 

The four gateways marking the cardinal points were re- 
productions of the gateways of the Indo-Aryan village. The 
rail was the same as that which enclosed the sacrificial area in 
the Vedic sacrifices. The Buddha, as an inspired Kshatriya 
teacher, disputed the Brahman interpretation of the Vedas and 
the efficacy of Brahmanical sacrifices ; but his followers, whatever 
their varha or colour might be, worshipped him with the im- 
memorial rites which belonged to all who came within the pale 
of the Indo-Aryan village community. 

The three bars of the rail meant the three positions of the 
sun at its rising, at its zenith, and at its setting — and hence a 
spiritual defence, for these were the three times of daily prayer — 



rr.Ai !•: x 



\ .^!^"S*<*^ 






;^^^^>■^^ 3x-^ 



r^- 






1^ 







'^0Mm^ 4'^^"-wt ^»i^i^'; 




^ ::3£.^:^'^-e.-:- j^ 






h-'Jmi ,. 



-^ 



^.ri 






43] 



A STLJI'A (fR(jiM IHH; A,MAKA\A-|i SCI' LP IT'REs) 



THE STUPA 49 

only the Buddhists called them Buddha, Sangha, and Dharma, 
instead of Brahm^, Vishnu, and Siva, according to the orthodox 
Brahman formula. Four bars to the Brahman meant the four 
Vedas, the depository of the sacred traditions of the Aryan race; 
the Buddhists explained them as the four events in the life of 
the Blessed One — the Nativity, the Enlightenment, the First 
Sermon at Benares, and His Death, or Pari-Nirvana. The 
splendid open lotus flowers carved upon the rail (PI. XIII, a) 
were symbols and votive offerings which had the same meaning 
for all schools of Aryan philosophy and religion. The rite of 
pradakshina, the circumambulation of the sttlpa, which the 
pilgrims performed, was the ancient Aryan rite which was 
repeated every day round the enclosure of every Indian village. 
And in Asoka's time all the beautiful imagery of Aryan poetry 
which first found expression in the Vedic hymns was woven 
into the fabric of the stdpa. It was no longer a funereal mound, 
but planned like the Indian village on the lines of the cosmic 
order which the Divine Artificer Himself had drawn. The 
dome was the symbol of the sky, the blue lotus flower en- 
veloping the earth with its inverted petals. The group of five 
columns which rose from the base of the dome at the point 
opposite the four gateways marked the arms of the cosmic cross, 
like the main streets of an Aryan village, and represented the 
five cosmic jewels, earth, air, fire, water, and ether. The 
reliquary, at the crown of the dome, was the Vedic altar of burnt 
sacrifice; the rail pattern upon it reproducing in a decorative form 
the actual rail which enclosed the sacrificial area, and also the 
village shrine. The umbrella over the reliquary, originally 
part of the royal insignia of the Kshatriya Prince Siddhartha, 

^ The Vedic connotation of this symbolism is tp be found in the five posts of sacrifice, 
i.e. the four marking out the sacrificial area and the central stake or altar, or the four corner 
pillars which upheld the universe with Vishnu's pillar or tree in the centre. Or again, the 
four corner posts of the village enclosure with the council tree in the centre. 

4 



50 



BUDDHIST SYMBOLISM 



was transformed into the pyramidal Tee (fig. 15), which was only 
the Buddhist and Jain equivalent symbol for the mystic tree of 
Vishnu, the cosmic tree, the tree of wisdom, and the trysting 
tree of the village ; for all Indian art derives ultimately from 
the life of the Aryan village. 

Fergusson's ignorance of the symbolism of Indian art led 
him to interpret the sculptures of Buddhist stdpas as represen- 
tations of "tree and serpent worship." Monsieur A. Foucher's 

brilliant analysis of the sculptures of the 
Sanchi gateway disposes of this fallacy, 
which has been the source of much mis- 
understanding of Indian art and religion. 
He shows that these sculptures, instead of 
representing the primitive animistic cult 
of wild aboriginal followers of the Buddha, 
really embody the esoteric teaching of 
Hinayana Buddhism, which was based 
upon the true spirit of Vedic Aryan philo- 
sophy in refusing to permit the representa- 
tion of the Deity in human form. Hero- 
worship was a popular sentiment which 
could not be ignored by Aryan religious 
teachers; it went down to the very founda- 
tions of Aryan religion, for the Kshatriya 
chieftain was the spiritual leader of his tribe before the Brahman 
hierarchy became a political power and developed the philo- 
sophical teaching of the Vedas ; and, even then, the fighting 
Kshatriya often overcame the Brahman with his own weapons 
in philosophic encounters. Both the Buddha and Krishna, 
the hero of the Mahabharata, were Kshatriyas. It was not to 
be expected that the abstruse speculations of Aryan philosophy 
could be made intelligible to the whole Indo-Aryan community, 
composed of so many different intellectual and racial elements ; 




Fig. 15.— The Tee of a 

Stflpa. 








mm: 



fca--& 















i^vf^ 






^i 










o 



f- K 



-I 

o 







BUDDHIST SYMBOLISM 51 

but a popular sentiment like that of hero-worship could be 
spiritualised and prevented from sinking into gross supersti- 
tion and idolatry. That was the motive of the ritual represented 
by the hieratic sculptures of the Asokan sttipas. Hinayana 
Buddhism forbade the worship of the great Teacher as a 
divinity: it permitted the veneration of the symbols which 
represented the events of His life on earth and the principles 
of His teaching. It would not tolerate the superstition of 
Brahmanical sacrificial rites, but it allowed the Vedic altar to 
be used as a table for the symbols of the Buddhist Law, as a 
mound upon which to plant the Bodhi tree (fig. 16), or as a 
casket for the relics of saints. 

That is exactly what is represented in the sculp- 
tures of Bharhut and Sinchi. As a symbol of the 
Nativity the Buddhist sculptor used the figure of 
Ushas, the Vedic Dawn-maiden, otherwise Lakshmi 
or Sri, the Goddess of Good Fortune, Abundance, 
and Fertility (PI. XI, fig. a). She rises from the 
cosmic ocean standing upon Brahma's lotus flower, fig. le.-Bodhi 
and two elephants, symbols of the rain-cloud, pour TreewJthi 
lustrations over her. Seven different kinds of trees, 
with Vedic altars as thrones of the gods placed in front of them 
(PI. XI, fig. b), symbolised the Second Event in the Buddhist 
sacred cycle, the Illumination under the Bodhi Tree, which was 
said to have taken place in seven different lives of the Tathagata, 
and represented, as Professor Rhys Davids has explained, the 
attainment of Nirvana, the zenith of spiritual consciousness. 
The Third Event was the preaching of the first Sermon at 
Benares, the turning of the Wheel of the Law. 

It is easy to understand why the wheel appealed to the 
understanding of every Indian as an appropriate symbol of the 
whole teaching of Buddha, which was not a dogma of religion 
but a rule of life. The wheel was not only an ancient Vedic 




52 BUDDHIST SYMBOLISM 

symbolof thesun,as representingthe cosmic soul-force, but every 
Aryan in performing the rite of pradakshini round his native 
village — starting from the eastern gate and following the path 
of the sun along the Road of Auspiciousness to its zenith at 
the southern gate, its setting at the western gate, its descent 
into the nether world until it reached its nadir at the northern 
gate, whither the sons of King Sagara' pursued the sacrificial 
horse which had escaped from their charge, and, finally, re- 
j turning to his starting-point in the east — was symbolically 
turning the wheel of the divine law and meditating upon the 
mystery of life and death. 

The Fourth Event, represented by a sculpture of the sttipa 
(Plate XI, fig. d), was the Death of the Buddha, and the com- 
pletion of the cycle of rebirths in his Pari-Nirvana, Reincarna- 
tion was symbolised by the serpent, which periodically sheds 
its skin and appears with a new body to resume the turning of 
the wheel of life. 

The Buddhist Law was only the spiritual staff which should 
help the Aryan villager over the obstacles and pitfalls of the way 
of life. It was not any dogmatic solution of the riddle of the 
universe, but a practical way of salvation which appealed 
strongly to the deep religious instinct of a people oppressed 
by the burden of the extravagant ritual of Brahmanical sacrifices. 
The inspiration of Buddha would hardly have touched the 
imagination of all classes so deeply had his teaching cut across 
the most cherished religious convictions of India. The almost 
instant and universal success of Asoka's missionary efforts must 

1 King Sagara prepared a horse-sacrifice, but the horse was stolen by the sage Kapila. 
The king's sixty thousand sons who had charge of it searched for it high and low, and at 
length discovered it in the regions below the earth, grazing by the side of the sage, who 
was wrapt in meditation. When attacked, Kapila burnt them all to ashes by the fire which 
flashed from his third eye— the eye of spiritual consciousness. A descendant of Sagara, by 
turning the waters of the Ganges on to their ashes, obtained the admission of their souls 
into heaven. 



THE SERPENT OF ETERNITY 53 

be attributed to the political genius of the Buddhist leaders in 
adapting their propaganda to the traditional religious observ- 
ances of Indian daily life. The thought of the nativity of 
Buddha as the sunrise, or dawn of a new spiritual life for every 
human being, quietly took the place of the original Brahmi 
concept, the Vedic Creator who opened the petals of the world- 
lotus. The Sangha, or the congregation of the faithful, meeting 
under the village council tree, was equivalent to Vishnu, the 
sun at noon — the Preserver whose mystic tree or pillar upheld 
the universe. Siva, symbolised by the sun at its setting and 
when below the horizon, who was the Dissolver of life and 
apotheosis of the Vedic philosophy of the cosmos, became 
Dharma — the Buddhist law of daily life — superseding the 
Brahman law of sacrificial rites, and pointing the way to Pari- 
Nirvana when the Ego, released from the chain of human 
existences, was merged in the cosmic ocean. Nirvana and 
Pari-Nirvana were the two ends of the upright arm of the 
cosmic cross, the pole or axis of the universe, which was 
Vishnu's pillar, or churning-stick, or Siva's lingam. It was 
worshipped by Buddhists as a mystic fiery pillar. 

The poets and philosophers of Vedic India pictured the 
night sky spanned by the Milky Way, with the seven bright 
planets of the Great Bear glittering athwart it, as Vishnu- 
Nariyana sleeping on the seven-headed Serpent of Eternity, 
whose coils encircled the universe. These planets had once 
been the seven great Rishis who taught the Aryans divine 
wisdom. Buddhist India adopted the same symbolism with a 
different connotation. The seven great Rishis were the seven 
Buddhas. The serpent was the cycle of countless existences 
through which they had at last attained to Pari-Nirvana. 
These were narrated in the jitakas, as told by village story- 
tellers on starlight nights under the mystic tree of Vishnu. 
The kathaks, or professional story-tellers, were probably the 

4* 



54 BUDDHIST PROPAGANDA 

most successful propagandists of Buddhism among the un- 
cultured non-Aryan masses ; for it is easy to believe that these 
delightful old-world tales appealed more strongly to popular 
imagination than the abstract philosophy of the Vedas, especi- 
ally as the doctrine taught by them relieved the people from 
the intolerable sacrificial ritual of the Brahmans. 

The Brahman philosopher taught his disciples as they 
went the daily round of the village to think of the four gates 
as the four Vedas.' The Buddhist teacher struck a more human 
note when he substituted the Four Events in the life of the 
Aryan hero, the Enlightened One ; and at the same time he 
respected the esoteric teaching of Vedic philosophy by in- 
venting a form of aniconic symbolism which met the natural 
desire of the artist to visualise his spiritual thoughts. When 
this symbolism is rightly understood, it is easy to read the 
sculptures of Bharhut and Sanchi as a narrative of the life of 
Sakiya Muni and his previous existences on earth, and also 
as an exposition of the teaching of the Hinayana school of 
Buddhism. The sculptures of Amaravati represent a later 
development of Buddhist philosophy when the prohibition of 
anthropomorphic symbolism was removed from Indo-Aryan 
religious ritual by the propagation of the tenets of the Mahayana 
school. 

1 Originally three, corresponding to the three bars of the Vedic sacrificial rail which 
appears in the Asokan stdpas. A fourth Veda — the Atharva — was subsequently recognised, 
and at Amaravati the sculpture frequently represents four bars in the rail. 



CHAPTER V 



SYMBOLISM 



THE LOTUS-LEAF ARCH, OR SUN-WINDOW — PILLARS, CAPITALS, 

AND BASES THE VISHNU STANDARD AND PILLAR — THE 

HOLY MOUNT THE SYMBOL OF DEATH 

It has been explained already that the Asokan arched window 
(fig. 17), commonly called " horseshoe " by Western writers — 
a form also applied to vaults and domes — was derived from the 
use of bent bambu, as in Bengali thatched roofs. The exquisite 






Fig. 17. — Sun- window of the 
Htnaylna School. 



Fig. 1 8. — Sun-window of the 
Mahaydna School. 



Fig. 19. — Mah^yana Sun- 
window used as a Shrine. 



symbolism, inspired by the poetry of the Vedic hymns, which 
was read into the structural use of it, was again that of the sun 
and of its floral emblem the lotus or water-lily ; it suggested 
the sun on the horizon in a cloudless sky rising or setting over 
sea, lake, or river. As a theological symbol, therefore, it 
stood for Brahm^, or Buddha, or Siva, and when image-worship 
gradually crept into Indo-Aryan ritual the arch became the 

55 



56 



SUN-WINDOWS 



aureole of a seated figure of the divinity, the form of which was 
associated in the mind of the devout with the lotus leaf. The 
outside line of the arched opening, following the curve of a 
village thatched roof, took the shape of a conventionalised leaf 
of the sacred pipal — the Bodhi tree (fig. 20). 

These sun-windows, as they may be called, in the oldest 
Indian buildings had no sculptured ornament, but in carved 
representations of them as symbols the ends of the purlins 

which supported the rafters of the roof 
were shown, and also, as a rule, the 
wooden screen or lattice whiqh filled 
them. Later on, at Ajanti and else- 
where, an elaboration of the symbolism 
was brought in (fig. 18). The outer edge 
on each side started at the springing 
from the mouth of a makara, a fish- 
dragon, which suggested the water or 
cosmic ocean from which the sun rose, 
and into which it sank at eventide : it 
was an emblem of the clouds or vapours 
which sometimes veiled, but never 
impaired, the glory of the sun.* At 
the pointed crown of the sun-window 
was carved the head of another dragon— Rahu, the demon 
of the eclipse — philosophically regarded as a manifestation 
of the tamasic quality of Siva which Vishnu, the Preserver, 
prevented from destroying the universe. Sometimes, when 
the sun-window was only a symbol, it was filled by a single 
head representing Siva, either in his sattvic or tamasic 

1 The makara was also the symbol of Kima-deva, the God of Love, whose eyes, like 
those of a fish, never closed, but were for ever gazing at the object of his desire : the 
antithesis of the blind god of Europe. To the Indian mind, closed eyelids, or the shutting 
out of sensual vision, suggest meditation and the opening of the third eye of spiritual 
consciousness. 




Fig. 20.— Leaf of the Pipal Tree 
(^Ficus religiosa). 




X 



<: 




< 

IE 
m 
S 
< 






z 














PILLARS 57 

aspect, as Avalokit^shvara— the Lord who looks down from 
above. 

The consecration of structural forms, originally derived 
from purely utilitarian uses, through this religious idealism was 
obviously the reason why the Vedic rail and the sun-window 
were retained as decorative motifs in the traditional canons of 
the Indian building craft long after their structural significance 
was lost sight of. They were ideographs of an art-language 
which, though incomprehensible by those outside the Indo- 
Aryan pale, was perfectly understood by the people whose 
religious sentiments it expressed. 

We will now see how this religious symbolism also deter- 
mined the decorative treatment of another essential structural 
feature in Indian building — the column, pier, or pillar. In 
Asokan and later Indian sculpture there are two kinds repre- 
sented : one is the dhwaja-stambha (flag-pole), or the Idt, used 
to mark sacred places, to carry inscriptions and symbols, and 
as lamp-standards ; the other is the structural form applied to 
the support of buildings, and subsequently, as in the classical 
" orders " of Europe, to their embellishment. The first kind 
is represented by the single pillars upon which Asoka inscribed 
his edicts, and by the pairs which, like the Boaz and Jachin 
of the Temple of Jerusalem, stood in front of the entrance to 
Buddhist and Jain sttipas and temples. They were originally 
the tribal ensigns or the standards of royalty, which were planted 
outside the entrance to the sacrificial area at the great horse- 
sacrifices in Vedic times. 

A quaint sculpture at Bharhut (fig. b, PI. XII) shows a 
female, probably Sri, or Lakhsmi, carrying Vishnu's standard 
surmounted by the mythical sun-bird Garuda. 

The Buddhist, Jain, and Brahmanical temple-pillar also 
derives its symbolic decorative treatment from the ancient 
Aryan sacrificial ritual in which gilded posts, " octagonal and 



58 



THE SYMBOLISM OF PILLARS 




smoothly planed " and decorated with pennons, served to mark 
out the holy ground. Ram Riz gives interesting details taken 
from the Manasira Silpa-sastra as to the ritualistic significance 
of different forms of pillars. A square-shafted one was asso- 
ciated with Brahma worship ; an octagonal 
one with that of Vishnu ; the circular or 
sixteen-sided one with Rudra-Siva as the 
Destroyer.' Translating this ascription 
into Buddhist terminology, it may be said 
that the square pillar stood for Buddha, an 
octagonal one for the Sangha, and a circular 
or sixteen-sided one for Dharma. A cylin- 
drical pillar without capital or base was 
dedicated to Chandra, the moon. 

In pillars or piers intended for struc- 
tural support and built up of three or more 
pieces, the capital, shaft, and base are all 
primarily structural forms, and the decora- 
tion should not impair, but rather em- 
phasise, the structural functions of each 
part. This principle was fully recognised 
by Indian craftsmen in applying their re- 
ligious symbolism to the forms of structural 
supports. Fig. 2 1 shows the type of capital 
y ' \ and base which appears in Asokan build- 

* ■ * ings; the structural and decorative elements 

in it, derived from the lotus flower and fruit, 
and from the sacrificial waterpot, prevailed 
in various combinations throughout the classic period of Indian 
architecture. 

In all Indo-Aryan religious ritual, from the earliest Vedic 




Fig. 21.— Vishnu Pillar from 
the Bharhut Sculptures. 



1 To s}mbolise the Trimflrti, or the Three Aspects of the Qne, all three forms are 
combined in one pillar, as in the great temple of Elephanta. 



SYMBOLISM OF THE LOTUS 59 

times, the fruit of Nelumbium speciosum, the sacred lotus of 
^gypt (fig. 22) has always been regarded as a symbol of the 
throne and footstool of the gods ; especially that of Brahma, 
the Creator, or the rising sun. The rosy petals enveloping it 
which opened at the first flush of morning light, were the robes 
of Ushas, the Dawn Maiden, who flung open the doors of the 
sky. This idea and the form of the fruit itself were skilfully 
adapted by the craftsmen of wood and stone to the supports of 
temples and other buildings. The profiles of the capital were 
modelled so as to suggest the fruit ; the petals turned down on 





Fig. 22.— Fruit of 
the Sacred Lotus, Ne- 
lumbium. 



Fig. 23. — Top of a Nepalese Box in Repouss6 
Brass, showing Lotus Flower with Turned-down 
Petals, and Fruit used as a Handle. 



to the shaft of the pillar formed the member to which Fer- 
gusson, not understanding the symbolism, gave the meaningless 
label " bell-shaped." In Asokan sculpture the lotus flower is 
very frequently represented with the petals turned down, so as to 
■disclose the fruit or seed-vessel, which has a special symbolic 
significance as the hiranya-garbha, or womb of the universe. 
Now, the fruit of the blue lotus, or, more strictly speaking, 
water-lily {NymphcBO), dedicated to the midday sun, and also 
that of the white Nymphcea (the flower of the moonlight sky), 

^ In the MahanirvinaTantra the mystic lotus flower of Brahma, which contains "the 
peaceful circle of earth," is said to have its four petals turned downwards. " The thousand- 
petalled lotus of knowledge " on the top of the holy Mount Meru, which is the dwelling- 
place of Para-Brahmi, is similarly described. 



6o THE WATER-LILY 

opening by night, had a different shape (fig. 24) and a somewhat 
different symbolic implication. It was the jar which contained 
the amrita, or elixir of immortality, the nectar of the gods ; 
and thus its form was adapted not only to sacrificial vessels, but 
to the ordinary Indian domestic water-pot, the lota. The shape 
of it was as admirably adapted for making a firm base to a pillar 
or column (fig. 21) as the form of the Nelumbium fruit was 
suitable for the structural purpose of the capital. 

The section of the water-lily fruit given in fig. 24 shows 
how its symbolic use was associated with form as well as colour, 
for within it is the mystic wheel containing the seeds of life. 





Fig. 24. — Fruit of Water-lily {Nymphaa) and Section showing 
the Mystic Wheel. 

which are scattered over the waters in which it grows like stars 
floating in the cosmic ocean. A fresco at Ajanta^ seems to 
suggest that wooden poles of garden pavilions were actually 
inserted into metal lotas firmly fixed in a stone, brick, or wooden 
base — a practice which might have arisen from the use of 
domestic water-vessels in street decorations for fixing up and 
keeping fresh young plantain and palm trees. The following 
passage in the Ummagga Jitaka, describing the preparations 
made for a royal procession, is interesting in this connection : 
" He also .strewed the ground with white sand and flowers of 
various kinds, and put brimming jars of water on either side 

1 See Griffiths, " Ajanta," vol. i. pi. 17. 





B. FKOM Till-. nilAHnUl .Si:ULl'TUKl':S 



A. FKOM THE S\NCHI SCULPTURES 




C. FKOM A FKESCO I'AINTT.NG AT AJANTA 

'IHE SACI:IJ> [X)IUS ANIJ Tfrp; W'ATICR-LILY 




THE HOLY MOUNT 6i 

of the roadway with cocoa-nut flowers and ornamental plantain 

trees." ' 

Another motif which is used both structurally and decora- 
tively in Indian art is a combination of the 
fruits of Nelumbium and Nymphcsa. This 
was applied to the domestic water-vessel, as 
in fig. 25, and also to the capitals of pillars 
for producing the form used at Elephanta 
and Ajanta, called by Fergusson " cushion- 
shaped " (fig. 26). It may be noted that an 
exaggeration of the torus to which the petals 
of Nelumbium are attached would produce a 

Fig. 25. -Indian Water- similar shape. 

vessel* ^ 

The most important architectural adapta- 
tions of the water-lily motif were Vishnu's standard, and the 
Vishnu shrine, with its sikhara, or spire, described at p. 63. 
Vishnu's standard, or pillar — otherwise the holy Mount Meru, 
the pivot of the universe — was represented 
by the stalk of the blue water-lily, its ensign 
being the fruit containing the mystic wheel, 
and its bright fluttering pennons the petals of 
the flower. It was often surmounted by some 
heraldic animal, by the wheel itself, or by 
Vishnu's eagle, Garuda, or by figures of the 
Devas, the Shining Ones who dwell aloft. 
The simplest form of it is that shown in fig. 2 1 , 
and in PI. XII, b and c. A very elaborate 
composite design is one of a pair of dhwaja- 
stambhas represented in the Amaravati sculp- ^'*Tempi^*piuar! ° 
tures placed on either side of the entrance to 
the sttlpa's procession path. It is reproduced in PI. XII, fig. a. 
At the foot is an empty throne, with two figures in adoration on 

^ p. 134, Yatawara's translation. 




62 SYMBOLISM OF VISHNU'S PILLAR 

either side of it. Behind the throne is the standard, the shaft 
built up of six fruits of the blue or white water-lily combined with 
mythical animals and figures. Five pairs of mounted figures, 
three pairs on lions and two on horseback, are ranged on either 
side of the shaft. They are probably the ten Visva-devas, or 
the ten chief powers controlling the forces of the universe. 
Above these deities, on either side of the shaft, a half-opened 
water-lily growing from it affords foothold to a female dancer, 
who, like the dancing Siva, probably symbolises the cosmic 
rhythm.^ 

The explanation of the symbolism of the whole stambha 
is no doubt that given in the Mahanirvana Tantra of the 
Seven Upper Spheres, described as a revelation of Siva. First, 
rising above the seven nether spheres of Patala,the under-world, 
is the Brahma Lotus, with its four petals turned downwards, 
the fruit of which is " the beautiful circle of earth." 

Over this is the blessed lotus, Bhima the Terrible, with 
six petals and an inner circle having four openings. The fruit 
of it is Bhuvaloka, the region of the air. 

Next above it is the rare flower of ten petals, Mahapadma, 
the heavenly lotus, containing within its fruit the fire element. 
The fourth is the transparent lotus of the Ether, with sixteen 
petals : its fruit is the abode of Viyu — Wind-force {vajra, elec- 
tric power). 

The fifth lotus is also transparent, with sixteen petals 
enclosing the fruit which is Jnana-loka, the abode of pure 
knowledge. 

The sixth is Gajna-padma, very rare, with two petals round 

' Incidentally the connection of these two water-lilies with this stambha proves that 
the melon-shaped forms which help to compose it, technically known as amalakas (from 
amala, pure), are really the fruit of Nymphaa, which was also taken for Lakshmi's jar 
holding the amrita of immortality. The importance of this fact for elucidating the sym- 
bolism of the sikhara of Vishnu's shrine will be seen below (p.- 63). The amalaka afld 
Lakshmi's jar are used generally as interchangeable symbols, as they are in this stambha. 



THE SIKHARA 63 

as the full moon. Within its fruit is the Chitamdni, the jewel 
of Thought, and here Siva dwells in bodily form as Brahma, 
with the divine swan Hamsa, a mystic word which being 
transposed becomes Saham — i am he. 

Crowning all is the vast lotus with a thousand shining 
turned-down petals, which contains the germs of thousand thou- 
sands of worlds yet unborn. It is the abode of para-brahma, 
and there is the formless and motionless one, maha-kali. "As 
the lightning is born from the cloud, and disappears within the 
cloud, so Brahma and all the gods take birth from kalI, and 
will disappear in kali who is the giver of nirvana." 

Now, the sikhara, or spire of Vishnu's shrine, which has 
been the subject of so much erratic archaeological conjecture, 
is only an application of the water-lily symbol to the roofing 
of the cell which contained the deity's image in any of its 
sectarian forms — Buddhist, Jain, Vaishnavaite, Saivaite, etc. 
It is a square cell covered by the " four-petalled lotus with 
turned-down petals " and surmounted by the amalaka, the 
fruit of the blue nymphaea which is Vishnu's ensign. Obviously 
it becomes absurd to classify Vishnu's shrines as " Indo- Aryan" 
and Siva shrines as " Dravidian," when both have a common 
origin as symbols of Indo- Aryan religion. The coincidence 
that the area of the distribution of Siva shrines in India followed 
closely that of the Dravidian languages is totally irrelevant as 
an explanation of architectural style. Both Vishnu and Siva 
shrines are " Indo-Aryan." This being the case, the whole of 
Fergusson's elaborate classification must be abandoned as being 
unscientific and based upon historical fallacies. The technical 
questions relating to the sikhara and the pyramidal roofs of 
Siva shrines will be dealt with in another chapter. 

The antithesis of the lotus and water-lily, which were 
always symbols of creation or life, was the white trumpet- 
shaped flower of the deadly datura plant, sacred to Siva. 



64 THE DATURA SYMBOL 

The flower and fruit in combination were used as the decora- 
tive motif of the cross-brackets (fig. 26a) placed as a super- 
capital above the lotus-flower capital. Thus the temple pillar 
stood, like the flowering tree climbing round the cedar or 
pine, as a symbol of life and death. The datura is also the 




Fig. 26a. — Cross-brackets used as Super-capital 
of Temple Pillar. 

motif of the brackets supporting balconies and chhajas in 
Indian houses (PI. Ill, b). 

When the symbolic and structural significance of the 
Indian " orders of architecture " is understood it is easy to trace 
the derivation of medieval forms and combinations, and their 
later Muhammadan modifications, from their Asokan proto- 
types, for the tradition remained unbroken throughout the 
Mogul period and has continued to the present day. 



X 




CHAPTER VI 

THE CHAITYA-GRIHA, OR BUDDHIST CHAPTER-HOUSE — THE 
RAISON D'ETRE OF ROCK-CUT TEMPLES AND MONASTERIES 

THE KARLE ROCK-CUT CHAITYA-HOUSE — THE BIRTH OF 

GOTHIC ART IN EUROPE 

Of all the buildings of the Mauryan epoch that which is most 
distinctly Buddhist is the Chatty a-griha, or House of the 
Chaitya, which was the assembly-hall or chapter-house of 
the Order.^ The religious observances enjoined upon members 
of the Order are distinguished from those of the Jains and of 
orthodox Brahmans by being congregational instead of indi- 
vidualistic, and thus Buddhist builders had to provide shelter 
for a much larger number of worshippers than would ordinarily 
gather together at Jain or Brahman shrines, except when the 
latter attracted large crowds of pilgrims. Though the religious 
tenets of the Jains and Buddhists had much in common, the 
social organisation of Buddhism differed from that of the former 
in recognising a distinction between laymen who merely ac- 
cepted the teaching of the Master and members of the Sangha 
who devoted themselves entirely to a religious life. The ne- 
cessity of providing accommodation for both classes, meeting 
tog"ether at stated times, in Buddhist places of worship, dictated 
the structural arrangements of the chaitya-griha. The Jains 

^ Fergusson, rather loosely, uses the word chaitya, which was the symbol or altar 
worshipped there, for the house itself. There was probably some technical distinction 
between a chaitya and a stflpa, but etymologically the two words have the same meaning 
— i.e. a tumulus, or heap. 

5 6s 



66 THE VILLAGE CHAITYA-HOUSE 

in their temple-building usually followed the structural tradition 
of the Brahmanical sects. 

The chapter-house was not a building taken over more 
or less complete, as were both the Christian church and the 
Muhammadan mosque, from an alien faith, nor was it "de- 
signed" in the modern architectural sense to meet the needs of 
Buddhist ritual. The elements of its structure grew together 
by a natural creative process. The chaitya itself, often enclosed 
in a simple circular shrine covered by a dome, as in PI. IX, a, 
was both the object of adoration and the pivot of the design. 
The little Buddhist congregation of a Bengali village, when 
they met at the holy spot to listen to the dialogues of the 
Master and to walk round the chaitya-shrine, " turning the 
wheel of the Law," according to the ancient 
Vedic rite, needed some shelter. So they put 
over the shrine a simple bambu pavilion with 
a mat roof, like the covering of a Bengali boat- 
vmage'chTS'ho'use. cabiu {chhai) (PI. II, fig. e), or bullock-cart ; 
or sometimes a more substantial building of 
clay or brick, roofed like one of their own cottages. The plan 
of such a building (fig. 27) was that of a long room, generally 
semicircular or apsidal at the end occupied by the chaitya, 
with entrances at the opposite one. This allowed space for the 
congregation to sit in front of the chaitya shrine when listening 
to recitations of the word of the Law, and to walk in procession 
round it. 

At T^r, the ancient Tagara, in the Waldrug district of 
Hyderabad, there is a building of a similar type, one of the 
oldest structural chaitya-houses now existing, which was dis- 
covered by Mr. H. Cousens in 1901. It is built of brick and 
plaster, with a roof exactly like that of the village huts 
sculptured at Bharhut (PI. I). The entrance faces east : a single 
window over the doorway was intended to throw a strong con- 




PLATE XV 




66] 



\"ISF^,V^■ I'lLI.Xk \T \IHOI.E 



THE AIHOLE TEMPLE 



67 



centrated light upon the chaitya at the farther end. The hall, 
or mandapiDu, shown in front of the chapter-house in the 
illustration (fig. 28), was most probably intended for the lay 
members who attended the service, or it may have been used 
as the assembly hall of the village. 

Generally, we may assume, the lay members listened and 
circumambulated outside the chaitya-pavilion, or hall ; but in 
the more important chapter-houses 
the devotions of the lay members 
were provided for by verandahs on 
the long sides of the hall. Plate 
IX, c, shows one of this type, in 
which, however, there is no sttlpa- 
like altar, but a simple table or 
throne covered by an umbrella. 
The verandahs are covered by 
lean-to roofs or chhajas, which 
support balconies, intended for a 
music-gallery, with the usual 
wooden rail surrounding them. 

The finest of the very few 
structural chaitya-grihas yet dis- 
covered is one which Fergusson 
and his followers, to the con- 
fusion of their readers, put into his Dravidian compartment, 
though he points out its resemblance in plan to the ancient 
Buddhist chaitya-hall at Sinchi. This is a stone building, 
probably of the sixth or seventh century a.d., situated at Aihole 
in the Bijaptir district of the Bombay Presidency. Although so 
many centuries later than the buildings of the Mauryan epoch, 
it may be taken parenthetically out of its chronological sequence 
to explain the arrangement of the great rock-cut chaitya-halls 
which are to be described next. 




Fig. 28. — Ancient Buddhist Chaitya-house at 
Ter (from Fergusson's "History"). 



68 



THE AIHOLE TEMPLE 



It is somewhat remarkable that this temple belonged 
apparently to the Jain sect : it was an exception to the rule 
that the Jains in their temple-building kept to the orthodox 
Brahmanical types, as their individualistic ritual demanded. 
Possibly, however, their ancient ritual differed from modern 
practice, and resembled that of the Buddhists more closely than 
it does now. But, in any case, in this temple a hall of the 
Sangha is provided, as if for an order of devotees distinct 
from the lay community.' The plan drawn by Dr. Burgess 
(fig. 29) shows the chaitya-cell placed in a pillared 
hall, with a pradakshini procession-path round the 
shrine for those who had admittance to the chapter- 
house. Outside is another one for lay worshippers, 
in a verandah — the roof of which is supported by 
stone piers — surrounding the whole building. As 
shown in the illustration of it (PI. XIV), the latter, 
including the verandah, is raised upon a high plinth, 
and the entrance to the hall is through a porch 
the roof of which is supported by a massive Vishnu 
pillar (PI. XV). The roof over the chaitya shrine 
has fallen, and the loose rubble which has been 
piled round the ruins makes it difficult to deter- 
mine whether it was a sikhara of the Vishnu type, 
or whether it was domed like a Siva shrine. The latter might 
be expected over a chaitya, and it is significant that it is known 
locally as a Dtlrga temple, a fact which makes a domed " Siva" 
roof, derived from the sttipa, almost a certainty. 

This Aihole temple is, or was, distinguished by its extra- 
ordinarily fine sculpture, as will be seen from Plates XIV and 
XV. The two superb high reliefs of flying Devas in the last 

1 The Sangha, like other Buddhist institutions, was only an adaptation of the or- 
ganisation of the Aryan clans to the rule of life propounded by Sikiya Muni : it was an 
Order within the larger Order of the Aryan community. 




Fig. 29.— Plan 
of Temple at 
Aihole (from Fer- 
gusson's "His- 
tory"). (Scale 
50 feet to I inch.) 



> 

< 





ROCK-CUT TEMPLES 69 

plate, which shows the condition in which they were discovered, 
have since probably been destroyed ; for the photographs taken 
by Dr. Burgess in 1874, and published in his Report of the 
Archaeological Survey of Western India for that year, show 
them already in a shockingly mutilated state. Such is the treat- 
ment of great works of art which archaeological historians con- 
temptuously dismiss as " Puranic." 

Before proceeding to describe the great rock-cut chaitya- 
halls, some splendid examples of which belong to the first three 
centuries before the Christian era, a few preliminary observa- 
tions regarding the practice which obtained in India, more than 
in any other country in the world, of excavating places in the 
living rock adapted both for religious and secular uses seem to 
be necessary. A cave temple or monastery suggests to the 
Western mind something essentially ascetic and barbaric, as 
our word " grotesque " implies. In India it represents a refine- 
ment of luxury for the users, an exceptional trial of skill for the 
craftsmen, and a special act of devotion and consecration on 
the part of the individual or the community for whom the work 
is performed. The reason why cave-dwellings remained in use 
in India long after the art of building had reached a high degree 
of perfection was partly climatic and partly geological ; it was 
partly also due to the intuitive instinct that close to the bosom 
of Mother Earth, wherever the genms loci invited to prayer and 
meditation, was the best place for her children in adoring their 
Creator. 

In India, instead of building, as in temperate climates, so as 
to admit sunlight right into the interior of houses, man instinc- 
tivelytries his utmost to diminish the glare and heat. A dwelling 
carved out of the living rock, when it is designed with due 
regard to lighting and ventilation, is not only an ideal retreat 
for the student and religious recluse, but it affords better pro- 
tection from the torrential rains of the monsoon and from the 
5* 



70 hinayAna chaitya-houses 

exhausting heat of the dry season than any building which the 
utmost skill of the carpenter, bricklayer, and stonemason could 
construct. It was not, therefore, the ascetic side of Indian 
religion which finds expression in the wonderful cave temples 
and monasteries, but rather the same spirit of bhakti, or the 
feeling that God demanded the best man could offer Him, both 
in a spiritual and material sense, which ever moves the mind 
of India. 

The earliest rock-cut meeting-houses of the Buddhist order 
belonging to Asoka's time are generally small and, like the 
stdpas, of the plainest description, though some of them exhibit 
a high proficiency in technique. In the beginning the ritual of 
Buddhism was of the severest Puritan form, and did not coun- 
tenance any elaboration either of structure or of symbolism, 
though all the artistic resources of Asoka's empire were at its 
disposal. 

Fig. 30 represents the Asokan type of chaitya-house with 
plain octagonal pillars sloping inwards, as if to resist the out- 
ward thrust of the roof, though in this case they are not struc- 
tural pillars, but cut in the solid rock ; it is one of the earliest 
of the Ajanti series, and is evidently a close reproduction of a 
wooden building. For further details of these early Hinayana 
buildings the reader must refer to Fergusson and other writers ; 
they are of great archaeological interest, but the structure of 
them can be studied in similar works of a later date. 

It was not until about a century after the death of the great 
Emperor who is canonised as a saint in the Buddhist calendar 
that Buddhism began to adapt the elaboration of the ancient 
Vedic ritual and the symbolism of Indo-Aryan art to the struc- 
ture and adornment of its chaityas, chaitya-houses, and 
monasteries. By that time the teaching of the doctrines of 
Buddha was being affected by the development of new schools 
of Indo-Aryan philosophy, and Hinayana Buddhism in the 



PLATE XNTT 




70] 



KN'IKANCI'; 'JO -||||., KAKi.l, t[!A I I \' A-HOl'Sl-: 



THE kArLE CHAITYA-HOUSE 71 

north of India was being transformed into the school of the 
Mahayana, or Greater Vehicle. 

The magnificent chaitya-house at Kirle, carved in the 
rocks of the Western Ghats between Bombay and Poona, though 
not the most ancient, is typical of the best architectural work 
of the Hinayana School in India. Fergusson dated it tenta- 
tively about the first century B.C. The main work of excava- 
tion may, however, have been begun even as early as Asoka's 



Fig. 30. — Interior of Htnaydna Chaitya-house at Ajanli. 

time ; but some of the figure sculpture which belongs to the 
Mahiyina School must have been added several centuries 
later. The description given above of the structural chaitya- 
houses will make it easy to understand the planning of it(fig. 31). 
In front of the entrance were the traditional pair of Vishnu 
standards {dhwaja-stambhas), usually placed in front of sttipas 
of great sanctity or the temples of Buddhism, Jainism, and 
Brahmanism. Only the left one, a sixteen-sided pillar(Pl. XVII), 



72 THE kArLE CHAITYA-HOUSE 

is now standing, the place of the other one being covered by a 
later Dtirga shrine. It is interesting to notice that the sym- 
bolical tradition is still maintained in this comparatively modern 
Hindu building, for, as the Silpa-sastras record,^ the sixteen- 
sided pillar is technically known as Rudra-kantha — i.e. it is 
consecrated to Siva in Brahman hagiology, or Dharma in the 
equivalent Buddhist meaning ; Dtirgi being the sakti or female 
energy of Siva in his tamasic aspect as Rudra. The modern 
shrine is therefore the correct symbol for the right-hand pillar, 




Fig. 31. — Plan of Kirle Chaitya-house (from Fergusson's "Cave Temples '"). 



which has fallen. The Hindu mali uses the same symbolism 
when he plants a pair of trees, as male and female, beside 
the well of his orchard or garden, and celebrates their wedding 
with sacred rites. 

The capital of this Vishnu standard is not, as Fergusson 
supposed, a Persepolitan idea imported into India by the crafts- 
men of Asoka's court, but the traditional Indian rendering of 
ancient Vedic symbolism. It is the amalaka, the fruit of 
Vishnu's blue water-lily, and of the pure white flower of Siva, 

' See above, p. 58. 



I'l.AI !■; will 




LOXCl ri'lUNAI, SIX'TIOX, KXKM' I ;[| All NA-IIOl'SI'', 







J leu 'fAl 



sf- - - 










mmUiht 



|.Ar\|i|'. ()!■ I HI'. KAUl.l': rilAirVA HOUSE 



72J 



THE kArLE CHAITYA-HOUSE 73 

placed within the four legs of a Vedic altar of sacrifice ; one 
part of the sixteen-petalled flower is turned down upon the 
shaft, as in the pillars of the Bharhut sculptures (fig. 21), and 
the other grows upwards to support the altar on which the four 
lion-guardians of the doors of the sky are placed. The entrance 
to the chaitya-house was through a porch with three entrances, 
over which was the naubat-khdna, or music-gallery, similar to 
that shown in the Bharhut relief (PI. IX, c). This is now in a 
very ruinous condition,^ and only the mortice-holes of wooden 
attachments to it now remain. 

The fagade of the entrance, which was screened from out- 
side view by this porch and gallery, is illustrated in PI. XVIII. 
The central doorway, opening into the nave, or hall of the 
Sangha, was the entrance for members of the order ; the left 
entrance was for the laymen, so that they might circumambulate 
the chaitya and pass out by the exit on the right-hand side with- 
out disturbing the congregation. 

This combination of three doorways in all the chaitya- 
houses and in other sacred edifices where the bodhi tree was 
the object of adoration, was a purely practical arrangement for 
the convenience of worshippers. 

Plate IX, D, shows the Asokan prototype of the twelve- 
pillared mandapam {baradart), used as a shrine for the sacred 
tree. The three doorways in each side of it could have been 
used in the same way, the inner circuit being reserved for the 
elect of the order and the outer one for laymen. Some Buddh- 
ist sttipas are provided with a double rail round the pradak- 
shind path for the same purpose. In Brahmanical shrines, 
also, the impure low castes could thus be separated from the 
twice-born. The ritualistic significance which attached itself 
to this combination of doorways was, no doubt, the reason why 

^ I do not know whether, like many ancient monuments, this has been lately restored 
by the Archaeological Survey of India. 



74 THE kARLE CHAITYA-HOUSE 

it persisted with a symbolical meaning only, when the original 
practical purpose had ceased to exist, as it does in modern 
Bengali temples. 

The great lotus-leaf arch, or sun-window, over the main 
entrance served to light up the chaitya with the most impressive 
effect ; but, like other constituents of the structural design of 
the chaitya-house, it was not merely placed there with the self- 
conscious motive of formal academic composition, which 
modern authorities declare to be the whole art of architecture ; 
the light had to be focussed upon the chaitya, for the latter 
was the sacred object upon which the devoted labour of the 
craftsmen was concentrated. Incidentally the window which 
illuminated the altar was used to provide the best possible ven- 
tilation for the whole chaitya-house. The ends of the purlins 
which would have supported the wooden or bambu rafters of 
an Asokan house or cottage (PL I, b) roofed in this way, but 
here piously carved for decorative effect only, appear on the inner 
edge of the arched window ; the outer edge is the ptpal leaf, as 
before explained. Part of the opening is filled with a frame- 
work of wood, resembling the torans of a village gateway. A 
framed lattice of this kind is almost invariably shown in the 
sculptured sun-windows used as symbolic decoration, except 
when they serve as shrines for deities. The whole fagade above 
the entrances is decorated with these symbols, combined with 
the Vedic sacrificial rail. Most, if not all, of the figure sculp- 
ture was added in the later Buddhist or Mahayana period. 

The extreme dimensions of the interior are about 124 feet 
by 43J feet. The great nave, or hall of the Sangha, is 
shown in PI. XIX. It is 25^ feet wide, and separated from 
the pradakshini path of the laymen by fifteen sculptured pillars 
on either side, with capitals similar to the two which flank the 
main entrance, but otherwise differing slightly in symbolism. 
Their shafts are octagonal, or, in the technical terms of the 



X 




THE KArLE CHAITYA-HOUSE 75 

Silpa-sistras, they are "Vishnu-necked."' The bases are 
Lakshmi 's jars of plenty. Instead of the lions which crown 
the capitals of the pillars outside, each Vedic altar here is a 
throne for two pairs of Devas mounted upon kneeling elephants 
(PI. XX). They are remarkable for proving what a high degree 
of excellence Indian sculpture had reached before the enervating 
Graeco-Roman influence manifested itself in Indian Buddhist 
architecture. There is not much in the whole range of 
Gandh^ran art to be placed in the same class with this and 
some of the Sanchi sculptures for spontaneity and freedom 
in design, fine expression, and bold technique. 

The seven octagonal pillars behind the chaitya are plain, 
without caps or bases. The chaitya itself is also without any 
sculptured decoration, but it must be remembered that fresco 
painting on a ground of fine white plaster, together with painted 
banners hanging from the wooden ribs fitted in the roof, gave 
a rich glow of colour to the whole of the interipr. The lower 
portion of the wooden tee, or pyramid of umbrellas (Vishnu's 
tree), placed upon the Vedic altar on the top of the chaitya, 
still remains. The underside of each umbrella was carved with 
a lotus flower ; the symbolism of the tee being analogous to 
that of Vishnu's standard described above (pp. 62-3). 

Obviously the vaulted roof, nearly semicircular in section 
but stilted at the springing, with its wooden ribs, were derived 
from the bambu-and-mat chhai of the Bengali village chaitya- 
house. Though there are striking resemblances with regard 
to planning and general arrangements between these great 
Buddhist temples and the Gothic cathedrals of Europe, it is 
impossible to draw any useful comparisons between them. The 
technical problems which confronted the Indian craftsmen in 
carving these chaitya-houses out of the living rock were totally 
different from those with which the Gothic builders had to deal : 

^ Or " Sangha-necked," as Buddhist craftsmen would have called them. 



76 THE ORIGIN OF GOTHIC ART 

the fairy shafting of Gothic vaults and their widely spaced 
supports would have crumbled into dust under the immense 
weight which these mighty, close-set pillars of the Sangha were 
designed to uphold. 

But the romantic spirit which informed the art of Indian 
Buddhist builders was the spirit of the Gothic cathedrals, and 
Gothic art was the gift of Indo-Aryans to their brother crafts- 
men in the West. In its pristine splendour the chapter-house 
of Kirl^ must have been one of the grandest places of worship 
ever made by the hands of men. 

It is easy to follow the journey of the Lotus of the Good 
Law from India into China, and thence into Korea and Japan; 
but how the art of Kirld and Ajanti passed into western Asia, 
and thence into Europe, to blossom again in the glorious 
cathedrals of France, is a fascinating chapter in the world's 
romance which remains to be written. 

It must have been partly through the craftsmen who fol- 
lowed the Asiatic hordes which overran Europe continually for 
many centuries after the beginning of the Christian era, and 
partlythrough the contact of East and West in the long struggle 
of the Crusades. But this much is certain, that East met West 
very long ago in the fellowship of art, and when a great art 
impulse comes again in Europe and in Asia the meeting-ground 
will be the same. 

And when that romance of real life is written, one chapter 
of it may tell how, after Charles Martel hammered the Moors 
on the battlefield of Tours and drove them from the fair fields 
of France, many of Abdur Rahman's craftsmen remained as 
captives or deserters to the winning side — for craftsmen were 
non-combatants, often unwillingly pressed into military service ; 
and how, settling down in their new adopted country and 
working side by side with their brother-craftsmen of the Latin 
race, they helped to build those splendid abbeys which were 



I'lAii-: w 




VISHNU PII.T.AKS, KARI.I'. CM MTVA-HOUSI'. 



76] 



THE ORIGIN OF GOTHIC ART 'j^ 

the nurseries of Gothic art, bringing to the West the masonic 
secrets of the East, the traditions and the inspiration of the Indo- 
Aryan abbeys of Ajanta and Ellora which were at that moment 
the grandest and most beautiful in the world. Thus the two 
branches of the Aryan race were joined together once more by 
spiritual and domestic ties for the advancement of the common 
cause of humanity. 

For other chaitya-houses of the Htnayina school of Buddh- 
ism at Bhija, Bedsi, N^sik, Ajanti and elsewhere the reader 
must refer to the descriptions given by Fergusson and Dr. 
Burgess. They are all planned on the same principle, and it is 
quite easy to follow the symbolism of their structure and deco- 
ration by means of the description of the YAx\t chaitya-house 
given above. The later chaitya-houses of the Mahciy^na school 
will be taken in their chronological sequence. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE VIHARA, OR MONASTERY — THE GAUTAMI-PUTRA MONAS- 
TERY, NASIK — MONASTERY AT BEDSA — MODELS OF 
MONASTERIES AT MAMALLAPURAM 

We must now pass on to the mhdras, or monasteries adjoining, 
-'or sometimes included in, the chaitya-houses and other shrines 
to which the religious devotees of ancient India attached them- 
selves. It is wrong to assume that either the chaitya-houses 
or the monasteries which belonged to them were exclusively 
Buddhist institutions, although the oldest materials for their 
architectural history are practically all Buddhist. The life of 
religious recluses dwelling together in forest asramas is often 
described in ancient Sanskrit literature. The Silpa-sastras give 
particular directions for the planning of villages intended for 
those who lived a monastic life ; and just as the builders of 
Buddhist chaityas and chaitya-houses followed very closely, as 
we have seen, the ancient Indian tradition of structure and 
symbolism, so there cannot be much doubt that the dwellings 
of the Buddhist bhikkus in Asoka's time differed very little 
from those which had been used by devotees of other sects 
before the tenets of the great Kshatriya reformer were propagated 
by his zealous royal disciple. 

An ordinary asrama occupied by Buddhist bhikkus is 
quaintly shown in one of the Bharhut reliefs (PI. XXI), which 
represents the Jetavana monastery of Srivasti, which in Fa 
Hian's time, or the fifth century a.d., had grown into a great 
establishment with splendid buildings seven stories in height. 

78 



X 





w 

H 
< 

o 



< 
3 

2 



ANCIENT INDIAN MONASTERIES 79 

Here it is only the usual collection of simple shrines and 
primitive hermits' huts which had existed in India from time 
immemorial, but some pious benefactor is superintending the 
paving of the ground with bricks, a cartload of which is being 
unloaded in the foreground. One of the monks is bringing 
water to pour on the sacred tree, planted on a mound sur- 
rounded by the Vedic rail, which grows beside one of the 
shrines. The bhikku's water-vessel is the same as that used 
by a Brahman sannyasin in the present day, and the bullock- 
cart is an exact rendering of the country vehicle for which 
modern invention has not yet found a practical substitute. 
This persistence of ancient types 
need not always be taken as a proof 
of the immobility of the Indian mind, 
but rather to indicate that certain 
fundamental problems of life were 
fully resolved in very early times by 
the pioneers of Indian civilisation, 
and cannot be radically altered 
without uprooting thewhole founda- 
tion upon which that civilisation ^ ^ ,,, ^ t ^- c-^^u 

r Fig. 32. — A Modem Indian Sadhu. 

rests. 

The two-^oried monastic dwelling shown in the same 
plate is also from the Bharhut reliefs. It resembles in general 
arrangement some Buddhist monasteries in Sikkim, which 
have a large prayer-wheel fixed in a verandah on the ground 
floor so that passers-by can turn it; the upper floor combining a 
shrine and living-accommodation for the monks who attend it. 

An ordinary wandering friar in ancient India carried his 
hut with him in the shape of a palm-leaf umbrella {chhattrd), 
as the sidhu of the present day does (fig. 32). The umbrella 
placed over a Buddhist chaitya was a mark of royalty in a 
double sense, as belonging both to the insignia of the Kshatriya 




8o ANCIENT INDIAN MONASTERIES 

Prince Siddhartha of Kapilavastu, and to that of the spiritual 
Lord, the Monk of Bodh-Gaya. 

A fixed chhattri, or shelter, for a yogi or bhikku in the 
absence of a tree, would be simply an umbrella supported on 
four sticks ; but respect for the holy man frequently inspired 
individuals or the community to build permanent chhattris of 
fine carpentry, brickwork, or masonry; others were four-pillared 
pavilions covered by a dome, like the village shrine shown in 
PI. IX, A. Akbar built such a yogi-seat of stone close to his 
palace at Fatehpur-Sikri. Yogis also went through their 
spiritual exercises in square cells made of matting, clay, brick, 
or stone, with a domed or vaulted roof. Their sleeping-cells 
are shown in ancient Indian sculptures as oblong huts with a 
single apartment roofed like the Bharhut cottages. 

An ancient Indian monastery consisted simply of rows of 
such cells ranged round or in front of the shrine, which might 
be a solid st(ipa, or a cell containing an image dedicated to the 
particular cult to which the monks belonged. In the early 
Hinayina monasteries the chaitya was only sculptured in low 
relief on the wall of the quadrangle, which was the hall of the 
Sangha, opposite the doorway. 

None of the early structural monasteries now remain. 
Among the oldest and most interesting of the rock-cut examples 
are those situated among the hills which form the watershed 
of the upper Godaveri River, at N^sik, an ancient seat of Indo- 
Aryan learning mentioned by Ptolemy. The Gautaml-putra 
Monastery, now known archaeologically as "Cave III," belonged 
to the Hinayana school, like the great chaitya-house of Kirl^, 
with which some of the Nisik monasteries are contemporary. 
The plan of it (fig. 33) shows the oblong sleeping-cells of the 
monks ; there are none of the square yogi seats which appear 
in later Buddhist monasteries after the Brahmanical doctrine 
of Yoga had filtered into Buddhism through the teaching of 



X 

K 

i- 
< 




ai 
t> 
H 
Z 
w 
u 

a 
z 

o 

CJ 






Z 

o 



THE GAUTAMI-PUTRA MONASTERY 



8 1 



Ndgarjuna. The simple ritual of the Hinayina school only 
demanded a stone bench which ran round three sides of the 
hall (41 feet broad by 46 deep) in front of the cells, upon which 
the monks sat to listen to the word of the Blessed One. The 
position of the chaitya, sculptured in low relief, is shown in 
the plan by the projection on the walls of the cells which face 
the central doorway. 

The entrance to the hall was through a verandah (PI. XXII) 
fronted by six pillars of the 
Sangha with capitals almost 
identical in their sculpture 
with those at Karl^, except 
that some of the Devas on the 
Vedic altars ride upon bulls 
and lions instead of elephants. 
The bull was the sacrificial 
animal, the symbol of pro- 
creation, the vdkan, or vehicle 
of Siva, and thus the guar- 
dian of the western quarter, 
or the gate of the setting sun. 
The lion stood for the blazing 
heat of the sun high in the 
heavens which dried up the 
deadly mists of the plains : it was thus the vehicle of Dtlrga, 
the Inaccessible, Destroyer of demons — who was Siva's bride 
and represented Nature-force, the counterpart of the Great 
Spirit who is the Lord of Death. The lion as a sun- 
emblem was the guardian of all four quarters, and became 
the udhan, or throne symbol, of the Buddha to signify his 
world-wide dominion and the glory of his spiritual conquests. 
The elephant was Indra's rain-cloud and guardian of the south, 
whence came the rushing monsoon winds carrying Lakshmi's 
6 




Fig. 33. — Plan of Gautamt-putra Monastery, Nisik. 



82 THE GAUTAMi-PUTRA MONASTERY 

nectar-jar upon their wings. The horse, guarding the northern 
quarter, was the noble steed upon which the Aryan warriors 
rode to victory in India from their ancient home in the north. 
This early Buddhist sculpture is purely and intensely Indo- 
Aryan : it is the joyous nature-symbolism of the Vedas carved 
in wood and stone. 

There is a slight difference between the Vedic altar? of the 
Gautaml-putra capitals and those at Karl^ : in most of them the 
four legs of the altar which enclose the water-lily fruit, or 
amalaka, are carved into dwarf figures, the pisdchas — little 
demons or trolls of the nether-world who are the servants of 
the Shining Ones, the Devas of the higher spheres. The pillars 
have no bases, but stand upon another stone bench provided 
for the monks in the verandah. In front of the pillars is a 
Vedic rail, supported by pisachas on a colossal scale. Another 
sculptured rail forms the entablature supported by the capitals. 

No sun-windows, either as decorative symbols or for giving 
light, appear on the front of this monastery. The hall is 
lighted through two doorways and two oblong windows. The 
head of the central doorway is sculptured with a toran like those 
at Bharhut and S^nch!, and two guardian deities {dwdra-pdlas) 
on either side protect it. Over the door are placed the three 
symbols of the Illumination (the bodhi tree), the Preaching of 
the Law (the wheel), and of Pari-Nirvina (the strlpa). 

Fergusson's critical judgment upon the sculpture of the 
Gautaml-putra Monastery is very wide of the mark. He com- 
pares it with that of the adjoining Nahapana monastery, which 
may be somewhat earlier in date, and praises the "graceful 
bell-shaped Persian capitals " of the latter to the disparagement 
of the "pudding-forms " of the other. Here he was betrayed 
into the misconception which with other modern writers has 
become an obsession, that all that was finest in Indian art 
always came straight from western Asia, and that the history 



MONASTERY AT BEDSA 



83 



of Hindu sculpture is "written in decay." None of the sculp- 
ture at Kirl^ and very little that belongs to the Mauryan epoch 
in India had any connection with Persia in the sense intended 
by Fergusson and other archaeologists. These capitals are 
Vedic-Indian, or Indo-Aryan, and only Persian so far as Persian 
art was in early Vedic times itself inspired by Aryan culture. 
The superficial similarity between these and Persepolitan 
capitals was the result of the common origin of their symbolism, 
not to the presence of foreign craftsmen in the India of Asoka's 
time. The splendour of the Mauryan court may have attracted 




Fig. 34. — Section of Rock-cut Vihara at Bedsa (from a drawing by the Archaeological 

Survey of India), 

skilled craftsmen from Persepolis, but they worked in India 
under Indian inspiration just as the Gandharan craftsmen did 
some centuries later. They were but craftsmen learning the 
art language of India, not artists enriching it with their own 
creative ideas. The symbolism of this Hlnayana Buddhist 
art proves this to be the case, as Fergusson himself would have 
admitted if he had understood it. 

An exceptional form of rock-cut vihara is the early 
Buddhist one at Bedsi, ascribed to the second century b.c, 
which has its cells placed round a chaitya-house having the 
usual barrel-vaulted roof and an apse round the chaitya. The 
plan and section are shown in figs. 34 and 35. 



s^ 



PYRAMIDAL MONASTERIES 



The Gandhara monasteries, described by M. Foucher, were 
generally rows of cells ranged in a square, the centre of which 
was occupied by the chaitya ; but occasionally the cells were 
placed in a circle round the sacred symbol. The panch-ratna, 
or " five-jewelled " temple, from which the plan of the Taj 
Mahall was derived, was probably a small monastery with a 
verandah all round the cell containing the chaitya or image 
and a yogi's seat at each of the four corners — the nava-ratna 
or nine-jewelled temple being a similar one with two stories. 

The most characteristic 
of ancient Indian monas- 
teries, often described in 
Indian Buddhist literature 
and bythe Chinese pilgrims, 
Fa Hian and Hiuen Tsang, 
were the many-storied pyra- 
midal ones. Perhaps there 
was in these lofty structures 
some reminiscence of the 
pyramidal ziggarats of 
Babylon, used for astro- 
nomical observations ; but 
the use to which they were generally applied was of purely 
Indian origin. They were both monasteries and colleges, their 
arrangement being adapted for the graduation of the courses 
of study followed in these institutions, both Buddhist and 
Brahmanical. The Pili books record that the spiritual training 
of members of the order was divided into six graduated coi^es. 
As soon as the first section of the prescribed texts was 
mastered, the monks were exempted from the common drudgery 
of their ordinary daily life. When they could expound two 
sections perfectly they were permitted to reside in an " upper 
furnished room." Those who were expert in three sections 




Fig. 35.— Plan of Vihara at Bedsa (half to scale 
of Fig. 34). 



y. 




PYRAMIDAL MONASTERIES 85 

were allowed a lower class of servants to wait upon them. 
Proficiency in four sections entitled the monks to the services 
of lay disciples, called "pure men" {upasakas). The reward 
for passing the fifth stage was an elephant-carriage. Finally, 
the monk who had complete knowledge of all six sections was 
qualified as an abbot and was allowed the dignity of an escort. 
No doubt the idea of this graduated curriculum was not ex- 
clusively Buddhist, but based upon the scholastic tradition of 
Vedic learning. 

The design of these pyramidal monasteries was eminently 
adapted for the practical working of such a system. Indeed, 
if the prestige of the British Raj is not compromised by the 
borrowing of Indian ideas, it might be adapted (with the help 
of lifts, telephones, and imagination) to the uses of modern 
secular administration. It certainly would lend itself to the 
administrative principle that the highest official ranks should 
have the coolest places ; and possibly it could be used as an 
architectural expedient for ensuring that full mental vigour in 
departmental heads which, in these degenerate days, can only 
be expected in Indian hill-stations. 

Hiuen Tsang gives the followingdescriptions of the appear- 
ance of such structures at the celebrated Bengali University of 
Nalanda, the modern Bar%ion, seven miles north of Rajagriha 
and not far from Pitaliputra, Asoka's imperial city — the modern 
Patna. " The houses of the monks," he says, " were each four 
storeys in height, Thepavilions [halls of the Sangha?] had pillars 
ornamented with dragons, and had beams resplendent with all 
the colours of the rainbow — rafters richly carved, columns orna- 
mented with jade, painted red and richly chiselled, and balus- 
trades [Vedic rails ?] of carved openwork. The lintels of the 
doors were decorated with elegance and the roofs with glazed 
tiles of brilliant colours, which multiplied themselves by reflection 
and varied the effect at every moment in a thousand manners." 
6* 



86 THE DHARMARAJA RATH 

All those which the Chinese pilgrim described, and also 
those which Kanishka built in the Gandhara country, are now 
only heaps of ruins. Their upper stories were, no doubt, often 
built entirely of wood ; and even more substantial ones of brick 
were pulled down as soon as they were deserted, to provide 
building material for neighbouring towns and villages. Fortun- 
ately, however, there exists a very fine model of such a building, 
one of the so-called Raths at Mamallapuram, near Madras, 
carved out of a large granite boulder (PI. XXIII). There is 
every reason to believe that it closely resembles the pyramidal 
monasteries of ancient India in the north as well as in the south. 

The date of this Dharmarija Rath,^ as it is now called, 
has been ascertained with tolerable certainty as circa 670-700 a.d. 
It is a reproduction in miniature of a Saivaite monastery of 
four storeys ; it is, in fact, an amplification of the plan of the 
Bharhut Bodhi tree shrine shown in PI. IX, d, by the provision of 
accommodation for devotees permanently attaching themselves 
to it. The nine-spired temple at Buxar, in the Hughli district, 
and similar twenty-five-spired ones at Lilgi and other places in 
Bengal, are designed on the same principle ; only the Bengali 
roofs have a convex curvature, on account of the heavy rainfall 
of the locality, and the square cells are crowned with Vishnu 
sikharas instead of by Siva domes. 

Though the interior of the Dharmaraja Rath is not shown 
in the model, it is easy by analogy to realise the plan of it. 
Making allowance for the difference of climate and material— 
the Bengali temples being built of brick— the ground plan of 
the Mamallapuram model follows closely the northern proto- 
type from which it was derived.' There was a square shrine 

1 Rath means, literally, the chariot of a warrior, or processional car of a sacred image. 

2 The particular Bengali temples mentioned are, of course, quite modern, but the 
type is a very ancient one, which the builders of Muhammadan Gaur adapted' to their 
mosques. 



GARGOYLES 87 

(or, hall of the Sangha, if the building was occupied by Buddh- 
ists), surrounded on all sides by a verandah roofed with the 
curved Bengali chhaja. On the side of the entrance of the 
shrine the verandah breaks forward slightly, so as to form a 
porch. At each corner of the verandah there was a square 
cell, either for a living yogi or for a sculptured symbol of a 
deity. But one of the corners might have been used, as in a 
storied Bengali temple, for the staircase leading to the first 
floor ; or this might have been placed in the thickness of the 
walls of the shrine, or hall of the Sangha. 

The miniature sun-windows, with which Karl^ and Nasik 
have made us familiar, are sculptured as ornaments at close 



W' IlltlU 





Fig. 36. — Gargoyles of the Dharmarija Rath. 

intervals along the whole length of the chhaja, and carved 
" Gothic " gargoyles throw off the rain from the pradakshini, 
or procession-path, on the next storey (fig. 36). 

The half-finished sculptured pillars and pilasters in front 
of the verandah and porch present the ancient motif of Vishnu's 
pillar, with the amalaka capital, the architectural use of which 
we have already traced back to the time of Asoka. For the 
bases, instead of Lakshmi's nectar-jar, the sculptors have used 
thesymboliclion-guardians — Ddrgi's emblems — which usually 
stand detached in front of the entrances, as they do at Elephanta. 
The reason for this innovation was that the dimensions of the 
rock were not sufficient for carving them in their traditional 
places on each side of the steps. 



88 THE DHARMARAJA RATH 

In the original, wherever it might have been, it is probable 
that the ground-floor of the monastery, here simulated in sculp- 
ture, was built of stone — all the upper floors being of brick and 
plaster, or wood, or a combination of these materials. The 
monastic cells which surrounded the shrine or hall of the 
Sangha, on the first floor, are shown in both types — i.e. there 
are four yogi cells at the corners and twelve oblong sleeping- 
compartments (three on each side), connected with them by 
lower covered corridors which may have been provided with 
benches. The Vedic rail which forms a plinth outside the 
whole range of cells, though still recognisable as such, has lost 

its triple bars. The ancient sun-windows 
are repeated as dormers in the roofs, but 
instead of the screen or lattice which they 
contain at Karl6 and Nasik, they have be- 
come miniature shrines. The dome of the 
yogi cells has also become bell-shaped by 
the addition of outward curving eaves for 
L. 37.-Diagram of throwiug off the ralu (fig. 37). 
Dome, showing Eaves added In frout of the cclls was thc usual 

for throwing off Rain. . , 1 , 1 1 • 1 • 

procession-path round the shrme or chaitya- 
hall, which probably had a pillared verandah outside like the 
temple at Aihole (PI. XIV), in which a staircase leading to 
the next storey might have been placed. Fig. 38 shows the 
plan as I assume it to have been. It differs considerably from 
that suggested by Mr. Chisholm, which Fergusson adopted. 

The plan of the second floor, or third storey, was similar, 
except that there was accommodation for eight monks only. 
The highest story provided for an equal number of yogi seats 
but only four sleeping-cells. The shrine here was octagonal, 
instead of square, and this slight difference from the usual 
northern plan (which Fergusson, curiously enough, overlooked) 
is the only distinction which justifies the name " Dravidian " 




BHIMA'S RATH 



89 



given to this kind of building. The M^nas^ra, says Rim Riz, 
gives the technical name of a square shrine as Ndgara ; an 
octagonal one as Drdvidka, and a circular one as Vesara} But 
as the entire planning and every other structural and symbolic 
detail of these pyramidal monasteries were Indo-Aryan ideas, 
imported from the north, it would be entirely misleading to 
take a minor difference of this kind as a reason for classifying 
all Siva shrines as " Dravidian." The fact that Siva shrines 
are nowmostly found in Southern 
India had nothing whatever to 
do with their architectural origin. 

Another splendid specimen 
of seventh-century craftsman- 
ship is a great monolithic model 
at Mamallapuram, called now 
Bhima's Rath, which reproduces 
on a smaller scale a two-storied 
Saivaite monastery. The dimen- 
sions of it in the granite rock 
are 48 feet in length, 25 feet in 
breadth, and about 26 feet in 
height. Like most of the raths 
at Mimallapuram, it remained 
unfinished, and owing to the sculptors having gone too far in 
imitating the details of a structural building, the upper part of 
the rock split right through the roof, probably while they were 
working at it. 

Plate XXIV will give a good idea of the noble design of the 
original building and of the extraordinary skill of the sculptors. 
The planning of it and general design were evidently the working 
out of a tradition which went back to the Buddhist two-storied 
halls of Asoka's time, as shown in the Bharhut reliefs (PI. IV, a). 

^ Rim Riz, p. 49. 




Fig. 38.— Conjectural Plan of First Floor of 
Dharmaraja RSth. 



90 



BHIMA'S RATH 



In this particular the Saivaites of the seventh century 
were probably borrowers or adaptors of Buddhist structural 
ideas, though Saivaite and Buddhist art as a whole comes 
from a common Indo-Aryan source. The ground plan (fig. 39) 
shows the hall, or temple, measuring in the model about 10 feet 
by 30 feet, which was probably intended to be open on the 
sides, like the Bharhut prototype. 




Fig. 39.— Plan of Bhlma's Rath (from Fergusson's " Cave Temples "). 

Excepting the roof, all the details — the pillars and pilasters ; 
the chhajas ; the rows of cells surrounding the procession-path 
on the first floor, etc. — are the same as in the four-storied pyra- 
midal monastery last described. At each end of the great hall 
or temple in the upper storey a Siva shrine is sculptured under 
a richly carved gable, which in Europe would be said to be a 
masterpiece of Gothic craftsmanship. The brackets which sup- 
port the arches under the barge-boards are identical with those 
which afterwards appeared in Akbar's buildings. Under the 



BHIMA'S RATH 91 

eaves, on each of the long sides of the building, are five other 
projecting shrines, three large and two small, placed opposite 
to the five monastic cells. They are flanked by pilasters of 
the same design as the pillars of the ground floor, and are 
covered by sun-window roofs in dormer fashion. The ridge 
of the roof was intended to be crowned by a row of eighteen 
kalasas (water-pot finials), but these were never finished, like 
many other details. In the original building most probably 
the whole of the upper storey, including the roof, would have 
been built of brick and plaster, like the fifteenth-century 
mosques of Gaur, the construction of which was derived from 
Bengali prototypes. In the Jahangtri Mahall at Agra there is 
a similar vaulted roof built of stone slabs, and Indian builders 
were as capable in the seventh century as in the fifteenth of 
using stone for such a purpose. Even in Asoka's buildings 
the choice of the material depended upon the supply available 
in different localities. There were skilled carpenters where 
wood was plentiful, skilled bricklayers where bricks were used, 
and equally skilled masons where stone was most abundant. 



CHAPTER VIII 

VISHNU AND SIVA SHRINES— THE ALLEGORY OF THE DAWN^ 
MAIDEN— THE BRAHMA SHRINE — ORIENTATION OF INDIAN 
TEMPLES 

It has been made evident in the last chapter that in ancient 
Indian monasteries the groups of cells inhabited by the monks 
were always very small and of no structural importance. All 
the architectural interest of the monastery was centred on the 
shrine or shrines around which the monastic cells were grouped, 
and on the Sangha halls, or the pillared pavilions, which be- 
longed to the former. We have seen what the sacred symbol, 
the chaitya, or sttlpa, venerated by both the Jains and disciples 
of the Buddha, was like. It is necessary now to describe in 
greater detail the shrine of Vishnu, the ancient symbol of the 
holy Mount Meru, which was also adopted by Buddhists and 
Jains, just as many pagan symbols were adopted by early 
Christians with a different connotation. 

Whatever century historians may assume to be the be- 
ginning of the period when the followers of orthodox Hinduism 
who took either Vishnu or Siva as their patron deity {Ishta- 
dSva) began to be sufficiently numerous and powerful in the 
State to take political and social precedence over other sects, it 
is certain that the philosophical and dogmatic differences typical 
of Vaishnavism and Saivism not only belonged to Buddhism, 
but prevailed in the earlier schools of Indo-Aryan thought. 
They were probably very much the same as those which in 

Greek philosophy distinguished the Epicureans from the Stoics. 

92 



VAISHNAVISM AND SAIVISM 93 

To go back to the Indian village: if one divides the 
southern half of the pradakshin^ path, which followed the 
movement of the sun in the day, from the northern half, which 
represented its night's journey, and assumed that the villagers 
of the southern quarters belonged to one school of philosophy 
and those of the northern quarters to another ; and, further, 
that the southerners maintained the supremacy of the cosmic 
powers which caused the sun to rise to its zenith at noon and 
brought happiness in this present life ; while the northerners 
held to the ascetic ideal and looked forward to future bliss 
through being merged in the supreme Spirit which rules the 
universe, we shall have a sufficiently clear conception of the 
broad distinctions between Vaishnavism and Saivism. 

There must have been, of course, in India — as at other 
times and in other places — many thinkers who held the middle 
course between the two extremes. The Buddha was one of 
those who succeeded in working out a philosophical formulary 
so generally acceptable that for a time his following absorbed 
the great majority of both extreme schools of thought. The 
architecture of Buddhism, therefore, for several centuries re- 
presented the architecture of India, not because it created any 
new architectural standards or ideals, but because the influence 
of Buddhism was supreme in the State. Buddhist architec- 
ture, like Buddhist philosophy, absorbed the traditions of 
Vedic India, but did not obliterate them. 

After several centuries Buddhism itself split into two 
camps : the Hinay^na — the Little Vehicle — which was the 
orthodox agnostic school, and the Mahayana — the Great Vehicle 
— which accepted, among other things, the doctrine of Yoga. 
Then gradually the Brahmans, who under the peaceful sway 
of Buddhism had superseded the Kshatriya, or warrior class, 
as spiritual leaders of the people, succeeded in establishing, 
upon the basis of so much of the Buddha's teaching as they 



94 VISHNU SHRINES 

had accepted, more abstruse metaphysical and philospphical 
theses, so that both the Hinayina and Mah^yana schools 
merged into modern Hinduism in the same way as the earlier 
schools of Vedic India had merged into Buddhism, The 
Hinayana, which was then the southern school of Buddhism, 
grew into the modern Saivaite school, which inherited the 
ascetic traditions of pre-Buddhist times ; while the Vaishna- 
vaites, who represent the reforming schools of northern India, 
absorbed the following of Mahayanist philosophy. It must, 
however, be remembered that in modern times the two main 
sects, or groups of sects, have intermingled at so many points 
that the old distinctions have been largely superseded by others 
which individual Hindu teachers, like Sankaracharya, Ramanllja 
and Chaitanya, have introduced. 

The apparent anomaly, which has confused Fergusson 
and many others, is that a Vishnu shrine is not necessarily 
Vaishnavaite in the sectarian sense, but only one that is 
dedicated to the Vaishnava aspect of Srahma, Buddha, or Siva, 
as the case may be. Similarly, a Siva shrine may be Saivaite, 
Buddhist, or Vaishnavaite. Fergusson did not perceive that 
throughout all these sectarian changes there prevailed the great 
architectural tradition which was Indo-Aryan, and that these 
symbols represent philosophical concepts accepted by all the 
chief schools of Indo-Aryan religion. 

The idea of the Vishnu mystic pillar, or holy mountain 
supporting the sky, is of very remote antiquity and common to 
Europe and Asia. The Christian church tower and steeple, 
and the Indian Vishnu sikhara are one and the same symbol 
with different implications. The Vedic philosophers took it as 
the symbol of the equilibrium of the two opposing cosmic 
forces, which they named Brahmi and Siva, or evolution and 
involution. The three symbols together, the Trimdrti, are not 
separate " gods," but three Aspects of Ishwara, the first mani- 



VISHNU SHRINES AT NINEVEH 95 

festation of the cosmic creative power proceeding from the 
Unknowable, Brahman. But the man in the Indian village, 
though not a polytheist, as is popularly believed/ would 
always think of a Vishnu shrine as the holy Mount Meru, or 
as Mount Mandara, Vishnu's abode in the Himalayas. 

Architecturally we are not concerned with the primitive 
Aryan rite of circumambulating a sacred hill or mountain with 
which the Vishnu shrine is connected, but certainly the Indian 
sikhara is of far greater antiquity 
than the sixth or seventh century, 
the date which Fergusson errone- 
ously gave to the great Buddhist 
shrine of Bodh-Gaya. W^hat is 
perhaps the earliest and most 
interesting representation of it 
seems to have escaped the notice 
of orientalists altogether. It 
occurs in one of the bas-reliefs of 
Nineveh discovered by Layard, 
and described by him as the 
Palace of Sennacherib. 

In this relief (fig. 40) the 
palace itself is evidently the 
group of flat-roofed buildings on 
the right. To the left of this are three domed buildings which 
I have no doubt are meant to be royal tombs ; they are proto- 
types of the sttlpa — Siva's symbol — which was the royal tomb 
of ancient India. The two conical buildings behind these are 
temples — shrines of the holy mountain which appears in the 
background. To make the symbolism clearer, the flowering tree, 
the Tree of Life, and the pine or cedar, the Tree of Eternity, are 
planted close to the tombs and on the slopes of the mountain. 

^ See Introduction, p. xxxv. 




Fig. 40. — Vishnu Temples and Royal Tombs 
at Nineveh (Layard's " Nineveh," 2nd series, 
PI. 16). 



96 VISHNU SHRINES AT SARNATH 

I must leave others to enlarge upon the inferences to be 
drawn from the appearance of Aryan Vishnu, and Siva symbols, 
or their prototypes, in the royal tombs of Nineveh in the eighth 
century B.C. The most significant point to be noticed is that 
the juxtaposition of Vishnu's sikhara and Siva's sttipa, or the 
symbols of Life and Death, is exactly what occurred so frequently 
in ancient and medieval India. Fergusson's description of 
the former as " Hindu and Indo-Aryan " and of the latter as 
" Buddhist and Dravidian " not only misled himself, but gave 
to others entirely false clues to the history and chronology of 
Indian art. 

The earliest Indian Vishnu shrines yet discovered are the 
monolithic ones carved in miniature which have been dug up in 
great quantities on the site of Sarnath, the Deer Park where 
the Buddha preached the Law to his first disciples, and also at 
Bodh-Gaya. They are found together with vast numbers of 
miniature stllpas, many of which are probably of greater age, 
as the stiipa was the most sacred emblem of the first disciples 
of the Buddha. But just as at the present day Hindus will 
often worship at Muhammadan shrines of great sanctityj so in 
early Buddhist times many who belonged to other schools of 
thought brought their pious offerings to the shrines of Sikiya 
Muni. Then Buddhism seems to have gradually adopted the 
Vishnu symbol as a distinctive mark of the Mahayina school. 

Fig. 41 is a typical specimen of the Vishnu symbols dug 
up at Sarnath: it has an image of Gan^sha carved upon it. It 
is crowned by the amalaka ; the finial, water-pot, or kalasha, 
is missing in most cases. It was probably carved in a separate 
piece and perhaps in a different material. Like all Vishnu 
shrines, the sides of the sikhara are ornamented with sun- 
windows : Vishnu watches for the approach of his lovely bride 
Lakshmi, or Sri, who is Ushas, the Vedic Dawn-maiden. 

The identity of Lakshmi with Ushas, I venture to assert. 



THE ALLEGORY OF THE DAWN-MAIDEN 97 

is proved by the allegory of the Churning of the Ocean, an 
ancient Indo-Aryan myth, the meaning of which has long 
been a mystery to Oriental scholars. It is really a vivid picture 
of the dawn and sunrise in the HimMayas, which were evidently 
the cradle of one branch of the 
Indo-Aryan family ; with Kail^sa, 
the great snow-capped peak of 
Siva, and Mount Mandara, 
Vishnu's abode, in the back- 
ground. The Devas, the powers 
of light, combine with the Asuras, 
the powers of darkness, to churn 
the cosmic ocean for the nectar 
of life and immortality. They 
use for a churning-stick Vishnu's 
mountain, Mandara, and for a 
rope the serpent Ananta, or 
Eternity (the Milky Way), which 
encircles the earth. After a long 
churning, fire and poisonous 
smoke (the first glow upon the 
mountains before dawn, and the 
gathering together of the mists 
and clouds in the valleys) ob- 
scure the sky, and the Devas 
are disheartened. Siva drinks 
the poison and becomes " blue- 
throated," i.e. the crimson glow on his snowy peak gradually 
turns to dazzling white and the mountain slopes below the 
snow-line become violet-blue. At the same time Lakshmt, the 
dawn, appears, seated on the Brahmi lotus, bringing with her 
health, dance and song, happiness and prosperity, and the jar 
of nectar which Indra, the rain-god, pouring his refreshing 
7 




Fig. 41.- 



-Miniature Vishnu Shrine found at 
Sarnath. 



98 VISHNU SHRINE AT BODH-GAYA 

showers upon her, takes into his keeping. As she rises from 
the cosmic ocean and prepares to fling herself upon Vishnu's 
breast, the Devas shout triumphant hymns and the powers of 
darkness fling themselves down into the underworld where 
they dwell. 

The whole site of Sarnath was covered with innumerable 
brick-built and monolithic sttipas of diff'erent dimensions, and 
it is probable that pairs of Vishnu and Siva symbols were often 
placed there by the same devotee. Perhaps some of the brick 
bases now remaining will prove to have belonged to Vishnu 
shrines, instead of stfipas, for the tall sikharas which crowned 
them were much easier to destroy than the more solid structure 
of the sttipa. 

The structural importance and historical interest attaching 
to the great Vishnu shrine of Bodh-Gayi are unique. Seeing 
that all the symbolism of Buddhist art was derived from the 
ancient Indo-Aryan tradition, the fitness of building a shrine 
to symbolise the Vaishnava aspect of the Blessed One at the 
spot where the Buddha had overcome the powers of Mara, the 
Evil One, needs no further explanation. It was an im- 
memorial tradition to mark the site of a famous Bodhi tree 
with a Vishnu shrine, and the place where the yogi who sat 
under it was cremated with a Siva shrine, or stfipa. Fergusson's 
chronological estimate of the building is an amusing attempt 
to reconcile the inconsistencies of his stylistic categories. He 
had to explain how the " Hindu " sikhara, typical of " a Dasyu 
province," came to be built on one of the most sacred sites of 
Buddhism. He surmounted the difficulty by calling the 
Vishnu sikhara a sttipa : in the " Cave Temples of India" he 
declared that it was " evidently of foreign design, as there is 
nothing of the same style in India, either before or after it." 
He adds that "anyone at all familiar with the architecture of 
the East would know that it was built by the Burmese in the 



I'LAl'l'; xxv 




ARCHES IN THE SIKHARA OF THE BODH-GAYA TEMPLE 



98] 



VISHNU SHRINE AT BODH-GAYA 



99 



thirteenth or fourteenth century a.d." In the first edition of 
his " History of Indian and Eastern Architecture " he revised 
this estimate by attributing it to the sixth century a.d. 

Dr. Burgess, in the revised edition of Fergusson's work, 




Fig. 42.— The Temple of Bodh-Gaya, Restored (from Cunningham's 
" Mahabodhi ")• 



published in 19 10, observes that the date of the erection of 
the " chaitya " is still obscure. When all the misconceptions 
of Fergusson and his followers regarding the origin and sym- 
bolism of the sttipa and sikhara are cleared away, General 
Cunningham's contention that the Bodh-Gayi temple was 



loo HINDU ARCHES 

built in the reign of the Kushan King Huvishka, or in the 
first century B.C., may after all prove to be nearer the mark than 
any other conjectures. Moreover, there need be no hesitation in 
believing that the arches in the interior (PI. XXV) belonged 
to the original structure and were not, as Fergusson supposed, 
placed there by the Burmese restorers in the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries. 

When further progress is made in the study of Indian 
craftsmanship, it will, I am sure, be proved conclusively not 
only that Fergusson was again in error in laying down the 
axiom that Hindu builders never used the arch structurally 
before Muhammadan times, but that the Muhammadans in 
India were themselves the borrowers and derived the Indian 
forms of the pointed arch from the brick buildings of Hindu 
Gaur.^ 

I have mentioned above that pairs of temples with an 
antithetical or complementary significance, like the dhwaja- 
stambhas at the gateways of stilpas, were often built side by 
side in India, as they were near Sennacherib's palace at Nine- 
veh. Mamallapuram furnishes one instance (PI. XXVI), 
which is interesting as it gives a clue to the derivation of the 
most usual method of constructing a sikhara, i.e. with stone 
ribs built up in short sections and tied together at regular 
intervals by through horizontal courses of masonry. 

These two shrines are, like the other Raths at Mamalla- 
puram, monolithic models. The popular traditional names 
given to them, Arjtlna's and Draupadi's Raths, should be 
very significant to Indians who study their own history, but 
convey nothing to Europeans who are misled by arbitrary 
archaeological terms of Western origin. Arjtlna was the hero 
of the Mahabh^rata who won victory for the Pandavas by the 

1 This question is discussed in greater detail in my previous work on Indian 
Architecture. 



> 

i- 

< 





SIVA AND VISHNU SHRINES loi 

magic weapons he obtained from Mah^deva himself, through 
the practice of austerities in the depths of the Himalayan 
forests. Arjtina's Rath is, therefore, only a poetical synonym 
for a Siva temple ; the adjoining one, Draupadi's Rath, named 
after the common wife of the five P^ndava brothers, is dedi- 
cated to Pirvati, Uma, or Dtirg^, which are all poetical names 
for Siva's nature-force or sakti, popularly called his wife.^ 
Draupadi's Rath is not, therefore, a Vishnu shrine, but sym- 
bolises Parvati, the Creatrix, as she is represented in the famous 
sculpture of the Trimtlrti at Elephanta.*^ 

It is, doubtless, an exact reproduction of an ancient Indian 
village shrine. The form of the roof was derived from primi- 
tive construction of bambu and thatch, but very skilfully 
adapted to the technique of brick and stone, and not, as 
amateur European craftsmen consider it, an unintelligent imi- 
tation. When the up-to-date building craft of Anglo-India 
equals the magnificent work of ancient and medieval India, 
or even that of living Indian master-builders, there may be 
some show of reason in the neglect and disparagement of the 
Indian building tradition. 

Siva and Vishnu shrines occur in pairs at Pattadakal in 
the south-west of India (PI. LIX) ; at Khajuraho in Central 
India ; at Bhuvan^shwar in Orissa ; and no doubt many other 
instances could be cited in every part of India had the great 
quantity of archaeological material collected since Fergusson 
wrote not been arranged according to his unscientific cate- 
gories. In every instance where these pairs are found, archae- 
ologists, Indian as well as European, have described the 
Vishnu shrine as northern, or Indo-Aryan, and the Siva shrine 
as southern, or Dravidian, regardless of the locality in which 

1 Compare the similar Dfirga shrine built outside the KMe chaitya-house 
(PI. XVIII) as a substitute for one of the pair of dhwaja-stambhas. 
* See below, p. 163. 
1* 



I02 SECTARIAL MARKS 

they are placed and of the obvious fact that the craftsmanship 
of both belongs to the same school and often is of precisely 
the same date — the only distinction between the two temples 
as regards style being in the symbolism. 

This symbolic distinction had an important bearing upon 
the respective constructive principles of Vishnu and Siva 
shrines. The distinction is also recognised in the sectarial 
marks painted on the foreheads of Vaishnavaites and Saivaites. 
As Vishnu, regarded as a nature-symbol, is the sun at its 
zenith and nadir, the Vaishnava schools of philosophy 
generally took for their sectarial marks various lines which 
stood for the upright arm of the cosmic cross,' and the sikharas 
of Vishnu shrines (whether Buddhist, Jain, Vaishnavaite or 
Saivaite) were built in soaring lines — the lines of the mountain 
peak — like the Gothic spire, its Western analogue. The 
rival schools of Saivaites draw horizontal lines upon their 
foreheads to indicate the philosophical concepts of Brahmi 
and Siva, which were based upon the earliest Vedic symbolism 
of sunrise and sunset — or the horizontal arm of the cross. 
The roofs of Siva shrines, though they might emulate those 
of Vishnu in height, were therefore always built in horizontal 
courses, like the pyramids of Egypt. 

There was also a composite form of construction, i.e. in- 
stead of building Vishnu and Siva shrines separately in pairs, 
both technical methods and both symbols were combined in 
one temple. This is the characteristic of the medieval school 
of temple-building in Western India, which Fergusson, for 
want of a better name, called " Chalukyan," from the dynasty 
which ruled over that part of India. 

All over the north of India there are to be found in- 
numerable fine examples of the simplest type of Vishnu 

> See Moor's " Hindu Pantheon," PI. I, for a complete series of Indian sectarial 
marks. 



ri.Aii' xx\i[ 



•«^- 







'4 















ti-.. 



RUINED blKHARA, SHOWINc; CONSTRUCTION 



CONSTRUCTION OF THE SIKHARA 103 

shrines, consisting of a cell— the holy of holies— and an ante- 
chamber ; but without the splendid halls of worship {manda- 
pams) which belong to the larger and more famous ones. It 
would take volumes to do justice to the intuitive sense of 
beauty and splendid craftsmanship which they display. A 
complete study of their structure would be a valuable addition 
to architectural knowledge, but would form a considerable 
monograph in itself. In some of them a cone of brickwork, 
suggestive of the structures shown in the Nineveh bas-relief 
(fig. 40), forms the core upon which the stone facing of the 
sikhara is built. Many are built entirely of exceedingly fine 
brickwork, with cut or moulded ornaments, finished with fine 
polished stucco. 

PI. XXXIV is a beautiful example of a brick sikhara, 
illustrating the composite style, called by Fergusson " Chalu- 
kyan," in which both the Vishnu and Siva principles of con- 
struction are combined in one sikhara. The amalaka, Vishnu's 
symbol, is used as an ornament in the horizontal courses of 
the brickwork, and the sikhara would be crowned with Siva's 
symbol, the stdpa dome, instead of by the amalaka. In the 
present instance the dome has fallen. PI. XXXV, from 
another temple, shows the fine brickwork on a larger scale, 
with some of the white stucco which covered it. 

PI. XXXIII shows a fine stone-built Vishnu shrine, pos- 
sibly of the eighth century, at Barwar Sagar, in the Jhansi 
district, Central Provinces. Here small porches are added in 
the north, south, and west sides, making it a chaumukh (four- 
Faced), as in a Brahmi shrine ; but the principal entrance on 
the east, the sikhara, and the miniature sun-windows skilfully 
used as ornaments in combination with the amalaka, indicate 
that the Vaishnava aspect of the Trimtirti is specially wor- 
shipped. 

A ruined temple at Khajuraho (PI. XXVII) shows very 



I04 THE SIVA SHRINE 

clearly the usual method of constructing a ribbed sikhara when 
stone is the material. The core is made of rough coursed 
rubble, without mortar or cement, bound together at intervals 
by larger horizontal slabs of stone. The weight of the heavy 
amalaka which crowns the sikhara acts as a key-stone. 

We will now proceed to analyse the structure and sym- 
bolism of a Siva shrine, of which Arjfina's Rath at Mamalla- 
puram is a typical example. To clear the ground of the 
misconceptions which Fergusson's analysis has created, it will 
be best to begin with two definite propositions. First, that 
the Siva shrine is a development of the sttlpa. Secondly, that 
the sttipa, a symbol not only of the Jains, but of orthodox 
Brahmanism, before it was adopted by Buddhism, was the 
true prototype of the modern Siva lingam. 

For the first proposition let us compare the two illustra- 
tions in PI. XXVIII, which give the front view of Arjtlna's 
Rath, and that of the chaitya in the chapter-house of Ajanti 
numbered twenty-six. The side view of Arjtina's Rath in 
PI. XXVI will be useful for reference. It is necessary to 
observe that though both are monolithic models and not 
structural shrines, there is a considerable difference in the 
treatment. The porch and the interior of the shrine, which are 
exactly reproduced in Arjtina's Rath, are only carved in relief 
upon the front of the Ajanta chaitya, so that the image seems as 
if it were placed within the porch, whereas in reality it would 
be within the shrine under the dome. Now, the porches in the 
two models are almost exactly similar. The columns are of 
the same design, only in one they are more elaborately carved 
than in the other. The entablature above the chhaja supported 
by them both are alike in reproducing two rows of monastic 
cells, one above the other, and are evidently of common origin. 
The Buddhist image is seated upon a throne guarded by lions : 
Dtirga's lions guard the entrance of Siva's temple. 



> 

X 

< 




< 

H 

< 




< 



5 

a; 



THE SIVA SHRINE 105 

The' shrines behind the porch differ in shape of plan : in 
the Ajanti model it is circular, or of the vesara type, according 
to the definition of the Silpa-sistras," while Siva's shrine is 
square, or of the nagara type. The base of the chaitya is 
sculptured in two stories, each divided by pilasters into shrines 
filled with figures. The two lower stories of Arjtlna's Rath 
are treated in exactly the same way. A minor difference is 
that the monastic cells do not continue all round the chaitya 
as they do in ^e shrine of 
Siva, and no yogi cells are 
shown in the former. Ar- 
jtlna's Rath is a nava-ratna 
(nine-jewelled) temple, or one 
that has eight yogi cells with 
domes, besides the dome 
which covers the principal 
cell containing the sacred 
image. But the so-called 
" Dravidian " dome, differs 
only from the northern dome 
in showing externally the 

eieht ribs used in the con- FlG.43-Plan of the Intemal structure of Ancient 
O . , , , „ , , Tain Stflpa, showing the " Eight-petalled Lotus. 

struction of both,' and 'by 

having outward curving eaves added to throw the rain off the 
walls of 'the cell (see fig. 37)- The dome of the chaitya is 
crowned by the Vedic altar and tee ; the other, when completed, 
would have had the water-pot finial {kalashd). 

Ther^ is then not the least difference between the two 
shrines as regards "style." Such differences as there are 
only arise from structural conditions— that one was a cubical 

' See above, p. 89. . • . t • *a.,™ 

2 Fig. 43 shows the sftuctural arrangement of the interior of an ancient Jain stflpa 

near Mathur^. 




io6 SIVA'S LINGAM 

shrine, built in three stories ; the other a cyHndrical shrine 
built in one storey. One was crowned by a Brahmanical 
symbol which was also Buddhist ; the other by a Buddhist 
symbol which was also Brahmanical. 

There is no need to demonstrate the fact that the sculp- 
tured Mahiyina chaitya of Ajanti was a development of the 
Hinayana chaitya of Karld (PI. XIX) ; it must therefore be 
obvious that the Siva, or so-called Dravidian temple, is also 
derived from the chaitya or sttapa. Its prototype was the 
cubical tomb with a domed roof shown in the Nineveh,sculp- 
ture (fig. 40) ; the chaitya of Hinayana Buddhism was a 
variety of this prototype -with a circular (lotus) plan.instead 
of a square one. 

This derivation throws' new light both upon the history 
of the Saiva cult and upon the oagin of the phallie symbol, 
the lingam, which now. belongs to it. *Siva, as the Lord of 
Death and Immortality, was always assec^ted ' with the 
cremation or burial ground, and haturally one of his symbols 
would be the st^pa, which became a cenotaph in India, but 
was a tomb in its earlier derivations. In his Brahma aspect, 
as the Lord of Life, Siva had another symbol, the bull, which 
is carved beside Arjtina's Rath at Mamallapuram (PI. XXVIII). 
Among the Aryan community, whose wealth consisted largely 
of cattle, the bull had ' been the sy^mbol 'of procreation from 
prehistoric times. It was also the sacrificial aninpal, and there- 
fore connoted in its symbolism the ideas not only of. life and 
death, but of the bliss of immortality! which Vedic India 
hoped to attain by means of sacrifices-. ' 

Now, there was an early phallic worship, common to the 
whole primitive world, but except for one or two casual allu- 
sions to it in the Upanishads, the Aryan phi|osophy of India 
was in no way identified with it. Oriental scholars, like 

' Siva's bull is called JVandi— bliss. 



SIVA'S LINGAM 107 

H. H. Wilson and Monier Williams, have been puzzled to 
account for the Saivaites using a symbol associated with the 
licentious orgies of Western paganism ; for not only, as Monier 
Williams 'observed, is the relation between the sexes in India 
regarded as a sacred mystery and never held to be suggestive 
of indecent ideas, but Saivism is one of the most austere cults 
of all India and preaches asceticism as a religion. I believe 
the explanation is this : the original symbols of Saivism in 
ancient India were the bull and the sttlpa— life, death and 
sacrifice. But the ideas connected with symbols are always 
interchanging, especially in the case of those which, like the 
bull and the stdpa, represent pairs of opposites. The oldest 
Saivaite lingams yet discovered ' (apart from the sttipa itself) 
have no phallic suggestions of any kind. They consist of 
four carved heads, arranged crossways on a short pillar which 
is fixed in the centre of a square lustration salver, and evi- 
dently, correspond to the Mahayanist Brahma, symbol of a 
sttipa with four slirines facing the four cardinal points 
(fig. 54). This was the first step, in the transference of the 
Brahma, or procreative, attributes of the bull to the Saiva or 
tamasic attributes of,fhe sttipa — or rather, their combination 
in one and tiie same symbol. When it is considered that 
the low-caste priests who attend Saiva temples are generally 
illiterate, and on that account held in great contempt by the 
learned Brahman pandits who expound the philosophy of 
the Saiva' cult, it is easy to understand how vulgar phallic 
notions became .associated with the symbol. The influx of 
Scythian tribes into" India probably tended towards the cor- 
ruption of the popjildr aspects of Hinduism ; but it was not 
until Muhammadan times, and as a concession to the hatred 

^ The Indian Museutp, Calcutta, has many examples of them; they are probably 
contemporary with the rise of Mah%4na Buddhism about the first century of the Christian 
era, when the aniconic symbols of Vedic India began to be anthropomorphosised. 



io8 THE BRAHMA SHRINE 

of Islam for anthropomorphic symbolism, that the lingam 
in its present form was substituted for the four-headed 
Brahma image, like the splendid sculpture at Elephanta 
(PL LIV and fig. 55). 

The symbolism of the sttlpa is, however, still retained in 
the domes surmounting the high pyramidal roofs of Siva 
shrines ; but as these no longer serve a structural purpose, 
they are built in solid masonry and brickwork, and only give 
in their external sculptured form the evidence of their structural 
origin. 

While innumerable Vishnu and Siva shrines are thus 
dedicated to the last two persons of the Hindu Trimtirti, it 
might seem as if Brahmi, the Creator, remains without any 
structural symbol of worship. It is a fact that there are very 
few temples in India dedicated exclusively to Brahma, but 
every chaumukh shrine, or that which has four doors facing 
the cardinal points, covered by a Vishnu sikhara or a Siva 
dome, is a Brahmi- Vishnu or Brahm^-Siva temple, as the 
case may be. It is only the uninformed European who regards 
Brahmi, Vishnu, and Siva as three "gods," instead of the 
three Aspects of the One. 

An important point to which the attention of archaeologists 
seems never to have been directed is that the orientation of 
an Indian temple invariably indicates the particular Aspect 
of the Nature-force {Prakriti), or Soul-force {Purusha), to 
which the temple is dedicated ; for the worshipper must place 
himself or herself " in tune with the Infinite," just as an Indian 
singer always knows, either by intuition or by study, the time 
of day or night and season of the year at which the r%a he 
sings must be sung. A Brahma temple- has four entrances, 
facing the four cardinal points ; a Vishnu temple one entrance, 
facing the rising sun ; and a Siva temple one entrance, facing 
the setting sun. But the three Aspects are often combined in 



THE THREE ASPECTS 109 

one temple. Thus the mandapam of a temple will symbolise 
Siva in its constructive principle ; the shrine itself with four 
doors will symbolise Brahmi; while the image and the sikhara 
which covers the shrine will symbolise Vishnu. The north 
and south aspects and the intermediate points also have their 
special dedications. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE EVOLUTION OF INDIAN FINE ART AND ITS INFLUENCE 

ON TEMPLE BUILDING — THE GANDHARAN SCHOOL THE 

PHILOSOPHY OF INDIAN TEMPLE BUILDING INDIAN 

ARCHES — THE TEMPLE OF MARTAND 

In the preceding chapters I have endeavoured to trace the 
evolution of Indo-Aryan temple architecture from its founda- 
tion in the ancient village communities, and to show the true 
relationship between the branch of Indian religion, called in 
Europe " Buddhism," and the other two branches of the same 
tree, Vaishnavism and Saivism. The further development of 
Vishnu and Siva temples from simple village shrines into the 
great medieval cathedrals of India will be discussed in its 
proper chronological sequence. We must now go back to the 
last centuries before the Christian era, and mark the beginning 
of a new movement which was destined to have a profound 
influence upon the whole art of Asia, and even upon that of 
Europe. 

We have seen in the great chaitya-house of Karl^, in the 
monasteries of Nasik, and later in the gateways of Sancht, how 
the dislike of the Vedic philosophers for anthropomorphic 
symbols of the Deity acted upon the art of Hlnayana Buddh- 
ism. The Devas — the bright nature-gods of the early Rig- 
Veda — sit upon their altars on the mighty pillars of the 
Sangha to listen to the inspired teaching of the Buddha. 
Brahmi, with his lovely handmaiden the Dawn — she whom 
gods and demons churned from the cosmic ocean arid gave to 



BUDDHIST ICONS in 

men as Sri — is there. Indra upon his elephant, the rain- 
cloud ; Dtirga upon her tawny lion, the scorching heat of the 
Indian plains — all the Vedic gods are there as witnesses of 
the Truth. But Buddha, the Blessed One Himself, is only 
represented by the precious relics placed within the Vedic 
altar upon the chaitya of the Pari-Nirvana. 

Suddenly, about the beginning of the Christian era, the 
chaitya becomes something more than a nature-symbol and a 
reliquary : it is transformed into a shrine for the Buddha as 
the Deity, and everywhere images of the Blessed One as the 
Preacher, or as the Great Yogi, appear within the chaitya- 
houses and monasteries of the Sangha. Are we to suppose 
that during the five centuries which had elapsed since the first 
preaching of the Law, all the followers of the Buddha had kept 
strictly to the spirit of Aryan philosophy, as expounded in the 
Deer Park at Sarnath,and even refrained from making for them- 
selves graven or painted icons to keep in memory the personality 
of their beloved Master ? As human nature is, this would be 
altogether incredible. There must have been numbers of 
pious Buddhists, outside the strict rules of the Sangha, who 
kept among their household gods His pictured and graven 
image, before which they would sit in silent adoration as they 
meditated daily upon His inspired precepts. All that we really 
know is that from the chaitya-houses and monasteries of the 
orthodox Sangha, upon which the finest artistry of the Aryan 
genius was lavished, such pictures and images were excluded. 

It is easy to understand, also, that a close restriction of 
this kind upon the highest imagination of the painter and 
sculptor is sufficient in itself to account for the comparative 
barrenness of Indo-Aryan fine art during the centuries when 
the Western branch of the same family tree was producing 
such wonderful fruit in the temples of ancient Greece. In 
later times it had the same sterilising effect upon the Muham- 



112 THE NEW DEPARTURE 

madan art of Europe and Asia. But for this restriction early 
Aryan sculpture and painting might have grown to the same 
height in India as it did in Greece ; for the ideal gods of 
Hellas were of the same aesthetic growth as the early hymns 
of the Rig-Veda, sung by the Aryans in their Eastern home 
to the nature-gods they worshipped. Here, however, the 
artistic genius of the Western Aryans stopped short. They 
never were inspired with a more profound metaphysic than 
the Homeric gods ; for Greece lost her freedom, and her 
artists became the servants of foreign patrons less intellectual 
than their own countrymen before that consummation was 
reached. Itwas left to their brother-artists in the East to proceed 
from the primitive nature-gods of the Rig- Veda to the inspired 
conceptions of the Upanishads ; but there never was at any 
time that irreconcilable antagonism between the ideals of 
Greece and of India which modern classical scholasticism 
fondly imagines — because the inspiration both of Greece and 
of India lies beyond its aesthetic comprehension. 

The first great impulse of the new movement, within the 
jurisdiction of the Buddhist Sangha itself, was synchronous 
with a considerable readjustment of political conditions in 
Northern India. In the year 184 B.C. the Mauryan dynasty 
founded by Chandragupta became extinct, and a new one, 
known as the Sunga, was established upon the imperial throne 
of Pataliputra. Pushyamitra, the first of the line, was not a 
follower of the Buddha, but celebrated his accession and a 
decisive victory over Menander, a Baktrian monarch who, like 
Seleukos, was ambitious of repeating the conquests of Alex- 
ander, by the old Vedic rite of the great horse sacrifice. 

But the dominions over which Pushyamitra ruled were of 
small extent compared with those of Asoka. After the death 
of the latter, the glory of the Mauryan empire was soon 
eclipsed by the rise of another dynasty, that of the Andhras, 



DYNASTIC CHANGES 113 

which at that time occupied the deltas of the Godsivart and 
Krishnd Rivers, but gradually extended their sway over the 
whole of the Dekhan ; until in 27 B.C. they overthrew the suc- 
cessors of the Sungas, and established themselves as the 
leading power in Central and a great part of Northern India. 

The Andhra kings seem to have been Buddhist ; the 
gateways of Sinchi (PI. V) and the carved railing of the 
Amarivati sttipa (PI. X) were among the architectural works 
dedicated to that cult which were completed under their 
patronage between the second century B.C. and the end of the 
third century A.D., when the dynasty was superseded by others. 

In the meantime the north-western part of Asoka's 
dominions had been occupied by invaders of Scythian or 
Iranian descent about the second century B.C., and by a.d. 45 
a chieftain of the Kushans, one of their tribes, founded a 
dynasty under which Buddhism, the religion adopted by these 
clans probably as the result of Asoka's missionary enterprises, 
began to enter upon a new phase. 

The impelling cause was only incidentally dynastic and 
racial. The new invaders, by their adoption of Buddhist 
culture, merely contributed one more racial subdivision to 
the Indo-Aryan synthesis. The Kushan king, Kanishka, 
emulated Asoka's zeal for the religion of his Indian subjects, 
and there is no reason to suppose that the Scythian invasions 
disturbed to any great extent the organisation of the Aryan 
village communities in north-western India. 

The philosophy of Yoga, as expounded by Patanjali, 
seems to have been the basis of the teaching of the Buddhist 
monk, Nigarjuna, who appeared in Kanishka's reign as the 
leader of a new school which eventually led to the secession 
of the northern Buddhists from the orthodox tradition of the 
Sangha. From about the beginning of the Christian era the 
northern or reformed schools were known as the Mah^yina, or 

8 



114 THE MAHAYAnA SCHOOL 

Great Vehicle, to distinguish them from those of the Hinaydna, 
or Little Vehicle, which remained steadfast to the early tea'ching 
of Buddhist philosophy. 

It is a common but erroneous view of the history of Indo- 
Aryan religion to regard this new movement as the herald of 
what Europeans describe as the triumph of Brahmanism, or 
of Hinduism over Buddhism. Brahmans were among the 
first disciples of the Buddha, and it was the Brahman accept- 
ance of his teaching in the Deer Park at Sarnath which set 
the seal of victory upon the Enlightenment under the Bodhi 
tree. The new Brahmanical teaching which sprang up later 
within Buddhism itself, and eventually superseded the original 
doctrines of Buddha, was as far removed from the older 
orthodox Brahmanism of those who remained outside the 
Buddhist pale as it was from the Buddha's own teaching. 

The philosophy of Yoga, of which Patanjali was the chief 
exponent, contained by implication the doctrine of Incarnation ; 
for if the soul within the human body could be and was joined 
with the Divine through the spiritual exercises enjoined by 
Yoga, it followed that the Divinity Itself could also be mani- 
fested to the world in the person of the saints and seers who 
taught this spiritual wisdom. And as soon as Buddhist 
philosophy admitted the possibility of a personal God, it 
became inevitable that the Buddha should be venerated as a 
manifestation of the Supreme Deity, though he himself might 
not have asserted such a claim. Similarly Krishna, the hero 
of the Mahibharata, and the inspired author of the Bhagavad 
Gita which contained the philosophy of the Vaishnavaite sect, 
was regarded as one of the incarnations of Vishnu. 

The Kushan dynasty, under Kadphises I, established 
itself in North-west India circa 45 B.C., when the ferment of 
these new ideas was beginning to transform the primitive 
teachings of Hinduism. The western borders of the Kushan 



THE KUSHAN EMPIRE 115 

dominions were in contact with the Roman Empire, and 
included part of the old Graeco-Baktrian Empire of Seleukus, 
As this new dynasty grew in power and affluence, numbers of 
Graeco-Roman masons and carpenters, who were always 
travelling in search of employment, were attracted to the 
Kushan capital, Purushapilra — the modern Peshawar — to 
assist in building the monasteries, chaityas, and chaitya- 
houses which were required for the crowds of Buddhist 
monks who collected there. This feeble backward splash of 
Aryan culture which thus flowed over North-west India until 
the Kushan dynasty came to an end in the fourth century 
A.D., created that Gandharan school of building and sculpture 
the influence of which upon Indian art has been so strangely 
misinterpreted and exaggerated by Western scholars. 

Whatever inspiration there was in this new court fashion, 
it was but a feeble reflection of the flame which the Aryan 
genius had lighted in India ten centuries before these Kushan 
kings came under its influence — a flame which continued to 
burn brightly for many centuries after the Kushan dynasty 
had passed away. 

Hellas herself was under the heel of Rome ; the light of 
her own inspiration was becoming dim, and her best artists 
devoted their talents to the service of Roman patricians. 
Among the best of the Gandharan craftsmen there were 
sometimes a few to compare with the second-best of the Greek 
sculptors and painters who adorned the villas of Pompeii and 
Herculaneum. But except for an occasional piece of fine 
academic craftsmanship, Gandharan sculpture is generally 
petty in ideas and feeble in execution, and nothing that was 
produced under the patronage of the Kushan kings approached 
in grandeur of conception the chaitya-house of Karl6 or the 
monasteries of Nisik, or showed the warm vitality and un- 
affected beauty of the Sanchi gateways. So far from inspiring 



]i6 IMAGES OF THE BUDDHA 

the ideals of Indo-Aryan art, it was not until the Gandharan 
master-masons had drunk in the inspiration of Indo-Aryan 
philosophy and religion that any of their sculpture became 
worthy of comparison with the best original art of India. 

Indirectly, however, the inflow of this current from the 
West greatly assisted the new movement from within, which 
was already tending towards the removal of the restraint which 
had hindered the higher development of Indo-Aryan sculpture 
and painting from the earliest Vedic times. The Kushan kings 
were evidently liberal patrons of the fine arts, and, like the Great 
Moguls, were personally interested in sculpture and painting. 
Though of the Buddhist faith, they were indifferent to the rule 
of the Hinayana school, which forbade any icon of the Master's 
personality in the service of the Sangha. The elders of the 
Buddhist Church in Gandhara, anxious to reconcile their royal 
patrons' dilettantism with the ritualistic traditions of their creed, 
withdrew the prohibition, but laid down strict rules, in the spirit 
of Vedic philosophy, to prevent vulgar idolatry. The image of 
the Blessed One was not to be fashioned, like those of the 
Olympian gods, as an ideal human ; nor was it to be worshipped 
until it had been consecrated with appropriate rites. The imager 
by spiritual insight must realise the Divinity which transfigured 
Him when He attained Nirvana under the Bodhi tree at Gayi: 
he must transport himself by meditation to the Tusita heavens, 
where the Buddha now watched humanity with compassionate 
eyes, and show the divine glory revealed to him there. 

The naive endeavours of the unimaginative Western crafts- 
man to adapt his materialistic art to these unfamiliar mystic 
ideas are to be seen in the early sculptures of the Gandhara 
school. The intellectual atmosphere of the Kushan court must 
have presented many analogies to that which exists in modern 
India: there were the similar endeavours to understand the 
Indian mind de haut en bas, the same aloofness from it, and 



GANDHARAN COURT FASHIONS 117 

the same honest, but hopeless, misconceptions. There is also 
a curious suggestion of modern commercialism in the average 
work of the Gandharan craftsmen. One can easily imagine them 
crying their wares in the manner of the Western shopkeeper : 
" Large stock of Olympian gods in latest fashion to suit every 
taste. Correct Baktrian images, as supplied to the Royal 
Court," etc. ! 

The profound critical error which Western writers have 
made is in supposing that these new court fashions, imported 
from the West, were any more inspiring to Indo-Aryan artists 
at the beginning of the Christian era than the "styles" of 
architecture, principles of anatomy and perspective now taught 
in Indian schools of art. As a historical chapter in Indian art 
the Gandharan school is only interesting for its gradual assimila- 
tions of Indian ideals. Except for a few technical mannerisms, 
Indo-Aryan art remained uninfluenced by it. 

But the effect of the encouragement which it gave to Indian 
sculpture and painting was very vital. From the beginning of 
the Christian era Indian sculptors and painters began to vie 
with others in creating images showing the Deity in every 
aspect, as symbols of philosophic concepts, and to be used as 
aids to meditation. The sttlpa became a shrine in which gold, 
silver, bronze, or stone images of Jain and Buddhist saints, 
of Vishnu or of Siva, were placed. The dedication of such 
icons as votive offerings became the duty of devout Hindus of 
every sect. 

The same precautions were taken by the Brahmanical sects 
to prevent image worship being regarded as anything more than 
a help and preparation for those who were unable to grasp the 
abstruse conceptions of Vedic philosophy. The Vedic Rishis 
had said : "The vulgar look for their gods in water; men of 
wider knowledge in celestial bodies ; the ignorant in wood, clay, 
or stone ; but the wisest men in the Universal Self." Similarly 

8* 



ii8 CLASSIFICATION OF SHRINES 

the Maha-Nirvana Tantra, after giving elaborate rules for the 
consecration and worship of images, adds the warning : " Those 
who (in their ignorance) believe that Ishwara is (only) in images 
of clay, or stone, or metal, or wood, merely trouble themselves 
by their tapas. They can never attain liberation without know- 
ledge. . . . Yoga is the union of the embodied soul with the 
Supreme Soul ; Pdji is the union of the worshipper and the 
worshipped ; but he who realises that all things are Brahman, 
for him there is neither Yoga nor Ptlja." ^ 

The traditions of the Silpa-sdstras, which classify the 
structure of viminas, or shrines, by the type of image contained 
by them, no doubt go back to this time. The Manasira says 
that they are of three kinds. The first, called sfhdnaka^ con- 
tains an image standing erect ; the second, called dsana, contains 
a seated image ; and the third, called sdyana, a recumbent one.^ 

The st'hinaka type would contain an image of Vishnu as 
the Pillar of the Universe, or of the Buddha in a similar aspect 
as the Teacher of the Law. The roof of it would be the sikhara. 
The asana type would be represented by an image of Buddha 
or of Siva in a Yoga attitude, or seated on a throne — the roof 
of the cell being flat or domical, or a combination of the terraced 
roof and dome. Arjtina's Rath at Mamallapuram (PI. XXVI) 
is an illustration of it. 

Bhlma's Rath at the same place (PI. XXIV) is a monastic 
temple of the sayana type : it is oblong in plan and covered by 
a vaulted roof with pointed arch or lotus-leaf gables. This was 
designed for a recumbent image, such as that of Vishnu- 
Nirayana reposing in the cosmic serpent Ananta, or the 
analogous image of the Buddha in the sleep of Pari-Nirvana. 

The Teli-ka Mandir, or Oilman's temple, at Gwalior 

^ Translated by Arthur Avalon, pp. 348-9. 
^ Standing firm, like the trunk of a tree. 
^ Mm Raz, p. 49. 



PI, All: \xix 




THIi TKLI-KA MANDIR, OWAI,IOR 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF TEMPLE BUILDING 



119 



(PI. XXIX), is another fine example of the siyana type, but 
here the cell remains square, and only the double vaulted roof, 
gabled at the ends with sun-windows, shows that it was meant 
for an image of Vishnu-N^riyana. Fergusson attributes it to 
about the tenth or eleventh centuries ; but the data by which 
he calculated, in the absence of inscriptions, were in most cases 
very unreliable, and probably the temple, like that at Bodh- 
Gay^, is a good many centuries earlier than his estimate. 

The raising of sculpture from an accessory detail to the 
principal subject in design, or, in modern phraseology, from a 
decorative to a fine art, was an epoch-making event in Indian 
architecture. The sculptured images of the gods whom we see 
at Karl^ and Nasik mqrely as onlookers, became the sacred 
symbols for which the shrines were built. The symbolism of 
the shrine, as regards plan and structure, had to be adapted to 
the particular type of image for which it was intended. And 
these considerations particularly affected the design of the roof. 
Indian temple builders never troubled themselves with pagan 
notions of beauty for beauty's sake. The skilful jugglery of 
lines and spaces which modern academicians teach as the art 
of building would have seemed to them childish play. 

The great thinkers of India, who anticipated Western en- 
deavours to establish religion upon a scientific basis, taught 
their master-builders to express in concrete architectural terms 
the theoretical principles of the cosmic forces, as the different 
schools of philosophy conceived them to be. Indo-Aryan 
builders were pure scientists — philosophers in brick and stone. 
Yet the fine intuition of the artist-craftsman clothed the science 
of natural religion with a grace and splendour of its own ; and 
thus Indian art grew, like a tree or flower, conscious of its own 
beauty and rejoicing in it always — receiving it in wondering 
adoration as a gift from heaven, but never struggling to attain 
to it by the pedantic and coquettish arts of the Renaissance. 



I20 THE PHILOSOPHY OF TEMPLE BUILDING 

The builders of the Saiva schools aimed at expressing 
the power of knowledge, of abstract thought — the static force 
of the universe. And they did so first by the image of the 
Great Yogi sitting with mind and reason set upon the Eternal, 
like a lamp in a windless place " which flickereth not." The 
plain cubical cell, with a flat roof or dome, which contained 






Q 



n 



Fig. 44a. — Diagram 
showing the Constructive 
Principle of Siva Shrines 
—with Flat Roof and 
Dome. 



n 



IE 



r 

Fig. 446.- — Diagram showing the 
Constructive Principle of Siva Shrines ; 
with Sloping Roofs as used in Hima- 
layan Districts and on the West Coast 
of India. 



this sacred symbol expressed the same idea— the dome being 
only a symbol of the sky, or of the chhatra of royalty. 

When they sought to give importance to the shrine by 
additional height, they simply raised the roof by putting cube 
upon cube like a pyramid, and crowning the topmost one with 
a dome (fig. 44a). 

But in the Himalayan districts, where the rainfall is very 
heavy, flat terraced roofs have obvious practical inconveni- 
ences ; so here it was found expedient to adapt the sym- 



SYMBOLISM OF THE ARCH 



121 



bohsm to the sloping wooden roof of the locaHty as shown in 
fig. 44d, a type of temple building which passed into China 
with the Buddhist religion.^ Similar roofs were used on the 
west coast of India, where similar meteorological conditions 
prevail (PI. XXX). In Bengal the local form of roof with 
convex curvature was adapted for the same purpose. When 
will the practical British architect in India begin to learn 
wisdom from the Indian master-builder ? 




fe-.^-^— -^- 



IHM'lllMllMlillL ... Jl'*^''^^'^ ^) *™Sfe**|>V y^'fm, J~Z, ' 






i5^ 






. >^:^. 



-^ 






Fig. 45- — Sculptured Shrines, Ellora. 



It will now become clearer why Indian builders before 
Muhammadan times used the arch, as a constructive principle, 
so seldom. The arch, as I have explained elsewhere," symbol- 
ised the aura of the sacred image, and every possible variety 
of the arch was constantly used for constructing the shrines 
or niches in which images were placed (fig. 45). For larger 
structural purposes it was also used occasionally, as in the 
sikhara at Bodh-Gayi (PI. XXV) ; but the trabeate system 
of building was preferred because it suggested a philosophical 

^ The dotted lines in the diagrams indicate the roofing. 

^ " Indian Architecture : its Psychology, Structure, and History," Chap. VI. 



122 SYMBOLISM OF THE ARCH 

idea. There was also the practical reason that when good 
timber and building stone of almost any dimensions were 
plentiful, the beam and -bracket were generally more expedient 
than the arch, especially in a country liable to severe earth- 
quakes. 

When the Muhammadans destroyed the images contained 
in the niches and adapted the buildings for their own worship, 
the niche itself and the arches which formed it remained as 
sacred symbols ; and thus from the more extended use of the 
Indian pointed arch for structural purposes a new era in 
architectural history was opened both in Europe and in India. 

It was in the buildings of the Vaishnavaite schools that 
the arch was most frequently used constructively, for colossal 
standing figures of Vishnu, or of Buddha, covered by the 
sikhara instead of by a flat roof or dome, would tend to bring 
the arch into use — as was the case at Bodh-Gay^. The in- 
tention of the builders of the Vaishnavaite schools — both those 
of Brahmanism and of Buddhism — was to symbolise the 
dynamic {rdj'asic) or active principle of nature — known to 
modern science as evolution. And for this they took the 
upright image of Vishnu or of Buddha as Upholder of the 
Universe, and for its shrine the ancient nature-symbol of 
the holy mount, which Vishnu upturned and used for a churn- 
ing stick in the allegory of the cosmic dawn.^ 

Plate XXXI gives the section of a Vaishnava sikhara, 
but in this temple there is a combination of symbols, i.e. in- 
stead of building a pair of temples, one for the Vaishnava 
Aspect and another for the Saiva Aspect, a Siva lingam is 
placed in the Brahmi shrine under a lotus dome crowned 
by Vishnu's sikhara, and Siva's bull occupies the centre of 
the pillared mandapam provided for the worshippers. Thus 

1 The equilateral triangle standing on its apex is a geometric Vishnii symbol ; the 
reverse is a Siva symbol. 




D 



z 

o 

H 
U 

w 



INDIAN TEMPLE ROOFS 



123 



one temple serves to symbolise the Three Aspects of the One. 
There may, however, be another explanation of the appearance 
of Siva's symbols in this temple — that it is a Vaishnavaite 
shrine appropriated for Saivaite worship. But in either case 
the Three Aspects are represented in the structure of the 
temple — Brahmi in the cubical cell for the image, Vishnu in 
the sikhara, and Siva in the domes of the mandapams and of 
the shrine. 

The application of this symbolism 
explains all the forms of roofs which 
covered the holy of holies in Indian 
temples. Even in Gandhara and in 
the adjoining districts influenced by 
Gandharan art the construction of 
roofs is never a meaningless repro- 
duction of foreign forms, but a well- 
reasoned adaptation of them to Indian 
philosophic ideas. The remains of 
Gandharan buildings in Gandhara 
itself have only an archaeological 
interest ; but when Indian master- 
builders had assimilated and revital- 
ised the emasculated Aryan tradition 
brought by the Graeco-Roman crafts- 
men, Indo-Gandharan art became really great, both in sculpture 
and in building — as even modern departmental art may become 
when the lessons of history have been learnt by Anglo-India. 

The finest building of the Indo-Gandharan school is un- 
questionably the ruined temple of Mirt^nd in Kashmir, built 
by King Lalitiditya-Muklapida between 725 and 760 a.d. 
There is not much left of it now, except part of the garbha- 
griha (the shrine) (PI. XXXII), and the ruins of the quad- 
rangular wall with monastic cells which enclosed it (fig. 46). 




Fig. 46.— Plan of the MSrtand 
Temple (from Fergusson's "History"). 
(Scale, 100 ft. to I in.) 



124 TEMPLE OF MARTAND 

The Indian master-builders of the eighth century have 
only taken some of the foreign suggestions brought in by the 
Gandharan craftsmen, and used them with much better effect 
than the latter did. An exact parallel to this is to be found 
in the way in which modern Indian builders sometimes adapt 
— when they are allowed to work in their own way — Public 
Works " Gothic " and " Classic " designs, reanimating the 
dry bones of Western academic formularies with the inspiration 
of real art.^ 

Except for its quasi-classic pilasters the design of the 
Mirtind temple conforms strictly to the Hindu tradition of 
the time. The trefoil arches were not a foreign suggestion : 
they were designed as a frame for the aureoled head and 
shoulders of the image for which the shrine was built. Nor 
is the pediment over them anything more than a decorative 
motif taken from the wooden hipped roofs of the HimMayan 
districts. The actual roof of the shrine was probably wooden. 
If the latter was built for a Vishnu image, it must have been 
a wooden adaptation of a brick or stone sikhara. If it was 
meant for a Siva image, it would have been the Himilayan 
form of the pyramidal roof (fig. 446), like that over the shrine 
of the Mudabidri temple (PI. XXX). 

1 Several good illustrations of this are found in the Report on Modern Indian 
Building, published by the Government of India in 1913. 




^m^mpmmi 




















^ CHAPTER X 

THE GUPTA EMPIRE VIKRAMADITYA's STATECRAFT — INDIAN 

COLONISATION CHINESE ACCOUNTS OF INDIA IN THE 

FIFTH AND SEVENTH CENTURIES — HARSHA OF THANESAR 

AND HIS GOVERNMENT THE FEAST OF THE INDIAN 

TRINITY AT PRAYAGA 

In the beginning of the fourth century Pitaliputra became 
again the seat of an empire under a new dynasty founded by 
the chieftain of one of the Indo-Aryan clans of Magadha, the 
Lichchhavi, which was closely allied to the Sakiya clan, whose 
illustrious Prince Siddhartha was still venerated by all India 
as the Buddha. The name of the chieftain, Chandragupta, 
revived the glorious memories of the Mauryan line, and might 
well have inspired an ambitious youth to emulate the prowess 
of Asoka's grandfather. 

It was not mere racial vanity, perhaps, but an ardent 
patriotic hope which made the head of the historic Indo- 
Aryan clan choose this proud name for his son. History was 
repeating itself in more ways than one. Alexander's famous 
raid in the fourth century B.C. had roused the clans to the 
necessity of combination for national defence. In the fourth 
century of the Christian era, Aryavarta, the holy land of the 
Aryans, was again threatened by dangers both from within 
and without. The existence of a foreign dynasty on the 
north-west frontier was a constant menace to Aryan India, 
even though these foreigners partially adopted Aryan institu- 
tions and the Aryan religion. Fresh hordes of semi-civilised 

125 



126 THE GUPTA DYNASTY 

tribes were pressing towards the Indus Valley from the high- 
lands of Central Asia. The Kushan power was weakening 
and seemed unlikely to keep them at bay for long. 

The dangers from within were not less alarming. For 
centuries the overgrowth of monastic institutions and the 
popularity of the ascetic ideal, which not only orthodox 
Brahmans and Jains but the Buddhist Sangha preached and 
practised, had been slowly sapping the manhood of India and 
laying the country open to the barbarians of Asia. Indo-Aryan 
thinkers had for long realised the danger, and the doctrine of 
karma-yoga, attributed in the Bhagavad-Gita to the hero of 
the Mahabhirata, Krishna, was a clarion call to the Aryan 
people to face the realities of life and to defend their Dharma 
against the common foe. 

It is very typical of the errors of the Western historian 
that this movement has always been described as the begin- 
ning of the revival of Brahmanism and of the decadence of 
Buddhism. Brahman thinkers, as the intellectual aristocracy 
of India, may have been the most active leaders in propagat- 
ing this mission of the fourth century ; they had been equally 
active in spreading the message of the Buddha over Asia. 
The Bhagavad-Gita did not denounce the teaching of Buddh- 
ism ; it only taught that the Dharma of the Aryan people 
was to be readjusted to meet the changing conditions of 
every age. It was the ancient doctrine of Yoga restated. 
Besides the Yoga of Spiritual Knowledge {jndna-yogd) which 
the Buddhists preached as a means of self-realisation, there 
was the Yoga of Action {karma-yoga). Now was the time 
for action, not for contemplation. The balance of the cosmos 
could only be maintained by perfect equilibrium of its three 
forces — sittvic, rajasic, and timasic. The force of goodness, 
or truth {sattvam), alone could not maintain its order. The 
Buddha had been the inspired teacher of sattvam ; the truth 



I'l.Ali: XWlll 




126] 



VrSHNU .^IlklNI,, l;Ak\VAR S.\(;\k, CI'.NTKAI, PKON'INCIvS 



THE GUPTA DYNASTY 127 

of his doctrines was not in question. But it was the hero, 
Krishna, as the incarnation of Vishnu, the Preserver, who was 
to be the patron saint of the new era. 

It was with such feelings that Chandragupta and the 
Lichchhavi clan set about the task of consolidating once more 
the material forces of Aryivarta. In his short reign of five 
years, says Mr. Vincent Smith, " he extended his dominions 
along the Gangetic Valley as far as the junction of the Ganges 
and Jumna, where Allahibid now stands ; and ruled, during 
his brief tenure of the throne, a populous and fertile territory, 
which included Tirhdt, Bihir, Oudh, and certain adjoining 
districts." * In a.d. 326 Chandragupta died and his mantle 
fell upon his son Samudragupta, a young prince who had 
been thoroughly trained in the arts of war. And so success- 
fully did he prosecute his father's mission that by the end of 
his reign, about 375, nine Rajas of the Gangetic plain, known 
as Aryavarta, had become tributary to him. On the north, 
he ruled to the foot of the Himalayas ; on the south to the 
Narmada River ; on the east to the Hooghly ; and on the west 
to the Chambal River and the Jumna.^ Moreover, by a tre- 
mendous raid through Southern India he had filled his 
treasury with the riches of Golconda and of the gold mines 
of Mysore. 

It is extremely characteristic of Indian historical feeling 
that not only the martial exploits but even the name of this 
great warrior-king were completely forgotten by posterity; and 
the facts now recorded, as Mr. Vincent Smith says, are the most 
conspicuous illustration of the success gained by modern archaeo- 
logical research. Unfortunately the treatment of this material 
as historical evidence by Western writers has only added to 
the obscurity with which Indian history is still enshrouded. 

• " Early History of India," p. 266. 

2 Vincent Smith, "Early History of India," p. 271. 



128 INDIAN COLONISATION 

The details of the war and the name of the warrior were 
forgotten ; for such matters never impressed the mind of India. 
But the things which really mattered remained for ever graven 
on her heart. It was Samudragupta's son, Chandragupta II, 
still celebrated in Indian romance as the god-like hero Vikra- 
maditya, who, like Asoka, completed his grandfather's task. 
Historians, deceived by their own categories, may describe 
Asoka as a " Buddhist," and Vikramiditya as a " Hindu " ; 
but such distinctions are only delusive. India recognises both 
as ideal Hindu sovereigns : the one of the sattvic type, and 
the other of the rajasic type. 

Upon his accession, about a.d. 375, Vikramiditya's first 
undertaking was to push the boundaries of his empire right 
across to the Arabian Sea, through Malwi and Gujerat, by the 
conquest of Surashtra or Kathiawar, where a dynasty known 
as the Saka had ruled since the beginning of the Christian era. 
It was probably as a consequence of this campg-ign that the 
Saka chieftains emigrated to Java, and, joining others of the 
same clan who had colonised the island in the previous cen- 
turies, began to build those wonderful monuments which are 
among the finest and most splendid creations of Indian art.^ 

This was not the first or only colonising enterprise of 
India. Ceylon had been brought under the influence of Aryan 
culture by Asoka's missionaries in the third century B.C. ; and 
according to tradition a Hindu Prince of Indraprashta, with a 
large number of followers, had gone farther east as early as 
the fifth century b.c, and founded the great colony of Cambodia 
which flourished until the fifteenth century a.d. , These great 
Indo-Aryan colonies furnish some of the most glorious chapters 
in the history of Indian architecture, but they cannot be in- 
cluded in the present volume. The key to the understanding 

' For a detailed description of the Borobuddr and Prambinam sculptures, see 
" Indian Sculpture and Painting," by the author. 



PLATR XXXIV 




128J 



VISHNU TKMPLE, PUJARII'ATI, CENTRAL I'ROVINCICS 



IRON PILLAR AT DELHI 129 

of them, and of a great deal more in Asiatic art, is in the art 
of India itself. 

Vikramaditya, finally, pushed back the Indian frontiers 
of the Kushan Empire to the banks of the Indus ; and, having 
thus secured Aryivarta from further incursions from the north- 
west, he performed the ancient Aryan rite of the great horse 
sacrifice, and set up dhwaja-stambhas of Vishnu to record his 
victories in various places. Among them was the famous Iron 
Pillar of Delhi ^ (PI. XII, c), one of the most extraordinary 
achievements of the Indian craftsman ; for it was not until 
the latter part of the nineteenth century that Europeans were 
able to forge iron columns of such dimensions, and even now 
the quality of metal which has preserved it from rusting for so 
many centuries seems to be a mystery to modern science.^ It 
is a Vishnu pillar of the same type as those sculptured at 
Bharhut, the base, now buried underground, being Lakshmi's 
jar of plenty. 

The great defender of the Aryan Dharma then began 
setting his house in order. He seems to have removed his 
capital to a more central position, which may have been 
Ayodhya, the famous city of Rama, as Mr. Vincent Smith 
suggests. Those who regard all Hindu monarchs as types of 
" oriental despotism," and believe that all that is best in Indian 
institutions is but a poor imitation of Western ideas, will 
expect to find that Vikramaditya's victories were followed 
by the assertion of autocratic government on the model of 
European empires. If that had been the case it is certain 
that the deeds of Vikramaditya would have fallen into the 
same oblivion as his father's. It was only because he fulfilled 

1 Mr. Vincent Smith says that its original position was probably at Mathura. It 
was removed to Delhi in a.d. 1052 (" Early History of India," p. 356). 

* The secret of casting iron so that it will not rust was known to Indian craftsmen in 
Travancore some twenty years ago. 

9 



I30 VIKRAMADITYA'S STATECRAFT 

to the highest degree the Indo-Aryan ideal of constitutional 
sovereignty that his memory was cherished, like that of Akbar, 
as Vishnu's Vicegerent on earth. 

What Vikramaditya did, as the champion of Indo-Aryan 
institutions, was to restore peace and order throughout his 
dominions, and revive the ancient traditions of popular self- 
government which was the original basis of Aryan civilisation 
where the true spirit of Aryan statecraft was ever able to 
assert itself. The Aryan clan to which the Guptas belonged 
was one of those which from time immemorial had been accus- 
tomed to self-government upon the principle of the Aryan 
village community. The head of each clan, the Rija, was the 
head of a confederation of villages — miniature republics as 
they have been aptly called. The Maha-R^ja was the head of 
a confederation of clans, and Vikramaditya the suzerain of a 
larger confederation, over which he ruled, not as an autocrat, 
but as the upholder of the Dharma of the Aryan race. The 
grouping of clans which acknowledged his supremacy and 
paid the customary vali was not disturbed. The R^jas and 
Maha-Rajas recognised as loyal to Aryan institutions were 
not deposed : only those who were hated as Mhlechas, or 
enemies of the Dharma, were, as the records of the time say, 
" rooted out." 

It was not therefore a Brahmanical revival, in the narrow 
sectarian sense conceived by Western writers, which the great 
Vikramaditya inaugurated. It was a revival of Aryan culture 
and of Aryan polity, which, owing to the disturbed condition of 
Hindustan and the corruption of Aryan ideals, were becoming 
decadent and stood in need of revision. The profound peace 
which a firm central government established opened the 
highways of commerce, promoted a great activity in all the 
arts of peace, and brought about a general revival of Aryan 
learning— philosophy, science, poetry, and the drama— all 



PLATE XXXV 




i;o] 



VISHNU TKMPLE, SIRPUK, CENTRAL l'ROVINCI';S : DliTAILS OF DRICKWORK 



FA-HIEN'S TRAVELS 131 

of which sectarians include under the vague designation of 
" Hinduism." 

The travels of the Chinese pilgrim, Fa-Hien, have given 
to the world some very interesting glimpses of India in the 
early part of the fifth century a.d., from the sectarian point of 
\iew. The object of his journey was to obtain copies of the 
Vinaya-pitaka, or rules of discipline of the Buddhist Sangha, 
and his chief interest as he went through the land of the Lotus 
of Good Law was to follow the footsteps of the Master, to re- 
count the wondrous legends of His life, and to describe the 
great monasteries and temples built in His honour. What 
struck him most in secular matters was the security and tran- 
quillity in which the people lived, their prosperity, piety, and 
benevolence. The great towns of Magadha, famous in Buddh- 
ist history, were mostly deserted or in decay ; others rich and 
prosperous which had sprung up in other places did not interest 
him. Buddhism as a sect was declining, but the spirit of the 
Master's teaching prevailed everywhere. 

This is a picture of India as seen by a fifth-century Chinese 
globe-trotter : " Throughout the whole country people do not 
kill any living creature, nor drink intoxicating liquor, nor eat 
onions or garlic. The only exception is that of the Chandalas." ^ 
The administration of justice was mild and humane. The law 
was generallymaintained without decapitation or severe corporal 
punishment. Only in repeated attempts at rebellion the right 
hand of criminals was cut off. The king's officials received 
regular salaries and did not vex the people. The latter " have 
not to register their households, or attend to any magistrates 
and their rules ; only those who cultivate the royal land have 
to pay a portion of the gain from it. If they want to go, they 
go ; if they want to stay on, they stay."^ 

^ Fishermen and hunters. 

' Fa-Hien's Travels, Legge's translation, p. 42. 



132 THE "GUPTA STYLE" 

Here is the explanation why Vikramaditya was and is re- 
membered as the great hero of Hindustan, while the very name 
of his father, Samudragupta, was forgotten. 

General Cunningham, Dr. Burgess, and others have 
laboured assiduously to reconstitute from buildings, which 
from inscriptions can be dated about the fifth or sixth centuries, 
what they call a " Gupta style," and cite instances to prove 
the popular archaeological thesis that whenever Indian art was 
great it was owing to contact with Europe. It need not be dis- 
puted that Vikramaditya, like the Mauryan and Mogul emperors 
and their modern Viceregal representatives, might have had an 
architectural hobby, and that in riding it he may have made 
use of foreign as well as native craftsmen who were attracted 
to his court. But that his dilettante efforts affected in the 
smallest degree the general character of Indian building there 
is not the slightest proof; nor is it at all probable that this 
was the case. 

The archaeological evidences put forward to support the 
case are as irrelevant as any of Fergusson's stylistic classifica- 
tions. If anything can be safely asserted about the temples 
which the Guptas built and of those which were characteristic 
of the period, it is that they would be dedicated to Vishnu, the 
Ishta-Deva of the Gupta dynasty. But in General Cunning- 
ham's analysis of the characteristics of the " Gupta style " the 
first and principal item is " Flat roofs, without spires of any 
kind," i.e. the instances cited are all Siva temples ! Further 
comment is needless. 

As an architectural landmark the Gupta period, so far as 
the north of India is concerned, must be identified with the be- 
ginning of that great epoch of Vishnu temple ^ building which, 
both before and after the Gupta dynasty ended, produced many 

' The reader must always carefully distinguish between a Vishnu temple as a symbol 
and a Vaishnava temple belonging to the Vaishnava sect. 



TLAII': \X\\[ 




132] 



A \1SHNU TEMPLE, CIIAMUA CITY 



THE HUN INVASIONS 133 

splendid shrines in Orissa, Rajputana, Khajuraho, and many 
other places in Central India. The rijasic Aspect of Ishwara — 
Vishnu — was thedominantcultoftheGupta period, as the sattvic 
Aspect — Buddha or Brahma — had been the prevailing cult in 
the Mauryan period. The holy Mount of Vishnu therefore 
became the usual temple symbol within the boundaries of Vikra- 
maditya's empire instead of the glorified sttipa which marked 
the orthodox philosophy of the Buddhist and Saivaite cults. 

I have little doubt that when archaeologists turn back from 
the blind alley into which Fergusson led them, a great deal 
more material will be found to fill up the blanks in Indian 
architectural history. In the meantime the great temples of 
Bhuvaneshwar in Orissa may be taken to represent very accur- 
ately the real characteristics of the " Gupta style." 

But as Vikramiditya was no more a religious bigot than 
Asoka had been, and every sect was free to follow its own way 
of thinking, building activity in the Gupta period was not con- 
fined to one type of religious edifice. The almost unbroken 
peace and prosperity which Hindustan enjoyed for nearly a 
century under the Guptas seems to have extended over the 
whole of India, and no doubt stimulated the arts of the builder 
in the provinces beyond Vikramaditya's dominions. 

In A.D. 455, when Europe was being desolated by wild 
hordes of Asiatic nomads, Vikramaditya's grandson, Skanda- 
gupta, once more upheld the banner of Aryan civilisation 
against the Turanian invader, and stayed the savage descent 
of the White Huns into the Indus valley, after they had over- 
run the Kushan dominions. The struggle continued at intervals 
until about 495. Then the Gupta power was broken for a time 
by the Hun leader, Torimana, who became the ruler of Malwa 
in Central India, apparently without destroying the political 
institutions which he found there, as he assumed the Indo- 
Aryan title of " King of Kings." 

Q* 



134 HARSHA OF THANESAR 

But the savagery of his successor, Mihiragula, drove the 
clans into revolt, and a confederacy under Narasimha-gupta of 
Magadhaand Yas6-dharman of Central India defeated the Hun 
tyrant, who was taken prisoner. The magnanimity of the Aryan 
race was shown in the way they treated the bloodthirsty enemy 
of their Dharma, whosefiendish cruelty, especially to Buddhists, 
had exasperated the clans. He was only banished from Arya- 
varta, and a younger brother was allowed to succeed him. 

Various dynasties then shared between them the sove- 
reignty of Vikramaditya's dominions until a.d. 606, when 
Harsha Vardhana, of Thanesar, famous in the Mahabharata 
as the land of the Kurus, repelled another Hun invasion, and 
reconstituted the supreme government of Aryavarta in a new 
confederacy, with Kanauj as its capital, which covered most of 
the territory formerly ruled by the Guptas. His reign is 
memorable in history for the visit to India of another famous 
Chinese pilgrim, Hiuen-Tsang, who, like Fa-Hien, left a record 
of his adventures, incidentally throwing much light upon the 
state of India at the time in its political, social, and religious 
relationships. ' 

The principal purpose of Hiuen-Tsang's mission was to 
study the science of Yoga, which, although regarded as heretical 
by Buddhists of the old school, was generally accepted by 
Mahayanists. From very early times Indian philosophers had 
laid down the theory that knowledge was of two kinds : The first, 
sruti, acquired by intuition, was that which was revealed by 
the Higher Intelligence which governs the universe ; the second, 
acquired by the reasoning faculties, was scholarship or tradi- 
tional learning {smriti). 

In its earliest conceptions the practice of Yoga in India 
probably consisted only of the rhythmical physical exercises 
with which the Kshatriyas, like their Hellenic brothers, main- 
tained a mens sana in corpore sano. The next stage of Indo- 



PLATE WWII 




A VISHNU ll.\ri'LK, .\HMAI)NA(;AR DISTKICr, nowiiAV 



I34J 



YOGA ,35 

Aryan culture was the consecration of mind and body for 
communion with the Higher Intelligence by a special series 
of exercises, both mental and physical. Patanjali was the chief 
exponent of this science of mysticism, which gradually became 
one of the fundamental doctrines of Indo-Aryan religion. The 
miraculous powers attributed to those who were expert in the 
science naturally led to much charlatanism and abuse ; and 
even the most saintly of Hindu men and women have some- 
times failed to recognise that, just as Reason without Intuition 
may tend to spiritual blindness, so the finest intuitive faculties 
without the complementary reasoning intelligence may be as a 
sharp razor in the hands of a child. 

Harsha emulated Vikramaditya in his zeal for fulfilling 
the duties of an Indian King of Kings, as laid down in the 
most ancient Hindu codes of law, and in the great Aryan 
epics — the science of government which every youthful Indian 
aristocrat was taught as the Dharma of his caste. The im- 
perial revenue, according to ancient Aryan custom, was derived 
first from the cultivation of the Crown lands, a certain propor- 
tion of the common lands of the Aryan community which 
belonged to the Kings of Kings by right. They were leased 
out at a fixed rent, reckoned upon the produce ' ; the cultiva- 
tion being superintended by one of the imperial officers. The 
next source of revenue was the vali, or customary offering, 
which was due from every village to the Rija or the head of 
its tribe. The latter had also a share of the common lands 
for the maintenance of himself and his retinue, and passed on 
to the Mahi-RIja — the head of a confederation of tribes — the 

1 In the Kautiliya-artha-sistra, one of the earliest manuals of Indian political 
economy, the proportion was as follows : One-fifth of the grain grown by manual irriga- 
tion ; one-fourth of the grain irrigated by water carried on the shoulder ; one-third of that 
irrigated by pumps ; and one-fourth of that irrigated by water derived from rivers, reser- 
voirs or wells, with an additional one-fourth or one-fifth of the total produce ("Antiquities 
of India," by Dr. L. D. Barnett, p. 102). 



136 MARSHA'S ADMINISTRATION 

proportion of the vali due to him. The vali payable by a 
village was generally reckoned at one-sixth of the agricultural 
produce. Mines, and also the manufactures derived from 
them, were an imperial monopoly ; but they were sometimes 
leased to private persons in payment of rent and royalties. 
Subsidiary revenue was derived from duties on pearls, corals, 
shells, salt, and tolls upon other merchandise collected by a 
Department of Commerce, which fixed prices and arranged 
suitable markets. A Department of Navigation and Fisheries 
controlled the traffic by sea and river, collected harbour dues, 
ferry tolls, and a vali of one-sixth upon the fisheries. Forests 
were also included in the imperial domains ; special officers 
were in charge of their conservation, and supervised the cutting 
of timber and the use of it for defensive and other purposes. 
Elephant forests were specially protected. Two other very 
important departments were those of Irrigation and Roads, 
for the chief function of the Head of the State, after the charge 
of military defence and the administration of justice, was to 
provide for and keep in order public reservoirs and other irri- 
gation works, to maintain the King's highway, and protect 
travellers upon it.^ 

The effects of the Hun invasions were still evident in 
Harsha's reign in the greater severity of the punishments 
awarded to criminals and in the unsafe condition of some of 
the public roads. As in Fa-Hien's time, the slaughter of 
animals and the eating of flesh was forbidden to the higher 
castes. Hiuen-Tsang found also public hospitals and rest- 
houses, at which necessitous travellers could obtain gratuitous 
medical aid and food and drink. 

1 All of these details are not mentioned by Hiuen-Tsang, but it may be taken for 
granted that the chief duties of Indo-Aryan kingship, as stated by Hindu law-givers, were 
fulfilled by Harsha as they had been by Asoka, Vikramaditya and other great Aryan 
sovereigjis. 



■1-ATli XXXVIII 




I3«] 



PORCH OF VISHNU TLilPLE, PATHARl, I^HOPAI, 



,-- ^ y 



THE FEAST OF THE TRIMURTI 137 

Harsha, like the Guptas, was a great patron of letters, and 
himself an author of high distinction. He was devout in 
religious matters, and, as a pious Hindu ruler, paid respect to 
all sects, and listened to the arguments of all the schools of 
philosophy which conformed to the rules of logic prescribed 
by the Slistras. As a Kshatriya warrior his Ishta-Deva was 
Vishnu, but this did not prevent him from revering the other 
Aspects of the One. The most interesting of the Chinese 
pandit's experiences was the great religious festival which he 
attended by Harsha's invitation, at Pray^ga (Allahabad), the 
confluence of the two sacred rivers, the Ganges and the Jumna. 

It was doubtless one of the most ancient of Aryan rites 
which v/as being celebrated, as it still is on the same spot, 
only under Harsha's patronage the ceremonies were of unusual 
magnificence ; for the festival was attended not only by the 
Sovereign Paramount, but by all the Mahi-rajas and Rijas 
tributary to him, and by crowds of pilgrims, Brahmans and 
devotees of every sect, numbering about half a million, from 
all parts of Hindustan. 

The first three days of the festival were consecrated to 
the worship of the Trimtirti. It is significant that in the 
seventh century (a.d. 644) the Saint of Bodh-Gayi was still 
venerated by this great concourse of Indians of all sects as 
representing the sattvic principle, or the first Aspect of Ish- 
vara ; for it was the Buddha's image which was set up on the 
sands at Prayaga and worshipped there. The next day Stirya, 
as Vishnu the Preserver— Harsha's own Ishta-Deva — was 
worshipped as the second Aspect of the Deity ; and on the 
third day, Siva, the timasic Aspect of Ishvara, received the 
adoration of the whole multitude. The pious Chinese pilgrim 
was pleased to note that in the distribution of the imperial 
bounty which followed each day's ceremonies the presents 
which were consecrated to the Buddha on the first day were 



138 THE FEAST OF THE TRIMURTI 

double the amount of those given on the two following days ; 
but his somewhat narrow sectarian view did not permit him 
to understand the religious spirit which animated Harsha and 
the great multitude worshipping the Buddha as an incarnation 
of Brahma, the Creator. 

The rest of the festival, which lasted seventy-five days, 
was devoted to the distribution of all the surplus of Harsha's 
treasury which had accumulated since the last festival had 
been held, five years before. Everything except what was 
required " for maintaining order and protecting the royal 
estate" was given away; first to members of the Buddhist 
Sangha, then to Brahmans, then to Jains and devotees of 
various minor sects, and lastly to the poor and destitute 
generally. Harsha set the example of benevolence by giving 
away " his gems and his goods ; his clothing and necklaces ; 
ear-rings, bracelets, chaplets, neck-jewel and bright head- 
jewel " ; and when he had nothing left he put on a mendi- 
cant's robe which he had begged from his sister, and paid 
worship toall the Buddhas, rejoicing that " his treasure had 
been bestowed in the field of religious merit." 

Hiuen Tsang, taking with him all his treasures of 
Buddhist relics, images, and manuscripts which he had col- 
lected, besides costly presents from Harsha, who sent a royal 
escort to accompany him to the frontier, shortly afterwards 
left India on his way back to China. 

Indian historians have always felt it superfluous for the 
study of their civilisation to follow the whole succession of 
kings and dynasties throughout the centuries ; they rightly 
considered chronology and events the most illusory factors in 
history. I will not therefore trouble the reader with the names 
and dates of other rulers in Northern India who followed 
Harsha in fulfilling, more or less successfully, the duties of 
Indo-Aryan kingship. From the seventh century unt-l the 



PLATE XXX I \ 




NS^r.:" 



i«»#» ^^'.^,= 








138] 



/ISHNU Tf.iVIl'IJi (KAJARANi;, l;tl U VANKSH VAK, ORISSA (eI.LVENTH CliNTUR\) 



GOLDEN AGE OF INDIAN LITERATURE 139 

conquest of Babar, the first of the Great Moguls, the political 
history of northern India was a continuation of the struggle of 
Indo-Aryan civilisation to maintain itself against the hordes of 
Huns, Arabs, Path^ns, Mongols, and other more or less civilised 
nomads who were tempted to plunder and devastation by the 
wealth and prosperity of India under her Aryan constitution. 

The particular cult of Indo-Aryan religion favoured by 
individual sovereigns of the different dynasties is also a matter 
of minor interest. The epoch from the beginning of the 
fourth to the end of the eighth century a.d., which was the 
golden age of Indian literature, when, as is generally believed, 
the great Indo-Aryan epics were given their present literary 
forms, and the Bhagavad Gita, India's Bible, was written as 
a synthesis of the religious teaching of the time — an age when 
the classics of Indian drama, poetry, painting, and music were 
produced, brought to a close by the appearance of the great 
philosopher of the Vedanta, Sankaracharya — will be most 
fitly summarised architecturally by a description of the rock- 
cut viharas and chaitya-houses of Ajanti, which formed 
during this period one of the famous universities of India. 



CHAPTER XI 

ANCIENT INDIAN UNIVERSITIES THE UNIVERSITY OF 

AJANTA — VISHNU's LAST AVATAR 

The universities of India were not, however, a creation of the 
Gupta period. Even as far back as the time of Buddha, 
Taksha-sila, the capital of Gandhara — now a heap of ruins 
near Rawalpindi — was a famous seat of Indo-Aryan learning. 
Chanakya, the famous Brahman statesman who was Chandra- 
gupta Maurya's War Minister and most trusted counsellor, 
and Panini, the great Sanskrit grammarian, graduated there. 

Two more of its alumni, Gobharana and Matanga, in 
A.D. 67 carried Buddhist learning into China, and in the 
Gupta period crowds of Chinese students were flocking to its 
halls. Kist (Benares) also, in the Buddha's time, was as now a 
stronghold of Brahman philosophy. Nagarjuna, the Brahman 
protagonist of Mahayana Buddhism, founded the university at 
Stldhanya Kataka, on the head waters of the Krishna River. 
He himself resided at Nalanda, the famous university of the 
Magadha country, near Rajgriha, which in the seventh century 
was attended by ten thousand learned monks and scholars. 
Hiuen Tsang, who lived there for five years, describes its 
towering monastic walls, resplendent with colour and sculpture ; 
its eight quadrangles and lofty enclosing walls ; its pavilions 
" like pointed hill-tops, its soaring domes and pinnacles which 
seemed to be lost in the mists of the morning." " From their 
windows," he said, " one could watch the movements of the 

140 



mink: ;yf|. 




c 



y. 




INDIAN UNIVERSITIES 141 

winds and clouds, and above their lofty roofs the sun and 
moon can be seen in conjunction." 

He was delighted with its shady groves and gardens ; the 
pools of translucent water shining with the open petals of the 
blue lotus flowers ; the kanaka trees with deep red blossoms, 
and the pleasant retreats under the dark-leaved mango trees. 
I' There were thousands of Sanghir^mas in India," he wrote, 
" but none equal to this in majesty or richness or the height 
of their construction." 

The universities were richly endowed by royal and other 
benefactors, and all of them had free hostels for the maintenance 
of poor scholars who paid no fees. Some of them, like Taksha- 
sila and Nalanda, were universities in the larger sense, where 
many schools of thought were represented : at Nilanda there 
were a hundred professors for expounding the recognised 
systems of Indo-Aryan philosophy. The larger ones taught 
secular sciences, such as mathematics and astronomy, as well 
as metaphysics and religion. Nalanda was the royal observa- 
tory, and its water-clock, says Hiuen Tsang, gave correct time 
for all Magadha. They were also schools of arts and crafts ; 
for both Brahman and Buddhist monks were skilled in sculp- 
ture and painting of icons and in temple decoration, though 
the former would generally look with contempt upon secular 
handicraft. 

Ajanta, carved out of the rocky scarp of the Waghora 
torrent in the upper basin of the Tipti River, was probably one 
of those of a strictly sectarian character, devoted to the propa- 
gation of a special cult. In some remote time before the 
Christian era, perhaps, it was only a retreat for a few Buddhist 
recluses who might have found some natural caves in this wild 
ravine — curved like the crescent moon and remote from the 
haunts of men — and made themselves a hermitage looking 
down upon the torrent which had carved a passage through it, 



142 



THE DIGIT OF THE MOON 



like the holy Ganges rushing out into the plains at Hardwar. 
Higher up the ravine ends as a precipice, over which the torrent 
pours from the wooded heights above in seven falls {sd^ kund), 
as Ganga leaps through the matted locks of Siva's hair in the 
forests of Himilaya. 

Gradually the fame of these saintly men spread over the 
country side. Ajanta became a place of learning, and many 

pious benefactors 
helped to cut monastic 
halls and chapels deep 
in the hard trap rock. 
According to the Wes- 
tern scientific way of 
writing history, there 
are four series of ex- 
cavations, representing 
as many successive 
periods. The Indian 
historian would classify 
them differently, but we 
will begin with the 
Western method. The 
first to be excavated 
were the monastic halls 
now known as Nos. XIII, XII, XI, and VIII, and the 
chaitya-houses Nos. IX and X, which belong to the second and 
first centuries B.C. Their axes point to the north or north-east, 
for they were the dwellings of an austere community of monks 
who did not adore the Buddha as the rising sun, but medi- 
tated upon his Pari-Nirvana, associated with the north side of 
the Aryan village, which symbolised the night sky. Their 
asceticism is further reflected in the simplicity of the pillars 
of the Sangha in the chaitya-houses (fig. 30), which are plain 




Fig. 47. — Hlnayina Sun-windows, Cliaitya-house No. IX, 
Ajanta. 



PLATE XLII 




VNDAH OK COLLEGE HALL NO. U, AJANTA 



142] 



GROUPING OF THE COLLEGES 



143 



octagonal shafts, without caps or bases, and in the absence of 
any elaborate sculpture except some of later date than the 
original excavations. Fine craftsmanship, however, is shown 
in the polished walls of the small vihira. No. XI IL Both 
chaitya-houses had painted decoration, renewed at various times. 

To the east of this early group, occupying the centre of 
the "digit of the moon,"^ comes the second one, including 
the viharas numbered XIV to XVIII and the chaitya-house 
No. XIX, which embrace 
a period commencing 
about the second century 
A.D. and ending about the 
fifth. Vihara XV can 
be definitely dated circa 
A.D. 185, and XVII and 
XVIII come within the 
reign of Vikramaditya of 
Magadha, an inscription 
showing that it was dedi- 
cated by the king of the 
Vakatakas, whose queen 
was a daughter of the 
great Gupta emperor. 

On the other side of 
the earliest group, or at the western tip of the moon's crescent, 
are the monastic halls numbered I to VI, most of which belong 
to the seventh century, and right opposite to them, at the 
other extremity, is the fourth group, standing apart from the 
other three and facing the setting sun. This includes the viharas 
or colleges numbered XX to XXV and the magnificent chaitya- 




FiG. 48. -Monastic Hall or College No. VII, Ajanti. 



^ See preface to Professor F. W. Bain's delightful Hindu romance. The disc of the 
moon is divided into sixteen parts, called "streaks" or digits; a beautiful woman being 
called "a digit of the moon." 



144 



COLLEGES I AND II 



house XXVI, which are the last and most elaborate of the four 
groups ; some of them remained unfinished. 

The whole of this splendid series, therefore, is a record of 
Indian architectural design from about the time of the KM^ 
Chaitya-house to the break-up of Harsha's empire in the middle 
of the seventh century. 

It is unnecessary to go again over the ground covered 
by the preceding chapters, so we will begin by comparing the 

finest of the monastic 
halls, Nos. I and II, in 
the third group (PI. 
XLI— XLIII) with the 
Gautamiputra monas- 
tery at Nasik(Pl. XXII), 
in order to show the de- 
velopment of the Indo- 
Aryan architectural 
tradition in the Gupta 
period. The plan of the 
Ajanta hall, fig. 50, is 
practically the same as 
the one at Nisik, only, 
instead of a simple stfipa 
symbol on the walls of 
the cells, a great image of the Buddha as the Teacher is 
sculptured within a cubical cell on the side facing the entrance. 
The verandah front (PI. XLI) is supported by six massive 
columns, as at Nasik, but an entrance porch had been added in 
the middle of it. This unfortunately has completely fallen away. 
Archaeologists have remained completely in the dark as to 
the connection of the Ajanta craft tradition with that of Kirl^, 
Nisik, and the earlier Hinayana school. Dr. Burgess only 
repeats Fergusson's puerile remark that the beautiful " Perse- 




FiG. 49.— Monastic Hall or College No. VI, AjantS. 



THE AJANTA colleges 



145 



politan bell-shaped " capitals are superseded at Ajanta by a 
"pudding-shape." The explanation of the symbolism of Indian 
pillars given above will enable the reader to see that the Ajantd 
type is also the traditional Vishnu pillar. Considering the 
difference of age — about four and a half centuries — there is 
comparatively little change in the forms, only at Ajanta there 
is a more voluptuous feeling for beauty, more classic refinement 
of detail, and a closer search- 
ing for just proportions. The 
Kirl^ and Nisik monasteries 
belong to the epic age — the 
art of the Mahabhirata and 
Ramayana; the Ajanti mon- 
asteries and chaitya-houses, 
from the fourth to the seventh 
centuries, belong to the later 
Indian classics — the age of 
Sakdntala. 

The symbolism is the 
same as at Kirl^ and at 
Nasik. The Silpa-sastras 
will help us to understand 
the ideas conveyed by the 
Ajanti variety of the Vishnu 
pillar. Instead of Lakshmi's 
jar of plenty, the bases of the 
pillars are square — Brahmd-kantha. Higher up they change 
into an octagonal section — Vishnu-kantha. Still higher the 
shaft becomes circular or sixteen-sided, with flutings : the 
technical name for this is Rudra-kantha. So the whole shaft 
symbolises the Three Aspects of the One. 

The capital consists of the traditional amalaka, the water- 
lily fruit (Fergusson's " pudding "). This, as at Karl^, supports 

10 




Fig. 50. — Plan of Monastic Hall No. I, Ajanti (from 
Fergusson and Burgess's "Cave Temples"). 



146 AVALOKITESHVARA 

a Vedic altar with four legs, only the succession of thin slabs 
is reduced to a plain square abacus, and the legs which enclose 
the amalaka are carved with the greatest skill into little fat 
men — Indian trolls — or pisdchas. Ushas, the Dawn-maiden, 
Indra, and other Vedic deities are no longer seated on the 
altar. Their place is taken by images of the Buddha, attended 
by Devas, carved upon the massive bracket capital. 

In Htnayana architecture one would find the Vedic rail 
used to decorate the architrave above the pillars. Here it is 
replaced by a sculptured frieze showing incidents in the life of 
the Buddha or stories from the Jatakas. Above this frieze is 
the chhaja, ornamented as usual with miniature sun-windows. 
In each of the windows a head appears. We have seen before, 
in the Bharhut sculptures (PI. Ill, a), representations of men or 
Devas peeping out of sun-windows. Who can this be ? That 
is a question which Buddhist pilgrims, accustomed to the plain 
sun-windows of Hinayina symbolism, might well have asked 
as they gazed upwards, after following with eager eyes the stoiy 
of the Master's life on the sculptured frieze. On a Vishnu 
or Siva shrine the devout would know at once that within a 
sun-window the image must be either Brahmi or Siva, the 
rising or setting sun, " What do our gurus mean by this ? " 
the pilgrims would ask. " It is Avalokiteshvara," the monks 
would answer — " the Lord who looks down from Heaven upon 
us ; not the Tathigata Himself, but a Bodhisattva, a Buddha 
in being." 

1 I had identified Avalokiteshvara with Brahma by this process of reasoning before 
I noticed that Colonel Waddell had arrived at the same conclusion by a comparison of 
the attributes of Brahmanical and Buddhist images. M. Foucher's objections (" Etude 
sur I'iconographie Buddhique," p. 173 n.) can, I think, be easily met. Avalokiteshvara 
has a sattvic as well as a timasic aspect, according as he is related, to the rising or the 
setting sun. In the former case (as in Nepal) his image is red ; in the latter white. The 
eleven-headed Avalokiteshvara is derived from the five-headed Brahma or Siva symbol, 
representing the five cosmic elements. 



PLATE XLIV 




146] 



PRINCE SIDDHAKTHA, FRESCO PAINTING, AJANTA 



rLATK XLY 




DEVAS AND ATI hNDANTS, FRESCO PAINTING, AJAMA 



146] 



THE AJANTA COLLEGES 147 

Thus MaMy^na Buddhism transformed into Bodhisattvas, 
to be worshipped by the faithful as Buddhas that are to be, the 
Devas who watched the Hinayana service at K^rl^ and Nasik, 
and at the older chaitya-houses of Ajanta, just as they had 
watched the Vedic sacrifices of old. The bright nature-spirits 
of the Vedas remained for ever impressed upon the Indian 
mind ; transformed into concepts of philosophy, they became 
the gods of Brahman theology and Bodhisattvas of the 
Buddhists. 

Above the chhaja is another sculptured frieze occupied 
mostly by scenes in the Buddhist heavens, and panels in which 
the sacred goose [hamsa), a symbol of the. parting soul, is used 
as a decorative motif. On a narrow band above it, supported 
by heads which seem to be those of the bats which infest the 
caves, is a small Vedic rail transformed into a chequer pattern. 

The inside of the verandah of the second monastic hall 
with the remains of its fine painted ceiling is shown in 
PI. XLIL The next plate gives a fine impression of the stately 
magnificence of the interior. The pillars which support 
the roof are similar to those of the verandah, only the 
proportions are more massive. It is somewhat smaller than 
the first hall, being only 48 feet square instead of 64 feet, the 
dimensions of the former, but the arrangements are similar. 
The sanctuary with an image of Buddha is on the side facing 
the entrance, with a smaller cell for another image on either 
side of it. The scholars' or neophytes' cells, ten in number, 
are placed along the two sides of the hall at right angles to the 
shrine. Two larger cells at each end of the verandah provided 
accommodation for the Abbot and his deputy. The arrange- 
ments of the first monastic hall (fig. 50) are nearly the same, 
but on a somewhat more ample scale. 

The chief glory of Ajant^ is in the frescoes, which are now 
nearly all that remain of the greatest pictorial art of India, but 



t48 THE AJANTA FRESCOES 

barbarously mutilated and ruined both from lack of care and 
by inept attempts at conservation. Very rarely in the world's 
history has there come together that true symphony of the 
three arts — painting, sculpture, and architectonic design — 
creating the most perfect architecture, which are so beautifully 
harmonised at Ajantl By a fortuitous circumstance a large 
fragment of one of the finest frescoes, and one of the greatest 
masterpieces of any age, in the first monastic hall, is one of 
the best preserved. 

It is painted on the wall to the left of the principal shrine. 
The central figure is of a youth crowned with a royal tiara and 
holding Vishnu's blue water-lily in his right hand. A water- 
lily is also fastened on either side of the tiara, and the long 
black curls falling over his shoulders are garlanded with jessa- 
mine. He is looking downwards in a pensive mood, as if 
filled with the presentiment of coming sorrow (PI. XLIV). 

On either side a youthful attendant carries the insignia of 
royalty, a sword of State, and the yak's tail fly-flap. On his 
left side a young princess, similarly crowned, accompanies him. 
Close tp her in the background is a building, no doubt the 
royal palace, from which the party is coming. Behind on a 
mountain-side gandharvas and kinnaras, the heavenly musi- 
cians, are discoursing sweet music. Siva sits conversing with 
Parvati (fig. 51), and the Devas are watching with interest the 
great event in the world below. 

No doubt the subject is the marriage of Prince Siddhartha 
— one which a Buddhist artist would paint as a parallel to the old 
Aryan myth of Siva and Parvati, or of the marriage of Vishnu 
with the Dawn-maiden. And considering that this monastic 
hall is one of those which inclines most towards the east, it is 
easy to understand that the motif of the Dawn-maiden, symbol- 
ised in every Vishnu shrine by the large sun-window placed in 
Dhe front of the sikhara, would be the first to suggest itself to 



PLATE XLVI 



7A ^ '^^ CV.PA„'^ 'tx 



1 I,' 



I I 



•i .J 



-.J: — J- A iL "1 l-tJi dL 4 jj 









m 



^W' 



J— ^ *., ^5* — ^ 






I" ~_ ;^ Iff — ^J 










t)||'^^^f€*i 
















■|, [J«M^), ^J 



148] 



FACADE OF CHAITYA-HOUSE XIX, AJANTA 



PLATE XLVII 




148I 



FACADE OF CHAiryA-HflUSE XXVI, AJANIA 



THE AJANTA frescoes 



149 



the mind of an Indian painter. The noble head of Prince Siddh- 
artha finds an exact parallel in another wonderful masterpiece 
of Indian art, the Vishnu Aspect or central head of the Tri- 
mtirti ^ at Elephanta (PI. LVI). The tiaras [mukutas) in both 
are identical in design, and the head, both in the fresco painting 
and the sculpture, evidently belong to the same traditional type, 
though the more youthful 
Christ-like face of Prince 
Siddhartha fitly expresses 
the distinction between the 
two conceptions. 

Another superb frag- 
ment of painting(Pl.XLV) 
appears to be also a Vishnu 
motif. This is painted on 
the walls of the verandah 
in the monastic hall No. 
XVII, which has a north- 
west aspect ; but here it is 
not the principal subject 
of the picture, as in the 
other hall, which is open 
to the rising sun. This is 

Vishnu as a BodhisattVa,^ Fig. si.-Slva and Parvati. Painting in Cave I (from 

^ a copy by Mr. Nanda Lai Bose). 

accompanied by Lakshmi, 

as Tari, flying down from heaven to attend some event in the 
life of the Buddha. The animation of the heavenly beings, ex- 
pressed by this Indian Tintoretto with an amazing display of 

^ This has always been mistaken for Brahmi. Dr. Coomaraswamy, in his " Arts and 
Crafts of India and Ceylon " (PI. 33), gives the head of Parvati as that of Vishnu. 

^ The Buddhist adaptation of Vishnu as the deification of the Sangha seems to have 
been the Bodhisattva Visvapini, whose other name was Akisa-garbha, the Container of 
AkSsa (ether) — this being also an attribute of Vishnu as the power which maintained the 
equilibrium of the cosmos. 
I of 




I50 THE AJANTA FRESCOES 

technical power, is a great contrast to the serene composure, 
tinged with sadness, so masterfully rendered by the forgotten 
Perugino of Ajanti in the first monastic hall. Only the dullest 
artistic comprehension will refuse to place these Ajanti frescoes 
in the same category as the greatest masterpieces of Italian art. 
That they have been so long unappreciated by European artists 
is due in great measure to the miserably inadequate reproduc- 
tions of them by which they have been hitherto known. The 
uninspired copies made by the Bombay School of Art, 
where the minds of Indian students are still drugged with the 
dull academic formularies of Europe, give no indication of 
the technical power and transcendent genius of the Ajanta 
painters. But for the fact that since these copies were made 
many of the original frescoes have been shamefully destroyed 
or ruined by neglect, their destruction by fire would have been 
no loss to art. 

Apart from their artistic value the Ajanti frescoes have an 
extraordinary historical interest for the light they throw upon 
the evolution of Mahiyina Buddhism ; but the full elucidation 
of them must be left until the publication in "Ars Asiatica" of 
the results of the complete photographic survey of the paintings 
with which M. Victor Goloubeff has followed up the devoted 
labours of Mrs. Herringham and her Indian collaborators. 

Of the many chaitya-houses which were the chapels of 
j the University of Ajanti the two which represent the great 
epoch of Indian architecture from the fifth to the ninth centuries 
are those numbered XIX and XXVI. 

The latter is the largest and finest in design, for the figure- 
sculpture on the facade of XIX (PI. XLVI), though fine as 
craftsmanship, is not happily conceived architecturally. It is 
very likely, as Sister Nivedita has suggested,^ that these sculp- 
tures were the work of Gandharan craftsmen, driven to find a 

1 "Footfalls of Indian History," p. 52. 



TLA IK Xl.Mll 




150] 



IN'IERIOR Ol' CIIAITYA-HOUSE XXVI, A.IANTA 



THE CHAITYA-HOUSES, AJANTA 151 

shelter in the cloisters of Ajanta when the Buddhist monasteries 
of North-west India were ravaged and burnt by the tyrant 
Mihiragula in the middle of the sixth century. It is quite 
possible, indeed, that this front is a sculptured palimpsest, 
executed by two different generations of craftsmen ; for it is 
unusual to find in this great epoch the clumsy spacing of 
decoration, contrasting so curiously with the fine design of 
the architectural detail. But it would be easily explained by 
assuming that some of the colossal figures were sculptured on 
the original facade long after the chaitya-house was finished. 

The facade of XXVI (PI. XLVII) is much finer as an 
architectonic unity, though unfortunately the roof of the 
verandah in front has gone and only a few fragments of the 
supporting pillars remain. This chaitya-house, indeed, ranks 
with that of K^rl^ as one of the two finest in India. 

Both of these Ajanta chaitya-houses are inclined towards 
the setting sun, the quarter of Siva is his t^masic Aspect. This 
accounts for the tamasic heads of Avalokiteshvara carved in the 
little sun-windows on the chhajas, and for the close connection 
between the chaitya in XXVI and the Siva shrine, known as 
Arjuna's Rath, at Mamallapuram, which has been already 
alluded to (p. 104). It also accounts for the head of the fish 
dragon {makara), the symbol of the clouds gathering at sunset, 
at the springing of the great sun-window which lights the nave 
of the chaitya-house ; and for the grinning head of the eclipse 
demon, Rihu, at the pipal-leaf crown of the arch. 

The three entrance doors to each chaitya-house are finely 
carved. As explained above (p. 73), the central door opening 
to the nave was for the members of the Sangha. At the Ajanta 
University it would no doubt be used for the Abbot and his 
monks ; the two side doors — on the left for entrance and the 
right for exit — being for the scholars, or neophytes, who 
attended the service in the aisles. 



152 



THE CHAITYA-HOUSES, AJANTA 



The entrances to a house, temple, or shrine are always in 
India consecrated places, only second in importance to the 
sacred image itself; it is therefore here that the highest art of 
the master-craftsman is shown. Volumes might be filled with 
examples of Indian doorways of the classic age which reveal 
the fountain-head of the inspiration of Chartres, Rheims, and 
Bourges. Ajanti has some of them, but other parts of India 
can show more perfect door-sculpture. Plates L and LI are 

superb examples from Vishnu 
temples in Central India, probably 
contemporary with the latest period 
of Ajanta. There one can see that 
Gothic art of India which in the 
three centuries of its zenith in 
India (a.d. 400-700) was the parent 
tree from which all its Eastern and 
Western grafts were taken. 

Fig. 52 shows the plan of the 
chaitya-house. The dimensions of 
it are nearly 68 feet in length, 
36 feet in breadth, and the height 
of the nave to the centre of the roof 
31 feet. It is therefore little more 
than half of the Kirl6 chaitya-house ; 
it is a university chapel, and not a cathedral, like the latter. 
The difference between the chaitya as at Karl^ and Ajanti 
shows how Indian Buddhism of the second or third century B.C. 
differed from that of the seventh or eighth century a.d. At 
Kirl6 the chaitya is a reliquary and a symbol. At Ajanti it 
is a shrine for the sacred image which, lighted up by the golden 
rays of the setting sun through the grand sun-window of the 
nave, was adored as a mystic vision of the Messiah (Maitreya) 
who is yet to come. The pillars of the Sangha which divide 



B 9 

• 8 

• $ 

■ ■ 

■ • 

■ B 



L ■ B ■ m isfit-' 

Fig. 52.— Plan of Chaitya-house XXVI, 
Ajanta (Irom Fergusson's "Cave Temples")- 



I'l.ATI-: L 




'-Z.- T'liii; --".'■-,_• '-l--- ^'l^ 



CARVED TKMl'LE DOORWAY, DHAMTAKI, ri';NTKAL I'Kl )\' I NCI'.S 



152] 



THE CHAITYA-HOUSES. AJANTA 153 

the nave from the aisles are of the same type as those already 
described in the first college hall facing the chaitya-house on 
the opposite bend of the torrent. The symbolism remains the 
same as at Karl^. On the architrave, or triforium, above the 
capitals there is a richly sculptured frieze (PI. XLIX), and 
images of the Buddha are placed in exquisite shrines along 
the walls of the side aisles where the scholars worshipped. 
All the sculpture at Ajant^ was finished with a fine coat of 
polished clumam, of the thickness of an egg-shell, which 
served as a ground for discreet touches of colour ; but very 
little of this now remains. 

Some of the latest sculpture at Ajanti is evidently done 
by ivory carvers, or goldsmiths, and Cellini's chisel never 
surpassed the beauty and finish of the bracket capitals from 
some of the college halls shown in Plate LII. In the lower 
figure of the plate the amalaka of the capital is converted into 
Lakshmi's jar of plenty — a favourite device in Indian medieval 
architecture — the legs of the Vedic altar being converted into 
floral devices growing out of this cornucopia. 

Having thus briefly described the principal architectural 
details of this wonderful university of ancient India and 
stated its chronology according to the scientific method, I will 
attempt to sum up its history from the Indian point of view. 
Let us try to see it as the Indian artists who created Ajanta 
saw and felt it. The Western scientific method ignores the 
Indian way of thinking and does nothing to light up the 
obscurity of Indian history : it tells the facts, but leaves Ajanta 
to the bats and owls. 

Ajanta is a microcosm of ancient and medieval Indian 
history, but Indian historians would divide it into three 
epochs instead of four. The first was the sattvic cycle ; the 
age of quiet meditation, beginning with the time of the Saint 
Asoka, whose peaceful edicts proclaimed the Blessed One's 



154 THE HISTORY OF AJANTA 

message of peace and love throughout the land of Bharata- 
varsha. Then some pious members of the Sangha carved out 
of this digit of the moon— Siva's crest— the middle section 
(PI. XL) facing north, the region of the moonlit sky, and 
taught the Buddha's doctrines with the simple austere ritual 
of the Hinayana school. 

The second was the rijasic cycle— the age of passion, 
action, and energy — when the hero Vikramiditya ruled the 
land with justice and wisdom, drove back the Hun invaders, 
and recovered Lakshmi's jar of plenty by the churning of the 
Ocean of Time. It was then that the college halls were carved 
on the western tip of Siva's crest, and there the scholars 
worshipped God in His rajasic Aspect, taking as His symbols 
the dawn and the rising sun. 

Then, when dark clouds began to gather over Bharata- 
varsha, when the black plague was raging, and savage hordes 
of barbarians poured down the Indus valley in the darkest 
days of the Kali age,^ began the timasic aspect of Ajantas 
life. It is then that the divine powers of destruction, death, 
and re-birth should be worshipped in fear, but with hope and 
faith. That was the time when the eastern tip of Siva's crest 
became the lodging-place of the scholars of Ajanta ; there, in 
those splendid chaitya-houses, they worshipped the Lord who 
looks down with infinite love upon His children, even when 
His work of destruction is going on. He knows there is no 
death ! 

J^nd so, at last, the sun of Ajanta set. The long-expected 
Messiah did not come. The exact time the sacred spot 
hallowed by associations of a thousand years was deserted is 

' Indian chronologists divide the life of the universe into four ages, the Krita, TrStd, 
Dwapara, and Kali. The commencement of the latter is reckoned at 3102 B.C., and 
towards the end of it the last incarnation of Vishnu, Kalkin, will appear to restore peace 
and righteousness on earth. 



riAii': 1.1 




CARVED 'I KM PI.EJ DOORWAY, SIRPUR, CI'.NIKAI, I'ROVINCIiS 



n \ I |- III 





CAKVI^D IIRACKET CAI'lTALS, AJAMA 



VISHNU'S TENTH AVATAR 155 

not known— probably about the tenth century, when the sword 
of Islam descended to complete the havoc which the Hun 
barbarians had begun. For centuries the college halls and 
chapels have been the haunt of venomous snakes and of the 
wild beasts of the neighbouring jungle ; myriads of bats have 
fouled them, and vast swarms of bees have blackened their 
lovely painted ceilings with their nests. Since they were dis- 
covered at the beginning of the last century, vandals have 
desecrated them, obsequious officials have cut out sections of 
precious frescoes to present to "distinguished visitors" as 
curiosities, and blundering antiquarians have helped to com- 
plete the ruin. 

Will there come another dawn when they will be filled 
again with teachers and scholars inspired by the noblest 
traditions of the noble Aryan race, and feeling the undying 
poetry of the place ? For now once again gods and demons 
are churning the Ocean of Time, and clouds of poisonous 
vapours — ignorance, greed, sectarian and racial hatreds— con- 
fuse the contending hosts, so that friends and foes mistake 
each other. But God still holds the churning stick and 
watches overhead — lest the Devas weaken in the struggle — 
to see that truth and right prevail. And though the darkness 
sometimes seems to thicken, the dawn will come at last. 

Maitreya did not come. But there is an ancient Indian 
prophecy that at the end of the Kali age, when the new day 
begins to dawn, Kalkin, Vishnu's tenth Avatar on earth, will 
come riding on a white horse, sword in hand, to restore the 
Law of Righteousness and to rule the Aryan lands. Who 
was this Avatar the Indian mystic saw ? Was it a vision of 
St. George of Merrie England — when England shall be 
Merrie once again ? 



CHAPTER XII 

THE GREAT TEMPLE OF ELEPHANTA THE TRIMURTI 

AjANTA is only one splendid episode in the history of the 
classic age of Indian art — an age so rich in achievement and 
so pregnant in inspiration for the whole civilised world that 
it would be quite impossible in one volume to more than 
briefly summarise it. Ajanti reveals the wreck of the great 
masterpieces of Indian painting. The contemporary Siva 
temple at Elephanta, a rocky island overlooking the harbour 
of Bombay, possesses the fragments which now remain of 
the achievements of India's Michelangelo — her Pheidias and 
Praxiteles. 

Archaeologists have been undecided as to the age of this 
temple, but I am convinced that both Fergusson and 
Dr. Burgess are very much at fault in attributing it, from 
evidence of " style," to the eighth or beginning of the ninth 
century of our era.^ It is certainly more than a century earlier 
than Chaitya-house XXVI at Ajanti, which they date circa 
A.D. 600— but that date is probably a century too early. I 
think it would be safe to assume that the great sculpture 
of the Trimtlrti had been completed a century before Harsha 
of Thanesar celebrated the feast of the Indian Trinity on the 
s ands at Prayaga, which Hiuen Tsang attended in a.d. 644. 
1 1 was probably known in the seventh century as a famous 
masterpiece throughout Western India, so that the artist of 
Ajanti had it in his mind when he painted the wonderful 

^ "Cave Temples," p. 467. 
156 



ELEPHANTA 157 

head of Prince Siddhartha on the walls of the first college 
hall, about the beginning of the seventh century. 

Elephanta was the name given to the island by the Portu- 
guese on account of a great stone elephant which formerly stood 
near the landing-place on the south side of the island. Its 
Indian name is Gharapurl, which seems to be a corruption of 
Gharipuri, " the town of the Ghirts, or Guruvas," who are 
people of the Sudra caste performing priestly duties at Saivaite 
temples. Probably at one time the island, which contains 
several other rock-cut shrines besides the great temple, was a 
sacred city dedicated to the cult of Siva. It is still visited by 
pious Hindu pilgrims on the occasion of the great Saivaite 
festival in February, but no regular service has been held at 
the temple since it was desecrated in the sixteenth century by 
the Portuguese, who are said to be responsible for most of the 
barbarous mutilation of the sculptures. 

The island, which is formed of a species of hard trap-rock 
about four and a half miles in circumference, consists of two 
long hills with a narrow valley between them. The great 
temple is carved out of the western hill, at a height of 250 feet 
above high-water level. It has three entrances : the principal 
one, opening to the central aisle (PI. LI 1 1), the end of which is 
filled by the Trimtirti, faces north — like thefirst cycle of monastic 
halls at Ajanta. This northern aspect commands a splendid 
view over the sea and mainland, with the silhouette of the 
Western Ghats bounding the horizon. 

Fig. 53 shows the plan of the temple. Excluding the 
pillared porticoes which form the north, east, and west entrances, 
and the shrine of the Trimtlrti which fills the place of the 
southern porch, the interior of the temple is a pillared hall 
about 91 feet square, the roof being supported by six rows of 
pillars with six pillars in each row, except for the space occupied 
by the Brahmi shrine (PI. LIV), which takes the place of four 



158 



ELEPHANTA 



pillars. If the temple had been a structural one, it would there- 
fore have been itself a Brahma shrine, with entrances on each 
of the four sides opposite the cardinal points. 

In classic dignity and restraint these massive Vishnu 
pillars, with their usual amalaka capitals, contrast strongly 
with the rich elaboration of the first two college halls at Ajant^ 




Fig. 53.— Plan of the Great Temple at Elephanta (from Fergusson's " Cave Temples"). 

though the symbolism is precisely similar. They resemble 
rather closely the pillars of No. VII (fig. 48), and it may be 
assumed that the Elephanta temple is of about the same age 
as the latter. 

Entering at the northern entrance, and passing up the 
central aisle, attention is first arrested by the wonderful Brahmi 
shrine on the right (PI. LIV), placed near the entrance, so that 
the glow of light from the western court falls upon it. It is a 



< 




THE BRAHMA shrine 



159 



cubical cell — a symbol of the universe — pierced by four doors, 
the ends of the four arms of the cosmic cross, each guarded by 
two colossal regents of the quarters, like gods of Olympus, 
which are among the most striking of the Elephanta sculp- 
tures. The shrine now contains only the modern lingam of 
Siva, placed there probably to placate the iconoclasts in early 
Muhammadan times, or perhaps after it had been desecrated by 




Fig. 54. — The Mahayanist Brahma 
Stflpa. 




Fig. 55. — ^The Stiipa Anthropomorphosised. 
(The Brahm^ Image of Elephanta restored.) 



the Portuguese, when the magnificent Brahma image (PI. LV) 
for which it was designed was knocked down and flung into 
the adjoining courtyard. It remains there, I believe, until 
the present day. 

Here is plain evidence of the form which Siva's lingam 
took about the sixth or seventh century a.d. It was a Brahmi 
image, which at this time took the form of an anthropomorpho- 
sised stOpa : i.e. the early sttlpa of the Mahiyina type (fig. 54), 



i6o IMAGE OF BRAHMA 

with a square or octagonal base and the four shrines — the symbol 
of the universe, or Brahma's temple — was converted into the 
four-headed image of Brahma, in which the dome of the stiipa 
remained as the top of h.\s mukut a or tiara (fig. 55). When 
the Muhammadan iconoclasts came, the Brahma symbol re- 
verted to its ancient an iconic form, and, the original symbolism 
having been forgotten in the decadence of Hinduism which 
set in after the Muhammadan conquest, the phallic ideas now 
popularly connected with it were read into it by the low-caste 
guardians of Siva temples. 

This grand sculptured symbol of the cosmic forces conveys 
a vivid impression of another great masterpiece of the Aryan 
genius — the. Hermes of Praxiteles. The two might appro- 
priately be placed side by side to show the similarity in artistry 
and the difference in spiritual insight of the two schools of 
Aryan sculpture ; for they sum up the highest art of the Western 
naturalist and of the Eastern mystic. 

Some day, perhaps, if the Eastern masterpiece still exists 
and when the Aryan of the West has begun to understand 
the art which belongs to him better, reproductions of it 
may be made for a museum in which Indian art will take its 
proper place side by side with that of Hellas. The Hermes 
of Elephanta will not suffer by comparison with that of 
Praxiteles. 

Elephanta is India's Parthenon, and when the eye has 
become accustomed to the dim light of the interior, the colossal 
bust of the Trimtirti (PI. LVI), carved in the rocky wall which 
ends the central aisle, will be seen looming out through the 
mysterious gloom. But it is difficult in the present state of 
the great temple to realise how awe-inspiringly beautiful it 
must have been when lighted up by the glow of the bronze 
temple-lamps and the silver shimmer of the snow-white pillars, 
finished like marble with the finest polished plaster, and when 



I'LAl'l-: l-V 




i6o] 



IMAGE OF IJRAHMA, KLI^'HAMA 



THE HYMN OF CREATION i6i 

the chanting of that great Hymn of the Rig- Veda (X. 129) 
echoed through the aisles : 

There was neither Existence nor Non-Existence ; 
The Kingdom of Air, nor the Sky beyond. 

What was there to contain, to cover in — 

Were there but vast unfathomed depths of Water ? 

There was no Death there, nor Immortality ; 
No Sun was there, dividing Day from Night : 

Then was there only that, resting within itself ; 
Apart from it there was not anything. 

At first within the Darkness veiled in Darkness, 
Chaos unknowable, the All lay hid : 

When sudden from the formless Void emerging, 
By the great power of Heat was born that Germ. 

Thereafter came Desire, the primal root of Mind ; 
Being from non-Being proceeded — this our Rishis know : 

What was the Cause — above, below ? 
What vital force impell'd this parting here ? 

Who knows whence this was born, or how it came ? 
The Gods themselves are later than this time : 

He only, the Creator, truly knoweth this ; 
And even He, perhaps, may know it not. 

The Indian conception of the Trimdrti, the Three Aspects 
of the One, may be considered from many different standpoints. 
Originally, like all other Indo-Aryan conceptions, it was derived 
from the life of the ancient Indian village community. The first 
Aspect was Brahma, the Creator, whom all Aryans worshipped 

II 



i62 THE TRIMORTI 

as the Cause of all things ; or Buddha, the great Aryan Guru. 
It was the symbol of the spiritual wisdom of the Aryan race. 
The second Aspect was Justice, the pillar of Aryan society, 
represented by the village council, or by the head of the tribe. 
The third was the Dharma, the Law spiritual and temporal, 
revealed and recorded by the Vedas. And as all three Aspects 
were interchangeable, and manifestations of the universal Law, 
together they represented God, as Three in One, or One in 
Three. 

As an abstract or philosophical concept the Trimtirti re- 
presented the Vedantic theory of the Evolution of the Universe 
from the Absolute or Unknowable Brahman — the first mani- 
festation of which is Ishvara, or God, likened to the passing 
of a human being from a state of profound sleep into a state 
of dreaming and then of awakening. From Ishvara is then 
manifested Purusha, or Spirit, and Prakriti, the Essence of 
Matter ; and through the divine power called Sakti, the female 
principle, Purusha causes Prakriti to take form as the Trimtirti. 

The latter symbolises two groups of cosmic conceptions. 
As related to Purusha, the Soul Force, it stands for the spiritual 
powers, Sat-Chit-Anandam ; or Being (connoting the power 
of truth and goodness), Thought-power, and Bliss. As related 
to Prakriti, the Nature-force, it represents the three gunas, 
Sattvam, Rajas, Tamas, or the conditions of creating, equi- 
librium or preservation, and dissolution or darkness. 

In a more popular or mythological sense the Trimfirti 
stands for the three chief divinities of the Hindu pantheon — 
Brahma the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, and Siva the 
Destroyer, who were represented in Mahiyana Buddhism by 
the deification of the Buddha, the Sangha, and the Dharma. 
These three divinities, or Aspects of Divinity, may again be 
considered from the Western scientific standpoint as solar myths, 
or symbols of the sun in its three aspects : at rising, at the 



PLATE l.\M 




162] 



THE TKIML'RTI, ELEl'HANTA 



THE INDIAN PARTHENON 163 

zenith, and at setting, which are the three times at which every 
orthodox Brahman recites his daily prayers. 

Though a Siva temple, Elephanta is, as I have said, the 
Indian Parthenon; for in the Trimtlrti sculpture Brahma's 
place is taken by Parvati, as Creatrix, just as in Mahay^na 
Buddhism it is taken by the Buddha. The legend of the 
marriage of Siva and Parvati— the springtime of the Himalayas, 
whose loveliness lures once a year the Great Ascetic from 
his meditation on the snow-clad mountain peak — as told by 
Kalidas in the poem of the Birth of the War-God, fills one of 
the sculptured panels in an adjoining aisle ; and her head in 
the Trimtlrti, mistaken by archaeologists for Vishnu, is the one 
on the right of the spectator, or facing west. 

The central head, majestic and calm in expression, has 
always been mistaken for Brahma, the Creator ; but it is really 
the rajasic Aspect of the Trimtlrti, Vishnu the Preserver, with 
the shining symbols of His three footsteps ^ upon the splendid 
jewelled crown, the holy Mount Meru. He wears also His 
necklet of pearls, the worlds innumerable in the making ^ which 
are strung together on their orbits in His firmament — and the 
glorious panch-ratna collar of gold glittering with His jewels^ — 
ether, air, fire, water, and earthy matter. 

Siva, with frowning brows, parted lips, and protruding 
tongue, holding the Serpent, a symbol of life, death, and re- 
incarnation, is the third or tamasic Aspect of the Trimdrti. 
His tiara contains a human skull, and floral emblems which 
belong to Saivaite ritual are wreathed in it.* 

^ The three positions of the sun. 

* The pearl is the symbol of the cosmic element ak&sha, ether, and thus also of the 
planets which are born from it ; Vishnu being known as Akisha-garbha, Container 
of Ether. 

' The precious stones which symbolise the elements are pearl, sapphire, ruby, emerald, 
and diamond. 

* These include the trefoiled leaf of the bel tree (Craiova religiosa), and that of the 
nirgundi ( ^itex trefoliata). 



i64 THE INDIAN PHEIDIAS 

Dr. Burgess states that behind the mukuta of Siva the 
rock is cut away into a recess in which two persons could lie 
stretched out at length without being seen from below. The 
Trimiirti of Elephanta was probably the Delphic Oracle of 
Western India ! 

It is difficult to compare the magnificent sculpture of the 
Elephanta temple with any of the masterpieces of the West, for 
it belongs to a plane of aesthetic thought, not entirely peculiar to 
India, but one in which Indian artists were supreme. Greek art 
had its centaurs, fauns, and satyrs, and its pantheon of deified 
heroes, but left the profoundest mysteries of creation to the 
speculation of philosophers. Egyptian art, marvellous as it is, 
can only be regarded from a philosophic standpoint as glorified 
totemism. Indian philosophy, rising to a far higher intellectual 
plane, seems to take the monumental art of Egypt at the point 
where it stopped short, and to raise it, with an equivalent power 
of technical expression, to the loftiest heights ever yet attained 
by human thought. The mystics of India reconciled the aims 
of the artist and philosopher, which Greece and Italy were 
content to regard as belonging to different planes of thought. 

If the Brahma image might have been created by the chisel 
of Praxiteles, it seems as if a reincarnation of Pheidias, 
inspired by the profound philosophy of the Upanishads instead 
of by the child-like conceptions of the Homeric Olympus, had 
been born again to carve this masterpiece of Indo-Aryan genius 
at Elephanta. There are other great sculptures at Elephanta; 
but the art of the unknown sculptors of the Brahma shrine 
and of the Trimtlrti stands out from the rest, as Valmiki and 
Kalidas shine pre-eminently in Indian poetry and drama. 

And it is impossible to doubt that these great artists, 
though their names were consigned to oblivion through the 
contempt of Islam for the sculptor's art, were in their day held 
in as high honour as the poets and dramatists of Vikramiditya's 



HELLENIC AND INDIAN ART 165 

court, and as the miniature painters whom Akbar and Jah^ngtr 
counted among their intimate friends. Great art like this could 
hardly have been created under the social stigma which now 
attaches to the master-craftsmen of India. The blindness of 
Anglo-Indian critics has not allowed them to perceive the wide 
gulf which separates the fine sculpture of the Indian temple 
images from the popular art of ordinary architectural decora- 
tion — a gulf fully as wide as that which separated the great 
masters of Europe from the apprentices or common craftsmen 
of their guilds. 

It is almost miraculous that, in the wholesale destruction 
of works of the classic age of Indian art, which went on un- 
checked for centuries after the Muhammadan conquest, any 
of those which must have been once counted the most precious 
of them all should be amongst those which have suffered least 
from the blind fury of the iconoclast. But one sculpture like 
the Trimdrti of Elephanta and one painting like the Prince 
Siddhartha suffice to show that Indian artists may stand among 
the greatest of the world. 

Orientalists, looking only at the outside of things, have 
worked with untiring zeal to show Greek influence in Indian 
art and literature, as a mark of Western superiority, without 
being able to realise where the true resemblances lie ; just as 
the secret links which bind Greek and Gothic art together re- 
main hidden from the book-learned student who sees the form 
but fails to grasp the inner spirit. - 

Indo-Aryan art was Greek because it was born of the 
common parent of European and Indian civilisation. Greek 
art remained a child always, with childish dreams of life and 
beauty. Let us ever cherish those dreams of childhood which 
belong to the springtime of humanity. But the art of India 
grew to maturity and put away childish things. The art of 
Gandhara was her plaything as a child. 

II* 



CHAPTER XIII 

THE DYNASTIES OF SOUTHERN INDIA — ARYAN CIVILISATION 

IN THE SOUTH THE FIVE GREAT ASSEMBLIES — LOCAL 

SELF-GOVERNMENT IN THE TENTH CENTURY SIVA 

TEMPLES AT BADAMI TEMPLES AT PATTADAKAL — THE 

VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE — THE EVOLUTION OF TEMPLE 
PLANNING 

So far we have left out of account the history of the dynasties 
which carried on the Indo-Aryan tradition in the Dekhan and 
in Southern India, after Asoka's great empire had resolved 
itself into different dynastic factors. The history of Indian 
civilisation is little concerned with the martial exploits of the 
different warrior kings who disputed for the headship of the 
Indo-Aryan communities in different parts of India, but a 
general outline of the dynastic record is useful for the frame- 
work of it. 

The most powerful people with whom the early Aryans 
first contended for the possession of Indian soil were probably 
the Nagas, who figure so conspicuously in ancient Indian 
sculpture with their remarkable serpent crest, or headdress. 
They must not be confused with the mythical people, with 
bodies half-human, half-snake, inhabiting rivers, lakes, and 
seas and also the sky and the regions below the earth, which 
appear in the same sculptures. The origin of the Nagas is as yet 
unknown : possibly their choice of a snake totem indicates that 
they were originally mariners and came to India oversea. After 
they had been driven out of the valley of the Ganges and the 

i66 



ARYAN CIVILISATION IN THE SOUTH 167 

Jumna by the Aryans, they probably remained as the principal 
power of the Dekhan for many centuries. They were among 
the first of the non-Aryan people to come under the influence 
of the Buddha's teaching, which must have brought them 
within the pale of Aryan civilisation ; but except for some in- 
definite poetical allusions to them in the Mahabhirata and the 
Rimayana nothing has been recorded of their history. 

The period when Aryan civilisation began to extend over 
Southern India is also a matter of uncertainty, though the 
poetical account of it is given in the R^mayana. As in the north, 
it invigorated and supplemented, but did not entirely supersede 
the older states ofculture which existed before the Aryans entered 
India. Asoka sent his younger brother, Mahendra, to lead 
the Buddhist mission in the south ; but even befprg^he third 
century B.C. Aryan institutions had existed there, and the three 
principal dynasties — the Pindya, Kerala or Chera, and the 
Chola — claimed descent from the five P^ndava heroes of the 
Mahabhirata, who founded a kingdom with its capital at 
Indraprastha, one of the old Delhis. 

The first of these three dynasties was the southernmost, ex- 
tending over the present Tinnevelly and Madura districts ; the 
Keralas ruled the western districts ; the Cholas the eastern and 
the central districts, now known as Mysore. Originally the 
latter had their capital at Uraiylir, the modern Trichinopoly.' 
In the early centuries of the Christian era, and probably long 
before that time, the southernmost point of India was a place 
of pilgrimage for Brahmans from Benares." In very remote 
times Southern India came into contact with the West through 
its great maritime trade. Gold and silver, pearls, coral and 
precious stones, pepper and other spices were sent by way of 
the Red Sea ports-and the Nile to Alexandria. Pliny com- 

1 Vincent Smith, " Early History of India," p. 415. 

" V. Kanakasabhai, "The Tamils 1800 Years Ago," p. 21. 



i68 THE KINGDOM OF DRAVIDA 

plained of the drain upon the resources of the Roman Empire 
on account of the wealth which went to pay for these luxuries. 
One of the Pandyan kings sent embassies to Augustus at Rome, 
and Grseco-Roman mercenaries were employed in the armies of 
the Tamil kings.^ 

There are some general descriptions of splendid cities and 
royal palaces in the earliest Tamil literature. Such details as 
are given indicate a close resemblance to the architecture of the 
north, and the employment of " skilled artisans fr9m Magadha " 
in the construction of them is sometimes mentioned.^ But the 
real architectural history of the south, or Tamil-speaking 
country, does not begin much before the seventh century, 
. when the principal " Raths " at Mimallapuram previously de- 
scribed were sculptured. This almost coincided with Hiuen 
Tsang's visit to Southern India (a.d. 640), where he stayed for 
a time at Conjeveram, then a large city and capital of the 
kingdom called Drivida, which was ruled by kings of the 
Pallava dynasty who rose to power about the third century a.d., 
and for five or six centuries afterwards disputed with the three 
older dynasties for supreme rule in the south. 

The dynastic history of Dravida in the seventh century is 
-mostly concerned with the constant wars between the Pallava 
kings and the Chalukyan rulers of the Dekhan who had 
succeeded the Andhras about a century previously. The 
fChalukyans seem to have been of Rajput origin. Both Ajanta 
and Ellora were situated in their dominions. The most power- 
ful of Chalukyan kings was Pulak^sin II, whom Harsha of 
Thanesar, circa a.d. 620, endeavoured to subdue ; but after a 
severe repulse he was constrained to leave him undisputed 
master of the Dekhan. Hiuen Tsang was also a visitor at 
Pulak^sin's Court at Nisik, and another record of his reign 
remains in a fragmentary painting in the ffrst monastic hall at 

^ V. Kanakasabhai, "The Tamils 1800 Years Ago," p. 37. 2 /^^-^ p ^j. 



THE DRAVIDIANS 169 

Ajanti, which is believed to represent the reception of an em- 
bassy which Khushra II of Persia sent to the Indian king/ 
It is impossible to follow Mr. Vincent Smith in the inference 
he draws from the painting of this event by Indian artists that 
" it proves, or goes a long way towards proving, that the Ajanti 
school of pictorial art was derived directly from Persia, and 
ultimately from Greece." 

Though the Dravidians of the Dekhan and the south were 
not of Aryan race, and though they were to a certain extent 
civilised before Vedic culture began to influence them, it can 
hardly be disputed that at a very early time they, like the Nigas, 
had adopted Aryan political and religious institutions, and that 
all the higher culture of Southern India was dominated by 
Aryan thought in much the same way as Roman culture was 
impregnated with that of Greece. 

The " Five Great Assemblies " which Megasthenes men- 
tions as restraining the power of the southern kings must 
have been modelled upon the traditional Council of Five which 
controlled the affairs of the Aryan village, in order to maintain 
the privileges of the people against abuse of regal authority. 
All the higher philosophy and religion of the South were like- 
wise Aryan in inspiration, though Dravidian culture had arobustlj 
local character, typical of the race, and was not purely imitative. 
Only in that sense can the architecture of the South be called^ 
Dravidian ; for all its derivation, structural and symbolic, was \ 
Aryan, and its traditions were those of the craftsmen of Magadha * 
who followed in the train of Asoka's missionaries. The 
" Dravidian " temple was, as I have explained, a glorified sttjpa ; 
no element in its design can be said to be of local origin, and 
there is no evidence of the existence of any great architectural 
tradition among the Dravidians before Aryan civilisation pene- 
trated into the south. 

1 Vincent Smith, " Early History of India," p. 384. 



I70 THE FIVE GREAT ASSEMBLIES 

Aryan culture, indeed, seems to have gathered new strength 
from its transplantation into southern soil ; just as Hellenic 
culture, when it was decadent in the land of its birth, acquired 
new vigour in Italy. Sankarach^rya, who relighted the torch 
of Vedic philosophy in the asrams of the north, and Ramantija, 
the exponent of Vaishnavism, were born there. When Northern 
India was being overrun by the Muhammadan invaders, the 
south remained the bulwark of Aryan institutions for several 
centuries, and many of the most important records of Aryan 
polity and culture are found there. 

The organisation of the Aryan village community remained 
intact in Southern India until the days of British rule. Rim Riz 
compiled his invaluable notes on Indian villageand town planning 
from the traditional canons of South Indian craftsmen, and to 
the present day the art of Southern India, decadent as it generally 
is, yet retains more of the virility of the classic Indo-Aryan 
period than is generally found in those parts of India which 
remained longer subject to Muhammadan influence. 

The earliest Tamil literature confirms the accuracy of Megas- 
thenes in reference to the " Five Great Assemblies." The mem- 
bers of them took precedence in royal processions after the king's 
principal officers of State.^ Of the different classes composing 
the Assemblies, the representatives of the people safeguarded 
the popular rights and privileges which Indo-Aryan institutions 
bestowed upon them ; the priests controlled all religious cere- 
monies and the administration of temples ; the physicians 
directed State sanitation ; the astrologers fixed auspicious times 
for public ceremonies and foretold coming events ; the State 
officials attended to the collection and expenditure of revenue 
and the administration of justice.^ 

A considerable number of inscriptions of the Pallava period 
discovered by the Archaeological Survey of India refer to the 

^ V. Kanakasabhai, "The Tamils 1800 Years Ago," p. 143. ^ Ibid. pp. 109-10. 



LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT 171 

system of local administration by the Councils of Five. But 
the most interesting and detailed in its information are two 
which are inscribed on the walls of a Vaishnavaite temple in the 
Madura district. They belong to the early part of the tenth 
century a.d., when a Chola king, Parintaka I, had possessed 
himself of Madura, the Pindya capital. The inscriptions relate 
to the king's intervention in the affairs of a municipality in his 
dominions, called Uttaram^ru-Catur-V^dimangalam, which was 
evidently of considerable size, as it was divided into thirty 
wards like the city of Pitaliputra in the time of Chandragupta.* 

The circumstances recorded in the inscriptions show that 
an appeal had been made to the king on account of the mal- 
administration of municipal affairs. The laws had not been 
observed ; there had been embezzlement of communal funds, 
and the officials responsible had not rendered their accounts. The 
king thereupon (a.d. 918-9) sent one of his Court officials, a 
Sudra, to inquire into the matter, and the first inscription relates 
to the arrangements made as the result of his conference with 
the local Assembly. The form in which it is set forth shows 
that the royal envoy acted solely in an advisory capacity, and 
not as a dictator of the king's commands : " We, the members 
of the Assembly of Uttaram^ru-Catur-V^dimangalam made this 
settlement — Tattantlr Mtivendav^lan sitting with us by royal 
order — in order that the wicked men of our village may perish 
and the rest prosper," etc. 

As it was a Brahman community it was not surprising that 
the Sudra official's visit did not result in a satisfactory settle- 
ment. The next year, apparently, another appeal was made, and 
this time the king sent a Brahman to assist the distracted muni- 
cipality with his advice. The second inscription which records 
the result is equally explicit as to the relationship between the 
local Assemblies and the Supreme Government. The arbitrator 

* Supra, p. 24. 



172 LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT 

sent from the royal Court in drafting the final settlement refers 
to the members of the Assembly with the honorific Tirwvadiydr 
(their Majesties), and it is by their command and not by royal 
mandate that the rules approved of are promulgated : " At the 
order of the great men sitting in the Assembly, I, the Arbitrator, 
Kidadippdttan Rijumalla-mangala-priyan, thus wrote the 
settlement." 

Sir C. Sankaran Nair has written an interesting analysis 
of the settlement,^ a full translation of which is printed in the 
Report of the Archaeological Survey of India for 1908, The 
main purport of it was the election of five committees of the 
General Assembly — namely, the Annual Committee, the Garden 
or Park Committee, the Tank or Water Committee, the Gold 
or Finance Committee, and the Panca Vara Committee to regu- 
late the affairs of the commune. 

The nominations for the committees were to be made at a 
meeting of the householders of each of the thirty wards. The 
qualifications for membership were : 

1 . He must own more than a quarter veli of tax-paying 
land. But in the case of a Brahman who was learned in one 
Veda and one of the four Bhasyas, one-eighth veli of land was 
sufficient qualification. 

2. He must be the owner of a freehold house and live in it. 

3. He must be above 35 years of age and below 70. 

4. He must know and be qualified to teach the Mantra 
Brahmana, 

The latter rule. Sir Sankaran Nair observes, placed the 
administration of the communal affairs entirely in the hands of 
Brahmans, or of those versed in Brahmanical philosophy ; but 
it should also be mentioned that Uttaram^ru was a Brahman 
community, as the affix -V^dimangalam implies." The election 

1 "Village Government in Southern India," Modern Review^ Calcutta, March, 1914. 
* See supra, p. 14. 



MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 173 

rules were made to suit local circumstances ; for other inscrip- 
tions show that cultivators and merchants were on the voters' 
register in other villages. 

The settlement enjoins that of those possessing the above 
qualifications only those who are well conversant with business 
and are virtuous shall be nominated, and that preference should 
be given to anyone " whose mind is pure and who possesses 
honest earnings, who had not served on any of the committees 
in the previous three years." 

The disqualifications for membership are then stated. Ne- 
potism was guarded against by the rule that none of the near 
relatives (a long list of whom is given) of any nominee for office 
shall be eligible. Anyone who had been outcasted, or was a 
" foolhardy" person, or who had committed incest or theft, or 
had become a " village pest," was to be permanently disqualified. 

The names of the nominees for each of the thirty wards 
were to be inscribed on voting tickets, and on the day of election 
a meeting of the General Assembly was convened by the Finance 
Committee of the current year at the principal temple. All the 
priests attending the temple were expected to be present in the 
inner chamber {antardld). The nomination tickets for each ward 
were tied up in separate packets and placed in a jar or voting urn. 
Then the eldest of the temple priests held up the jar before the 
whole assembly, and one of the packets was drawn at random by 
any young boy who stood near. The packet thus drawn was 
placed in another jar, and from this the boy drew one nomina- 
tion ticket and handed it over to the arbitrator, or returning 
officer, who was to receive it "on the palm of his hand with the 
five fingers open." The arbitrator then read out the name on 
the ticket and it was handed on to be read out in turn by all the 
temple priests present. One nominee for each of the wards was 
similarly drawn and declared duly elected for the ensuing year 
of office. 



174 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 

From the members thus elected, twelve of the oldest and 
most learned, or those who had previously served on the Park 
and Water Committees, were selected for the " Annual Com- 
mittee." Twelve of the rest were chosen for the Park 
Committee, and the remaining six formed the Water Com- 
mittee. The term of office for each committee was one year ; 
but any member guilty of misconduct was to be removed 
at once. 

There were separate nominations for the Panca Vara 
Committee, which apparently checked the work of the other 
four ; and also for the Finance or " Gold Committee." The 
elections for these committees took place in the same manner 
as that prescribed for the other three. A sixth committee, 
" For the Supervision of Justice," is mentioned, but the mode 
of its election is not specified. It may have been nominated 
by the king, who was presumed to be the incarnation of 
justice and who represented the final Court of Appeal. 

The settlement concludes with rules for the appointment 
of the local accountant. He had to prepare his own accounts 
and submit them to the " Great Committee " for audit at the 
expiration of his term of office ; his honesty must be vouched 
for by the Committee before he could be reappointed. 

Other South Indian inscriptions record the interesting 
fact that women were eligible for membership of these com- 
mittees ; mention is made of one who served on the Committee 
of Justice. 

Hiuen Tsang's record of his travels gives us information 

of the different religious sects existing in Southern India in 

.the seventh century. The Jains were numerous and flourish- 

(ing, but Buddhism, as a sect, had almost ceased to exist. 

According to tradition, the Jains are said to have gone south 

j owing to a great famine in Northern India in the first century 

) B.C. The old Jain temple at Aihole has already been described, 



> 



< 

0^ 




THE JAINS 175 

and also the characteristic roofing of Canarese Jain temples, 
the form of which was dictated by local climatic reasons.^ 
Jainism cannot be said to have created a special architecture 
of its own, for wherever they went the Jains adopted the local 
building tradition. In Northern India Jainism followed the 
Vaishnava cult in building, and their tirths, or places of 
pilgrimage, were the sacred hills, like Palitana, Girnar, Abtl 
and Parisnath, upon which they built " cities of the gods " 
consisting of innumerable temples crowned with the symbol 
of Vishnu's holy mountain, the sikhara, and grouped together 
on a regular plan like a village. In Southern India they 
adopted the " Dravidian " or Siva type of temple ; only using 
the Vishnu symbol in sculpturing colossal images of their 
Tirthankaras as Pillars of the Universe. These temples 
mostly belong to a later chapter of Indian architectural history 
which does not come within the scope of this book. 

The Saiva cult, after the decline of Buddhism, took deep 
root in Southern India, and even when a Vaishnava propaganda 
was successful there it had little influence on the local architec- 
tural tradition, for the Vaishnavaite temple differed only from 
the Saivaite in the symbolism of the sacred images which 
were worshipped. 

As in the north, the period from the seventh to the tenth 
centuries was a great architectural epoch in Southern India, 
The most characteristic of the Mimallapuram monolithic 
shrines which belong to the beginning of this epoch have been 
described in a previous chapter. In the neighbourhood of 
Bidimi, situated in the Bijapdr district of the Bombay 
Presidency, there is a small but exquisite temple of the same 
age, known as the Malegitti Sivalaya temple, which shows 
South Indian art in its perfection. It is built of stone finely 
jointed without mortar, and is one of the earliest structural 
temples of the Siva type now known. It is placed on the 



176 TEMPLES AT BAdAmI 

summit of a rocky hill with surroundings of similar character 
to those of Ajanta. The cubical shrine with its pyramidal 
tower (PI. LVII) closely resembles that of Arjtina's Rath at 
Mimallapuram, but the entrance faces the rising instead of 
the setting sun, as it is dedicated to the benign aspect of 
Mahadeva. It differs from the Mamallapuram temple in 
having a mandapam, or hall of worship, about 20 feet 
square added to the antarala of the shrine. This has a terraced 
roof surrounded by sculptured monastic cells used only 
symbolically. The walls which enclose the mandapam have 
two windows on the north and south filled with perforated 
stout lattices. In front of the mandapam there is an open 
porch supported by four massive pillars. 

The classic proportions of the whole structure and the 
exquisite taste of the sculptured ornament of this little temple 
will be a revelation to European artists who only know Indian 
architecture from the over-laboured craftsmanship and re- 
dundant decoration of the decadent period. A smaller shrine 
in the same neighbourhood (PI. LVII I) and of about the same 
age reveals the unerring judgment of the Indian master- 
builder in choosing his site and adapting his structural design 
to the formation of it. It seems almost as if the Divine hand 
which piled up this steeple of living rock above the river bank 
had also sculptured the temple as its finial, so cunningly has 
the craftsman adapted the canons of his art to the place chosen 
for the shrine of the Deity. 

Not far from Badami, in the ancient Chalukyan territory, 
is Pattadakal, a place as yet unheard of by most European 
students of architecture, but remarkable for some of the finest 
and most interesting structural temples in India. It is not 
far from Aihole, a little to the south of Bijipilr, famous for 
its great mosques, tombs, and other buildings of the 
Muhammadan period. The Virdpiksha temple, the largest of 



I'LAII'- lAIII 




SIVA TEMI'I.E AT liADAMI 



I7fj] 



TEMPLES AT PATTADAKAL 177 

them, has a definite date, an inscription showing that it was 
built by a king of the Chalukyan dynasty, Vikramiditya II, 
who ruled from 733 to 747. It is of the Siva type of design, 
and, were it not for Fergusson, who classifies the one as 
"Dravidian" and the other as "Indo-Aryan," there could be no 
question but that the supplementary Vishnu temple adjoining 
it (PI. LIX) is of the same style and period, built to represent 
the Vaishnava or rijasic Aspect of Mahideva. There are 
several similar pairs of temples in the neighbourhood of 
Pattadakal. 

The archaeological explanation of the "style" of the 
Vishnu temple, as given by Dr. Burgess in the " Imperial 
Gazetteer of India," is that perhaps some northern king coming 
to Pattadakal on a pilgrimage had this temple of the " northern 
style" built by the side of the "Dravidian" temple as a 
memorial of his visit. This hardly explains how similar pairs 
of temples came to be built near Sennacherib's palace at 
Nineveh with the symbols of life and death planted beside 
them on the sacred hill, nor other coincidences of the same 
kind in many other places in India. Kings do not generally 
build temples in the territories of other potentates whom they 
visit in a friendly way. 

It is a somewhat remarkable circumstance that the earliest 
known temple architecture of Southern India appears in the 
seventh and eighth centuries in the perfectly developed state 
shown by the temples of Badami, Mimallapuram, and Patta- 
dakal, and that there seems to be no extant record of the many 
centuries of growth which led up to this perfection. It has 
been assumed that the use of wood and other impermanent 
materials accounts for the historical hiatus, but I do not think 
that this is altogether a sufficient or convincing explanation. 
In many localities in India stone must have been the usual 
building material for centuries before the temples of Aihole 

12 



178 EVOLUTION OF TEMPLE PLANNING 

and Badami were built and before the granite rocks of 
Mamallapuram were sculptured. The real explanation is, I 
believe, to be found in the study of the planning of the great 
cathedral temples of India, such as the Virdpaksha temple at 
Pattadakal. 

The great temples of India were rarely, if ever, built for 
their own sake, to make a place known as a religious centre. 
They grew gradually out of the sacred associations of the sites 
which they occupied. Pattadakal must have been noted as a 
place of pilgrimage for many centuries before the Virtlp|ksha 
temple was built : some yogi of great fame may have lived there 
under his chosen Bodhi tree, growing where the natural forma- 
tion of the ground suggested a symbol of his cult, or where the 
beauty of the prospect inspired pious thoughts. When the yogi 
died, his stdpa would be raised near the same tree, and pilgrims 
would flock to worship at the shrine Vishnu the Preserver and 
Siva the Lord of Death. When the tree died, another shrine 
crowned with Vishnu's sikhara would be built to mark the place 
where it grew. The two shrines would remain perhaps for 
many centuries quite insignificant in size and with no archi- 
tectural pretensions, until some royal devotee or wealthy 
merchant would pay for enclosing the holy places in splendid 
caskets of sculptured stone, and for the accessory buildings 
which provided accommodation for the priests and pilgrims who 
worshipped there. An inscription would record the donor's 
name and the date of this devotional act ; the previous history 
of the shrines would remain only as a tradition in the minds 
of the people. To the outside observer, who saw only the 
buildings, it would remain a blank. 

This is the story which the plan of the Virtipaksha temple 
(fig. 56) tells us. The nucleus of the plan originally was a plain 
cubical cell covered by a dome like the buildings shown in the 
Nineveh relief (fig. 40). At first, perhaps, it was built only of 



y. 




THE VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE 



179 



rough stones or of bricks. When it fell into ruin, another one, 
still small in size but of better material and construction, was 
built in place of it. The magnificent pile of the eighth century- 
was the casket of sculptured stone which enclosed one of the 
earlier shrines, leaving a path for the pradakshini rite all 
round it. 

The details of the Virdpiksha temple have never been 
adequately photographed, but the design of 
the whole tower built over the holy of holies 
can be seen in the illustration of another 
Siva temple at Pattadakal (PI. LX) : it 
differs only in minor details from the Vird- 
paksha temple. 

The structural principle of its design has 
been already explained (p. 120). It closely 
resembles the Badami temple and Arjtina's 
Rath at Mamallapuram (PI. XXVIII) ; but 
the roof of the antarala is built up higher, and 
a large sun-window filled with a sculptured 
shrine in miniature occupies the front of it. 
It corresponds with a similar one which appears 
over the antarala of the adjoining Vishnu 
shrine. 

In front of the antarala — the hall of the 
priests — is a pillared mandapam, the hall of the people and 
the meeting-place of the General Assembly of the village. 
The tradition of Aryan village life was linked with its struc- 
ture by the pillars supporting it, symbolising the sacred grove 
which was the general meeting-place in the absence of a 
building ; by the gopurams, the cow-gates which formed its 
entrances, and by the "embattled fret" in the plan of the 
walls which enclosed it. Only, instead of Kshatriya warriors, 
the shrines of the gods protected the villagers within the sacred 




XT 



Fig. 56.— Plan of Virt- 
piksha Temple. Scale, 
100 ft. to I in. (From 
Fergusson's " History.') 



i8o THE VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE 

enclosure. The shelters of the fighting men upon the walls 
became monastic cells. 

The mandapam of the Virtlpaksha temple is of the same 
design as that of the temple of Bidami described above, but 
it is more than double the size of the latter — i.e. about 50 feet 
square. The roof is supported by sixteen monolithic pillars 
with sculptured bracket capitals, and the enclosing walls on 
each side are pierced by four windows. The pierced stone 
lattices which fill the latter (PI. LXI) are the prototypes of those 
which were so conspicuously beautiful in Muhammadan 
mosques and tombs at Ahmadibid and elsewhere. All the 
motifs, geometric as well as floral, used in what are wrongly 
called " Indo-Saracenic " lattices are found in Indian temples 
of this early period. Except for the substitution of Arabic texts 
for animal and human forms as decoration, Islam brought 
nothing new to the masonic craft of India. Indo-Muhammadan 
architecture belonged root and branch to India's own tree. 

Though in a bad state of preservation, one of the most 
striking features of the Virdpiksha temple is a masterpiece of 
architectural sculpture, the detached Brahmi shrine placed in 
front of the mandapam enclosing Siva's symbol, the bull Nandi 
(PI. LXI I). It combines the stateliness of the classic design of 
Europe with the fervid imagination of Gothic art. The finest 
modern sculpture of Europe has a close kinship with it. If 
M. Rodin's genius had been devoted to building design, he 
would have created architecture like this. 

It would be a mere solecism to compare these Indian Siva 
shrines with Renaissance buildings like St. Paul's in London 
or St. Peter's in Rome. The Indian builder was too sincere 
in his religious feelings to try to amuse the eye with meaning- 
less " effects " of line or form, or to exhibit for public applause 
his cleverness as a composer of " style." The temple was not 
\ an archaeological essay, but a sermon in stone, suggesting in 



X 



w 




THE VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE 



x8i 



its symbolism the rhythm of the cosmos, teaching the lessons 
of the universal life, and recording the sacred traditions of the 
Indian people. There is, nevertheless, a closer aesthetic affinity 
between these South Indian temples and the Parthenon of 
Greece than in any of the buildings of the Renaissance of 
Europe. 

PI. LIX gives a general view of the two temples,^ but 




Fig. 57. — Virfipaksha Temple at Pattadakal, South Elevation (from a Drawing by Mr. H. Cousens). 

Scale, 20 fr. to i in. 

the fine proportions are considerably marred by the fact of the 
sculptured plinth upon which they both stand being buried 
underground. 

Mr. Cousens' drawing of the south elevation (fig. 57) 
represents the plinth of the Virdp^ksha temple after excavations 
have been made. Possibly these have not yet been carried down 
to the original ground level, for the famous sculptured Kailisa 
temple at Ellora, which is almost a duplicate of the Pattadakal 



From Fergusson's " Mysore and Dharwar." 



12' 



i82 THE VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE 

temple, has a lower plinth with a high dado of magnificently 
sculptured elephants in high relief (PI. LXVIa), which adds 
greatly to the grandeur of the design. The Pattadakal original 
of the Kailisa temple has not yet received the attention due to 
it as one of the master-works of the classic period of Indian 
architecture. Fergusson's meagre description does scanty 
justice to it. 

The Vishnu shrine adjoining it is shown in the foreground 
of PI. LIX, on the right. The sikhara has lost its crowning 
member, which Fergusson assumed to have been an amalaka, 
like those of the Orissa temples. The vagaries of the archaeo- 
logical stylist are difficult to follow, for there seems no reason to 
suppose that it was different from other temples of this part of 
India, styled " Chalukyan " by F^ergusson, in which the sikhara 
is crowned by a sttlpa dome instead of by the amalaka ; for the 
temples belong to the Saiva cult, and are dedicated to the 
Vaishnava Aspect of Siva, as Mahadeva. The four sides of 
the sikhara are ornamented with projecting vertical bands of 
miniature sun-windows in the middle ; the corners show 
horizontal mouldings in which the amalaka motif alternates 
with sun-windows. 

The plan is similar to that of the Virdpaksha temple, only 
on a much smaller scale. The roof end of the antarila is orna- 
mented with a large sun-window, used as a shrine for the 
image of Siva in his mystic dance of the cosmic rhythm. The 
mandapam has a flat roof supported by four pillars. The 
sculptured bull of Siva stands in the open facing the mandapam, 
the shrine enclosing it having fallen into ruin. 

The Virlipaksha temple, which has an easterly aspect like 
the contiguous Vishnu shrine, was walled in by a great quad- 
rangle, with the principal gopurams on the eastern and western 
sides. Under the shelter of the walls accommodation was 
provided for Brahmans and their scholars, and for pilgrims. 



I'LAII' l.\l 





STONE LA'ITICES, VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE, PATTADAKAE 



182] 



THE VIRUPAKSHA TEMPLE 183 

Many of the great South Indian temples repeat the plan of the 
Indian village in their enclosing walls, with gopurams on all 
four sides. This is not so frequent an occurrence in Northern 
India, which was so much more completely under Muham- 
madan domination, probably because the Muhammadan rulers 
razed the outer defences of Hindu temples for military reasons ; 
but it may be seen in the plan of the Martand temple in Kash- 
mir (fig. 46), where the lines of the two main streets of the 
village plan are also repeated. 

When a famous shrine like the Virfipaksha temple at- 
tracted more pilgrims than could be accommodated under the 
walls, or when a pious king wished to increase the endow- 
ments of Brahmanical learning which belonged to the temple, 
the difficulty of enlarging the original sacred structure was 
overcome by the expedient of enclosing the first quadrangle 
with a larger one, the gopurams of the latter being correspond- 
ingly greater in width and height. The temple of Tiruvalldr 
(fig. 58) is an example of this natural process of organic growth 
in building which Fergusson, with curious inconsistency, 
criticises as a " false system of design." To satisfy architectural 
theorists, the builders should have pulled down the innermost 
shrine, with all its immemorial traditions, and rebuilt it on a 
larger scale according to the " true principles " of design. 

As a matter of fact, in every South Indian temple which 
was completed according to the intention of the original 
builders, the tower of the holy of holies always dominated the 
gopurams of the mandapam and those of the walls of the quad- 
rangular enclosure, as it does in the Virtlp^ksha temple. The 
great temple at Tanjore, completed about the beginning of the 
eleventh century, is a conspicuous example of this rule. The 
expedient of making the outer gopurams the principal struc- 
tural features was only adopted when some ancient and highly 
venerated shrine already existed on the site, and it might be 



i84 TEMPLE PLANNING 

considered desecration to touch it or to disturb the meditations 
of its pious custodians. 

This system of adding enclosure to enclosure gradually 
created the best known of the great temples of Southern India, 
like those of Srirangam, R^m^svaram, and Madura, with their 
towering gopurams forming landmarks for many miles around 




Fig. 58. — Temple at Tiruvallur (from RSm RSz's Essay on the Architecture 
of the Hindus). 

them. Within the outer courts numbers of subsidiary shrines, 
bathing tanks, and " halls of a thousand pillars," representing 
the parks or groves of the Indo-Aryan village, were built to 
provide for the vast crowds of pilgrims which congregate there 
at the time of great festivals, while numerous bazaars supply 
them with food and other necessaries. 

In most cases the existing outer enclosures are additions 
or restorations made since mediaeval times ; but it must be 



X 



H 
< 




TEMPLE PLANNING 185 

understood that the traditions which ascribe great antiquity to 
the temples cannot be dismissed as Brahman fables. The 
nucleus of the temple may be an ancient structure associated 
with the first penetration of Aryan religion into Southern India. 
The successive enclosures are the record of the unbroken 
tradition of j;he Indo- Aryan buildingcraft from remote antiquity 
to the present day. 



CHAPTER XIV 

THETtRTH OF ELLORA — THE VISVAKARMA CHAITYA-HOUSE THE 

DUMAR LENA TEMPLE — THE RAM^SVARA TEMPLE THE 

KAILASA TEMPLE — THE INDRA SABHA AND JAGANNATH 
SABHA 

Within the territories of tiie Chalukyan kings where Badimi, 
Pattadakal, and Ajanti were situated there was another place, 
now known as Ellora, around which the associations of Aryan 
piety had gathered from time immemorial. Ellora, which is 
now within the Nizam's dominions, is not far to the south of 
Ajanta, and the amenities of the place which made it sacred to 
religious devotees of every sect were likewise Siva's moon- 
crest, the bend of a rushing torrent, overhung by a rocky hill, 
and a waterfall. Ajanta was a university, Ellora a tirth, or 
place of pilgrimage. Tradition does not record what yogi's 
wonder-working austerities first brought pilgrims to the place, 
but it is known at the present day as one of the twelve sacred 
tirths to accomplish which is the desire of every ^sadhu or 
sannyisin. 

According to the strict rule of his caste every Brahman, 
when he has fulfilled the duties first of a Brahmacharin, or 
student, and afterwards those of a father and householder, 
should on the approach of old age hand over charge of his 
family to his son, and, following the example of the Buddha, 
shave his head, discard the sacred cord which is the symbol of 
his order, and take the vow of a sannyasin. Then with a 
pilgrim's staff and water-vessel, and with begging-bowl in hand, 

1 86 



I'LATI': I.XIIL 




i36J 



FACADE OF TH IC N'FSVAKAKMA CF£ ArrVA-Hf)rSE, EFLORA 



TIRTHS 



187 



he should go forth into the world as a mendicant and spend 
the rest of his life in wandering from one sacred tirth to another. 
At this stage the Brahman's only spiritual exercise is medita- 
tion, and he is absolved from the routine of religious ceremonies 
and ritual. 

The Brahman, as a sannyisin, is one of a Sangha or 
spiritual brotherhood in which 
caste restrictions are unknown. 
His body is held to be no longer 
subject to defilement, and to 
become so free from the gross 
attachments of the flesh that 
on his death it does not need 
the purification of fire. As in 
the days of the Buddha, this 
brotherhood is open to all 
castes, though non-Brahman 
mendicants, or sadhus, are 
supposed to need the help of 
religious exercises, other than 
meditation, to enable them to 
rise to a higher spiritual grade. 

The choice of tirths for 
pilgrimage depends upon the 
Ishta-deva of the pilgrims, 
whether they be sannyasins, 
sadhus, or belonging to the 
lay community. There are tirths for pilgrims of all sects ; 
others which are considered as specially Jain, Saivaite, or 
Vaishnavaite. All sects have their sacred hills or mountains, 
rivers and waterfalls. Other places are sacred as being associ- 
ated with the events of the Mahabharata or Ramayana. Some 
pilgrims will elect to follow the course of the wanderings of 




Fig. 59.— The Waterfall at Ellora, from an 
engraving by F. J. Havell, after a drawing by 
W. Havell (i 782-1857). 



i88 TIRTHS 

Rima and Sita in exile, others the last journey of the Pindava 
heroes ; or to visit the birthplace of Krishna, or the places 
where portions of Umi's body fell upon the ground as Siva bore 
it sorrowfully away to his Himalayan retreat. 

There are places, like Benares, which provide for those who 
are unable to accomplish the greater ones a series of miniature 
ttrths which are believed to possess all the efficacy of the 
originals. But in all cases it is the place and its associations 
which are in the pilgrim's mind, not the temples which have 
been carved or built as a tribute to the sanctity of the ground. 
And wherever the tlrth may be, from Cape Comorin to the 
HimMayas, it is always associated in some way with the sacred 
soil of Aryavarta and the traditions of the Aryan race. In this 
way of thinking all India is one, so perfect is the bond of 
spiritual sympathy between all the diverse sects and races 
which came within the Aryan pale and under the spell of the 
Aryan genius. 

The scarp of the rocky hill at Ellora, over which in the 
rainy season several torrents leap down into the watercourses 
at its foot, for over a mile in length is sculptured into shrines 
and monasteries belonging to different sects, but most of them 
face the setting sun and thus are dedicated to the timasic 
aspect of the Trimtirtt. The chief exception is the small 
group of Jain temples at the northern extremity of the line, 
including the Indra Sabhiand the Jagannath Sabhi which face 
the south. From this one may conclude that they were not 
devoted to the austere meditative cult of the Jain ascetic, but 
that some wealthy Jain merchants were showing their gratitude 
to Lakshmt for success in business by having these splendid 
shrines carved in her honour ; the Dawn-Maiden, as the bringer 
of prosperity, being associated with the quarter from which the 
monsoon rain-clouds come. 

The sectarian dedication of Ajanta kept its architectural 



h-1 

H 
< 

P-< 




THE TIRTH OF ELLORA 189 

character within one very well defined type. At Ellora, which 
was and is a place of pilgrimage for all India, the imagination 
of the artist had wider scope ; and there could hardly be a 
grander opportunity for sculpture on a titanic scale than the 
cliffs of Ellora afforded. So far as archseological investigation 
goes, the group of monasteries and an important chaitya-house, 
now known as the Visvakarma jhdpri, at the south extremity 
of the line, are assumed to be the earliest in date, because they 
are Buddhist ; but the system of chronology based upon the 
hypothesis that Brahmanical architecture is derived from the 
Buddhist is wholly unreliable. There is very little doubt that 
Ellora was a resort for devotees of all sects from a remote anti- 
quity — Buddhists, Jains, and sadhus and sannyasins of the 
orthodox schools living side by side, worshipping together 
the aspect of the Divine manifested in the wonderful natural 
phenomena which attracted them to the place, but every sect 
representing a different philosophical school or a different 
theory of the divine nature. 

The command of an unlimited number of skilled craftsmen 
which the affluent Buddhist sect had for centuries after Asoka's 
conversion naturally gave Buddhism greater architectural 
opportunities. But in every period of Indian history it was 
only the popular side of Indo-Aryan religion that was repre- 
sented by the sculptor, painter, and architect. The higher 
philosophy of every sect ignored the aids to contemplation and 
the gorgeous ritual which popular feeling demanded. The 
lonely forest, the mountain cave, the quiet river-bank were 
more to the philosopher than the most splendid shrine ever 
made by the hands of men. So at Ellora and every other sacred 
tlrth the centre of interest to the pilgrims would often be, not a 
magnificent chaitya-house, temple, or splendid monastery, but 
a roughly hewn cave or a natural grot, where a yogi lived 
whose inspired sayings were treasured up in the people's mind 



190 THE VISVAKARMA CHAITYA-HOUSE 

and added to the storehouse of Indian wisdom. Archaeology- 
can give a date to the work of the painter, sculptor, and archi- 
tect ; but the antiquity of the hermit's cave, which to the Indian 
historian may be a record of far higher significance, must 
always remain a matter of conjecture. 

Ellora was never at any time, like Ajanta, appropriated 
by any particular sect, as archaeological classification might lead 
one to suppose. The chief architectural or sculptural antiqui- 
ties of Ellora which can be approximately dated all come 
within that epoch of Indian history so graphically described 
by Hiuen Tsang, when Buddhists, Jains, and orthodox Brah- 
mans joined together in divine worship at public festivals, and 
were more or less equal sharers of state patronage. 

The Visvakarma^ chaitya-house, if the local tradition 
preserves its original dedication, may have been the chapel of 
the guild of masons who were working at Ellora, and some of 
the adjoining monastic halls may have been their residences. 
A place like Ellora, where splendid shrines and monasteries 
were continually being carved out of the cliffs on either side 
of the great waterfall, would doubtless have a colony of skilled 
masons permanently residing there, and their services would 
be utilised for any religious sculpture required, whatever its 
sectarian character might be. The same masons who sculp- 
tured the Visvakarma chaitya-house, or their descendants, 
may have assisted the Saivaites at the Dumar Lena — a repro- 
duction of the Elephanta temple — and later on at the Kailisa 
temple, which is almost a copy of the Virtipaksha temple at 
Pattadakal, and also the Jains in sculpturing the Indra 
Sabha and the Jagannath Sabha. In the same way, in 
later times, Hindu craftsmen of every sect worked for the 
Muhammadans in building their mosques and tombs, for no 

' Visvakarma was the craftsman's synonym for Brahma, as the Divine Artificer, or 
the Architect of the Universe. 



THE VISVAKARMA CHAITYA-HOUSE 191 

"Saracenic" builders came into India with the Muhammadan 
conquerors. 

The Visvakarma chaitya-house is larger than any of the 
Mahayinist chapels at Ajant^, its length being over 85 feet 
and breadth 43 feet, but it is by no means so impressive, either 
externally or internally. It is chiefly interesting for the novelty 
of the design of the facade, PI. LXIII. When a chaitya-house 
faced the west, as in this case, the usual proportions of the 
great sun-window which lighted the nave would be inconveni- 
ently large, although the set-back of the front wall and the use 
of curtains tended to mitigate the glare. In the Visvakarma 
chaitya-house the traditional design of the facade is altered 
by an arrangement which might have been called " Renais- 
sance " in style, had it been seven or eight centuries later in 
date, in order to reduce the size of the openings. The effect is 
not altogether pleasing, and the Visvakarma chaitya-house, 
on the whole, is lacking in the fine inspiration of other great 
works at Ellora. There is a certain dryness and formality in 
the design of the whole front, although it has the negative 
merit of not being overcrowded, like some of the Ajanta 
work. 

According to archaeological convention, the Buddhist 
group is placed first in chronological order; but the prob- 
ability is that the Saivaites, or followers of orthodox Brah- 
manism, were the first to occupy the site, for they held all the 
places adjoining the waterfall and Siva's crescent which made 
Ellora holy ground. Both the Jains and Buddhists would 
seem to have been allotted their respective stations to the north 
and south of the Saivaite group at a later date. On both sides 
of the ravine above the waterfall there is a series of simple 
excavations of no architectural pretensions, but they may 
possibly have formed the original asrama, or hermitage of 
Ellora, before it became famous as a place of pilgrimage. 



192 THE DUMAR LENA TEMPLE 

Adjoining the waterfall the scarp of rock on the southern 
side is cut into a group of three comparatively small and simple 
shrines ^ which also belong to the period before the seventh 
century, when the quiet of the hermitage was as yet undisturbed 
by the excavation of the magnificent temples upon which the 
Chalukyan kings lavished all the resources of their treasury. 
The Dumar Lena temple, close to the waterfall on the northern 
side of the ravine, seems to indicate the beginning of the 
bestowal of royal bounty upon the asrama of Ellora. In plan 
it is almost an exact reproduction, on a somewhat larger scale, 
of the great temple at Elephanta ; but it is oriented differently, 
as the four entrances of the Brahmi shrine, instead of fronting 
the four quarters, turn to the intermediate points of the com- 
pass. The entrances correspond with those of the shrine — 
that which overlooks the waterfall is south-east. Probably 
this orientation was arranged so that the main axis of the 
temple should follow the direction of the stream at the point 
where it stands. 

The principal subjects of the sculpture are a repetition of 
those at Elephanta, but none of it has the wonderful inspiration 
of the original. The Dumar Lena might be dated roughly at 
about the seventh century, at the time when Harsha of Thane- 
sar, Pulak^sin II, and the Pallava dynasty of the south shared 
between them almost the entire sovereignty of India. Both 
Ellora and Elephanta were within the Chalukyan king's 
dominions, and possibly one or both of the temples may have 
been executed under his patronage. 

The next group, farther to the south of the waterfall and 
having the same orientation as the Dumar Lena, marks the 
increasing fame of the Ellora tirth. The eight shrines in 
the group, now numbered 24 to 17, are of about the 

^ According to the arbitrary scheme of numbering adopted by Dr. Burgess, these are 
Nos. 27, 26, and 25. 



> 

X 



w 




o 



THE RAMESVARA TEMPLE 193 

same age as the Dumar Lena. The most remarkable of 
them is known as the Ram^svara temple ; its noble sculptured 
front is shown in PI. LXIV. Opposite the entrance Siva's 
bull, Nandi, is raised on a richly carved pedestal. Though 
very different in proportion and effect to their prototypes in 
the Karl^ chaitya-house and the Gautamiputra monastery at 
Nisik, the decorative motifs of the massive dwarf pillars of the 
fa9ade are the traditional ones derived from ancient Aryan 
symbolism. Lakshmi's water-jar, the cornucopia of India, is 
used for a capital as the alternative of the amalaka ; the legs of 
the Vedic altar which it was meant to support are here trans- 
formed into sculptured figures. The panelled treatment of the 
low screen-wall connecting the pillars is evidently a reminis- 
cence of the Vedic railing, and the same motif in a modified 
form appears in the sculptured frieze above the pillars. The 
two columns in front of the shrine are of the same type as those 
at Elephanta, and the craftsmanship throughout the temple 
evidently belongs to the same virile school as the latter, repre- 
senting the period when the principal seat of the Chalukyan 
government was at Nasik instead of at Bidami. 

Farther south along the line we come next to the chief glory 
of Ellora, and in some ways the most wonderful tour deforce 
achieved by Indian sculptor-architects — the Kailasa temple. 
The history of the temple has been ascertained with tolerable 
certainty. About a.d. 754 Dantivarman, one of the minor 
chiefs of the Dekhan and the head of the ancient Rishtraktlta 
clan, overthrew Klrtivarman II, the descendant of the great 
Pulak^sin, and assumed supreme power in the Chalukyan 
territory which his dynasty enjoyed for two and a half cen- 
turies.^ He was soon afterwards deposed by his uncle, 
Krishna I, who extended his nephew's conquests and, ap- 
parently to celebrate his triumph, had this magnificent Siva 

^ Vincent Smith, " Early History of India," p. 256. 
13 



194 THE KAILASA TEMPLE 

temple carved out of the living rock. As Krishna's capital was 
at Badimi it was natural for him to choose the neighbouring 
temple of Virtipiksha at Pattadakal as the model for it. 

The Kailisa temple has the usual orientation of a Siva 
shrine, that is, its entrance faces the setting sun. It derives its 
name from the Himalayan mountain which was Siva's mytho- 
logical paradise ; for Siva, like Vishnu, as a nature symbol is a 
mountaindeity, and thehigh pyramidal towers which covered Siva 
shrines were meant to represent Kailasa, just as the sikhara of 
Vishnu shrines represented Mount Mandara, or M^ru. The dis- 
tinction between the two symbols was that Siva's mountain was 
the rugged, white snow-capped peak, soaring above the clouds, 
where nature was quiescent and as if wrapped in meditation. 
The cubical cell where the yogi sat in thought alone with 
the universe was the symbol of it. Vishnu's symbol was the 
fruitful mountain, whose rounded summit was crowned with 
deodar or cedar, and the tree- and flower-clad hill glad with the 
song of birds and teeming with joyous life, like a lotus-flower 
with turned-down petals offering its nectar to the bees. 

The dedication of the Kailasa temple to Siva's Himalayan 
paradise was not an arbitrary choice ; for it had a particular 
significance in reference to the tirth of Ellora, which in the 
imagination of the pilgrim was a sacred place because the rocky 
hill and its watercourses seemed to reproduce in miniature the 
Himilayan mountains and the holy rivers which had their 
sources there. The army of skilled masons Krishna I had at 
his command set themselves a gigantic task, which at that time 
was also a novel one. Instead of merely hollowing out the 
interior of a temple in the scarp of a hill, or sculpturing one in 
miniature from a boulder of granite, they cut down into the rock 
and, quarrying a pit from 50 to 100 feet deep, 250 feet in length, 
and 160 feet wide, carved out of the middle of it a full-size 
double-storied temple, considerably larger than the structural 



X 




> 
w 

< 
-1 




THE KAILASA TEMPLE 



195 



one which was its model, adding to it a series of magnificent 
chapels and monastic halls which were cut deep into the rock 
on three sides of the quarry, as shown in the transverse section 
of the temple, PI. LXV. 

The comparative dimensions of the Kailasa temple and 
the Virtipaksha temple at 
Pattadakal can be seen in 
figs. 60 and 56, which are 
drawn to the same scale. 
The general view of the 
former from the north-west 
is given in PI. LXVI. The 
block in front is the outer 
gopuram, or entrance, with 
a fragment of the adjoining 
walls crowned with the 
lotus-leaf battlement which 
is so conspicuous in later 
Muhammadan fortresses, 
mosques, and tombs. The 
first part of the temple in- 
side the gopuram is the 
two-storied Brahma shrine 
for Siva's bull, connected 
with the gopuram by a 
bridge cut into the rock. 
On either side of this 
shrine are two fine dhwaja- 
stambhas, nearly 50 feet high, surmounted by Siva's three- 
pronged ensign, the trisula, the symbol of the three Aspects. 
Another bridge connects the Nandi shrine with the splendid 
porch, or gopuram, which is the front entrance to the twelve- 
pillared mandapam leading into the antarila and the holy of 




Fig. 60.— Plan of Kailisa Temple, showing the Cloisters 
and Side-chapels at Ground Level, and the Temple at the 
Upper-floor Level. Scale, loo feet to i inch. (From 
Fergusson's "History.") 



196 



THE KAILASA temple 



holies. The section given in PI. LXV through the correspond- 
ing north and south gopurams shows the arrangement of the 
interior of the mandapam. It closely follows the design of 
the Pattadakal temple, but it is considerably larger and more 
ornate. It is lighted by the gopuram doors, by two other 
doors opening into the terrace surrounding the vimana, and 

also by six windows of almost 
the same design as those of 
the Virtipaksha temple which 
have been already illustrated. 
The walls of the mandapam 
on the north, south, and west 
are decorated with panels of 
figure sculpture illustrating 
various mythological subjects, 
such as that of Dtirga slaying 
the buffalo-demon Mahisha- 
sura, probably an allegory of 
the return of clear weather in 
Northern India, when the 
bright sunshine dispels the 
miasma and oppressive atmo- 
sphere which accompany the 
cessation of the monsoon rains. 
But hardly any of the figure 
sculpture at Ellora is specially 
remarkable ; it is more the stupendous tout ensemble of the 
Kailasa temple which is so amazingly wonderful. 

The roof of the antarala, according to the usual design, 
rises above the terraced roof of the mandapam, and the gable 
of it is sculptured with a large sun-window filled with a figure 
of Siva, seated in yogi attitude, with the right hand raised in 
the dharma-chakra mtidra, or the gesture of teaching. The 




Fig. 61.— Perforated Window of the Mandapain, 
Kailisa Temple. (From a drawing by the Archaeo- 
logical Survey of India.) 



> 

X 
w 

H 

<: 
ft 




THE KAILASA temple 197 

pyramidal tower of the holy of holies is of the Siva type, based 
upon the piling up of the yogi's cubicle, as before explained, 
the crowning member being the sttlpa dome. The whole of 
the main block, including the vimama, the antarala, and the 
mandapam, rests upon a basement, about 27 feet in height, 
sculptured with a magnificent dado of elephants in very bold 
relief which seem to be supporting the temple on their backs. 
The large intervening panels beneath the north and south 
gopurams of the mandapam are filled with groups of figure 
sculpture. The fine one under the south gopuram, illustrating 
the legend of the demon king, Ravana, being imprisoned by 
Siva under Kailisa when he impiously attempted to remove 
it bodily to Ceylon, is shown in the frontispiece. 

This great sculptured basement, unfortunately now much 
mutilated, provides a raised terrace for the circumambulation 
of the holy of holies, the entrance and exit being through the 
mandapam on either side of the antarala. At" the corners and 
in the middle of the three sides of this terrace there are five 
small shrines forming a group round the principal one. The 
first one, on the north side, is dedicated to Ganesa, the elephant- 
headed son of Siva, symbolising the reasoning faculties, who 
must always be first invoked before the Great Spirit is 
addressed. The next, at the north-east corner, is the shrine 
of Bhairava, or Rudra, Siva's timasic or destructive aspect. 
The third, immediately behind the holy of holies, belongs to 
Parvati, Siva's sakti or nature-force. The fourth belongs to 
Chanda, the scavenging deity who purifies the foulness caused 
by the processes of involution, and thereby prepares for the 
next turn of the wheel of life. The fifth is dedicated to the 
Sapta-Matris, the seven Mothers of Creation. 

As will be seen in the plan, fig. 60, and the transverse 
section, the Kailasa temple is surrounded on three sides by 
cloisters and chapels cut into the faces of the quarry which 

'3* 



198 THE KAILASA TEMPLE 

has this glittering marvel in the centre of it. If the temple 
were detached from its surroundings and stood in the open, 
like the Raths at Mamallapuram, it might be compared 
unfavourably with the simpler and more stately craftsman- 
ship of the Pattadakal temple. But with a rare inspiration of 
genius the sculptors of -Ellora threw into striking contrast the 
effect of the jewel-like brilliance of the temple — built as it 
were of white marble, coruscating with the sunlight reflected 
on every facet and elaborated with the finesse of chased silver 
— and the broad surfaces of smoothly dressed stone on the 
sides of the quarry, the noble simplicity of the massive piers 
of the side-chapels cut into the rock and the mysterious gloom 
of their deep recesses. Part of the cloisters which surround 
the temple and the front of the Lank^svara chapel above them 
are illustrated in PI. LXVIII. 

In accordance with the usual Indian practice, the finished 
surface of the Kailasa temple and its surrounding chapels 
were coated with fine white polished plaster, suggesting the 
Great Yogi's snow-capped Himalayan hermitage. In the 
interior of the mandapam the plaster was used as a ground 
for fresco painting. The cloisters on the 'ground-level and 
the chapels facing the north and south gopurams of the manda- 
pam formed an outer pradakshina path, the sides of the 
cloisters being sculptured with a great series of reliefs 
illustrating the whole mythology of the Trimtirti for the 
edification of pilgrims. The series of chapels or monastic 
halls on the south side (PI. LXV) rise in three stories above 
the cloisters, the intention being to cut right through the upper 
surface of the rock, so as to form a sky-light. This part of 
the scheme was never completed. 

The outer circuit of the temple commenced at the north- 
west corner with the delightfully sculptured shrine (fig. 62) of 
the sacred rivers, which, flowing from the Himalayas through 



y. 




SHRINE OF THE SACRED RIVERS 



199 



Siva's matted locks, were here appropriately worshipped at the 
gates of his paradise. The goddess Ganga, standing on a 
makara, is in the centre ; on her right is Sarasvati with a 
lotus flower as a pedestal ; and the goddess Jumna standing on 
a tortoise holds the left. The seven sculptured panels on the 




Fig. 62. — Shrine of the Sacred Rivers, Kailasa Temple. 

architrave above probably represent others of the fertilising 
rivers which water the holy land of Aryivarta, and the water- 
jars above them doubtless have a similar significance. The 
symbol of the rain-cloud, Indra's elephant, stands detached in 
front of the shrine, and is matched by another one on the 
opposite side, in front of the small chapel which completed the 
outer circuit. 



200 THE KAILASA TEMPLE 

It is reasonable to suppose that several generations of 
craftsmen were employed in completing the whole scheme of 
the Kailasa temple. At the same time it is evident that the 
additions made by Krishna the First's successors were not hap- 
hazard, but were part of a skilfully co-ordinated traditional 
plan which the original designers had in view, if they did not 
actually lay it out. In fact we have in the Kailasa temple a 
complete reproduction, so far as different technical conditions 
allowed, of one of the great structural temples of that epoch, 
including the surroundingwalls, accessory chapels, and monastic 
buildings. The temple enclosure, as in structural examples, 
repeated the plan of the Aryan village, the mandapam in the 
centre standing for the assembly hall, the Lankesvara chapel 
on one side and the corresponding chapels opposite to it repre- 
senting the north and south cow-gates, and the battlements of 
the screen walls on either side of the entrance gopuram 
exactly reproducing those of a fortified town or village. 

The cliffs between Kailasa and the Buddhist quarter of 
the ttrth is occupied by the Das Avatara Temple, so called from 
its sculptures of the ten incarnations of Vishnu, and by the 
Ravana-ka-khii, both of which are planned on similar lines to 
the monastic halls of Ajanta and were probably Brahmanical 
adjuncts to the Kailasa temple. The Buddhist quarter begins 
with the great three-storied monastery now known as the Tin 
Tal cave. 

Though the most splendid of the temples and monasteries 
at Ellora belong approximately to the same period (from the 
sixth to the ninth centuries), the location of the different sects 
points to the conclusion that the orthodox Brahmans and their 
followers were the first to constitute Ellora as a tirth and that 
they always had a priority of claim, signifying in this case the 
choice of sites nearest to the torrent and waterfall which repre- 
sented the source of the Ganges. The relegation of the Jains 






< 







<}^ 



-Ait 



1" 



I 



X 
X 















't 






ti' 












O 



r- 

o 
►J 



JAIN TEMPLES 



20 r 



and Buddhists to the places farthest from the chief attraction 
of the tirth shows that they were the last comers and had to con- 
tent themselves with inferior stations. When the Jains began 
to add to the architectural splendour of the place, about the 
ninth century, the best available site was on the northern side 
of the " Ganges source," and at a considerable distance from it, 
where the two fine temples already alluded to, the Indra Sabhi 
and the Jagannath Sabhi, are located. 

The names of the two temples and the orientation of their 

shrines indicate that, unlike most of the other shrines at Ellora, 

it was not the tamasic aspect of the Trimlirti that was here 

invoked, but the blessings of the Rain-god, represented by 

Vishnu the Preserver and his sakti, Lakshmi, the bringer of 

prosperity. Only, as the temples belonged to the Jain sect, 

they appealed specially to their saints, the Tirthankaras, to 

whom analogous divine powers were attributed. With this 

qualification the symbolism of the structure and ornament has 

the same significance as in Brahmanical and Buddhist temples. 

The entrance to the Indra Sabhi (PI. LXIX) is completely 

sculptured out of the living rock, like the Kailasa temple 

which it resembles in many respects, though on a considerably 

smaller scale. It is approached through a gopuram with the 

usual guard-house sculptured in miniature on the top of it. 

Immediately within the walls stands the Jain equivalent of 

Siva's Nandi shrine. The cubical cell is of the Brahmi type, 

with a door on each of the four sides, and the square block of 

stone in the centre of the shrine, sculptured on each side with 

a figure of Mahavira, the Jain contemporary of the Buddha, 

stands for the four-headed Brahma symbol as seen at Elephanta. 

The roof of the shrine is of panch-ratna or " four-jewelled " 

type — that is, a yogi's cell, covered by the sttlpa dome in the 

centre, with four similar ones of smaller size placed at the 

corners of it. Variety is given to the traditional design by 



202 JAIN TEMPLES 

adding a porch, or antarila, with its deep chhaja to each side of 
the shrine and corresponding sun-windows or gables filled with 
sculpture on the roof. 

On the west side of the court, in front of one of the side- 
chapels, there was, as shown in the illustration, a very splendid 
Vishnu pillar 31 J feet in height, crowned by a Brahmi symbol 
represented by four Jain figures in yogi attitude. The pillar 
collapsed many years ago. The main block of the Indra Sabha 
consists of a two-storied temple cut into the rock for a depth 
of over 100 feet, as shown in the section, PI. LXX. Perhaps 
the most remarkable of the sculpture of the Indra Sabhi is 
the strikingly beautiful and original facade of the side-chapel 
on the western side of the main temple (PI. LXXI), the richness 
of which contrasts so admirably with the larger surfaces of the 
grand chhaja shading the main front and the magnificent pro- 
file of the elephants kneeling above it, seen on the right of the 
illustration. 

Adjoining the Indra Sabha is another Jain temple of a 
similar type, but smaller in size, called the Jagannath Sabha, 
the front of which (PI. LXXII) — a splendid example of the 
skilful artistic treatment of masses of living rock — shows the 
practical effect of the massive chhajas in giving protection from 
the heat and glare of the Indian sun. 



X 



Oh 




y. 
y. 




CHAPTER XV 

THE HINDU DECADENCE IN THE NORTH OF INDIA — THE TEMPLES 
OF KHAJURAHO — THE DOMES OF MANDAPAMS — SANKARA- 
CHARYA AND HIS MISSION — SOUTHERN INDIAN ARCHITEC- 
TURE IN THE TENTH AND ELEVENTH CENTURIES 

The Kailasa temple at Ellora, magnificently conceived and 
superbly wrought though it was, must always rank lower as an 
artistic achievement than the great temple of Elephanta. The 
eighth century in the north of India was artistically and politic- 
ally the beginning of the Hindu decadence which continued 
its downward course until, after several centuries of ineffectual 
struggles against the Muhammadan invader, India at last, 
under the great Akbar, once more enjoyed the blessings of a 
lasting peace, and a renaissance began of which Hinduism, 
purified and strengthened by the ordeal of fire and sword, was 
again the moving spirit. Politically, the decadence began with 
the death of Harsha in a.d. 647, soon after the return of Hiuen 
Tsang to China, when one of his ministers, Arjuna or Arunasra, 
seized the throne. Shortly afterwards, owing to his ill-treat- 
ment of an envoy sent by the Emperor of China, a Tibetan 
army invaded Magadha and the usurper's career was cut short 
by a disastrous campaign in which he was taken prisoner and 
sent off to China in the train of the imperial envoy he had 
insulted. Harsha's empire was then broken up. 

Except the Chalukyan king, Krishna I, whose reign was 
made memorable by the KailAsa temple, there is hardly a name 

of distinction in the next three and a half centuries among the 

203 



204 THE INDO-ARYAN SOCIAL FABRIC 

rulers of the numerous kingdoms, great and small, into which 
India was divided, until Mahmtld of Ghaznt began his series 
of ferocious raids which ended with the capture of Somnath 
and the destruction of the famous temple in 1026. The 
dynastic history of this period, so far as it has been ascertained 
by patient research, is a tedious record of petty internecine 
warfare caused by the rivalries and quarrels of kings and chief- 
tains, who, except for the record of conquest or defeat, seem 
to have very little claim to be remembered by posterity. 

But during this long period India remained free from the 
ravages of foreign invasions, zind owing to the solidity of the 
Indo-Aryan social fabric these constant local wars probably 
affected the economic condition of the country far less than 
might be supposed. Fighting was the business of the 
Kshatriya caste alone, and when there was no vital national 
interest at stake, the wars which were the outcome of dynastic 
jealousies were only gladiatorial contests on a large scale in 
which none but the combatants and their relatives were deeply 
interested. The other three castes, Brahmans, Vaisyas, and 
Sudras, went on with their respective occupations as philoso- 
phers, traders, and husbandmen, and looked for protection 
from the winners in the game, whoever they might be. The 
description given by Megasthenes of men ploughing and 
digging the soil in perfect security, while close at hand armies 
in battle array were fighting desperately, may seem highly 
coloured, but it gives an insight into social conditions which 
prevailed in India under the caste system for many centuries 
after the time of Chandragupta. 

The causes which led to the spiritual and intellectual 
degradation of India in this period were those which affect 
every state of culture too long confined within itself and 
deprived of the stimulant of new ideas which enable it to re- 
adjust itself to changing conditions of life in every age. Indo- 



I'LAII' LWIII 




GOPURAJI OF THE MADIIAVA PliRlIMAL 'liaiPI.E, GANDIKOTA, CUDIlAPAH niSTRICT 



^04] 



THE BEGINNING OF THE DECADENCE 205 

Aryan religion, which was based upon a profound philosophy 
of life, physical and spiritual, became bound up with the per- 
sonal interests of a corrupt priestly caste which exploited the 
instinctive piety of the people, and the original simple 
meanings of its formularies were buried under a mass of 
ritualistic mummery. The respect paid by the people to 
monasticism led thousands to adopt it solely for the easy life 
and prospects of worldly advantages which it held out to its 
votaries. Philosophy, losing touch with realities, stultified 
itself with hair-splitting dialectics, and as in the Middle Ages 
in Europe, religion, superstition, and rascality too often went 
hand in hand. As a religion Buddhism had become infected 
with the prevailing sacerdotal vices against which the original 
teaching of Sakiya Muni was a protest. His ethical doctrines 
had long since become the common property of Hinduism, and 
the Buddha himself was acknowledged as one of the ten 
incarnations of Vishnu ; but as a sect Buddhism was fast 
declining in the land of its birth, although in China and the 
Far East it was gaining many adherents. 

But neither the spiritual and intellectual degeneracy of the 
times nor the frequent local wars caused any diminution in 
the activity of the builder. On the contrary, the enormous 
increase of monastic institutions and the encouragement of 
superstition by a crafty priesthood gave a great impetus to 
religious foundations, while the constant fighting made the 
fortification of towns and villages a necessity. Temple build- 
ing also, by the veryidegeneracy of religious teaching, received 
an enormous increase. According to the true spirit of Indo- 
Aryan religion there were certain worshipful places marked 
out by nature as the dwellings of the gods, and the temples 
built there by man were but symbols of the divinity that was 
immanent in the site. But superstition encouraged the belief 
that temple building had a virtue of its own, and that the 



2o6 THE BEGINNING OF THE DECADENCE 

presence of the gods could be compelled by establishing earthly 
thrones for them in places where their presence was most 
needed. So every petty Rija who busied himself in robbing 
and killing his neighbour invoked the blessing of God upon his 
undertakings by providing sumptuous temples in his capital, 
or at the tirth which his Brahman counsellors advised him to 
patronise, or by providing accommodation for the crowds of 
monks who were the parasites of every royal court. 

It is the architecture of this decadent period, labelled 
" Puranic " or " Hindu " by antiquarians, which the European 
student has been taught to believe is most typical of the Indian 
mind. The art of every country has passed through the same 
phase of deterioration when its vital creative energy begins to 
wane. The undiscerning critic is unable to see that the defects 
of the qualities of Indian art do not represent its highest ideals. 
Most of the great temples of India with which Europeans are 
more or less familiar belong to the period of decadence, either 
before or after the Muhammadan invasions. Though many of 
them certainly can stand by themselves as splendid monuments 
of art, it is impossible to appreciate them rightly without a 
careful study of the classical models which furnished the 
motifs of their design. From about the eighth or ninth cen- 
tury, until the time of Akbar, the creative energy of the Indian 
master-builder kept to the beaten track of Hindu tradition and 
did little but elaborate upon old ideas. 

In Northern India one city after another grew in architec- 
tural splendour with the rise of new dynasties and the creation 
of new kingdoms. Kanauj had been Harsha's capital, and its 
fine gardens and public bathing-tanks attracted the notice of 
Hiuen Tsang. In the ninth and tenth centuries it became still 
grander as the capital of the Panchala kingdom, and when 
Mahmdd of Ghazni captured it in a.d. ioi8, his iconoclastic 
fury vented itself upon the destruction of its temples, which 



THE CITIES OF NORTHERN INDIA 207 

were said to number ten thousand. In 1193 Shihibu-d-Din, 
the first of the Ghtlri line which succeeded MahmM's dynasty, 
completed its ruin, and only the mosque which he built with the 
masonry borrowed from its temples remains to witness its 
departed glory. 

Gaur, which under the name of Lakhnautt succeeded Pata- 
liputra as the principal city of the Magadha country, became 
one of the capitals of the Pila and Sena kings of Bengal. It 
was likewise sumptuously laid out with parks and bathing-tanks 
and extended for about nine miles along the bank of the Ganges. 
In 1 194 it shared the fate of Kanauj when the last of the Sen 
dynasty was overthrown by one of Kutbu-d-Dtn's generals, and 
thereafter its craftsmen were employed in reconstructing its 
innumerable temples to suit Muhammadan ritual. Thus though 
the style of the mosques and other buildings which now remain 
is essentially Hindu and in no sense " Saracenic," as under- 
stood architecturally, there is nothing left of the architecture 
of the place belonging to the period treated in this volume. 
Benares and Ujjain, though historically two of the oldest and 
most famous cities of India, and even now of great archi- 
tectural interest, contain few important buildings of the pre- 
Muhapimadan period, most of them having fallen under the 
mailed fist of the iconoclast Aurangzib in the seventeenth 
century. 

In spite of the wholesale destruction which went on almost 
unchecked for several centuries, there are still remaining enough 
of the great buildings of the Hindu decadence to make the 
architectural reputation of any country. The immense building 
activity of the period was by no means confined to temples and 
monasteries. India had always been famous from the days of 
Chandragupta for its great public highways with fine bridges 
and sumptuous rest-houses for travellers. The earliest Muham- 
madan visitors to India, like Alberuni, were amazed at the 



2o8 IRRIGATION WORKS 

magnificence of the irrigation works built of massive masonry, 
and all that was done subsequently by the Mogul rulers was 
but a revival of the Buddhist and Hindu tradition. It is, how- 
ever, impossible to treat this part of the subject satisfactorily in 
the present work ; but as there was never any distinction in 
India between civil and ecclesiastical architecture, the study 
of temple craftsmanship gives the key to all the rest. The great 
irrigation works of India were also a part of the temple stapa- 
thi's work. Temple building was the artistic synthesis of 
Indian daily life and the stapathi was both engineer and 
architect — a master-craftsman to whom art was both religion 
and the science of practical work. 

We have already discussed the development of the great 
Siva temples in the south of India up to the eighth century. 
The colossal gopurams which distinguish them in the present 
day are nearly all additions of comparatively modern date. 
Besides being landmarks for pilgrims, the gopurams doubtless 
served their original purpose as watch-towers ; also the battle- 
ments of the walls enclosing the temple courtyards were not 
mere ornaments, but would be used for defensive purposes in 
time of war. PI. LXXIII will enable the reader to appreciate 
the fine design of some of these temple gopurams, although the 
roof of it has fallen. 

It remains now to compare the great Siva temples of this 
period with the analogous Vishnu temples, built by Jains, 
Saivaites, and Vaishnavaites in Northern India. The sim- 
plest type of a Vishnu temple, consisting only of the shrine, or 
vimina, and the antarala provided for the priests, has been 
sufficiently illustrated by the examples given in Pis. XXXIII 
to XXXIX. The splendid temples at Khajuraho, the ancient 
capital of the Chand^la dynasty, whose dominions covered the 
districts now known as Bundelkhand of the Native States and 
the Central Provinces of British India, are typical of thearchi- 



I'LAric i,\\i\- 




208] 



KANDARVA MAHA(JI':VA TKMPLI':, KHAJURAHO 



THE KHAJURAHO TEMPLES 



209 



tecture of the middle period of the Hindu decadence which was 
shortly before Mahmdd of Ghazni's raids. They were probably 
built, together with a number of magnificent reservoirs formed 
by building great embankments of masonry across the valley 
of Bundelkhand, in the course of the century beginning with 
A.D. 950, when the Chand^las, who had for a long time been 
petty feudatory Rajas, became powerful independent sove- 
reigns who played a considerable part in the attempt to repel 
the Muhammadan invasions. The temples 
of their capital, now a deserted place lying 
about 150 miles south-east of Gwalior, 
escaped entire destruction, and about thirty 
of them still remain more or less intact. 
Though the sectarian dedication of them 
differs, some being Jain, others Saivaite and 
Vaishnavaite, they are nearly all of the Vishnu 
type of design, but elaborated with extra- 
ordinary richness. 

PI. LXXIV, a view of the sikhara of the 
Kandarya Mahadeva temple, will show with 
what magnificent imaginative power and 
technical skill pinnacle upon pinnacle, crowned 
with Vishnu's lotus emblem, are piled round 
the central tower of the shrine to give the impression of the 
holy mountain upholding the highest heavens. The sculpture 
in itself is not of the finest art, but nothing could surpass the 
skill with which details of bewildering complexity are co- 
ordinated together in masses so as to form a perfectly balanced 
architectonic unity. 

The plan of the temple (fig. 63) points to the probability 
that the structure is not all of the same age, but that the 
sanctum and perhaps the inner four-pillared mandapam 
belong to a more ancient shrine which was enclosed in the 

14 




Fig. 63. — Plan of Kan- 
darya Mahideva Temple, 
Khajur&ho. (From Fer- 
gusson's " History.") 



2IO THE KHAJURAHO TEMPLES 

tenth century by tHe wonderful casket which now forms the 
exterior, on the same principle as the great Siva temples of 
Southern India were gradually built round a nucleus of i 
simple yogi's cell. 

The view of the Chutterbhuj temple (PI. LXXV) shows 
the external effect of the three successive mandapams through 
which the inner shrine is approached, and the section of a 
Vishnu temple (PI. XXXI) will explain the arrangement of the 
interior. The Chutterbhuj temple is of \h& panch-ratna type, 
being built like the Taj Mahall on a high platform of masonry 
with four smaller shrines at the corners of it. It is also 
interesting to notice that adjoining it a Siva, or so-called 
" Dravidian " temple, built on an extension of the same plat- 
form, makes a symbolic pair with it in the same way as the 
pair of temples at Pattadakal and those in the Nineveh relief 
(fig. 40). A distant view of this temple, called the Mritanga 
Mahideva, appears in the illustration on the right. 

The mandapams of these temples and many others of the 
same type are distinguished by their splendid domes supported 
on eight or more pillars and built up in concentric rings of 
masonry, sculptured internally with endless variation of detail, 
but always to represent the mystic lotus flower which encloses 
" the beautiful circle of earth." Externally the courses of 
masonry are extended into a square pyramidal form, like the 
tower of a Siva shrine, so that the three different parts of the 
structure of the temple stood for the Three Aspects — the cell 
of the vimina with its four porches representing Brahma ; the 
sikhara, Vishnu ; and the roof of the mandapam and also the 
internal dome of the vimana, Siva. Sometimes a hollow space 
was left between the internal and external courses of masonry — 
a practical arrangement for keeping the mandapam cool inside. 

These great domed mandapams were no doubt built in 
place of the more ancient flat terraced roofs panelled internally 



PLAI'I-: I, XXV 




l> 



4 

_^^,.^j__,_ S~^^^ ^ ~^ -f^ 'y'^l-^- -^^ ■-— rSn_ ,j»-- .f : - -^^ ^ l^LULLl 





CHUlTERBHUj AXD AlklTANGA M.\ J I.\ I .) .\A I I..MiLh,-, Kli\iLK\Hu 



210] 



DOMES OF MANDAPAMS 211 

with lotus flowers (fig. 13), in order to provide an open floor 
space in the centre of the pillared halls for the convenience 
of public meetings, musical entertainments, nautches, etc., 
which were held at the temple. Sometimes, as in the larger 
temples at Khajuraho, separate mandapams were provided for 
music and dancing. The mandapam, the fine interior of which 
is shown in PI. LXXVI, belongs to the Khanwar Math at 
Khajuraho. The crown of the dome with its carved pendant 
has fallen in. The next plate illustrates the very beautiful 
marble dome of the Vimala Saha temple at Mt. Abti, a building 
of the eleventh century. The sculptured figures, though here 
they serve no structural purpose, are reminiscences of the ribs 
of wooden domes. The ribbed dome came into practical use 
again in Muhammadan times. The so-called " Pathan" domes 
and all the great domes of Bijapfir and elsewhere were entirely 
of Hindu craftsmanship, and were directly derived both as 
regards symbolism and structure from the domes of Indian 
mandapams. 

The decorative sculpture on the temples at Khajuraho and 
elsewhere is sometimes grossly obscene, a fact which might 
mislead Europeans into forming a wrong judgment of the 
ethics of Hindu religion. It is no doubt true that some Hindu 
sects, especially in the decadent period, indulged in the most 
depraved ritualistic practices, but Indo-Aryan religion should 
not be convicted of immorality on that account. There must 
naturally be a different outlook in sexual matters among a 
community which regards marriage at an early age as a 
social and religious duty than there is in Europe, where it is 
usually deferred to much later in life and where a considerable 
proportion of both sexes remains celibate. A Vishnu temple 
was a symbol of the active or dynamic principle of nature, and 
most of the external sculpture was popular art interpreting 
vulgar notions of the philosophic concept, but not necessarily 



212 THE VIIIth. century IN SOUTHERN INDIA 

implying any moral depravity. The indecency was generally 
introduced on account of the popular belief that it was a pro- 
tection against the evil eye. There was never any obscenity 
in the sculpture of the sacred images worshipped within the 
sanctum and elsewhere. The imagers, being often Brahmans, 
were much more highly cultured than the ordinary craftsmen, 
and their art was the authorised interpretation of the esoteric 
philosophy of Hinduism. 

The temples of Khajuriho may be regarded as typical 
both of the greatness and weakness of the architecture of the 
north of India in the period immediately preceding the 
Muhammadan conquest In the south the decadence was 
deferred for at least two centuries later, for South Indian 
architecture hardly passed its zenith before the end of the 
tenth century. The demoralising effect of the Hun invasions 
and of Mahmtid of Ghazni's devastating raids did not penetrate 
into Southern India, and probably on that account Aryan 
culture there retained its vitality much longer. The eighth 
century in the south was the beginning of an intellectual 
revival heralded by the appearance of the great philosopher 
Sankaracharya, the protestant reformer and defender of Vedic 
religion. His mission, like that of the Buddha, was to free 
Indo-Aryan religion from the superstitious abuses which had 
accumulated round it and to propound a new philosophical 
synthesis of all the spiritual wisdom of Hinduism. But while 
the Buddha's doctrines were agnostic, Sankaracharya's religious 
teaching was essentially pantheistic and his philosophy set 
forth a rationalistic theory of the First Cause based upon the 
teaching of the Upanishads and of the Bhagavad Gita. 

Both on religious and philosophical grounds he was an 
uncompromising opponent of the Buddhism of his day, though 
it differed fundamentally from the original creed of the Hina- 
yana school ; but he sought to reconcile the differences of 



PLATE T.XWr 




DOME OF .MANDAI'AM, KHANWAR MAIH TEMPLE, KHAJUKAHO 



X 




SANKARACHARYA 213 

all the Brahmanical sects which took their stand upon the 
Vedas. Sankaracharya may be regarded as the founder of 
the modern Saivaite cult, as Ramanilja, his opponent in the 
twelfth century, was the protagonist of modern Vaishnavism. 

Sankaracharya was a Brahman of the Nambudri class, 
and is supposed to have lived about the end of the eighth and 
beginning of the ninth centuries. His birthplace according 
to one account was in a village of the Malabar district, 
according to another at Chidambaram. There are numerous 
legends of the miraculous events attending his birth and early 
years. After some years of studentship at an israma on the 
banks of the Narmada under a famous Guru called Govinda, 
he renounced marriage and the life of a householder and took 
the vow of a sannyasin. Then, like the Buddha, he went to 
Benares, where he gathered round him a number of disciples 
and probably wrote his most important works, the com- 
mentaries on the Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita. He 
was still a young man when, accompanied by great numbers 
of his chelas, he started on his great pilgrimage throughout 
India, preaching the philosophy of the Vedanta, denouncing 
the immoral ritualistic practices of the Saktas and other sects, 
and refuting the arguments of the pandits of different schools 
who opposed him. To establish his teaching on a permanent 
footing he organised an order of sannyasins open to all castes, 
after the model of the Buddhist Sangha, which was divided 
into ten grades, and with the help of his many royal adherents 
he built and endowed a number of monastic institutions as 
training centres for the exponents of reformed Hinduism. 
The chief Guru of the Sringeri Math, the most famous of his 
monasteries in Southern India, continues to be regarded as the 
spiritual head of the Saivaite cult to the present day. When 
Sankardcharya's mission had been thus accomplished, he retired 
to the Himalayas, and^ according to tradition, died at Kedar- 

14* 



214 SOUTH INDIAN ARCHITECTURE 

nath, one of the most venerated of the Siva tirths, in a.d. 828, 
at the age of thirty-eight.' 

As before mentioned, the architecture of Southern India 
from the ninth to the eleventh centuries bears witness to the 
vitaHty of Indo-Aryan culture at this period, and Sankara- 
charya's influence was so lasting that even when Rimantlja 
subsequently succeeded in creating a diversion in favour of 
Vaishnavism, the temple buildings of the south continued to 
adopt the Saivaite forms of architecture in preference to the 
proper symbolism of the Vaishnavaite sect. Thus the great 
Vaishnava temple of Srirangam and the Vaikuntha Perumal 
temple at Conjeveram ^ are designed entirely as Siva shrines, 
and differ only from the traditional type in the symbolism 
of the images worshipped there. 

The records of the Chola king of the tenth century, 
Parantaka I, in connection with the mode of election for 
village councils, have already been mentioned. The most 
powerful king of his line, Rajaraja the Great (a.d. 985-1018), 
conquered Ceylon and became suzerain of nearly the whole of 
Southern India. He built the stately Siva temple at Tanjore 
to commemorate his victories, but other temples of lesser note 
belonging to his or his son's reign are more interesting on 
account of their superb sculpture. Pis. LXXVIII-IX illustrate 
some of the wall shrines of a temple at Gangaikonda-chola- 
puram in the Trichinopoly district which show South Indian 
sculpture at its finest. The magnificent bronze images of this 
period, examples of which are preserved in the Madras Museum, 
are among the greatest achievements of Indian art. 

The classic dignity of the mandapam of the temple at 

1 For further details of Sankaricharya's life and work, see " Sri Sankaricharya," by 
C. N. Krishnasamy Aiyar, M.A., and Pandit Sitanath Tattvabushan's explanation of his 
philosophy (Natesan & Co., Madras). 

^ See Fergusson's "History" (revised edit.), vol. i. pp. 359 and 371. 




H 
CJ 



O 

X 
o 






2 

O 







w 
►J 



o 



Q 

w 

a; 



THE "CHALUKYAN STYLE" 215 

Darisuram in the Tanjore district (PI. LXXX) may be said 
to reflect something of the austere intellectuality of Sankari- 
charya's teaching. The strength and simplicity of the structural 
design and the comparative reticence of the ornament stand in 
striking contrast with the almost riotous profusion of the 
Khajuraho temples, though the magnificent tout ensemble of 
the latter may be more impressive. These two buildings are 
contemporary documents which give a faithful record of the 
life of the times when the intellectual and spiritual centre of 
Aryan India had moved from the northern to the southern 
provinces. 

It is to this period that Fergusson assigns the most 
delusive of all his classifications of Indian architecture, the 
" Chalukyan style." His definitions of it are so vague that 
it is difficult to make anything intelligible out of them. He 
is nearest the mark in describing it as being locally " halfway 
between the Dravidian and northern styles," for most of his 
examples are a composite form of Vishnu and Siva temples — 
that is, the Vishnu sikhara is crowned by the Siva dome 
instead of by the amalaka — a natural consequence of the fact 
that the districts in which he locates the style lie just between 
the special spheres of influence of the Vaishnavaite and 
Saivaite cults in the north and south of India respectively. 

The temple at Ittagi in the Hyderabad dominions 
(PI. LXXX I), which Fergusson cites as one of the most typical 
of the style, is evidently only an elaboration of the Vishnu 
temple at Pattadakal (PI. LIX), which he labels " Indo- 
Aryan." The " star-shaped " plan of some of the vimanas 
given as examples is also only an elaboration of the circular 
plan of the sttjpa and a structural application of the symbolism 
of the eight- or sixteen-petalled lotus. The circular vimana, 
technically called vesara, was by no means confined to the 
provinces described as the location of the style. 



2i6 THE "CHALUKYAN STYLE" 

Nor are richly carved doorways and pillars a peculiarity 
of these provinces, and if technical distinctions like that of 
pillars turned in a lathe are to be catalogued, every one of the 
provinces of India must be assigned its own style, for every 
locality had its own school of craftsmanship with certain techni- 
cal traditions peculiar to itself. In this case the local school 
developed a special skill in turning massive stone columns upon 
a vertical lathe, and consequently every temple in those dis- 
tricts was ornamented with elaborately turned pillars as speci- 
mens of its skilled craftsmanship. The mandapam of the temple 
of Rangaswami in the Dharwar district of the Bombay Presi- 
dency (PI. LXXXII) is a fine example of this local peculiarity ; 
but though admirable as a technical achievement, it is not 
altogether an artistic success on account of the bewildering 
repetition of circular mouldings by which the craftsmen sought 
to display their skill in turning. 

When the fundamental ideas which underlie the structure 
and symbolism of Indian architecture are properly understood, 
it will be easy for the student to analyse the innumerable varia- 
tions of traditional themes which are to be found in other great 
buildings and which must be left unnoticed in this work. 
India, in spite of its heterogeneous sectarian and racial com- 
position, is spiritually and intellectually one country. That is a 
fact clearly stated in its architecture. The artificial boundaries 
which antiquarians have sought to establish are academic 
conventions which leave the heart of the matter untouched, for 
they are without either assthetic, scientific, or historic founda- 
tion. The Indian synthesis must be understood before any of 
the elements of its composition can be intelligently analysed. 



PI.ATF. 1 XXIX 




SIVA AND PAKVA'II, rh\U'Ll. A I' I , AN( ;A IKON I ) \-CIIUl. AI'U k A M, TR IC II I Nnl'CII A' DISTKR-I' 
216J 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE MUHAMMADAN INVASIONS AND AFTER 

MuHAMMADANiSM is onc of the principal elements which are 

combined in the Indian synthesis. The fierce struggle which 

took place before it was fused together with Hinduism was 

born of racial antipathies and material interests rather than of 

intellectual or spiritual differences. Ages before the time of 

Muhammad Hinduism had settled for itself by the peaceful 

arguments of philosophy all the problems which Islam set out 

to determine by the sword. The missionaries of Asoka were 

the first to prepare in Western Asia the soil in which Islam 

grew. Its iconoclastic madness was only the religious zeal of 

a primitive, warlike race inspired by the principles of Hina- 

yana Buddhism as they were re-stated by the prophet of Mecca. 

The monotheistic idea which Islam propounded was as old 

as the Vedas, and even Buddhism itself had accepted it long 

before the Hegira. 

Indian literature and science had been eagerly studied by 

the scholars of Baghdad for centuries before the Muhammadan 

conquest of Hindustan. The skill of Indian master-builders 

made Mahmtid of Ghazni's capital one of the finest cities 

of the East. Hindu generals fought in the armies of 

the Muhammadan invaders of India, and when finally the 

old Hindu capitals, Delhi and Gaur, became the seats of 

Muhammadan power, Baghdad and Mecca nominally remained 

the spiritual centres of Muhammadan India, but the culture of 

217 



2i8 THE «' INDO-SARACENIC STYLE" 

Islamic India was farther removed from its birthplace than the 
Muhammadanism of Arabia and Turkey from Judaism and 
Christianity. The philosophical diiferences between Muham- 
madan and Hindu thought were no greater than those which 
existed between the different sects of Hinduism itself The 
success of Islam in India from a proselytising point of view 
was always due to its material inducements and the attractions 
of a social system which freed the low-caste Hindu from 
Brahman tyranny, rather than from the spiritual appeal of 
its dogma. 

The " Indo-Saracenic " style of Indian architecture was 
purely a creation of Fergusson. The Muhammadan invasions 
made no decisive break in the building traditions of India, 
except that they brought about a reversion to the ideals of 
Hlnayana Buddhism. The Indian master-builder continued 
to build for his Muhammadan rulers according to the Indo- 
Aryan traditions, just as he had done for Buddhist, Jain, and 
Hindu. The Indian mosque was the Hindu temple adapted 
to Muhammadan ritual. Its most typical plan, oriented like 
a Vishnu shrine, was like that of a Hindu temple, a rectangle 
with gopurams on the north, south, and west sides, for both the 
temple and the mosque enshrined the tradition of the Indo- 
Aryan village. The so-called " Pathan dome," like all other 
Indo-Muhammadan domes, was the dome of a Hindu man- 
dapam minus the external symbolism. The " Indo-Saracenic" 
arch was the arch of a Hindu vault technically adapted for the 
wider spans required by the different structural conditions 
which Muhammadan ritual imposed. No Indian mosque con- 
tains a single structural idea borrowed from the Saracenic 
architecture of Western Asia, Egypt, or Turkey. Muhamma- 
dan art in India from its very beginning was, and continued 
to be, wholly Indian in spirit and in craftsmanship. All the 
symbolism of its ornament was Indo-Aryan, except that texts 



X 

y. 
y. 




HINDU AND MUHAMMADAN IDOLATRY 219 

from the Quran are used in places where the Hindu sculptor 
would have put symbolic figures or animals. 

The story of the Muhammadan conquest, so far as it 
affected Indian architecture, has been told in another volume.^ 
Everyone of the local varieties of the so-called Indo-Saracenic 
style was derived from an adaptation of the local temple crafts- 
manship. Mosque and temple were both Hindu art, and under 
such wise and beloved rulers as Husain Shah and Akbar, 
orthodox Hindus would help to build a mosque in the same 
spirit as in Asoka's time they would bring votive offerings to 
the sttipas of Buddhist saints. 

Not even in the question of the idolatry which was 
anathema to the Muhammadan was there any vital difference 
between the teaching of Hinduism and of Islam. The icono- 
clast vented his blind rage upon Hindu sculptured symbols 
without understanding their meaning to prove that he was a 
true believer. His own intangible idols were sacred things 
necessary for his soul's salvation. The Muhammadan was no 
philosopher, and to his practical mind an image of wood or 
stone, set up for worship as a symbol of God Who is everywhere 
and in everything, seemed an impious attempt to substitute 
things of earth for thoughts of heaven. The Hinayana school 
of Buddhism had forbidden image worship for a different 
reason, because the teaching of the Buddha was agnostic and 
did not recognise the idea of a personal God. But both before 
and after the time of Muhammad all Hindu teachers were 
iconoclasts in a spiritual sense, though they did not seek to 
propagate their culture by fire and sword, and at all times there 
were among them some who were puritans in the Muhammadan 
and Christian sense, objecting to any kind of figure symbolism 
in religious ritual. 

^ "Indian Architecture: its Psychology, Structure, and History, from the First 
Muhammadan Invasion to the Present Day." 



220 THE INDIAN SYNTHESIS 

There are numerous temples to be found in different parts 
of India representative of this puritan phase of Hindu art. 
PI. LXXXIII shows the wall sculpture of one such temple in 
the Dharwar district of the Bombay Presidency, which might 
belong to a Gothic cathedral. The canopies of the shrines remain 
as ornaments, but a Vishnu pillar, or a pair of them, used as 
pilasters take the place of the images. 

The whole synthesis of Indian life and thought from the 
time of Asoka down to the present day is thus written down 
in its craft traditions, forming a priceless record of a great 
civilisation to which the whole world is deeply indebted. No 
civilisation, ancient or modern, has produced a higher culture, 
no other has succeeded better in making religion the philosophy 
of life, and on the whole probably no other has contributed so 
much to human knowledge. All Indo-Aryan religion, decep- 
tive and often degraded though it may be in ritualistic practice, 
is founded upon the greatest of all scientific truths — the reality 
of divine revelation or inspiration. That was the great secret 
of the Rishis which they so jealously guarded for posterity, 
seeking for humanity's sake to find the way by which the pure 
in heart may come to drink at the divine well of knowledge 
the elixir of immortality — the all-pervading truth which must 
be the mainspring of every right human action. It was there- 
fore that the yogi who believed himself to be in contact with 
that divine source was regarded as a man of God, and his cell 
a fit place for worship. And if the yogi often deceived both 
himself and others, and if human credulity often ascribed to 
the truly inspired powers equal to the Highest, the divine truth 
shines none the less brightly behind the clouds of man's follies 
and weaknesses. 

Indo-Aryan sociology as regards the caste system was 
admirably conceived, under the peculiar conditions in which 
Aryan society found itself in India, for preserving its higher 



y. 
w 

< 

J 




I f 



















w 






J 




' 


UJ 




1 ' 


1 


^ 




_^ 


1 


( 


/■-■ 

X 






X 
X 

h-1 

H 

<; 




o 



H 



p 



H 



O 



O 
H 



HI^DU POLITY 



221 



culture from degradation by contact with the semi-civilised 
races which formed the substrata of the population. All systems 
have their abuses, but without the caste system Indo-Aryan 
civilisation would probably have been obliterated long ago. 
Whether the rigidity of the system, which became more intense 
as the forces which tended to disintegrate Indo-Aryan society 
grew stronger, should under modern conditions be relaxed, is 
quite another question. 

The best testimony to the wisdom of Hindu polity is that 
the organisation of the village community, which was the bed- 
rock of Aryan society, remained unshaken for at least five thou- 
sand years, until the middle of the last century. Aurangzib's 
attempt to uproot it only led to the downfall of his dynasty. 
From the days of Chandragupta Maurya every empire which 
remained secure in the affection of the Indian people built upon 
that foundation. Its solidity preserved Indian culture from all 
the attacks of bigotry and racial hatred, and maintained the 
country's economic stability throughout centuries of devastating 
foreign invasions. 

No political system yet devised by the wit of man has 
succeeded in making the methods of war obsolete ; but the 
organisation of the Indian village republics was a better defence 
against the vile tyranny of an overgrown militarism than any 
yet discovered in Europe or in Asia. It failed at times as an 
instrument of national defence only because the petty jealousies 
and rivalries of kings prevented India from presenting a united 
front against the common enemy, but militarism never grew 
into a menace to the liberties of the people and a danger to 
civilisation : except when Scythians, Huns, or Mongols thun- 
dered at the gates of India, war was the sport of kings which 
did not very deeply affect the life of the majority of the people 
who were non-combatants. For individuals it probably 
secured a larger measure of personal freedom than most 



222 INDIA OF THE PRESENT DAY 

governments of modern times in the East or in the West, 
while it did not prevent the co-operation of national forces for 
purposes useful to the community at large. 

Though her ancient political constitution has been broken 
up, the heart and soul of India are still in her villages, and if 
her voiceless millions are ever to become articulate, it must be 
by restoring the communal life of the Indian village. Only 
when that is accomplished can it be said that the foundations 
■of the British Raj are well and truly laid ; for then it will 
Test upon the bed-rock of liberty and justice, which in India 
as in other countries has always been the safest foundation of 
Empire. 

India is loyal to the core ; the canker.of anarchy bred in 
the foul slums of cities only penetrates into her village life 
because the law-abiding instincts of the people are there denied 
the power of expression. India still has faith in British 
justice, but the complications of modern administrative methods 
sow the seeds of discontent and prevent European officials from 
keeping in touch with popular sentiment. Justice can only serve 
its purpose when it accords with popular sentiment. The village 
panchayat may have been crude in its ideas, but the justice it dis- 
pensed in its own community was based upon popular tradition 
and intimate knowledge of the life of each one of its members. 
Professional litigation, which is the curse of modern India, did 
not exist under the native system of administration, and per- 
jury, which is rampant in Anglo-Indian courts of justice, was 
a vice which had little purpose to serve when every witness's 
previous life and character were known to all the judges. 

India is awakening to a consciousness of her past history; 
it would be folly for British administrators to shut their eyes 
to the fact or to believe that bureaucratic methods out of all 
relation with India's past can continue to work without ever- 
increasing friction. The difficulties and dangers can only be 



y. 
y 



< 



. ''J-r^ ' ■• 


H 


W^ 




S'%:i 


H 
r: 


■m:r> 


p 


A'' t : 


[i 


^'-'- ■;;;'; 


^ 




U. 


■^^ffl 


< 


™£j^*«B 


X 


^^Pflp 


Q 




THE PHILOSOPHY OF BRUTALITY 225. 

met by a thorough investigation of the means by which the 
Aryans of old succeeded in winning the undying affection and 
devotion of their fellow-men in the East. 



Europe is now witness to the demoralising effect upon a 
great nation of a perverted philosophy which glorifies brute 
force as a symbol of kingship and manhood, and does not dis- 
dain to propagate it by crimes which disgrace the name of 
civilisation. When the intellectuals of Germany are allowed 
to see a glimmering of truth they may begin to find the spiritual 
philosophy of the East of more service to humanity than their 
poisonous scientific "culture," and recognise in Asoka, Vikra- 
maditya, and Akbar a nobler ideal of kingship than that which 
is now held up to them. 

And when it has shaken off this tyranny of militarism 
which has fooled and enslaved it, the democracy of Germany 
may find in the ancient Aryan constitution of India a practical 
solution of the problem of self-government which stood the test 
of five thousand years, and might be used still, as in the days 
of Chandragupta Maurya, " to check the power of kings," and 
to lay the foundations of a lasting peace in Europe. 

Rheims Cathedral, the glory of the Middle Ages, is 
shattered by twentieth-century savages ; but the genius of the 
Latin race survives and the traditions of Gothic art are still 
alive in India, the land of its birth. Only a new spiritual 
stimulus is needed to revive their old creative force, and the 
comradeship-in-arms of East and West on the battlefields of 
France will surely be followed again by a closer spiritual fellow- 
ship in the arts of peace. So the spirit of Gothic art may be 
reborn, and East and West may join once more in raising a 
great monument to the glory of God, in memory of the heroes 
who have fallen in the fight and of the martyrs who have 
suffered for the cause of freedom. 



INDEX 



Aihole, temple of, 67-9, 177 Badami, temples at, 175-6, 177, 179 

Akdsha, i49«., xbyi. Bengali roofs, 21 

Akdsha-garbha , i4gn. Bhagavad Gita, 114, 126, 139, 212, 213 

Akbar, 80, 90, 165, 203, 206 Bharhut sculptures, 20, 51, (>i) 

Amalaka, 63, 72, d^z, 103, 145, 158, 209 Bhima's Rath, 89-91, 118 



Amaravati stupa, 47, 113 

Amrita, 60 

Ananta, the serpent, 53, 97 

Andhra dynasty, 112-3 

Antardla, 37, 173, 179 

Arches, 3, 55-6, 100, 121-2 

Arjuna's Rath, 100, 104-6, 118, 151, 176, 

179 
Aryan immigrations, 5, 47 

„ inspiration, 45 

„ religion, 35, 48 

„ rites, 52, 58, 66 



Bhuvaneshwar, loi 
Birdwood, Sir George, xxviii 
Bodh-Gaya, temple of, 43, 95-100, 119 
Bodhi tree, 11, 51, 82, 116, 178 
Bodhisattva, 146, 147 
Brahma, 40, 43, 51, 55, 106, 107, no, 
138, 161 
shrines, 42, 103, 108, 122, 157-9 
Brahmacharin, 186 
Brahman, 162 

Buddha, 48, 49, 50, 52, 55, 93, 96, 98, 
114, 137, 138, 142, 161, 162, 186, 187 



Asoka, I, 6, 20, 36, 46, 47, 153, 166, 217 Buddhist worship, 65, 70, 146-7 



Asrdma, 13, 78 
Assemblies, the Five, 170 
Assembly-hall, 11, 23, 38, 179 
Asuras, 97 
Aurangzib, xxvi 
Avalokiteshvara, 146, 151 
Avalon, Arthur, ii8«. 
Abu, Mt., 175 
Asana, 118 

Babar, 18 

Babylon, excavations at, 3 

Baradari, 75 

Barwar Sagar temple, 103 

15 



Building bye-laws, 19-20 

Bull, symbol of the, 81, 106-8, 122, 180, 

182, 193, 195 
Burgess, Dr., 99, 132, 156, 164, 177 
Burial of the dead, 47 

Castes, 5, 14, 204 

Cave temples, 69-70 

Chaitya, 65W., 66, 74, 92, 104-6, in, 152 

Chaitya-griha, 65-77, 78, 150-3, 189 

Chalukyan dynasty, 168-9 

,, temples, 102, 103, 182, 215 

Chanakya, 140 
Chanda, 197 



226 



INDEX 



Chandela dynasty, 208-9 
Chandragupta Maurya, i, 24-5, 112, 

221, 222 
Chandragupta I. (Gupta dynasty), 125-7 
„ ■ II. (Gupta dynasty), 128-32 
Chamnukh temple, 103, 108 
Chhaja, 23, 67, 146 
Chhattri, 23, 47, 80 
Chisholm, Mr., 88 
Chitamdni, 63 
Chola dynasty, 167, 171 
Churning of the Ocean, 97-8, 155 
Chutterbhuj temple, 210 
Colonisation, Indian, 128-9 
Coomaraswamy, Dr., 44, 45, 149W. 
Cousens, Mr. H., 181 
Creation, Hymn of, i6i 
Cross, the cosmic, g, 10, 11, 53 
Cunningham, General, 99, 132 
Curzon, Lord, xxxviii 

Danddka village plan, 10, 13 

Dantivarman I, 193 

Das Avatara temple, Ellora, 200 

Datura flower, 63-4 

Davids, Professor Rhys, 51 

Dawn-maiden. See Lakshmi 

Darasuram, temple at, 215 

Delhi, the New, xxxi, 15;;. 

Devas, 81, 82, 97, iio-ii, 146 

Dharamsdla, 19 

Dharma, xxvii, 53, 126, 133, 162 

Dharmaraja Rath, 86-9 

Dhwaja-stamhhas, 57, 61, 71 

Domes, 39, 88, 123, 210-11 

Doorways, 75, 151-2 

Draupadi's Rath, 100 

Dravidian style, 63, 67, 88, 89, 105, 169, 

177 
Dravida, kingdom of, 168 
,, plan of shrine, 89 



Dumar Lena temple, Ellora, 190, 192 
Durga, 71, 81, 104, III, 196 
Dwara-palas, 82 

Elephanta, temple of, loi, 156-65, ^93, 

203 
Ellora, 186-202 
Events, the Four, 51-2 

Fa Hien, 84, 131, 136 

Fergusson, xxii-iii, 33, 34, 40, 41, 47, 48, 

50, 67, 71, 82, 98, loi, 103, 119, 132, 

156, 177, 182 
Foucher, M, A., 50 

Gajna-padma, 62 

Gandharan art, 115-7, 123, 165 

Gandharvas, 148 

Ganesha, 96, 197 

Gangai-konda-cholapuram, temple at, 2 14 

Garhha-griha, 37 

Gargoyles, 96 

Garuda, Vishnu's eagle, 61 

Gaur, 13, 207 

Gautami-putra monastery, Nasik, 80-3, 

144. 193 
Gobharana, 140 
Goloubeff, M. Victor, 150 
Gopuram, or gateway, 31-2, 179, 183, 

184, 195 
,, symbolism of, 52-4 
Gothic art, 75-7, 122, 152, 165, 220, 223 
Gramya-deva, 35 
Griffin, Sir Lepel, xxix, xxx 
Gupta dynasty, 125-34 
„ style, 132 

Hamsa, 63, 147 

Harsha Vardhama, 134-8, 156, 203 
Hellenic art, 112, 164, 165, 181 
Herringham, Mrs., 150 



INDEX 227 



-'J 



Hiranya-garhha, 59 Kali, 6^ 

Hiuen Tsang, 84, 134, 136-8, 140-1, i5t-, Kanauj, 134, 206-7 

168, 174, 203 Kanarak, temple at, 44 

Hinayana architecture, 70, 71-6, 77, Kandarya Mahadeva temple, 209-10 

iio-ii, 144, 146 Kanishka, 113 

Buddhism, 50, 70-1, 81, 93-4, Karma-yoga, 126 

no, 114, 147, 219 Kathaks, 39, 53 

House planning, 12 Kautilya-artha-sdstm, 133;!. 

Hun invasions, 133, 134, 136, 139, 154, Kama-deva, 56«. 

155, 212 Karle chaitya-house, 47, 71-7, no, 115, 

Huvishka, King, 100 144, 145, 151, 152, 193 

Kerala dynasty, 167 

Icons, III, 116 Khajuraho, temples at, loi, 103, 208-12 

Image-worship, 35, 41, 50, 51, 55, 117-9, Khushru II of Persia, 169 

144, 219 King's Road, 10, 25 

Imperial Gazetteer of India, xxvii, xxviii, Kinnams, 148 

xxix, 177 Kirtivarman II, 193 

Indo-Aryan style, 63 Krishna, 50, 114, 126, 127, 188 

Indra, 97, in, 146, 201 Krishna I, 193-4, 203 

Indraprashta, 128 Kshatriyas, 35, 50, 93, 134, 137, 179 

Indra Sabha, Ellora, 188, 190, 201-2 

Irrigation works, 208, 200 Tit,- o /- o 

T , , n Lakshmi, 51, 57, 87, 96-8, 149 

Ishta-deva, 35, 44, 92, 132, 137, 187 . tec o 

, oj. -tt. J . o • J/. / ^^ ,j^j- of^ gQ^ 52«,. 87, 129, 153, 

Ishvara, 137, 162 

' '''' 193 

Ittagi, temple at, 215 Lattices, 180 

Ldt, 57 

Jagannath Sabha, Ellora, 188, 190, 202 ^ .^^^^ ^^^^ 

Jahangiri Mahall, 91 Lion symbol, 81, 104 

Jaina sect, 65, 174-5, 201, 208, 209 Lotus flower, 49, 51, 59-60 

„ worship, 68, 174-5, 201 
Jdtakas, 53, 146 

Jerusalem, temple of, 57 Madura, temple at, 184 

Jnana-yoga, 126 Mahabharata, the, 41, 187 

Jndna-loka, 62 Maha-deva, 182 

Maha-Govinda, architect, 27 

Kadphises I, 114 Maha-kali, 63 

Kailasa, 97, 194 Maha-Nirvana-Tantram, 62, 118 

temple, Ellora, 182, 193-200, 203 Mahdpadma, 62 

Kalasa, 91, 96, 105 Mahayana architecture, 71, 77, 96 

Kali age, 154 „ Buddhism, 93-4, iij 4, 134, 

Kalkin, 154 i47, 150 



128 



INDEX 



Maliisliasura, 196 

MahniM of Ghazni, 204, 209, 212, 217 

Maitreya, 152 

Makara, 56, 151 

Manasara, Silpa-sastra, 7, 8, 9, gw., 12, 

19-20, 40, 42, 58, 89 
Mandapam§, 11, 31, 37, 38, 39, 67, 109, 

176, 179, 180, 210-11 
Mandara, Mt., 18, 61, 163, 194 
Mangala-vUM, 10 
Manu, 26 
Mara, 98 

Mauryan dynastj^, 1-3 
Mamallapuram, Raths of, 86-91, loo-i, 

104, 168, 177 
Martand, temple of, 123-4, 1^3 
Megasthenes, xxvi, 2, 24, 169, 170 
Meru, Mt., 18, 61, 163, 194 
Mihiragula, xxvi, 134, 151 
Milky Way, the, 53, 97 
Monasteries, 78-91, 92 
Montagu, Mr., xxv 
Morley, Lord, xxiv 
Mritanga Mahadeva temple, 210 
Mudabidri, temple at, 121, 124 
Muhammadan craftsmen, 46 
Mukuta, 149, 160, 164 

Nair, Sir C. Sankaran, 172 
Nandi, Siva's bull, 180, 182, 193, 195, 201 
Nandydvarta, plan of village, 14-15 
Narasimha-gupta, 134 
Narasinha incarnation, 42 
Naubat-khdna, 29, 31, 73 
Nava-ratna temple, 105 
Ndgara, plan of shrine, 89 
Nagarjuna, 81, 113, 140 
Nagas, 166-7, 169 
Nalanda, 85, 140-1 

Nasik, monasteries at, 80-3, no, 115, 
144. 145 



Ndiiinbiiiiii, lotus, Go-i 

Nirvana, 51 

Nivedita, Sister, 150 

Nymphcea, water-lily, 59, 60-1, 148 

Orientation of temples, 42, 44, 108-9, 
142, 143, 154, 182, 188, 191, 192, 19^, 
201 

Orissa temples, 133, 182 

Padmdka, plan of village, 15-16 
Paintings, 147-50 
Palitana, 175 
Pallava dynasty, 168 
Panchdyat, 24 

Panch-ratna , or five jewels, 49 
,, ,, collar of Vishnu, 163 
,, temple, 84, 201, 210 
Para-Brahma, 63 
Parantaka I, 171 
Pari-Xirvana, 52, 53, 82, 142 
Parks, public, 24, 174, 184 
Patanjali, 135 

Pattadakal, temples at, loi, 176-83 
Pala kings, 207 
Pandya dynasty, 167 
Panini, 140 
Parisnath, 175 

Parvati, loi, 148, 149, 163, 197 
Pataliputra, 2, 20, 24, 85, 125, 207 
Persepolitan art, 2, 72, 82-3 
Pillars, symbolism of, 52, 72, 74-5, 81, 

87, 129, 145-6 
Pisdchas, 82, 146 
Pipal tree, 56 

Pradakshina path, 11, 52, '^^, 93 
Prakriti, 108, 162 
Pulakesin II, 168, 193 
Purusha, 108, 162 
Pushyamitra, 112 
Pyramidal monasteries, 84 



INDEX 



229 



Railing of stupa, 47 ij 

Rangaswanii, temple of, 21b 

Ra/Ihis, or cars, 44, 86 

Havana, King, 197 

Rdhti, the eclipse, 56, 151 

Rajapatha, or King's Street, 10 

Rdjasic quality (Rajas), 122, 126, 154, 

162, 177 
Ramaniija, 170 
Ramayana, 20, 167, 187 
Ramesvaram, temple of (Madras), 184 
Ramesvaram, temple of (Ellora), 193 
Ram Raz, 7, 40, 58, 170 
Rig Veda, no, 112 
Roofs, 21, 22, 55, 75, 86, 119, 120-1, 124, 

175, 180 

Saivaites, 44, 90, 107 
Saivism, 92-3, 102, 107, 175 
Scika dynasty, 112-13 
Samudragupta, 127, 128, 132 
Sangha, the, 37, 49, 53, lu, 138, I49«., 
154, 162, 187 
„ pillars of, 74-6, 142, 152-3 
Sankaracharya, 94, 139, 170, 212-14 
Sannyasin, 47, 79, 186-7 
Sapta-Matris, 197 
Saracenic architecture, 207 
Sarnath, 96, 98, in, 114 
Sadhu, 79, 187 
Sakiya Muni. See Buddha 
Sanchi, chaitya-hall at, 67 

,, sculptures, 20, 50-2 

„ stiipa, 47, 48, 113, 113 
Sdttvic quality [sattvam], 56, 126, 154, 160 
Sectarial marks, 102 
Sena dynasty, 207 
Sennacherib, palace of, 95, 100, 177 
Siddhartha, Prince, 49, 148-9, 157, 165 
Sikhara, 33, 42, 61, 63, 96, 98, 103-4, 
118, 121, 209 



Silpa-sdslruk. 7, 25, 42, 58, 72, 78, 105, 
118, 145 

Sitala, goddess of small-pox, 19 

Siva, 40, 41, 43, 53, 53, 56, 64, 71, 106, 
148, 131, 163, 182, 194, 197 
,, crescent of, 142, 143, 154, 186 
,, shrines of, 42, 43-4, ^8, 94, loi, 
104-8, 120-1, 132, 146, 177, 178, 
180-1, 194-200, 208 

Smith, Mr. Vincent, 127, 169' 

Smriti, 134 

Somnath, temple of, 204 

Sri, or Lakshmi, 31, 37, 87, 96-8, 149 

Sringeri Math, 213 i 

Srirangam, temple at, 184 

Stapathi, or architect, 7, 9, 9n., 208 

Streets, village, g-io 

Siupa, 29, 40, 43, 44, 46-34, 96, 97, 106, 
107, 117 

Styles, classifications of, 33, 96 

Sun-windows, 31, 33-7, 74, 87, 152, 183 

Sungha dynasty, 112-3 

Surya, 137 

Sutragrahi, or surveyor, 7 

Swastika plan of village, 16-17 
sign of, 16-17 

Symbolism, 46-64, 139-60, 161-3, 194, 

196, 210, 211 

Tagore, Mr. Abanindro Nath, xxviii 

Takhsa-sila, 140, 141 

Tanjore, temple at, 183, 214 

Tata, Mr. Ratan, 2 

Taj gardens, 18 

Tamasic quality (Tamas), 36, 131, 134, 

160, 197, 201 
Teli-ka Mandir, 118-9 
Temple building, philosophy of, 11 9-21 

122 

planning, 178-9, 209-10 
Ter, chaitya-house at, 66 



INDEX 



Tiruvallur, temple at, 183 
Tin Tal Cave, EUora, 200 
Tirth, 175, 186-8 
Tuihankams, 46, 201 
Torans, or gateways, 28-g, 37, 48 
Toramana, 133 
Town planning, 7-18 
Trimiirti, the, 44-5, loi, 108, 149, 156, 
157, 160-5, 195. 210 
„ Feast of the, 137-8 
Tiisula, 195 

Umnjaga Jataka, 26, 60-1 
Universities, Indian, 140-55 
Upanishads, 160, 112, 212, 213 
Ushas, 51, 59, 96-8, 146 

Vaishnavaites, 44 

Vaishnavism, 92-3, 102 

Vajra, 62 

Vali, 24, 135, 136 

Varnas, the four, 5 

Vdhan, 81 

Vdyu, 62 

Vedic railing, 37, 48, 51, 146, 193 

ritual, 36, 48 
Vedikd, 20, 2on., 136 
Vesara plan of shrine, 89, 105 
Viharas, 78-91 

Vikramaditya (Gupta dynasty), xxv, 
128-33, 154. 164 
II. (Chalukyan dynasty), 
177 
Village, the Indian, xxv, xxxi-ii, 4-32, 93, 
142, i6i-2, 179-80, 183, 200 



Village, administration of, 24, 135-6, 
171-4 
artisans, 24 
classifications, 12-13 
council, II, 162, 169 
defences, 27-31 
dwellings, 19-23 
elections, 172-4 
federation of, 25, 130 
gateways, 48 
planning of, 7-18 
sites of, 8 
Vimana, 44 
Vinaya Pitaka, 131 
Virupaksha temple, Pattadakal, 31, 176- 

83, 195, 196 
Vishnu, 40, 41, 43, 53, 56, 97, 98, 122, 
132, 137, 149, 162, 163, 177 
Holy Mountain of, 18, 61, 94-5, 

97. 133. 163, 175 
shrines, 42-4, 94-104, io8, 129, 
132-3, 146, 177, 178, 182, 208- 
II 
tree or pillar of, 11, 42, 43, 53, 
58, 61-3, 68, 94, 145, 158 
Vishnu-Narayana, 53, 118, 119 
Visvakarma chaitya-house, 189, 190-1 

Weavers, xxix 

Wheel of Life, 51-2, 60 

Women councillors, 174 

Yaso-dharman, 134 

Yoga, 93, 113, 114, 118, 126-7, 134-5 

Yogi seat, 80, 88 



PHMed by Haxill, WalsOn & Vimy, Li., London and Aylesbury, 



